
It’s a curious quirk of Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> that, despite 
there being more than 200 distinct languages spoken by Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander Australians, the government usually listens to just one person.

For the past three years, that person has been Warren Mundine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/warren-mundine>. But on 31 January 
the Bundjalung man’s term as chairman of the prime minister’s Indigenous 
Advisory Council will be up.

Included in his parting advice to Malcolm Turnbull is a recommendation that 
the prime minister fight the impulse to seeIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> as a single 
group, for which a single person – either himself or Noel Pearson or, perhaps 
lately, Stan Grant – can be appointed oracle.

“That’s one of the things I find quite strange in the system, because getting 
back to history, there were over 500 groups in Australia,” Mundine says. “And 
then you had the Torres Strait Islanders, a distant group, and then the 
Tasmanians, another distant group. It was never a one Aboriginal culture, there 
was never such a thing.”

I spoke about the frustration of Aboriginal people … we got the 
recommendations 25 years ago, we want action
Warren Mundine 
Mundine calls it the “Post Office hotel approach,” named for the pub he used 
to drink at in Redfern, the centre of Australia’s Indigenous rights movement in 
Sydney.

“We were there drinking with all brothers and sisters … all great people,” he 
says. “As soon as a fight broke out we all split straight along cultural lines. 
All of a sudden we were Bundjalung, all of a sudden we were Wiradjuri, we were 
whatever, and that is ingrained into our DNA.

“And of course we do look at these things with a larger approach as Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islanders, but deep down, I’m Bundjalung.”

It’s for this reason that he’s sceptical of the decades-long push towards a 
national treaty that has gained momentum again in the lead-up to a proposed 
referendum on recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the 
constitution.

It’s clear who would sign on behalf of the commonwealth of Australia, but who 
should sign on behalf of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples?

“I am a strong supporter of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture, who 
speaks for country, and the only people who speak for country are those 
traditional owners of country,” he says. “You go to the Northern Territory and 
you try and talk about country and it’s not your country, you’ll get run out of 
town.

Indigenous prison rates: Mundine says plan for fresh inquiry is a joke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/mundine-pans-dickhead-plan-for-new-inquiry-into-indigenous-prison-rates>
“So you have got to get a real, representative, local treaty process. 
Otherwise all you’re doing is modelling the non-Indigenous system now, where 
you have a group of people talking from above-down.”

Mundine knows more than most about the non-Indigenous political system. He 
climbed the ladder of the Australian Labor party to become national secretary 
in 2006, stepping down a year later. He served on the Howard government’s 
advisory council on Aboriginal affairs and has continued to advise every prime 
minister since, from Rudd to Turnbull.

He was appointed chairman of the newly constructed Indigenous Advisory Council 
by the then prime minister,Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, in 2013.

It makes sense, he says, that Turnbull wants to appoint a new chairman, to 
distinguish himself from his predecessor.

“Abbott was a whirlwind [with a] reformist approach, and shifting, moving the 
goalposts and moving them quickly,” Mundine said. “Turnbull is coming off the 
back of that. His focus is about, ‘How do you change those socioeconomic 
outcomes?’ It’s more of a business-focused approach.”

Three months ago, Mundine went on national television and called one of 
Turnbull’s senior ministers a 'dickhead'

While Abbott had been active in Indigenous affairs for a decade or more, 
regularly living and working in remote communities, Turnbull has his focus 
elsewhere.

It is not necessarily a weakness: much of what Abbott did, from introducing 
the Indigenous advancement strategy to trialling the Healthy Welfare Card 
income management scheme, has been unpopular and heavily criticised – at times 
even by Mundine.

There is something to be said for having a clean slate and Mundine recognises 
he is part of the detritus of governments past.

It didn’t help that, three months ago, Mundine went on national television and 
called one or more of Turnbull’s senior ministers a “dickhead” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/mundine-pans-dickhead-plan-for-new-inquiry-into-indigenous-prison-rates>
. It was in response to an announcement that the attorney general, George 
Brandis, and the Indigenous affairs minister, Nigel Scullion, had asked the 
Australian Law Reform Commission to conduct an inquiry into Indigenous 
incarceration – just weeks after the royal commission into child protection and 
youth detention in the Northern Territory had begun.

“I don’t know who the dickhead is who actually thought up this incredibly 
brilliant idea,” Mundine told Sky News, describing the inquiry as “a total 
waste of taxation money”. Scullion returned fire in what Mundine described as a 
“heated exchange”.

“I just spoke about the frustration of Aboriginal people,” he told Guardian 
Australia at the time. “We are just tired of these things … we have got the 
recommendations from [the royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody] 
25 years ago, we want action.”

Using a headline-grabbing word to express that frustration was a deliberate 
strategy. In the Australian media and politics, Mundine says, you occasionally 
need to upset people to get attention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Findigenous-australia-warren-mundine-treaty-consultation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346baa8c05d55bf3d19f0f86df93f04524a60e4c%2F0_321_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Warren%20Mundine%20looks%20back%3A%20'Tony%20Abbott%20was%20a%20whirlwind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Findigenous-australia-warren-mundine-treaty-consultation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Warren%20Mundine%20looks%20back%3A%20%27Tony%20Abbott%20was%20a%20whirlwind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Findigenous-australia-warren-mundine-treaty-consultation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346baa8c05d55bf3d19f0f86df93f04524a60e4c%2F0_321_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
 Warren Mundine in Canberra. Of royal commissions, he says: ‘Aboriginal people 
become just sort of spectators in the whole process.’ Photograph: Mick 
Tsikas/AAP 
He had used the same strategy four weeks earlier to talk about rates of family 
violence in Indigenous communities,writing in the Australian that 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/indigenous-people-must-find-a-voice-to-condemn-domestic-violence/news-story/1670a3fe4f2651819f4625023b7c480f>
: “Frankly, if Indigenous people remain silent we deserve to be tarnished.”

This time the group he upset was the very same he was trying to help: 
Indigenous women. Amy McGuire, a Darumbal and South Sea Islander journalist,
wrote for Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/if-you-think-aboriginal-women-are-silent-about-domestic-violence-youre-not-listening>
: “If you think Aboriginal women have been silent, it’s only because you 
haven’t heard us.”

Mundine said he knew his comments would be controversial. “Look, there’s 
Aboriginal people been working in this space for ages,” he said. “It was a 
deliberate approach … I’m of that belief that sometimes you’ve got to toss a 
bomb out there to shake things up.”

Noel Pearson says 'soft bigotry' of the left the biggest challenge to 
Indigenous reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/noel-pearson-says-soft-bigotry-of-the-left-the-biggest-challenge-to-indigenous-reform>
It worked, he says, because it had reignited conversations about Aboriginal 
family violence in spheres where it was not being discussed. That talk has yet 
to lead to action, and Mundine is less concrete about what form that action 
should take. His only recommendation is that it not be another royal 
commission. He says they are too expensive, take too long and make 
recommendations that are too easily ignored.

“I know that the longer royal commissions get dragged out the more there’s a 
lot more money being spent, a lot more judges and lawyers, and Aboriginal 
people become just sort of spectators in the whole process,” he says.

There is also a risk that processes such as the Northern Territory royal 
commission, which sprang from an ABC Four Corners investigation into abuse at 
Don Dale youth detention centre, will further cement negative stereotypes about 
Indigenous peoples.

While the rates of Indigenous incarceration are much higher than 
non-Indigenous incarceration – Indigenous adults are 14 times more likely to be 
imprisoned, and Indigenous children are 26 times more likely – Mundine says it 
still only affects a portion of the Indigenous population.

“There’s 600,000 Aboriginals in Australia, only 10,000 Aboriginals in the 
justice system,” he said. “That makes 590,000 other Aboriginals that aren’t, 
but all I hear about is the 10. And that is a … that’s a problem. There are so 
many other good things that are happening.”

Among the good things he lists is the New South Wales government’s 
rediscovering Indigenous language project, which he labels an economic 
development project for the benefits to education and career outcomes that stem 
from the boost to identity and self-esteem of learning an ancestral language.

Warren Mundine 'not told' about inquiry into Indigenous prison rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/30/warren-mundine-not-told-about-inquiry-into-indigenous-prison-rates>
His criticism is close to that of Pearson, who has for the past 20 years 
blamed the “soft bigotry of low expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/noel-pearson-says-soft-bigotry-of-the-left-the-biggest-challenge-to-indigenous-reform>
” – with one key difference. Where Pearson points to the “leftist media”, 
Mundine blames the government. Pearson, like Mundine, has at times been the 
dominant Indigenous voice head by the government.

The targets the government has set itself, mainly through the Close the Gap 
process, are too low, he says, based on what is “achievable and not 
embarrassing”.

“I have many conversations where people say, ‘That target is a bit too high, 
what if we don’t make it?’ Well, if at the very least, if we don’t make it then 
we have data that tells us why we didn’t make it and we can work on that and 
fix it.

“I can assure people there’s no embarrassment in being competitive, it 
actually helps motivate people to do things.”
 