
A Chinese campaign to have documents related to Japan’s use of wartime sex 
slaves and its bloody invasion of Nanjing recognised by Unesco has sparked a 
new round of diplomatic tension between Beijing and Tokyo.

A Unesco panel in Abu Dhabi will announce on Friday successful nominations for 
inclusion in theUN body’s Memory of the World programme 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/flagship-project-activities/memory-of-the-world/homepage/>
, amid efforts by Japanese officials to block the bid.

Japan  <>lodged protests after China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
asked Unesco to recognise items relating to the Rape of Nanjing, in which tens 
of thousands of people died after Japanese troops invaded the southern Chinese 
city in December 1937.

Tokyo has questioned the authenticity of Chinese archival materials related to 
the incident, and to an estimated 200,000 women, mainly from the Asian 
mainland, who were forced to work in wartime brothels.

The two countries adhere to dramatically contrasting accounts of the Rape of 
Nanjing.

While Chinese historians claim that Japanese imperial army troops killed more 
than 300,000 soldiers and civilians in a six-week rampage, some Japanese 
historians insist the number was much lower.

Japan’s official position is that “the killing of a large number of 
noncombatants, looting and other acts occurred”, but that “it is difficult to 
determine” the actual number of victims.

Japan’s top government spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, said he regretted China’s 
decision. “It seeks to unnecessarily emphasise a negative legacy from a certain 
period in the past involving Japan andChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>,” he told reporters.

“When Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and China are making 
efforts to improve relations, China is trying to use Unesco for political 
purposes. It is quite regrettable.”

Unesco’s director-general, Irina Bokova, will study the recommendations of a 
14-member panel before deciding which of more than 80 nominations should go on 
the register.

Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, who has said he will uphold previous 
official apologies to surviving sex slaves –euphemistically known as “comfort 
women” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/18/forced-prostitution-wartime-japan-korea>
, did not issue a fresh apologyin his statement to mark 70 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/shinzo-abe-japan-no-new-apology-second-world-war-anniversary-speech>
 since the end of the second world war in August.

Abe, a nationalist who supports less critical appraisals of Japan’s wartime 
actions, has voiced support for the claim that there is no evidence that the 
women were forced to work in frontline brothels by Japanese military or 
government authorities.

A foreign ministry official in Tokyo said China had rejected requests to make 
the Unesco documents public and to discuss the nominations with Japanese 
historians.

“China is offering a unilateral account of history, despite diverging views 
that exist between Chinese and Japanese academics regarding historical facts,” 
the official, who requested anonymity, told the Guardian.


Relations between Tokyo and Beijing have improved in the wake of two meetings 
between Abe and the Chinese leader Xi Jinping.

But disagreements over wartime history and competing claims to the Senkaku 
islands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/senkaku-islands> in the East China 
Sea continue to overshadow strong trade ties between Asia’s two biggest 
economies.

“We are always talking about the past instead of our common future,” the 
foreign ministry official said. “We are not saying that the comfort women never 
existed, or that the Nanjing massacre never happened, but events of 70 or more 
years ago are dominating discussions that instead should be more 
future-oriented.”

China, meanwhile, accused Japan of trying to block its bid to get the 
documents recognised by Unesco.

Guo Biqiang, a Chinese archive official, told the Xinhua news agency: “This 
year marks the 70th anniversary of the victory of the world anti-fascist war, 
as well as the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese aggression. 
[Unesco inscription] would remind us to remember history and cherish peace.”

Japan’s two nominations include memoirs and drawings by former Japanese 
soldiers who were held in Siberian labour camps.

Since its launch in 1997, the Memory of the World programme has registered 
dozens of submissions, including the diaries ofAnne Frank  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank>and an annotated copy of Karl 
Marx’s Das Kapital.
 