
 Have we fallen into a mesmerized state that makes us accept as inevitable 
that which is inferior or detrimental, as though having lost the will or the 
vision to demand that which is good?”

- Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (1962)

Society benefits from hundreds of thousands of chemical products, but some 
have undesired effects. We also produce a lot of waste, much of it hazardous, 
and seem to think it will go away and vanish. Yet - despite being separated by 
half a century and half a planet - Rachel Carson, and theBeijing anti-smog 
police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/beijing-creates-anti-smog-police-to-tackle-air-polluters>
 are united in clearly demonstrating that chemical products damage not just the 
environment and human health, but jobs and the economy.

Our planet – and its global commons - do not have the means to detoxify wastes 
unassisted, so all countries should be concerned about managing and disposing 
of chemicals and products. The international legal framework for addressing 
growing air, land and water pollution – and illegal dumping of hazardous wastes 
across borders - is partly established by three global United Nations 
conventions: the Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions. Any planet-wide 
solution for managing chemicals, wastes and pollution implies implementing them 
effectively.


Toxic smogs engulf many mega-cities, up to a reported 12.7m metric tonnes 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/347/6223/768> of plastic enters the 
oceans each year, and a reported 40-50m tonnes of electronic waste illegally 
crosses borders annually. All are consequences of unsustainable consumption and 
poor management of polluting products.


Turning the tide on ocean degradation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-gef-partner-zone/2017/jan/13/turning-tide-ocean-degradation-coral-barrier-reef>
After traversing our rivers, oceans and atmosphere, many of those chemicals 
end up in cities and villages, on our plates, and in our bodies. Most things 
around us derive from, or are contaminated by, some chemical product. Our 
children grow up with hundreds of chemicals accumulating in their bodies. Human 
bodies accumulate more than a thousand man-made chemicals, some of which 
undoubtedly affect health, including retarding development in young children, 
prompting dementia in the elderly, and causing cancer. The World Health 
Organizationattributes 12.6 million annual deaths 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/deaths-attributable-to-unhealthy-environments/en/>
 to an unhealthy environment.

International negotiations on controlling and managing dangerous chemicals are 
often challenging, as they have to balance and trade off economic interests, 
impacts on markets, jobs, health, livelihoods and the environment. Placed in 
the right perspective, and subject to rigorous scientific assessment, the 
business case for managing chemicals and wastes better is strikingly evident. 
The World Bank estimates that air pollution costs the global economyabout 
$225bn (£182bn) a year 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/09/08/air-pollution-deaths-cost-global-economy-225-billion>
.


Lost labour income and increased healthcare costs together justify efforts to 
reduce pollution and invest in alternatives – and create opportunities to do so 
- particularly in less-developed regions. There are significant opportunities 
for safer, non-toxic alternatives, for better design to extend value chains 
over products’ life cycle, and for recycling: all can be exploited by industry 
for economic, environmental, and social gain.


Consumers send powerful signals to industry and governments. We have 
individual and collective responsibilities in how we consume and dispose of 
products and wastes, since pollutions knows no borders. However all nations 
must urgently prioritise their management: what individual people or countries 
can do is limited.

The Stockholm Convention, with 180 national parties, was instrumental in 
banning the widespread use of DDT, and restricting it to such specific uses as 
managing malaria epidemics in certain regions. Efforts to find a cure for 
malaria and research into alternatives have also reduced its use.


So far the Convention has listed 26 persistent organic pollutants (POPs), 
unfortunately only a small fraction of the chemicals known to be toxic to human 
health and the environment. With financial support from - inter alia - the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), many countries eliminated a large part of 
them from consumer markets and industrial production. By June 2016 the GEF had 
committed $1bn, leveraging approximately $3bn in co-financing - for projects 
targeted at global reductions, for example of: 10,200 tonnes of PCBs used in 
power transformers; some 100,000 tonnes of PFOS used in carpeting, leather and 
upholstery; and 6,130 tonnes of obsolete POPs stockpiles.


Impressive progress, but challenges remain as large stockpiles persist in many 
parts of the world: leakage from them may result in air, water and soil 
contamination, causing environmental health issues particularly for vulnerable 
groups.

Industry remains an important partner. It has the know-how, technologies and 
resources to reduce or eliminate the use of such chemicals and develop better 
alternatives. Public-private partnerships brokered by the international 
community - such as thePartnership for Action on Computing Equipment 
<http://www.basel.int/Implementation/TechnicalAssistance/Partnerships/PACE/Overview/tabid/3243/Default.aspx>
 - have made best practices widely available, and have developed guidance for 
governments and other stakeholders.


Adopting a life-cycle approach is key, as are policies and incentives to 
encourage and accelerate a shift towards seeing waste as an economic 
opportunity if managed properly, rather than an environmental, social and 
economic cost.
Nevertheless, new chemicals and products proliferate and waste increases as do 
demands for chemicals in food production. These continue to strain meagre 
resources for sound management. The global chemicals industry earns more than 
$5tn annually but contributes less than 1% of that to managing chemicals and 
wastes, through the GEF chemicals and waste portfolio ($2.7bn) and the UN 
Environment’s Special Programme ($14m).


Sound management of chemicals and wastes must thus be mainstreamed throughout 
all the sustainable development goals, in which aspects of their use are 
ubiquitous. Focussing on impacts on the global environment and human health 
helps solve challenges – whether climate change, biodiversity loss or chemicals 
and waste management – and promotes wider sustainable development.

The conventions’ Conference of the Parties in April will address some of these 
challenges and explore a greater role for industry. The conventions create 
opportunities not barriers. Pollution, in all its forms, undermines economic 
development, allowing poverty, instability and other crises to persist. The 
SDGs will surely fail if we cannot halt and reverse the rising tide of 
contamination, ocean plastics, toxic waste, and poison pumped into our shared 
planet. But sound management of chemicals and wastes will make it healthier, 
wealthier and more productive.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by The Global Environment 
Facility <https://www.thegef.org/gef/>, a sponsor of the Guardian’s Global 
Development Professionals Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network>.
 