
If you’re below retirement age, you’ll never have seen it so big or so bright. 
Amid all the political seismic shocks, the universe is throwing in a stunning 
natural phenomenon this week, with the appearance of the largest“supermoon” 
<http://guardian.ng/features/biggest-supermoon-set-for-november-14/> to grace 
our skies in 68 years.

The moon <https://www.theguardian.com/science/moon> is coming closer to Earth 
than is usual on its orbit on Monday, and the side facing us will be fully 
illuminated by the sun. The combination produces what is known as a “super 
perigee full moon”, and we will witness one of the most impressive examples as 
it passes closer to Earth on Monday than at any point since 1948.

It should be around a third brighter than the smallest full moon and will be a 
mere 225,623 miles away, compared with the 252,088 miles at its furthest point 
from Earth. The average distance of the moon, which keeps an imperfect 27-day 
oval orbit, is 238,855 miles.

Full moons always rise around sunset which, cloud cover permitting, will be a 
good time to spot the “supermoon”, said Dr Chris North, science lecturer at 
Cardiff University. Writing forthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/get-ready-for-the-biggest-supermoon-in-nearly-six-decades-68637>
, he said: “The reason this perigee full moon is quite so ‘super’ is because 
perigee and full moons happen at almost exactly the same time, so the moon is 
at its closest possible when it’s also at its fullest. There are a number of 
other subtle effects that cause the moon’s orbit to vary slightly in size and 
shape, but this one pips the last few decades’ worth of super perigee full 
moons by a few hundred kilometres.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhat-is-the-supermoon-the-science-behind-the-lunar-wonder-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20supermoon%3F%20The%20science%20behind%20the%20lunar%20wonder%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhat-is-the-supermoon-the-science-behind-the-lunar-wonder-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20supermoon%3F%20The%20science%20behind%20the%20lunar%20wonder%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fwhat-is-the-supermoon-the-science-behind-the-lunar-wonder-video-explainer&media=>
What is the supermoon? The science behind the lunar wonder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/nov/10/what-is-the-supermoon-the-science-behind-the-lunar-wonder-video-explainer>
“These differences are pretty small, and with the moon rising so high in the 
sky, as it does in the winter, it’ll be quite hard to notice any difference 
without comparing photographs. Of course, it might be cloudy – though it can be 
rather atmospheric to see the bright, full moon through thin cloud,” he said.

“Even if it’s completely overcast, there are plenty of other chances to see 
the moon as it gradually moves past its full phase over the next few nights, so 
don’t be disheartened. It rises at different times of day and night as it 
orbits the Earth ... but it’s not going anywhere.”

At around 11.30am on Monday the moon will reach its closest point to us – the 
perigee moment – and will then begin moving away, very slowly. By 1.30pm the 
Earth, sun and moon will be almost perfectly in a line – a phenomenon known as 
a “syzygy” – with the moon directly opposite the sun. So the best time to see 
it in the UK will be when the sun sets, when it will only be about 50km further 
away than in the late morning – not much in the grand scheme of things.

Neil deGrasse Tyson, director of New York’s Hayden Planetarium, thinks 
“supermoon” is an unsuitable term. “I don’t know who first called it a 
supermoon,” he said. “I don’t know, but if you have a 16-inch pizza, would you 
call that a super pizza compared with a 15-inch pizza?”

If it is cloudy on Monday night then fear not. You will be able to see a 
comparable display again on 25 November 2034.
 