
Marco Silva would probably prefer to be picking up league points than 
examining the possibilities presented by cup football in England, though 
perhaps theHull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> manager 
should view his first two games as a honeymoon period.

Quite an eventful one at that. Victory at the first time of asking in the FA 
Cup at the weekend may have been marred by a shortage of home fans – Hull 
supporters were staging a protest against the club owners – but this occasion 
was even weirder. First of all Silva was up against the only other Portuguese 
manager in the Premier League, and possibly the only one to claim to know him 
well. “He is one of the game’s good young coaches and I hope he wins some 
matches,” José Mourinho said. “Just not this one.”

Juan Mata and Marouane Fellaini put Manchester United on top against Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report>
Second, Silva was joining the tiny band of managers to have taken over at a 
clubinvolved in a semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report>
. Not a position that goes hand in hand with being bottom of the table, even if 
Hull enjoyed a run to the FA Cup final three years ago. Theoretically, at least 
before the game started, Silva could regard himself as one step from Wembley 
were he in a mood to count his blessings.

Then the game did start and Silva was suddenly confronted by the enormity of 
the gulf that can exist between Premier League sides. All through the first 
half the electronic perimeter hoardings kept flashing a message from the home 
side’s official tractor partner, not a development expected at the KCom Stadium 
anytime soon. This was not just a noisy near full house at Old Trafford either, 
this was a crowd anxious to seeManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> record a ninth 
successive win. As if that did not promise entertainment enough after the thin 
fare of the past three years, to judge by the giddy chanting in the car park an 
hour before kick-off, whole coachloads of excitable schoolboys had turned up 
for the express purpose of seeing Wayne Rooney break Sir Bobby Charlton’s 
scoring record by reaching a club 250.

Mourinho did not disappoint anyone on that front, naming Rooney behind Marcus 
Rashford in attack. Zlatan Ibrahimovic was apparently ill, though he may have 
been rested anyway with an eye on Liverpool on Sunday. Rooney did not exactly 
disappoint either, though if any of his admirers have been keeping up with 
events these last couple of years they will be aware he no longer leads the 
line like the snorting young bull of old but rather sits in a figurative 
armchair within a few yards of the penalty spot waiting for opportunities to 
arrive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEj-GxlXqp4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEj-GxlXqp4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEj-GxlXqp4&media=>
 José Mourinho: Manchester United fans must improve for Liverpool match. 
He can still stick the ball away when given the chance, though perhaps not as 
acrobatically or as efficiently as Ibrahimovic, yet the trouble with this plan 
is that it transmits itself too readily to defenders. A Rooney waiting in the 
middle is a Rooney too easy to mark or, put another way, too difficult for his 
team-mates to find, which is why from the midpoint of the first half onwards 
the striker’s support cast began to take matters into their own hands. One by 
one United’s forwards tired of finding a way through a packed penalty area and 
tried potshots. Henrikh Mkhitaryan had three in a row, the first the best 
chance of all after neat work by Juan Mata, then Antonio Valencia, Paul Pogba, 
Rashford and Ander Herrera all tried and failed.

When half-time arrived Rooney was one of the few red-shirted players on the 
pitch still to have a shy at goal. His frustration led him to have a word with 
Kevin Friend at the end of the half, at which point a supportive crowd began 
chanting his name. He probably needed the encouragement. The only sniff he had 
had was right on the stroke of the interval following a thrilling break by 
Mkhitaryan but Rooney and Rashford managed to get in each other’s way to allow 
David Meyler to make a clearance.

Manchester United v Hull City: EFL Cup semi-final first leg – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-v-hull-city-efl-cup-semi-final-first-leg-live>
All this time, though Hull were defending doggedly, they were managing to 
create a few opportunities. Adama Diomandé even struck the post, which was 
closer than United had come, though he was adjudged to have been offside. 
Mourinho’s plan to grab enough goals to kill the contest before the second leg 
was being jeopardised by the old failing of domination without penetration. In 
the adjacent dugout Silva must have been encouraged by what he was seeing, 
apart from the consideration that standards in the Premier League must be quite 
high if a team as tidy as Hull are struggling at the bottom.

Finally, six minutes into the second half, a diagonal ball from Pogba gave 
Rooney the sight of goal he was looking for, only for a well-struck shot to 
flash the wrong side of a post. Mata put United ahead shortly after that, 
Mkhitaryan’s header to set up the chance effectively cutting out Rooney. When 
Mkhitaryan telegraphed a pass on United’s next attack, all too obviously trying 
to tee up Rooney for the record but succeeding only in allowing Hull to 
intercept, it began to look as if it would not be the captain’s night. Sure 
enough, within minutes Rooney was making way for Anthony Martial. There will be 
other opportunities, no doubt, but everyone at Old Trafford would like to see 
this saga brought to a conclusion sooner rather than later. Not least because 
going into games thinking of records invites distraction from what should be 
the main focus, the opposition. Hull were pretty good here, and not just in 
keeping Rooney off the scoresheet.
 