
In 1967, my father took me and eight of my brothers and sisters on a 
whitewater trip down the Colorado River through Grand Canyon National Park. We 
camped on its massive sandbars, swam in its silty waters and explored the 
ancient geology of this iconic American landscape. He wanted us to experience 
the river and to understand the benefits that stem from our nation’s commitment 
to protecting its inspiring natural treasures.


I had these ideas in mind when I took my own daughter, Kick, down the Grand 
Canyon 40 years later, in 2007. We joined my old friend, the great 
anthropologist Wade Davis, and his daughter Tara. Davis was working on a book, 
and the four of us were guests of Imax cinematographer Greg MacGillivray, who 
released his film about our journey, Grand Canyon Adventure: River At Risk, in 
2008.

The trip, book and film focused on the myopic water management policies that 
led to the construction of the two giant dams that bookend the Grand Canyon – 
Glen Canyon Dam and Hoover Dam – and the environmental devastation they’ve 
wrought.

Lives in the balance: climate change and the Marshall Islands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/15/marshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas>
We weren’t aware, at that time, of another insidious threat facing the 
Canyon’s fragile ecosystems and the people who depend on them: uranium mining. 
As rock climbing phenom Alex Honnold pointed out herein the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/22/alex-honnold-opinion-protect-america-national-parks-environmental-threats>
 last May in a bold call to protect our public lands, the Grand Canyon is at 
once grappling with contamination from past mining and threatened by proposed 
new mining.

Uranium’s boom-and-bust history has left hundreds of abandoned mines leaching 
toxic contaminants into this desert region’s vital water sources. In 2010, the 
US Geological Survey found that15 springs and five wells 
<http://www.grandcanyontrust.org/sites/default/files/gc_uranium_USGSsummaryContamination.pdf>
 within the Grand Canyon’s watershed had dangerous levels of uranium “related 
to mining processes”.

The National Park Service warns hikers passing Horn Creek, within Grand Canyon 
National Park,not to drink the radioactive water 
<http://azdailysun.com/news/canyon-creek-still-flows-radioactive/article_8c775e0d-78c7-5b6d-beb9-ecb665bc39ae.html>
, still poisoned by a mine that closed in 1969. Desert animals find 
life-sustaining moisture in collecting ponds where uranium concentrations can be
80 times greater <http://www.grandcanyontrust.org/uranium-mining> than safe 
drinking water standards.

On nearby Navajo lands, abandoned uranium mines have left a lethal legacy of 
cancer and disease among Navajo former mine workers and their families. New 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) research showsuranium in the 
bodies of newborn Navajo babies. 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/04/10/473547227/for-the-navajo-nation-uranium-minings-deadly-legacy-lingers>

Tens of millions of Americans downstream depend on the Colorado River for 
drinking water and crop irrigation, yet government regulators in the thrall of 
powerful mining companies allow uranium extraction to continue at sites near 
the Grand Canyon. The Canyon Mine, six miles from the South Rim, sits above an 
aquifer that providesthe only source of water 
<http://archive.azcentral.com/news/articles/20130326grand-canyon-uranium-mine-ire.html>
 to the 700-member Havasupai Tribe.

Recent surges in uranium prices prompted a rapid rise in mining claims, from 
about 1,000 a year in 2005 to more than 8,000 in 2009. Concerned about the 
impacts of a new uranium boom on this priceless American landscape, President 
Obama, in 2012, imposed a20-year moratorium 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-grandcanyon-uranium-idUSTRE8081NA20120109>
 on new mining activity on more than one million acres of public land adjoining 
Grand Canyon National Park.

The National Mining Association (NMA), whose membership includes many foreign 
companies, responded by suing to overturn the ban.Four states are supporting 
NMA’s suit 
<http://publiclands.utah.gov/current-projects/national-mining-association-v-jewell-uranium-withdrawal-case/>
, despite the real national security peril; this misguided litigation could 
allow potentially hostile foreign nations to mine nuclear material from lands 
owned by the American public.

It is time to make President Obama’s temporary ban permanent. Last fall, 
Arizona Congressman Raúl Grijalva and southwestern tribal leaders collaborated 
on a bill that would do just that.The Greater Grand Canyon Heritage National 
Monument Act 
<https://democrats-naturalresources.house.gov/media/press-releases/grijalva-introduces-landmark-bill-to-create-grand-canyon-area-national-monument-honoring-regional-tribal-history>
 would establish a new national monument on 1.7m acres of public land 
surrounding Grand Canyon National Park. On 20 September this year, in a show of 
growing political will, US Representative Ann Kirkpatrick of Arizona joined 
Grijalva as the bill’s cosponsor.

Monument status would end future uranium mining, protect grazing and 
recreational access, defend old-growth ponderosa pine forests and critical 
wildlife corridors, safeguard the human rights and cultural heritage of tribal 
peoples and augment the staggering economic contributions made by the nearly 6 
million visitors who come to marvel at Grand Canyon National Park and its 
astonishing surroundings every year.

The sensible piece of legislation has virtually no chance of consideration in 
our polarized Congress, buta poll released on 20 September 
<http://www.grandcanyontrust.org/poll-voters-nationwide-strongly-Grand-Canyon-monument>
 shows broad support among likely American voters: 82% back monument 
establishment and 93% feel that the Grand Canyon is a national treasure for all 
Americans, not just people who live nearby. As labor and civil rights activist 
Dolores Huertahas pointed out 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/protect-americas-heritage-protect-the-grand-canyon_us_5804f384e4b0f42ad3d2655e>
, more than half a million people have submitted comments in support of Grand 
Canyon protection, and many organizations have endorsed the proposed monument.

President Obama, who has made conservation and climate change mitigation 
cornerstones of his presidency, should honor that public will by employing the 
Antiquities Act to establish the monument.

The lucky ones: Native American tribe receives $48m to flee climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/native-american-tribes-first-nations-climate-change-environment-indican-removal-act>
Threats to the Grand Canyon abound. Those sandbars I camped on with my family 
in 1967? They are gone. Three of the Grand Canyon’seight native fish species 
are extinct. <https://www.nps.gov/grca/learn/nature/fish-native.htm> Glen 
Canyon and Hoover Dams have ended the Colorado River’s natural flush of 
sediment, which has backfilled and drastically reduced the storage capacity of 
Lakes Powell and Mead, a situation exacerbated by climate change. At the 
confluence of the Colorado and Little Colorado Rivers, as well as at the South 
Rim town of Tusayan, greedy commercial developers continue to push destructive 
projects.

My father taught my siblings and me that these majestic landscapes, and the 
shared values of our constitutional democracy, were the common ground where 
Americans of diverse races, colors, cultures and religions became molded into a 
single nation. Historian Frederick Jackson Turner pointed out that our values 
and landscapes were intertwined; American democracy, he observed, emerged from 
the wilderness experience.

President Obama remains in office until 19 January, 2017. He should be 
commended for already protecting more than 4m acres of land. For all of our 
daughters and sons, we must now prevail upon him to protect the Grand Canyon 
before we lose this historic chance.

Robert F Kennedy, Jr is president of Waterkeeper Alliance 
<http://waterkeeper.org/> and the supervising attorney for Pace University 
School of Law’s Environmental Litigation Clinic 
<http://www.law.pace.edu/pace-environmental-litigation-clinic>
 