
Wow! What a reaction to All Aboard! The Country Bus 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07r2s1r> on Bank Holiday Monday (Watch this, 
TV and radio, G2, 29 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/29/mondays-best-tv-great-british-menu-all-aboard-the-country-bus-the-coopers-vs-the-rest>
). Viewing figures from ratings agencyovernights.tv <http://overnights.tv> show 
that at its peak 973,000 people were watching the BBC4 programme, the latest 
slow travel programme to hit our screens. Nearly a million viewers! Great 
credit must go to The Garden Productions Ltd for producing what must be one of 
the best films ever made about the Dales landscape and capturing it so 
perfectly in the late spring sunshine.

But who is behind the Northern Dalesman bus service? Well, it’s the Dales and 
Bowland Community Interest Company – a volunteer-run subsidiary of the 
Yorkshire Dales Society, a registered charity. It is a social enterprise which 
has been managing the Dales Bus network of bus services in theYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> Dales area since 2007. The 
directors plan, manage and market the network themselves, and competitively 
tender the operation of the buses to reputable local companies.

About 14 different services run during the summer months, including the 
Northern Dalesman, Ingleborough Pony and Nidderdale Rambler; and about five 
services all year round, including the Yorkshire Dalesman, the Wensleydale 
Flyer and the Cravenlink.

The economics of rural bus operation are such that on most services the income 
from ticket sales and the reimbursement rates for concessionary pass users is 
insufficient to cover operating costs. Directors have to work hard to secure 
funding support from organisations, businesses and individuals to keep the 
network running.

There is currently an urgent appeal for funding for their 856 Wensleydale 
Flyer winter service, which runs between Hawes, Leyburn and Northallerton, 
providing the only Sunday bus link in the area. If new funding cannot be 
secured, then sadly the service will end in October, leaving local residents 
isolated and denying potential visitors access to the area.

The company is also seeking offers of funding for summer 2017 and beyond to 
secure the Dales Bus network, including the Northern Dalesman service featured 
in the programme. Further information about the Northern Dalesman and the 
DalesBus network can be found atwww.dalesbus.org/thecountrybus 
<http://www.dalesbus.org/countrybus.html>. Small donations can also be made on 
the website.
Jan Stallworthy
Ilkely, West Yorkshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 