
The famous Jean Louis dress that Marilyn Monroe wore to sing “Happy birthday, 
Mr President” toJohn F Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-f-kennedy> at New York’s Madison 
Square Garden has been sold for $4.8m at auction in Los Angeles. The dress was 
bought by the museum chain Ripley’s Believe It or Not and surpasses the last 
most expensive dress sold at auction – Monroe’s white costume fromThe Seven 
Year Itch ($4.6m).

So, more than half a century after she died (mere weeks after JFK’s birthday), 
the Monroe death industry keeps turning (and collecting money), though this 
truly is a fabulous dress that led to an unforgettable image – Monroe, 
shimmering in the spotlight, singing to her married lover. The woman, the man, 
the dress, the moment, the approaching shadows mistaken for ordinary darkness – 
a scene that is universally recognised and viewed as representative of a bygone 
1960s era. Rightly so, but for women, maybe the dress represents more than just 
a high-end piece of pop culture.

Here’s the thing – I hate that creepy dress and what it symbolises. At least 
the white dress fromThe Seven Year Itch was naughty – sure, it sexualised 
Monroe as it famously blew up from the wind in the subway grate, but there was 
mischief in that image, an energy and insolence.

The sparkly gown has none of this brio. Monroe could barely walk in it – it 
was so tight she had to be sewn into it. Combined with the shoes, she was 
forced painfully on to her tippy-toes. (Never trust clothes designed to 
restrict your chances of escaping.) Then there’s the flesh-coloured fabric, 
which, when the lights shone on it, made Marilyn seem quasi-nude. That’s nice 
for a reportedly shy, fragile woman – appearing to stand naked on stage in 
front of thousands of strangers.

That’s just what’s there. What’s missing is worse, namely, any sense of 
Marilyn’s own agency. This doesn’t come across as her own cute idea – there’s 
the sense of a valuable doll being positioned by powerful men, who just want 
her to tell the world about another powerful man. They pull the cord on her 
back and make her do “her thing”. They don’t go so far as to make her jump out 
of a cake, smeared with buttercream, but they might as well have done. When 
Monroe opens her mouth to sing, it’s in her signature breathless little-girl 
voice that says in an unspoken way: “Please don’t hurt me, but I know you 
will”, and the crowd go wild.

This is what I see when I watch that 1962 footage. A bundle of shivering nerve 
endings in human form – almost too painful to behold. The exploitation of a 
hyper-vulnerable woman with crippling mental health problems by the rich and 
powerful, who, according to Monroe, passed her around “like meat”. The 
realisation that even one of the most celebrated women in the world could not 
protect herself. The sickening lack of surprise that Monroe was dead so soon 
afterwards.

There’s also a sense that this wasn’t just “the times”. Still today, there are 
echoes and lessons for women in the fate of Marilyn Monroe. She is still held 
up as some aspirational manifestation of womanly appeal, in a way that goes 
beyond her physical beauty, and even her vulnerability, into the realms of an 
almost childlike helplessness. Perhaps it’s this very belief – that a “real” 
woman must be vulnerable in some way – that at least contributed to someone 
such asHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
not winning the presidency. Too bossy, too strident, too powerful – and too 
unapologetic about the first three.

Certainly, had Clinton become president it would have been unthinkable to see 
Bill, or any other man, singing happy birthday to her in such a meek, 
subservient, “begging” kind of way. Perhaps therein lies not only the problem, 
but also the problem that’s never gone away.

Let’s hear it for our heroes in ermine
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a82131eb0e679f0f2cca2ee78f99bf9fccd1ec2%2F45_0_3409_2047%2F3409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20can%E2%80%99t%20dress%20up%20what%20happened%20to%20poor%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20can%E2%80%99t%20dress%20up%20what%20happened%20to%20poor%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a82131eb0e679f0f2cca2ee78f99bf9fccd1ec2%2F45_0_3409_2047%2F3409.jpg>
 The Lords at work earlier this month, before Theresa May has dropped plans to 
curb their influence. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/PA 
While plans for reform have been shelved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/government-ditches-plans-to-curb-lords-as-it-prepares-for-brexit-bill>
, theHouse of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/the-guardian-view-on-brexit-and-the-lords-power-to-examine>
 could still be threatened with having some powers taken away if it insists on 
carrying on rebelling against the government, blocking proposals and making 
moves against Brexit.

The last two Tory administrations have been finding the Lords (including, of 
course, the Ladies) very irritating. Which directly contradicts my view, which 
is that, suddenly, in a shock turnaround, theHouse of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> is a revelation.

In fact, I almost feel as though I owe the place an apology. All this time, 
I’ve been thinking that peers are just a bunch of over-entitled horrors, 
sitting around, stinking of cognac and cigars, waffling about passing the port 
and grouse shooting or some other outdated nonsense. I’ve pictured them 
clutching their pathetic status – inherited, bought or grovelled for? – close 
to them like so much soulless stained ermine. And I’m sure that still holds 
true in many cases.

However, then there’s the other frisky side to their lordships. Quite a few of 
them, particularly among the Liberal Democrat and Labour peers, are turning out 
to be a fairly lively and useful bunch, refusing to approve vile legislation, 
standing up to pressure, and, where Brexit is concerned, let’s be frank, doing 
the opposition’s job for them.

Of course, there are the trifling matters of feudalism, cronyism, ingrained 
privilege and so on. In many ways, it still seems equal parts amusing, surreal 
and enraging that such an institution exists. However, right now, there’s much 
to be grateful for. Certainly, it’s been an eye-opener for people like me who 
previously may not have thought much about the Lords except to brand it elitist 
and redundant. Elitist it may be. Redundant – perhaps not so much.

Sex and laundry? She should get a badge for that
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4371a7b2a8b318a31ced9c016938bc5cc8ce27%2F0_159_4002_2402%2F4002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20can%E2%80%99t%20dress%20up%20what%20happened%20to%20poor%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20can%E2%80%99t%20dress%20up%20what%20happened%20to%20poor%20Marilyn%20Monroe%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmarilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4371a7b2a8b318a31ced9c016938bc5cc8ce27%2F0_159_4002_2402%2F4002.jpg>
 Janet Ellis with her daughter, the singer Sophie Ellis Bextor, after receiving 
her MBE from the Duke of Cambridge this month. Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images
Former Blue Peter presenter Janet Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/02/the-butchers-hook-janet-ellis-review>
 has been shortlisted for theLiterary Review’s 2016 bad sex in fiction award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/17/bad-sex-award-2016-the-contenders-in-quotes>
 for her novel,The Butcher’s Hook.

She is facing stiff (I do apologise) competition from the likes of Tom 
Connolly forMen Like Air (“He watched her passport rise gradually out of the 
back pocket of her jeans in time with the rhythmic bobbing”) and Robert 
Seethaler forThe Tobacconist (“He closed his eyes and heard himself make a 
gurgling sound”). But Ellis’s is the best (“I am pinned like wet washing by his 
peg”). Erotica via the medium of laundry – where has this been all my life?

It is reported that Ellis is delighted by the nomination, which would seem to 
be thewhole point of the award <https://www.theguardian.com/books/badsexaward>. 
The objective, of course, is to smoke out those who would take deep umbrage at 
mockery, while celebrating the good sports.

If I were Ellis, I’d go along to the award ceremony with a basketful of 
clothes pegs and a jumbo bottle of Febreze. After all, this isn’t just an award 
about bad sex writing, it’s a very British one for Good Sense of Humour and who 
wouldn’t want to win that?
 