
One of my favourite dining memories involves a lunch that became a ­dinner at 
Galatoire's <http://www.galatoires.com/> restaurant in New Orleans 
<http://www.neworleansonline.com/>. I was with a party of locals including my 
friendJulia Reed <http://www.wowowow.com/users/julia>, a writer and epicurean 
from Mississippi who considers nine-hour lunches part of the well-lived life. 
Needless to say, memory is not as precisely etched as one might hope where 
alcohol is involved, as it always is in New Orleans, but I had lots of time 
that day to become ­acquainted with the city's classic Creole cuisine, which is 
one of the few great indigenous culinary traditions in America.

Foodies everywhere wondered if this ­tradition would survive the devastation of
Hurricane ­Katrina <http://www.guardian.co.uk/katrina/0,,1560620,00.html>. When 
I visited some nine months after the deluge, the jury was still out. 
Galatoire's was open, but many of the city's great restaurants remained 
shuttered and those that were open were struggling. My most recent visit has 
left me wildly optimistic and several pounds heavier. While the old temples of 
Creole cuisine have mostly reopened their doors, the post-Katrina dining scene 
is more varied than ever.
 Jay McInerney. Photograph: Chris Granger 
All the local gourmands agreed that Herbsaint <http://www.herbsaint.com/> 
should be my first stop. Chef Donald Link is an improbably tall and skinny 
native of ­Louisiana who studied in San Francisco. His menu at ­Herbsaint is 
happily eclectic, with a strong grounding in the local traditions, beginning 
with gumbo. "Gumbo was what made me want to be a chef," he told me when I 
cornered him outside the men's room. Link grew up in Cajun country, cooking 
with his grandmother. "Every day the menu starts with the gumbo." That day's 
­version, a dark brown, silky stew with homemade­andouille sausage 
<http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-andouille-sausage.htm> and tasso (ham) 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tasso_ham>, was one of the best I've ever had, 
the memory of which survived an excellent chicken and mushroom ­ravioli and a 
crispy, fattyMuscovy duck 
<http://www.feathersite.com/Poultry/Ducks/Musc/BRKScobies.html> confit.

The definition of gumbo is almost as slippery as that of Creole. Just as gumbo 
can contain pretty much any kind of meat or seafood, ­Creole is a vague and 
inclusive term for native New Orlean­ians, who may be black or white, depending 
on whom you're asking. Gumbo may be based on an African okra dish called 
quingombó, or it may derive from bouillabaisse. Or both. By comparison, it's 
easy to define the Cajuns (originally ­Acadians), French loyalists who chose to 
fleeNova Scotia <http://novascotia.com/en/home/default.aspx> rather than pledge 
allegiance to the British crown. Improbably, they ended up in swampy Louisiana, 
though their rural culture remained largely isolated from cosmopolitan New 
Orleans. In the 1960s, a brilliant Cajun chef namedPaul Prudhomme  
<http://www.chefpaul.com/site.php>was largely responsible for transplant­ing 
their cuisine to the city and making it famous.

"The best meal you're going to eat is down in the bayou," claims Todd, a bear 
of a man in a volum­in­ous, blindingly colourful paisley shirt who accosts me at
Bayona <http://www.bayona.com/>, chef Susan Spicer's 20-year-old restaurant in 
a 200-year-old cottage in the French Quarter. (Link worked here before opening 
Herb­saint.) Todd is a Cajun from Lafayette, Louisiana. He's in the oil 
business, but it's clear that eating is his true passion. We exchange notes on 
theFrench Laundry <http://www.frenchlaundry.com/> in Napa and the Fat Duck  
<http://www.fatduck.co.uk/>in Bray – and he has come from the bayou to eat at 
his favourite New Orleans restaurants, of which Bayona seems to top the list. 
Indeed, the sweetbreads (fried, of course) with a mustard ­vinaigrette are 
among the best I've ever had, washed down with an 08 Bastianich Sauvignon 
Blanc, though possibly bested by the smoked duck, cashew peanut butter and 
jelly sand­wich. Todd orders a fifth daiquiri and recommends the desserts at
Lilette <http://www.liletterestaurant.com/>, where I'm dining that night.

Lilette is a very pretty bistro in the garden ­district with a menu that seems 
at pains to avoid New Orleans traditions. Even the oysters are from the west 
coast, but the hanger steak is perfect and the fries cooked in duck fat are too 
good. My friend Julia, who lives nearby, says there are more ­restaurants 
post-Katrina than before, which is good news, though I realise I will have to 
eat more often if I want to scratch the surface.

The next morning I have a gut-busting breakfast at Brennan's 
<http://www.brennansneworleans.com/>, a local institution that opened its doors 
in 1955, just before its creator died in his sleep at the age of 45. I start, 
naturally, with turtle soup and move on to eggs bayou Lafourche – ­basically 
eggs benedict with a thick slice of andouille sausage – and manage to eat part 
of my friend's eggs Nouvelle Orleans, heaped with piles of ­crabmeat smothered 
in brandy cream sauce.

Less than an hour later I hit Cochon <http://www.cochonrestaurant.com/>, 
Link's newest restaurant, which opened some six months after Katrina and serves 
Cajun-inflected fare like fried alligator with chilli garlic aïoli, and fried 
rabbit livers with pepper jelly toast. The fried boudin balls with pickled 
peppers are especially delicious, as are all permutations of pork, and I am 
also very fond of the catfish courtboullion (pronounced coo booyon), a spicy, 
tomato-based stew. But my friendTom Piazza <http://www.tompiazza.com/>, author 
of Why New Orleans Matters, reminds me to save room for our next stop, which is
­Domilises <http://www.roadfood.com/Restaurant/Reviews/141/domilises-poboys>, 
­located in a somewhat ramshackle house in an ­uptown residential 
­neighbourhood. Enough fine dining – it's time for an oyster po boy: 
fried ­oysters with tomato, lettuce and mayonnaise in a soft French baguette 
which may be the high point of my trip. Tom says when Domilises finally 
reopened, he felt as if the city would recover from Katrina.

New Orleans is a city that smiles on excess, so I didn't feel guilty about 
sitting down just a few hours later atAugust <http://www.restaurantaugust.com/>
, chef John Besh's flagship, which is often cited as the city's finest 
restaurant. Situated in a corner town house at the edge of the French quarter, 
the main ­dining room is both ­dramatic and soothing, with 5m ceilings and 
soaring columns, full of very ­attractive locals, nearly all of whom seem to 
have consumed quite a few cocktails before dinner. My waitress gives me a black 
napkin to match my black suit and within moments, it seems, I am drinking an 07 
JM Boillot Montagny which the very helpful sommelier has selected to go with my 
pumpkin ravioli. Halfway through the crispy sweetbreads, paired with a 
shockingly good 07 Mayer Nakel Spätburgunder, I am already ­planning my next 
meal here, and ­plotting my ­return to this supremely edible city .

Getting there Delta Airlines <http://www.delta.com/index.jsp?noFlash=true> 
flies London ­Heathrow to New Orleans, from £296 return.

• Stay at Westin Canal Place 
<http://www.starwoodhotels.com/westin/property/overview/index.html?propertyID=1763>
, from £121 per room per night. For more information about the city and 
­restaurants, go toNew Orleans Convention & ­Visitors Bureau 
<http://www.neworleanscvb.com/>.
 