
A new age is dawning. Whether it is a wonderful one or a terrible one remains 
to be seen. Look around and the signs of dizzying technological progress are 
difficult to miss. Driverless cars and drones, not long ago the stuff of 
science fiction, are now oddities that can occasionally be spotted in the wild 
and which will soon be a commonplace in cities around the world.


With a few flicks of a finger, we can use our phones to order up a meal, or a 
car, or a translation for a waiter’s query in a foreign country. Gadgets such 
as theAmazon Echo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/amazon-echo-alexa-voice-recognition-superfans>
 are finding their way into living rooms, where they sit listening, ready to 
comply with a voice command.

Just a few years ago, one could dismiss the digital age as consisting of 
little more than social networks and cat videos; no longer. Yet at the same 
time, many of the world’s fundamental political institutions look dangerously 
unsteady. Britain is preparing to crash out of the European Union. In America, 
Republicans have nominated for president a man with no regard for global norms 
and little enough for the American constitution.

What is important, but far from obvious, is that these two trends – this 
careening toward a new digital age on the one hand and this descent into 
political darkness on the other – are closely related.

History suggests that periods of great economic change are also times of 
political and social difficulty. We must recognise that the present is no 
exception. It is our failure to recognise and address the difficulties created 
by the digital revolution that has helped usher us to this troubling political 
moment. There could be more trouble ahead. The digital revolution is beginning 
to teach us what a tectonic economic transformation feels like. It is putting 
us in the shoes of our great-great-grandparents: those who first experienced 
the transmission of a human voice across an electrical wire, who watched as the 
time to travel from one city to a distant other shrank from weeks to hours and 
who found themselves displaced as smiths or farmhands by fantastic new 
technologies. We have all found our working lives altered by it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa44dbb44f65e2f1d386341e374751bbe2cb01500%2F0_336_2971_1782%2F2971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa44dbb44f65e2f1d386341e374751bbe2cb01500%2F0_336_2971_1782%2F2971.jpg>
 Today’s technology is disrupting life, just as the machines of the Industrial 
Revolution destroyed the work patterns of our great-great grandparents. 
Photograph: Topical Press Agency/Getty 
Today’s economic revolution produces concern and not simply about the 
uncertainty of employment in the years to come. Those of us who currently 
appear to have job security can more than likely look forward to making less in 
the future than we had once hoped we might. Over the last couple of decades, 
wages, adjusted for inflation, have scarcely grown throughout a broad range of 
rich countries, longer in some cases. And this wage stagnation has occurred 
alongside other distressing trends. The share of income flowing to workers, as 
opposed to business and property owners, has fallen. And, among workers, there 
has been a sharp rise in inequality, with the share of income going to those 
earning the highest incomes increasing in an astounding fashion.

Then there is the sobering data on employment. In America, the share of adult 
men of prime working age who are working or actively looking for work has 
fallen steadily, in some cases dramatically, over the last generation. Among 
all men, the rate of participation in the workforce dropped from about76% in 
1990 to 69% in 2015. 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160620_cea_primeage_male_lfp.pdf>
That may not sound especially worrying, but it corresponds to a difference of 
about 9 million men.

And those squeezed out of work often find their lives upended. Stuck in 
atrophying communities with few prospects, many struggle to find purpose and 
satisfaction in life; indeed, recent research has turned up analarming rise in 
mortality since the late 1990s among middle-aged white Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/02/death-rate-middle-aged-white-americans-aids>
, mostly accounted for by an increase in suicides and in drug and alcohol 
abuse. The authors see economic insecurity as a contributing factor.

This trend is not limited to America and neither can it be explained away as 
the product of ageing and retirement. In Europe, one in five adults under the 
age of 25 is unemployed. Across theOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> (OECD), 12% of people 
aged between 15 and 29 are neither in school nor work. Some are engaged in 
illicit activity or are in jail; others are in their parents’ basements playing 
video games. Much the same is true of the long-term unemployed, many of them 
older men without much education, who drift around, often drinking to pass the 
day, lacking much, if any, connection to society at large.

For an awful lot of people, work has become a less certain and often less 
remunerative contributor to material security. But work is not just the means 
by which we obtain the resources needed to put food on the table. It is also a 
source of personal identity. It helps give structure to our days and our lives. 
It offers the possibility of personal fulfilment that comes from being of use 
to others and it is a critical part of the glue that holds society together and 
smooths its operation. Over the last generation, work has become ever less 
effective at performing these roles. That, in turn, has placed pressure on 
government services and budgets, contributing to a more poisonous and less 
generous politics. Meanwhile, the march of technological progress continues, 
adding to the strain.

Either society will develop ways to shore up work or find substitutes


The digital revolution alters work in three ways. The first is through 
automation. New technologies are replacing certain workers, from clerks to 
welders, and will replace more in the future, from drivers to paralegals.


At the same time, the digital revolution has supercharged a second force: 
globalisation. It would have been nearly impossible for rich western firms to 
manage the sprawling global supply chains that have been wrapped around the 
world over the past 20 years without powerful information technology. And while 
China and other emerging markets might have become better integrated in the 
world economy even without companies such as Apple scattering production across 
the globe, such growth would have been much slower and less dramatic. Instead, 
global employment grew by over a billion jobs over the last generation, with 
most of the growth occurring in emerging economies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cfe51e84d520e67fbd8df459e0a6c1ede19180%2F0_243_3453_2073%2F3453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cfe51e84d520e67fbd8df459e0a6c1ede19180%2F0_243_3453_2073%2F3453.jpg>
 Globalisation of western companies has helped the growth of China and other 
emerging economies. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty 
Third, technology provides a massive boost to the productivity of some highly 
skilled workers, allowing them to do work that it might previously have taken 
many more people to accomplish. Technology enables small teams of money 
managers to run vast funds; it is increasingly allowing highly skilled 
instructors to build courses that can be taken and retaken by millions of 
students, potentially replacing hundreds or even thousands of lecturers. New 
technology is allowing fewer doctors and nurses to observe and treat many more 
patients, fewer lawyers to pore over vastly more trial-related evidence and 
fewer researchers to sift through massive amounts of data and test more 
hypotheses more quickly.

These three trends – automation, globalisation and the rising productivity of 
a highly skilled few – are combining to generate an abundance of labour: a 
wealth of humans. In its struggle to digest this unprecedentedly enormous ocean 
of would-be workers, the global economy is misfiring in worrying ways. And the 
institution of work – apart from family, our most important piece of social 
infrastructure – can no longer be counted on to fulfil its many crucial roles, 
from the ordering of our days, to the allocation of purchasing power, to the 
strengthening of the social ties that are nurtured when individuals feel as 
though they are contributing positively to the community. Workers are unlikely 
to take these woes lying down. Something has to give. Either society will find 
ways to shore up work or develop substitutes for it or workers will use the 
political system to undermine the forces disrupting their world.

This should be a good problem for mankind to have. An abundance of labour is 
arguably the point, to the extent that there is one, of technological progress. 
It is the beginning of the end of the need to work hard to stay alive. A system 
in which people actively seek out labour they would strongly prefer not to do – 
manning call centres to handle the complaints of unhappy customers or carrying 
packages around a boiling warehouse, for example – is not one society ought to 
aim to preserve any longer than technologically necessary.

Yet the hardest part in finding utopia is not the figuring out of how to 
produce more. We’ve managed that. The hard part is the redistribution. Crafting 
a balance of work and redistribution that is sustainable is incredibly 
difficult. The rich and privileged don’t want to subsidise the poor. The poor 
may conclude that what redistribution the rich offer leaves an impossibly huge, 
even unfair gap in the incomes of the haves and have-nots. The poor may also 
not be content with an economy in which they are effectively unnecessary, kept 
at peace by a hand-out from the state. If redistribution is managed too 
clumsily, the incentive for clever or ambitious individuals to work to improve 
the economy might be lost, leading to stagnant growth and too little social 
surplus with which to provide all members of society with a rising standard of 
living.

The battle lines of the great social upheaval are already being drawn. Their 
defining questions: who deserves credit for generating economic bounty and who 
has the right to claim a share of that bounty once it has been generated? Many 
of those earning top incomes, in individualist America in particular, believe 
they are the overtaxed “makers” in society. But a makers-and-takers conception 
of the world is one that neglects the social foundation on which wealth is 
built. We aren’t merely divided into makers and takers. We are participants in 
societies, operating according to a broad social consensus. When that consensus 
breaks down, the wealth goes away. Society either agrees a way to share its 
riches that most members find acceptable or the system fractures and the social 
wealth available to everyone shrinks.

The social nature of wealth, always important, is increasingly critical. The 
long process of cultural development that eventually yielded the Industrial 
Revolution was in many ways the process by which humanity learned ever better 
ways of structuring society in order to foster the emergence of complex 
economic activity. The digital revolution is increasing the importance of 
social wealth in two key ways.

First, new technologies increase our potential productivity and output as a 
society; because we are capable of becoming richer thanks to digital 
technology, the economic return to economically important social institutions, 
such as a government capable of enforcing private property rights, is rising. 
The gap between the incomes of societies capable of supporting these 
institutions and those that cannot is growing. In 1980, Americans were 30 times 
richer than residents of the Central African Republic. In 2015, they were 90 
times richer.

The better countries become at sharing social wealth, the greater the pressure 
to shrink the circle of social membership

And second, the small-scale economic processes that generate new knowledge and 
turn it into profitable, welfare-enhancing activity are also becoming more 
social, and less individual, in nature. The value-generating pieces of 
successful companies were once satisfyingly tangible, consisting of buildings 
and machines, patents and people. That is ever less the case. Company cultures, 
which shape worker incentives and determine how a business reacts to changes in 
the marketplace, have become much more important in the digital age. Today, 
more than 80% of the value of Standard & Poor’s 500 firms is “dark matter”: the 
intangible secret sauce of success; the physical stuff companies own and their 
wage bill account for less than 20%, a reversal of the pattern that prevailed 
in the 1970s.

A large proportion of that dark matter is an amorphous “know-how”: the 
culture, incentives and tacit knowledge that make a modern company tick. 
Successful companies, be they Goldman Sachs or BuzzFeed, evolve a way of 
gathering, processing and acting on information that is critical to their 
success and which cannot easily be replicated. The value generated by a firm’s 
culture, just like the value generated by networks of people within cities, or 
by a country’s economic institutions, is social rather than individual.

As social wealth becomes more important, fights about who belongs within 
particular societies – and can therefore share in that social wealth – will 
intensify. To take full advantage of its promise, countries must become better 
at sharing social wealth. Yet the better countries become at sharing social 
wealth among members, the greater the pressure to shrink the circle of social 
membership.

Separatist and nationalist political parties are on the rise across Europe


Today’s political disturbances reflect the opening exchanges in a long 
societal negotiation over just what the state and the economy ought to do, and 
for whom, in the digital era. If the industrial era is any guide, this 
negotiation will last for decades to come and will occasionally result in 
dramatic, and possibly even violent, changes to the structure of global 
politics. Political systems are stubbornly resistant to change. Political 
parties are massive social institutions that persist for decades or centuries 
by building and maintaining connections with collections of smaller interest 
groups and individuals. Those people and interest groups come to define their 
political identity through their association with the party. Identities are not 
rewritten on a whim. Yet long-term changes in economic fundamentals do 
eventually force change.


In America, where the political structure strongly favours a two-party system, 
the rise of fundamentalist factions has led to partisan polarisation. Intense, 
intra-party battling could eventually lead to irreconcilable differences, 
prompting a major party shake-up (or break-up). Such shifts are extremely rare 
in American politics, however. It is more probable that ascendant ideological 
camps within the Republican party, such as those with nativist passions, will 
come to dominate the party leadership, displacing the former establishment 
bosses. And the former establishment will then mostly accommodate itself to the 
new order, an easier trick, for most partisans, than flipping to the other side 
of the aisle entirely.

Separatist and nationalist parties are on the rise across Europe. Le Pen’s 
Front National is ascendant. Radical parties in Hungary and Poland are pushing 
for significant political change: to undermine existing democratic institutions 
and to edge away from the EU. In Britain, nationalist political elements, 
within the Ukip and the Conservative party, astonished the world by calling and 
winning a popular vote to remove Britain from the EU. Brexit will encourage 
Scottish nationalists, who may ultimately demand to leave the United Kingdom.

Radical factions and parties battling for supremacy each have at their heart a 
particular conception of the “good life”. Writers and thinkers, like me, try to 
imagine post-work utopias, in which, for example, sensibly structured social 
safety nets could free people of the constraints of the typical job. These 
people could then offer their services by the hour or the job on newfangled 
market-making apps, among other things, or they could even abandon labour 
markets altogether, as new forms of social institution encouraged them to 
volunteer their time to the community or otherwise engage in pro-social 
behaviour – while also living alongside people from vastly different 
backgrounds and perhaps nationalities, if some of us get our way.

But that is possibly not what the typical rich-world citizen would consider 
the “good life”, however much we might want that to be the case. We should 
instead anticipate that voters in many countries, rich and poor alike, will 
want something more predictable than life governed by supply-and-demand 
matching apps; more structured than life on the perpetual dole; more 
comfortable and familiar than life surrounded by people who do things in 
different ways, speak different languages and worship different deities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae141403c84fba58dfee476c3c5884a80c114fc8%2F0_221_4074_2445%2F4074.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20a%20world%20without%20work%20%7C%20Ryan%20Avent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftechnological-revolution-sparks-social-unrest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae141403c84fba58dfee476c3c5884a80c114fc8%2F0_221_4074_2445%2F4074.jpg>
 Violent opposition to migrants in countries across Europe, including Poland, 
are forcing political change. Photograph: Marcin Obara/EPA 
In any future in which technology frees workers of the need to spend most of 
their daytime hours on the job, many people will opt for much more down time, 
often spent in rather aimless fashion. Yet people of all backgrounds also seem 
to value narratives of personal ambition and responsibility. People wish to 
have control over their economic lives and to be seen as contributing both to 
society and to the wellbeing of their families. People desire agency. They do 
not wish to be forced into unpleasant work by the need to feed their families, 
but neither do they want to be written off – or assigned meaningless work as 
the price of a generous welfare cheque. It isn’t clear that the digital economy 
can provide the working conditions needed to extend the possibility of 
bourgeois comfort and status to a broader class of people. That will not stop 
them desiring it.

The conflict between what people want and what economic and political systems 
are able to provide will play out in the political arena. Political battles 
will increasingly feature narratives about how to restore us all to a world in 
which people work at purposeful jobs for good pay. Those narratives will be 
thick with bogeymen: the malevolent forces denying voters access to that “good 
life”. Conniving foreign governments, job-stealing immigrants, greedy bankers 
and incompetent politicians all star in such roles. Demagoguery can be a 
compelling political force.

Generous welfare policy will struggle to emerge in ethnically diverse regions


Reformers can compete in this arena. There will be room for leaders willing to 
say that the “good life” of misty memory cannot be brought back; who promise 
instead to push forward modest, incrementalist policies, such as more generous 
state benefits and increased investment in training and infrastructure.


The difficulty the reformers will face is that the global economy will tend to 
punish such effort. Labour abundance and structural demand weakness are not the 
sorts of things national politicians working in isolation can fix. They can 
ameliorate the worst effects, but that will leave voters disappointed. Moderate 
reformers will find themselves losing ground to politicians keen to unpick 
elements of the era of moderation, from the move towards freer trade and 
capital flows to the elimination of labour-market protections.

Could there be a constituency for a more radical set of policy innovations: 
for generous, universal basic incomes, for example? Political interest in these 
sorts of reforms is growing. Yet generous welfare policy might struggle to 
emerge outside of places where political units are more ethnically or 
nationally coherent: where an absence of tribal suspicion facilitates the 
sharing of social wealth. It is no wonder that experimental, generous welfare 
policy has tended to emerge in Nordic countries, where ethnic and communal ties 
are strong (but where openness to immigration has begun to tear at the social 
consensus).

Indeed, the creation of such communally coherent groups in an effort to 
protect social safety nets often seems to be the point of the new nationalist 
politics. What separatist quasi-nations seem to want is a world in which they 
enjoy the economic benefits of global integration, but in which critical 
political and economic decisions are made by societies with a high degree of 
national or ethnic coherence: a future of Irelands and Estonias rather than of 
Britains and Spains: larger states with more diverse populations. The 
institutions of the EU or, indeed, the world economy as a whole are not built 
to handle waves of fracturing nations.

Italian, Belgian and even German leaders are understandably reluctant to sign 
off on Catalan independence, given the damage regional separatism could do to 
their own states. Rich-world ethno-nationalism could destroy the economic 
integration on which its prosperity depends. Even if it doesn’t fail before it 
begins, the model of highly redistributive, ethno-nationalist mini-states will 
depend for its success on the exclusion of outsiders, condemning much of the 
world’s population to poverty.

Some time in the future, a wonderful new politics might well emerge that 
provides a robust minimum standard of living to all regardless of race or 
nationality, which supports a multitude of different conceptions of the “good 
life” and which does not rely on some underlying fear of some outside other to 
maintain its popularity. We are not yet able to conceive of such a system or to 
understand what balance of political forces needs to emerge to bring it into 
existence and sustain it. And so, for the time being, we are stuck in a world 
of nasty political trade-offs. We can but hope this era will prove a fleeting 
one. History suggests it will not be. But perhaps we will get lucky.

The Wealth of Humans 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/284165/the-wealth-of-humans/> by Ryan Avent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ryanavent> is published by Allen Lane, £25

 