
The world feels like a different place from the one in which, this time last 
year, I sat down to write the introduction to our Christmas issue. It is 
different too, and heaven only knows what the next 12 months will throw at us.

If ever there was a time to pass around plates of goodwill to family, friends 
and strangers, then this is it. Which is why in this issue we offer a 
succession of good things – special, thoughtful, generous and delicious – to 
share with others.

Joe Trivelli has a tempting collection of recipes with their soul in Italy. A 
duck, stuffed and slowly roasted, a crisp side of celery, radicchio and brazil 
nuts, and a splendid crostata of pears, persimmons and ricotta. A feast in any 
language, yet each dish only a short jump from the glistening roast and 
fruit-laden dessert we know so well.

To my mind, the bits around the bird are the most interesting elements of 
Christmas dinner. To this end, I have new accompaniments for you: salt-crusted 
potatoes with blue cheese; mashed parsnips with brussels and honey; a ring of 
Cumberland sausages baked with bacon and dates. Most of which I would be happy 
to eat alongside the goose, beef or turkey on the day, or as dishes in their 
own right at any of the many meals to come over the holidays.

We have our ever popular taste test with the lowdown on the best Christmas 
food on the high street, and our 20 best food books of the year, thousands of 
delicious words for you to digest.

And what with Roy Hudd showing us his Life on a Plate while playing Mother 
Goose at Wilton’s Music Hall, and lunch with our old friend Monty Don, we have 
something of Christmas cracker to share with you. So it just leaves me now, on 
behalf of the entire team, to wish you all peaceful and delicious Christmas, 
and to hope for the very best for the year to come.
 