
Occasionally, I print out a particularly enjoyable piece of writing, fold it 
up and tuck it between the pages of my diary. Finding the fading text a year or 
two later and rereading it is one of life’s little joys. Looking back, two of 
these favourite pieces of food writing are by Jeanette Winterson. That those 
stories are now preserved permanently in the pages of her new book,Christmas 
Days, extracted here, makes me particularly happy, as my original copies are 
getting a trifle dog-eared.

I tend to remember Christmases past more clearly than almost any other date in 
the calendar. I am unembarrassed by being first in the street to get my tree up 
or to hang the wreath from the door. The day I decorate the branches of the 
tree with my collection of baubles, pin up the mistletoe and stuff oversized 
bunches of prickly holly into the fireplaces is one I look forward to more than 
any other. With each passing year, I love this season more and more.

I have a collection of recipes for you this month that includes a plump pork 
and partridge pie, soft potato pancakes and little butternut custards flecked 
with herbs that would be suitable for any time over theChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> period. And, of course, 
there is pudding. This year, I suggest a fig and maple syrup ice cream, cut 
into chunks after freezing, so you can dip into it like a packet of fudge.

The sweetness that runs through the season’s food is also illustrated in our 
recipes from Dominique Ansel. From snowflake beignets and champagne morning 
rolls to gingerbread alfajores with dulce de leche and chocolate tres leches 
cake, you might just find yourself seduced into rolling up your sleeves and 
having a go at some serious festive baking.

We also have the 50 best wines for Christmas, our seasonal gift guide (so many 
good things there) and our usual columnists all donning their Christmas jumpers 
for you.
 