
When we finish photographing the food for this magazine, we eat it. The crew, 
usually three of us, sit in my office-studio, and tuck into whatever we have 
just photographed. Anything shot after lunch is commandeered for dinner or 
taken home in doggy bags. The rest becomes my food for the week. You could 
measure my life in the reheated and the recycled but it pleases me that in this 
kitchen at least, there is almost no waste.

There is still quite a bit of waste in the food industry. There are many 
initiatives reducing waste around the country, but such good practice needs 
highlighting. Which brings me toDan Barber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/15/dan-barber-mission-to-change-food-and-farming>
’s posh burger – for which, like any of the food at his Manhattan pop-up, you 
would have had to join a long waiting list. Made from vegetable pulp from a 
juice company’s presses, diners couldn’t get enough of it. His idea drew 
attention to the growing problem of food wastage. Next month sees Dan opening a 
pop-up here in Britain, and we sent Tim Adams to see him.

We also have a lovely story from novelist Kathleen Alcott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/15/restaurants-have-taught-me-who-i-am-kathleen-alcott>
. A memoir about eating out, and how a meal at a restaurant can teach you a lot 
about the person you are dining with. There are also classic recipes from
Marcella Hazan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/17/ofm-classic-cookbook-marcella-hazan-classic-italian-cookbook>
, a sneaky peep at René Redzepi’s plans forrelaunching Noma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/15/noma-last-supper> and 
lunch with Laurie Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/15/laurie-anderson-i-see-lou-reed-all-the-time-interview>
.

This month we also get to turn the tables on Jay Rayner. Our intrepid 
columnist and restaurant reviewer spends a day on the other side of the green 
baize door. Specifically, the door that leads toScott’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/15/a-day-in-the-life-of-scotts-britains-grandest-restaurant>
 in Mayfair, where he gives us a chance to see the side of a restaurant that is 
normally hidden from view. The blood and guts, if you like. The bits that few 
of us ever think about when we are shown to our table. Perhaps we should.
 