
For most Americans the fallout of the 2008 financial crisis was all too 
obvious. The economy imploded, jobs disappeared, house prices collapsed. But 
coming to grips with the reason it was happening – the run on mortgage-backed 
securities, collateralized debt obligations (AKA, CDOs), credit default swaps, 
synthetic derivatives, tranches – was not so easy.


 The mumbo jumbo mattered – and that’s what made it all the more infuriating. 
It was a banking crisis that only the insiders could decode.

 Even on the occasions (both then and since) when the bank CEOs have been 
dragged in front of Congress for what have become almost ritual attempts to 
humiliate and shame them, most of those efforts have been failures. Why? Partly 
because ofthe way the bankers dodged and dived 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/why-havent-bankers-been-punished-just-read-these-insider-sec-emails>
, of course. And partly because the issues involved just didn’t make it easy 
for anyone to catch a dodging, weaving banker, advised by a canny, high-priced 
lawyer.

It just wasn’t that easy for some of the non-specialists on Senate and House 
committees to be as effective as they might have liked in pillorying the 
finance industry when the subject was the way in which traders had rigged the 
Libor rate (the interbank borrowing rate against which the interest rates on 
most loans are benchmarked), say, or the precise way in which a hedge fund 
participated in selecting investments in a derivative sold to a pension fund 
client. It’s even hard to explain how some of that stuff affected ordinary 
Americans (even though it did – ultimately, and sometimes indirectly.)

Elizabeth Warren is still mad about the financial crash, and we should be too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/us-money-blog/2016/sep/17/elizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj>
 So let’s be grateful that the banks have finally provided us with a scandal 
that we can understand, and to the regulators, for (belatedly) addressing a 
real problem that too many Americans grapple with daily.

The Wells Fargo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wells-fargo> mess is the 
poster child for it all. Last month, the bank – one of the oldest in the 
country, with a tradition dating back to the Pony Express – disclosed that it 
would fork over $185m in penalties to regulators after an audit discovered that 
employees opened as many as 2m deposit and credit accounts in customers’ names 
but without their consent.

 Testifying before Congress, John Stumpf, the bank’s CEO and chairman, made 
much of the breach of trust on the part of more than 5,000 employees who opened 
the accounts, in an attempt to meeting sales quotas, either earning bonuses or 
simply holding on to their jobs. While initially he backed away from 
suggestions that he himself might have been held accountable, last weekhe 
discovered he will share some of their pain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/wells-fargo-sales-tactics-investigation-john-stumpf>
: independent directors announced they will implement salary and bonus 
clawbacks, and Stumpf’s own compensation will be on hold while the directors 
investigate.

But Wells isn’t the only venerable Wall Street name to run afoul of regulators 
in recent days.Morgan Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morganstanley>, too, appears to have been 
putting pressure on its brokers to engage in “dishonest and unethical conduct”, 
according to the top securities regulator of Massachusetts, pushing them to 
cross-sell products.

Cross-selling <http://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cross-sell.asp> is at the 
heart of both the Wells Fargo and the Morgan Stanley scandals, and unlike CDOs 
and credit default swaps, it’s something that any bank customer can understand 
all too easily. If you’ve ever walked into a bank – or talked to a bank 
representative on the phone – and had him suggest that you might want to 
consider opening a new account or that a different product might be just 
perfect for your needs, when you really just called to reset your pin or check 
your balance, well, you’ve encountered cross-selling.

 There’s nothing wrong with it as a business strategy. In fact, it’s eminently 
logical, and can even be good for customers, to make them aware of products or 
services that might be out there and fit their needs. But it only works well 
when it’s done carefully and on a customized basis.

 As retail banking in the United States has struggled 
<https://www.ft.com/content/32b989ac-870f-11e6-a75a-0c4dce033ade> in the 
current low interest rate environment, with too few creditworthy customers 
eager to increase their borrowing and help banks boost their profits, 
institutions like Wells Fargo increasingly viewed selling more products as the 
best way to increase earnings. If they couldn’t make more on the same number of 
products, well, they’d just increase the number of products. And so they put in 
place the kind of bizarrely high targets that prompted those “rogue” employees 
to begin opening fake accounts. Even after they were aware of what was 
happening, those targets remained in place; even when Stumpf first testified to 
Congress, the targets were still (theoretically, at least) what Wells Fargo 
bankers had to hit each day/week/month.

 You don’t need a Jenga game 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/12/finance-big-short/420903/>
, or Anthony Bourdain cooking a fish stew, Margot Robbie languishing in a 
bubble bath, or any other tortured metaphor, to explain the concept and just 
what is wrong with this picture.

 Similarly, Morgan Stanley allegedly crossed the lines by running 
cross-selling contests for brokers in five offices 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-morganstanley-massachusetts-idUSKCN1231KD> 
in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. The brokers could win as much as $5,000 for 
convincing customers to take out as many as 30 loans against securities 
portfolios. Although the firm’s own rules banned the contests, the compliance 
office didn’t figure out what was going on for a year, until the end of 2014. 
Even then, the contests didn’t stop until April 2015, according to the 
complaint filed by William Galvin, secretary of the Commonwealth. Meanwhile, 
the contests generated $24m in new loans for Morgan Stanley, Galvin said.

 A spokesman for Morgan Stanley has said the complaint is without merit and 
that the bank plans to defend itself vigorously. The loans were only open after 
discussing the product with each client, he added.

 That distinguishes it from Wells Fargo, whose clients had no idea that 
accounts were being opened in their name. On the other hand, did Morgan 
Stanley’s clients know that their brokers were competing – and being paid – to 
open these new loan accounts? That the reason they were being offered the 
product might have as much or more to do with the broker’s own financial 
wellbeing as with their own real needs? (Did they really need a new loan? Or 
the risk associated with taking out a loan against a securities portfolio when 
the market is near what seems likely to be its peak?) I suspect not.

 Thomas Curry, the US comptroller of the currency, has warned other banks to 
review their own cross-selling practices 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-banks-regulation-idUSKCN11L2U0> and has 
told Congress that his own staff will be evaluating what the largest banks are 
up to in this respect. It’s about time. Hopefully, he’ll report back with the 
answers. At least, when he does, we’ll all understand what he’s talking about. 
At the end of the day, it’s really not much different than the high-pressure 
telephone sales guy who simply will not hang up or go away. Only because it’s 
your banker who’s putting you on the spot, you’re a particularly vulnerable 
kind of captive audience who can’t just hang up.
 