
José Mourinho has revealed that Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> rejected West Bromwich 
Albion’s £13m offer for Morgan Schneiderlin and that Anthony Martial will not 
go on loan to Sevilla.

Last week Tony Pulis, the West Brom manager, confirmed his club made a bid for 
Schneiderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/west-brom-morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-bid>
, which is thought to have been £13m. But Mourinho said on Friday: “We have not 
received one single offer that we are going to accept.

“I don’t want to sell players. The club and the board is totally with me, but 
as I told before, if a player is not having lots of minutes and really wants to 
leave, we have no right to stop him leaving if the conditions are our 
conditions.”

Mourinho, who also stated Wayne Rooney’s muscle injury rules him out of the 
visit of Middlesbrough on Saturday, will only allow one player to leave on a 
temporary basis – the goalkeeper Sam Johnstone, who is of interest to 
Sunderland and Aston Villa.

Martial’s agent had claimed he has been discussing a temporary move to Sevilla 
but Mourinho said: “Sam Johnstone is the only player that I allow to go on 
loan. He doesn’t play one minute and he needs to play. We have a young keeper 
in Joel [Pereira], he played many minutes in the last six months in Portuguese 
PL, so now is the time to play six months for Sam.”

Boro’s Karanka: I’m good friends with Mourinho but for 90 minutes cannot be | 
Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/aitor-karanka-good-friends-jose-mourinho-middlesbrough-manchester-united>
Regarding Rooney, the 53-year-old said: “He is out. He is not ready.”

On Saturday Mourinho hopes to guide United to a fifth successive league win 
for the first time since February-April 2015 when facing Aitor Karinka’s side,
the Spaniard having been his No2 when previously in charge of Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/aitor-karanka-good-friends-jose-mourinho-middlesbrough-manchester-united>
.

Mourinho said: “He is my friend and a real friend. I always want him to win 
and he always wants me to win, but tomorrow is the first time where I want to 
against him. That’s football. Sometimes brothers against brothers happened, a 
father against his son maybe, and that would be even more difficult. For 90 
minutes, he and I want to win and that is it.”

Of United’s winning sequence, Mourinho said: “The momentum of playing well 
comes from a long time ago. It is difficult to remember the last match we 
didn’t play well. Even playing for results that should not be, but the reality 
is that we managed to win the last five [in all competitions] and we need 
points. Let’s try for three more points.”

United are in sixth place on 33 points, four behind Arsenal in the final 
Champions League spot.
 