
Slaven Bilic and his West Ham United players were left bemoaning the 
reluctance of the referee to dismiss Diego Costa for two bookable offences as 
the Spain forward scored the late goal that ensured Antonio Conte’s tenure as 
Chelsea manager beganwith a morale-boosting win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/chelsea-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Anthony Taylor opted not to show Costa a yellow card for a late challenge on 
Adrián midway through the second half, having already cautioned theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> forward for dissent. Costa’s 
left foot sank into the inside of the goalkeeper’s right calf to leave him 
sprawled on the turf and West Ham’s players were incensed no further action was 
taken. “A couple of decisions went against us,” said Mark Noble. “It’s a yellow 
card isn’t it? I’ve seen the tackle and he’s wiped his ankle out completely.”

Antonio Conte steps into the Chelsea spotlight but Mourinho shadow remains | 
Amy Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/antonio-conte-chelsea-west-ham-premier-league>
Bilic, who lost his record signing André Ayew to a thigh injury, was reluctant 
to criticise the referee’s decision but suggested the challenge would normally 
have merited a caution. “Look, it’s the first game of the season and we are 
already talking about those kind of decisions,” he said. “From our point of 
view we are not happy with that. I saw the tackle once again … I don’t think it 
was reckless. It was not a deliberate one. But it was late. Nine times out of 
10, a challenge on a goalkeeper like this looks like a booking. Unfortunately 
this was the 10th time. But, really, I’m only disappointed with the way the 
goals were conceded.

“Chelsea deserved it. We were so close and thought that was it at 1-1 late on. 
But, to be honest, apart from the first 15 minutes, and the time we equalised, 
they were better than us. We didn’t create many chances, we gave them a 
penalty. The second goal we had the ball totally in control, too, at our end of 
the park. They were much more aggressive, winning balls and second balls, and 
their front four were on fire. I’m not happy with the way we played. We can do 
much better.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fantonio-conte-thanks-chelsea-fans-after-win-over-west-ham-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antonio%20Conte%20thanks%20Chelsea%20fans%20after%20win%20over%20West%20Ham%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fantonio-conte-thanks-chelsea-fans-after-win-over-west-ham-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antonio%20Conte%20thanks%20Chelsea%20fans%20after%20win%20over%20West%20Ham%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fantonio-conte-thanks-chelsea-fans-after-win-over-west-ham-video&media=>
Antonio Conte thanks Chelsea fans after win over West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/16/antonio-conte-thanks-chelsea-fans-after-win-over-west-ham-video>
Conte was encouraged by his team’s energetic performance, particularly once 
they had forced themselves ahead early in the second half courtesy of Eden 
Hazard’s penalty, and praised the contributions of the Belgian, the debutant 
N’Golo Kanté and Costa. “You know Diego, he’s a passionate man,” he said. “He 
puts passion in everything he does: if he shoots, if he runs, for everything. 
But, in this situation [with the challenge on Adrián], I must be honest, I 
think the referee took the right decision. Before the contact he stopped.”

Chelsea’s Diego Costa sinks West Ham to give Antonio Conte debut victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/15/chelsea-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
The Italian fielded 10 of the 11 players who started last season’s opening 
fixture against Swansea City under José Mourinho, with Kanté preferred to Cesc 
Fàbregas in midfield. The Spaniard has been the subject of interest from 
Juventus. “But Cesc is a Chelsea player,” added Conte. “I’m happy about him, 
with his attitude in training. You must know that, when you are a great team 
like Chelsea, it can happen. That you can find yourself out of the team. I have 
to take decisions for each game to choose a starting XI. In Fàbregas’s 
situation, he wasn’t in the starting XI but that could happen to any of the 
players.

“It’s important to see always the right attitude because we must fight this 
season. We have to stay together in every situation so the shape can improve 
and I can change all the situation. I took this decision but, next game, we 
don’t know. I can change it or not. It’s important, I repeat, that the team 
comes before all. But I don’t see any problem with him.”
 