
More than half of the harm caused by domestic violence offenders in Western 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/11/revenge-porn-to-be-criminalised-in-western-australia-domestic-violence-law>
 was perpetrated by just 707 people, according to a report commissioned by 
Western Australian police.

The report, by the Cambridge Centre for Evidence-Based Policing, used a harm 
index based on time spent in prison to analyse the offences of 36,228 people 
charged in relation to 214,814 cases of domestic and family violence in WA 
between 2010 and 2015.

Daniel Andrews unveils Victoria's 10-year domestic violence plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/daniel-andrews-unveils-victorias-10-year-domestic-violence-plan>
Using that “crime harm index,” it found that 2% of offenders were responsible 
for 50% of the harm. It dubbed that group “the powerful few”.

The youngest of the 707 people dubbed the “worst offenders” was 12 years old, 
and 35 of them were under the age of 15. The youngest person charged with any 
domestic violence offence was seven years old.

However, the methodology has been questioned by domestic violence experts, who 
say it underplays the harm caused by domestic violence that does not result in 
either murder or a serious, reported assault.

According to the Cambridge crime harm index scale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/mar/02/offenders-serious-crimes-criminal-justice-revolution>
, which is based on average jail terms in Britain, murder is assigned 5475 
points while domestic violence is 20 points – the same as burglary or motor 
vehicle theft. Arson is worth 33 points, threatening behaviour is 10 and 
property damage is two.

Curtin University’s Prof Donna Chung said while murder was undoubtedly the 
most serious and harmful offence, the index did not recognise the harm caused 
by having an intimate partner threaten you, smash a window in your house, or 
even commit an “ordinary” domestic assault.

Australians are being told that gender inequality is the root cause of 
domestic violence. But is it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/19/australians-are-being-told-that-gender-inequality-is-the-root-cause-of-domestic-violence-but-is-it>
“The emphasis is on physical harm for which there is evidence and meets the 
requirement of the criminal law,” Chung told Guardian Australia.

“That’s a very narrow definition of harm. ‘Harm’ [in this index] doesn’t 
include women having PTSD for the next 20 years which can prevent them from 
working and cause them to live in poverty.”

Chung said the report also only included domestic violence cases as verified 
by police, which she said was just a proportion of cases overall. Between 20% 
and 40% of all domestic violence incidents are not reported to police, she said.

“Obviously, if you kill someone it’s going to come to the attention of the 
police but anything short of that it may not go to them,” she said.

According to the Cambridge report, 80% of the 707 most serious offenders had 
no prior record for domestic violence when they committed their most serious 
offence.

It also said very few were charged by police with subsequent domestic violence 
offences and said there was no evidence that the severity of domestic violence 
offences escalated over time, or that there was a link between an escalation of 
violence and murder.

Australian territory to pay for domestic violence prevention with yearly levy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/08/australian-territory-to-pay-for-domestic-violence-prevention-with-yearly-levy>
There was a link between offenders who made threats or attempts of suicide and 
murder or attempted murder, the report said, but that was based on a sample of 
76 people.

The report recommended greater information sharing between police and mental 
health services, to try to identify suicidal ideation as a risk factor, and 
also recommended extensive and aggressive monitoring of the “powerful few” 
offenders, including potentially using GPS tracking ankle monitors.

It said the list of the worst offenders should be continually updated and sent 
to all local police stations. The deputy police commissioner Stephen Brown said 
the report provided “the evidence that a change in thinking is needed”.

“While treating every family and domestic violence matter appropriately, we 
need to get the focus and balance right if we are serious about saving lives, 
preventing serious injury and reducing the number of victims,” Brown said in a 
statement.

Chung also agreed with those recommendations, but questioned the use of the 
term “powerful few”, saying that although it was a statistical term in this 
case it could be interpreted as “heroicising” the most violent offenders. 
“These are men that like to feel powerful,” she said.
 