
Haggling with Brentford over the asking price for Scott Hogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/west-ham-united-scott-hogan-brentford-striker>
, testing Sunderland’s sense of humour with a £4m offer for Jermain Defoe, 
steeling themselves for bids for the mutinous Dimitri Payet, waving goodbye to 
Simone Zaza and preparing to point Jonathan Calleri to the exit, how West Ham 
United savoured the majesty of Andy Carroll’s scissor-kick strike in Saturday’s
3-0 victory over Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
. For a team who had to wait until 27 November for a striker to score this 
season, Carroll’s wonderfully acrobatic goal lifted the mood at the London 
Stadium and provided a timely tonic afterPayet’s revolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/dimitri-payet-west-ham-marseille>
.

Yet before celebrating too much about showing Payet that they can win without 
him, West Ham would be wise to pause and consider a statistic that should make 
David Sullivan and David Gold wince. In the seven years since the pair bought 
the club, West Ham have completed 32 deals for new strikers for four different 
managers and the numbers make for grim reading. Between them those players have 
managed 128 goals in 643 games.

Related: Dimitri Payet and co cross a line with their striking self-indulgence 
| Daniel Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/14/dimitri-payet-striking-west-ham>

Those figures are a damning indictment of the piecemeal way West Ham have gone 
about trying to fill such an important position. From mysterious South American 
imports such as Brian Montenegro and Wellington Paulista, both of whom 
disappeared without a trace, to forgettable loan signings such as Marco 
Borriello and Marouane Chamakh, and from flops like Modibo Maïga to stopgaps 
like Nikica Jelavic, their underwhelming attacking purchases have too often 
undermined their attempts to grow.

Of those 32 strikers, only four have managed double figures in terms of goals: 
Diafra Sakho (20 in 52 games), Carroll (26 in 101 games), Frédéric Piquionne 
(11 in 62 games) and Enner Valencia (10 in 68 games). Ignore strikers who were 
signed for the youth team and include Calleri and Zaza, and almost a third left 
east London without scoring. Once Carroll’s injury record is taken into 
account, only Sakho, signed for £3.5m from Metz in 2014, and Demba Ba, whose 
seven goals following his arrival from Hoffenheim in January 2011 were not 
enough for Avram Grant’s side to avoid relegation to the Championship, can be 
viewed as successes.

Since their return to the top flight in 2012, only one of the seven strikers 
who have joined on loan, Carroll, has earned a permanent transfer. In their 
drive to seek out bargains, West Ham have frittered away too much time and 
money on strikers who never looked likely to make the grade, leaving them stuck 
on a loop of short-termism as they find themselves dipping back into the market 
for the next unsatisfactory quick fix. One mistake simply leads to another.
 Nikica Jelavic is one of a number of stopgap strikers bought in the Sullivan 
and Gold era. Photograph: Carl Recine/Reuters 
Payet’s desire to leave is a consequence of unfulfilled promises. After West 
Ham came close to qualifying for the Champions League last season before 
squeezing into the Europa League with a seventh-place finish, Sullivan and 
Slaven Bilic agreed that the priority for the summer had to be the acquisition 
of a striker with the potency to lift them into the top four. Having finished 
as the fourth-highest scorers in the league, it was a solid assessment of the 
side’s potential and Sullivan spoke bullishly last May about the need for a 
striker who could score 20 goals a season, while also raising expectations by 
talking about imminent £20m and £25m bids for players.

Goal-shy forwards have been a perennial weakness. Only the midfielder Kevin 
Nolan (10 in 2012-13) and Sakho (10 in 2014-15) have hit double figures in a 
single Premier League season in the Sullivan and Gold era. Getting that striker 
was easier said than done, of course, bearing in mind that the best are usually 
found at the leading clubs. It is rare to find one away from the elite in 
England. No player has ever scored 20 league goals in aPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> season for West Ham.

Leaving Upton Park for the London Stadium is meant to catapult West Ham into 
the next level, however, and they were keen to make a marquee signing last 
summer. “Whatever happens, we’ll bring a top striker in,” Sullivan said. “It’s 
a statement of intent.”
 See the full visual 
What did happen, however, is that West Ham found that Lyon’s Alexandre 
Lacazette and Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi had set their sights higher, while 
talks with Milan’s Carlos Bacca went nowhere, and the arrivals of Calleri, Zaza 
and Ashley Fletcher were the universe’s way of telling Sullivan that actions 
speak louder than words. When West Ham did break their transfer record by
spending £20m on Swansea’s André Ayew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/west-ham-andre-ayew-swansea-record-signing>
, the money went on an overpriced winger.

Payet cannot be blamed for deciding that he has had enough, even though there 
is little to admire aboutthe midfielder downing tools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/dimitri-payet-wants-to-leave-west-ham-united-slaven-bilic>
. While Fletcher has shown promise since his free transfer from Manchester 
United, Calleri’s and Zaza’s loan spells have been disastrous and long-term 
injuries to Carroll and Sakho meant that West Ham were often forced to play 
without a striker before Christmas.

Calleri has failed to score in nine appearances and the 23-year-old 
Argentinian is set to return to Deportivo Maldonado, while the Zaza deal was 
structured in a way that unfairly raised the pressure on the Italy 
international. Having paid a £5m loan fee to Juventus, West Ham would have had 
to buy Zaza for a further £20m if he had reached 14 Premier League appearances. 
The 25-year-old barely threatened a goal in 11 appearances in all competitions 
before departing for Valencia.

The addition of a lethal striker alone would not eradicate all of West Ham’s 
flaws. Bad defending, muddled tactics, the absence of a right-back and a 
shortage of resilience have been just as harmful as the lack of a finisher. 
Sunderland are in relegation trouble despite Defoe’s 11 goals and the same 
applies to Crystal Palace, who spent £32m on Christian Benteke. West Ham, 
because they played with superior coherence last season, were able to spread 
the goals around effectively.

Yet achieving that balance was possible only because of forwards creating 
space for their team-mates. They are a different side when Sakho, strong, fast 
and instinctive in the area, is fit, but the Senegalese soon succumbed to 
injury after his earlyheader in the 1-1 draw at Manchester United in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/manchester-united-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
.

That hole in Bilic’s attack has placed a heavy strain on the side. They have 
won one game in which their opponents have scored – five of their seven 
victories have been by 1-0 scorelines – and they have recovered two points from 
losing positions.
 Diafra Sakho, centre, is the only West Ham forward to score 10 goals in one 
Premier League season since the ownership of the club last changed. Photograph: 
Phil Noble/Reuters 
Losing to Palace might have dragged them back into the relegation picture. 
Instead they are 10 points clear of the bottom three, having displayed 
character and quality in the face of adversity, and fine performances from 
Michail Antonio, Manuel Lanzini and Sofiane Feghouli against Sam Allardyce’s 
struggling side offered hope for the future. Yet while Carroll had a fine game, 
he is their only fit striker and once again they find themselves trying to 
bolster their attacking options in the January window.

We have been here before. Shortly after Sullivan and Gold’s arrival in January 
2010, there was talk of Ruud van Nistelrooy being offered a £100,000 a week 
contract. West Ham ended up with Benni McCarthy, Ilan and Mido. Only Ilan 
contributed anything, two of the unheralded Brazilian’s four goals earning four 
points that were enough to stave off relegation, but staying up with 35 points 
was no cause for celebration. Robbie Keane and Ba arrived a year later, but 
West Ham went down.

Related: West Ham want Dimitri Payet to apologise after they reject £20m 
Marseille bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/west-ham-reject-bid-dimitri-payet-marseille>

The club’s parlous financial situation meant that Sullivan and Gold were 
afforded some slack during that period and West Ham immediately bounced back 
under Allardyce. Yet history has a way of repeating itself. Having lost Carroll 
to a nasty foot injury after buying him for £15m from Liverpool, West Ham began 
the 2013-14 season with Maïga as their only striker. They were reduced to 
signing two free agents: Carlton Cole, having released him a few months 
earlier, and Mladen Petric, who made four substitute appearances without 
scoring a goal. Borriello, a 31-year-old Italian, arrived on loan from Roma in 
January and left after appearing twice.

Something to consider as West Ham mull over whether to meet Brentford’s £15m 
asking price for Hogan, a 24-year-old forward who has scored 14 goals in the 
Championship this season, and whether £4m might be a touch too low to convince 
Sunderland to part with their best chance of staying up, is that Sullivan and 
Gold have rarely used the winter window productively. None of the 10 strikers 
signed in January has managed a full campaign.

None of this would matter as much if they were still at Upton Park but West 
Ham convinced their supporters that staying in E13 would have condemned them to 
irrelevance. Although it is too early to offer any definitive judgments about 
the wisdom of moving to Stratford, there must be evidence of a shift in the 
board’s mentality soon. After six months in their new home, West Ham’s most 
prized asset wants to leave and they will find it hard to attract new fans to 
the London Stadium without players of Payet’s calibre on show. Talk is cheap.
 See the full visual 
West Ham strikers signed since Sullivan and Gold took over

1. Ilan free in January 2010, 29 at time of arrival, 4 goals in 11 games, 
released in May 2010

2. Benni McCarthy £2.2m in January 2010, 32 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 14 
games, released in April 2011

3. Mido loan in January 2010, 26 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 9 games, loan 
cancelled in May 2010

4. Fréddie Piquionne £1m in July 2010, 31 at time of arrival, 11 goals in 62 
games, released in March 2013

5. Victor Obinna loan in August 2010, 23 at time of arrival, 8 goals in 32 
games, loan ended in May 2012

6. Demba Ba undisclosed in January 2011, 25 at time of arrival, 7 goals in 13 
appearances, released in May 2012

7. Paul McCallum £64k in January 2011, 17 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 0 
appearances, free to Leyton Orient in May 2015

8. Robbie Keane loan in January 2011, 30 at time of arrival, 2 goals in 10 
games, loan ended in May 2012

West Ham relegated to the Championship in May 2011

9. Brian Montenegro loan in August 2011, 18 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 1 
game, loan ended in May 2012

10. John Carew free in August 2011, 31 at time of arrival, 2 goals in 21 
games, released in May 2012

11. Sam Baldock £2.4m in August 2011, 22 at time of arrival, 5 goals in 24 
games, sold for £1.1m to Bristol City in August 2012

12. Nicky Maynard £1.7m in January 2012, 25 at time of arrival, 3 goals in 17 
games, sold to Cardiff for £2.5m in August 2012

West Ham promoted to the Premier League in May 2012

13. Sean Maguire undisclosed in January 2013, 18 at time of arrival, 0 goals in
0 appearances, released to Dundalk in 2015

14. Andy Carroll loan in August 2012, 23 at time of arrival, 7 goals in 24 
games, loan became permanent deal after one season

15. Modibo Maïga £4.5m in June 2013, 24 at time of arrival, 8 goals in 45 
games, free to Al Nassr in August 2015

16. Wellington Paulista loan in January 2013, 28 at time of arrival, 0 goals in
0 appearances, loan cancelled at end of season

17. Marouane Chamakh loan in January 2013, 28 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 3 
appearances, loan ended in May 2013

18. Andy Carroll £15m in June 2013, 24 at time of arrival, 19 goals in 77 
appearances.

19. Danny Whitehead free in June 2013, 19 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 1 
appearance, joined Accrington on free transfer in 2015

20. Mladen Petric free in September 2013, 32 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 4 
appearances, released in Jan 2014

21. Carlton Cole re-signed on free transfer in October 2013, 30 at time of 
arrival,10 goals in 57 games, released in 2015

22. Marco Borriello loan in January 2014, 31 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 2 
appearances, left at end of 13/14 season

23. Jaanai Gordon undisclosed in Jan 2014, 19 at time of arrival, 0 goals in 0 
appearances

24. Mauro Zárate free in May 2014, 28 at time of arrival, 7 goals in 29 games, 
joined Fiorentina for £1.6m in January 2016

25. Diafra Sakho £3.5m in August 2014, 24 at time of arrival, 20 goals in 52 
appearances

26. Enner Valencia £12m in July 2014, 24 at time of arrival, 10 goals in 68 
appearances, joined Everton on loan in August 2016

27. Nikica Jelavic £2.8m in August 2015, 30 at time of arrival, 2 goals in 15 
appearances, left for £4m in February 2016

28. Emmanuel Emenike loan in Jan 2016, 28 years old at time of arrival, 2 FA 
Cup goals in16 appearances, left in summer 16

29. Simone Zaza £5m loan fee in August 2016, 25 years old at time of arrival, 0
 goals in11 appearances, left in January 2017

30. Jonathan Calleri loan in August 2016, 22 years old at time of arrival, 0 
goals in9 appearances, probably leaving in January 2017

31. Antonio Martínez £2.4m in July 16, 19 years old, 0 goals in 0 appearances

32. Ashley Fletcher free transfer in July 16, 20 years old at time of arrival, 
1 League Cup goal in 16 appearances
 