
Every time I interview a Brexiteer, I come away more confused than I arrived. 
This week I thought I was going to meet the pub trade’s real life Al Murray, 
for the parallels between Tim Martin’s public image and the fictional 
Eurosceptic landlord appear disconcertingly close. In fact, on the train to JD 
Wetherspoon HQ in Watford I opened the Guardian to find a quiz inviting readers
to guess which quotes to attribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/who-said-it-pub-landlord-al-murray-or-jd-wetherspoon-founder-tim-martin>
 to each publican. When I run the quiz past Martin later, even he gets two 
answers wrong.

Wetherspoon's boss: we could drop European brands over Brexit bullying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/wetherspoon-boss-eu-leaders-brexit-talks-tim-martin>
The founder of Wetherspoon’s first entered the debate about Europe in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2002/jan/05/theeuro.europeanunion>, when 
he distributed 500,000 beer mats across his pub chain, urging Britain not to 
join the euro. Before this year’s referendum he printed upanother half a 
million mats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/wetherspoons-brexit-beer-mats-eu-referendum-imf>
, encouraging his customers to back Brexit. One of Vote Leave’s few 
high-profile businessmen, the multi-millionaire was back in the headlines this 
week,attacking EU leaders for “hectoring” the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/wetherspoon-boss-eu-leaders-brexit-talks-tim-martin>
. If Jean-Claude Juncker doesn’t stop “bullying” us, he warned, Wetherspoon 
pubs might stop stocking European wines and lagers and buy its drinks 
elsewhere. “Britons could BOYCOTT European booze if Juncker punishes UK, warns 
Wetherspoons boss,” whooped a Daily Express headline.

But Martin’s vision of Brexit turns out to be very different to that of others 
on his side. During the referendum campaign, a diversity of reasons for leaving 
was one of the leave side’s great strengths; amid the chorus of different 
arguments there was something for almost everyone. Now that they have won, 
however, their incompatibility is becoming overwhelmingly clear. In many 
respects, Martin’s view of Europe is as unlike Nigel Farage’s – or Al Murray’s 
– as mine.

We meet in his office, an unostentatious room cluttered with boxes of Moët 
champagne, which he gives to office staff when it’s their birthday. At 6ft 6in, 
well built and ruddy-faced, he looks more like a farmer than a 
multi-millionaire chairman, and now that he has tamed his silver mullet into a 
more conventional haircut, the most striking thing about him is his voice. 
Martin grew up in Northern Ireland and New Zealand, and the accent meanders 
between the two, via the West Country, interrupted by endless eruptions of 
booming laughter. I can’t remember meeting anyone who laughs so much, so I ask 
if he is enjoying his role as a political campaigner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46f1eb105d71677038ff59e373f177986c2f63de%2F0_167_1398_1745%2F1398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wetherspoon%20boss%20Tim%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20EU%20became%20a%20quasi-religion%2C%20and%20universities%20are%20the%20modern-day%20seminaries%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wetherspoon%20boss%20Tim%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20EU%20became%20a%20quasi-religion%2C%20and%20universities%20are%20the%20modern-day%20seminaries%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46f1eb105d71677038ff59e373f177986c2f63de%2F0_167_1398_1745%2F1398.jpg>
 JD Wetherspoon boss Tim Martin pulling pints in 1999. Photograph: UPPA Ltd. 
“Well, it’s quite weird, actually,” he admits, “because it was unplanned.” In 
2002, in the wake of the ERM debacle and with the prospect of Britain joining 
the euro, Martin made the “banal observation” that “every other currency in the 
world has got a government. The euro can’t work without a government. I kept 
waiting for a Harvard professor to come out of the woodwork and say, ‘I’ve 
never heard such ignorance in my life.’ But they never did. So I just kept 
repeating it. I became someone on the national news, repeating the same 
phrase.” He breaks into a cackle. “And in the end, the point was true.”

Once Britain opted not to join the euro, Martin lost interest in Europe. “I 
never said a word.” Had we met even just a couple of years ago, would he even 
have described himself as fiercely Eurosceptic? “Not in the way that a lot of 
fiercely Eurosceptic people were. I think I was probably just starting to 
become aware of the lack of democracy at the heart of the EU, and formed the 
amateur philosophical theory that for the future of humanity – for prosperity 
and peace – you must have democracy. Because if you don’t have democracy,” and 
he starts to laugh again, “you always end up with a nutter in charge.” (Does 
the same apply to businesses? “Yes! Even more so, only the customers are the 
electorate.”) Martin wouldn’t even have been too unhappy for us to remain in 
the EU. “I just agreed with David Cameron that it needed fundamental reform.”

The 61-year-old is of the firm, if increasingly heretical, opinion that 
Britain has benefited enormously from EU migration, “not just economically but 
socially and culturally”. His preferred Brexit model would continue to allow 
anyone from current EU member states to live and work here. “If you look around 
the world, successful economies and countries have had gradually rising 
populations, and that’s needed for the UK as well.” The only change he would 
make to the free movement of labour would be to exclude countries who join the 
EU in the future.

How, then, did he feel when the leave campaign focused so heavily on 
immigration? He exhales uneasily, ums and ahs, and says: “Well, you’ll always 
get an element of xenophobia in any society, but I don’t think Britain is 
generally xenophobic. There was one poster I didn’t think should have been put 
there. But for me, I argued from the point of democracy.”

Martin doesn’t even share most Brexiteers’ fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 at the high court ruling requiring parliament’s consent to trigger article 50. 
“Well, it creates a bit more uncertainty,” he offers, “so I can’t exactly 
welcome it. But I’ll support the legal outcome, because I believe in the law, 
and I believe in parliament, and I believe in democracy.”

Wetherspoon's founder rails at establishment over Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/wetherspoons-founder-tim-marting-blasts-establishment-over-brexit-vote>
The democratic deficit is Martin’s sole objection to the EU project. “The 
thing I cannot understand is that when I said I think democracy is crucial for 
the future of the world, I’d have thought people would pour out of the doors 
saying, ‘Yes! Tim is right!’ But people on the remain side just don’t seem to 
think like that. The emotion of people who’ve been to good universities, et 
cetera, is not that they owe everything to democracy, but that they owe 
everything to people like them, who are better able to run companies, the civil 
service, universities, societies in general.”

The phrase “better able to run companies” catches my attention. Martin studied 
law at university, and qualified as a barrister, but then at 24 bought a pub in 
north London. There was more than a touch of the maverick, plucky little guy 
about his business model as he expanded: when brewers refused to sell him their 
tied-lease pubs, he bought up old banks and shops, licensed the converted 
premises and set about selling affordable food and drink to the unfashionable 
masses. Famously scruffy, he drives an old Volvo – “I don’t own a yacht” – and 
is pointedly unimpressed by the pretensions of professional boardroom culture. 
It makes me wonder if his Euroscepticism is really another expression of his 
emotional rebellion against the blue-chip elite.

“No. I know what you’re driving at, but no.” It’s the remainers, he claims, 
who are motivated by emotion. “Someone from the Financial Times said I was a 
great amateur philosopher, which is an insult – and also probably true.” He 
hoots with laughter. “And I think modern people think because they don’t go to 
church they’re more sophisticated and don’t have a religion. But I think what 
the EU became was a quasi-religion for that sector of society. And universities 
are the modern day seminaries.”

Although happy to be a philosopher, he is emphatically not a politician. The 
last time he voted in a general election was 1992; “I’m not proud of that fact. 
I just didn’t feel strongly enough.” The only other time he has ever voted was 
in the 80s, for Margaret Thatcher, because she was his local MP. He 
mispronounces Andrea Leadsom and Gisela Stuart’s names, and until recently 
Nigel Farage was the only Ukip politician he had even heard of. Were he 
American, he would vote for Hillary Clinton, and thinks Donald Trump is a 
“complete egocentric weirdo”, but adds that “I trust the American people to 
look into it in a bit more detail than me,” so will defer to their judgment 
next week. “I would never want to be a politician. I know my limitations, and 
I’m sure politics is more difficult than it looks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F041e7cba40f974468c68580efeed2439e95d1fd3%2F0_167_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wetherspoon%20boss%20Tim%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20EU%20became%20a%20quasi-religion%2C%20and%20universities%20are%20the%20modern-day%20seminaries%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wetherspoon%20boss%20Tim%20Martin%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20EU%20became%20a%20quasi-religion%2C%20and%20universities%20are%20the%20modern-day%20seminaries%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fwetherspoons-boss-tim-martin-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F041e7cba40f974468c68580efeed2439e95d1fd3%2F0_167_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Tim Martin being interviewed prior to the EU referendum – in which he urged 
his customers to vote leave. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
Martin’s indignation this week about EU leaders’ hostility towards Britain did 
seem politically naive. How else did he imagine they would feel about us for 
leaving? “Well, I didn’t really know. It was impossible to know how they would 
react.” He was very cross with Juncker fortelling EU business leaders to be 
“intransigent” <https://www.ft.com/content/1ba02b24-8c8a-11e6-8cb7-e7ada1d123b1>
 in their dealings with British companies. “And after telling them to make sure 
the UK pays a price, he has to expect people from the UK who are fighting from 
the opposite economic position to make the opposite case!” Well, yes, quite. 
This outbreak of hostilities was precisely what the remainers had warned of.

Has Wetherspoon's become Britain's canteen?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/oct/09/has-wetherspoons-become-britains-canteen>
But leavers will be disappointed by his response when I ask about his boycott. 
“Oh dear!” he laughs, burying his head in his hands. “I can see I’m in trouble 
here already! I haven’t got a boycott. Absolutely not. I was just attempting to 
show that if European companies do what Juncker says and try to get heavy with 
us, inevitably we’d go elsewhere.” I don’t know what “get heavy” means. “Well, 
no one does!” he hoots.

Martin has said the UK doesn’t need to sign a trade deal with the EU, because 
his pubs don’t sign deals with suppliers. He can’t think running the country is 
like running a pub, can he? “What I was saying is that you can’t go into 
negotiations with the EU insisting upon a particular outcome. If you say your 
pre-condition is that we have to have free trade, then in order to get that you 
have to accept what comes with that.” I suggest that I’ll be the EU, and he can 
be the UK, and he can show me how he would approach the negotiations.

“OK, I would say: Decca, I think free trade will suit both our territories 
better.” I’ll say: fine, but in that case you have to accept free movement of 
labour. “I’ll say: look, politically, we can’t.” But this is non-negotiable, 
I’ll say. “Then I think that we have to, er – well, it’s up to you then, Decca, 
what you want to do. We’d like to trade with you. You want to trade with us. So 
what basis would you like to trade on? That’s what I would say.”

I’m not sure this would resolve the impasse. Martin is banking on the EU’s 
aversion to tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/eu-firms-higher-tariffs-export-to-uk-than-vice-versa-civitas>
 to overcome its impulse to impose terms that deter other members from leaving 
– and he may be right. But this is a businessman’s assumption; to EU leaders, 
their political project’s survival may turn out to matter more.

We move on to much firmer ground when we abandon Europe and talk about the pub 
trade. To its admirers,Wetherspoon’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jdwetherspoon> is the saviour of the 
industry – while nearly 30 pubsgo out of business every week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/13/the-death-and-life-of-a-great-british-pub>
, Martin’s chain keeps on growing. With nearly 1,000 pubs, it turns over £1.5bn 
a year,employs 35,000 staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/12/jd-wetherspoon-sports-direct-zero-hours-contracts>
, and makes Martin, who owns between a quarter and a third of its shares, worth 
roughly £250m. But a sign on his office wall reads “Only the paranoid survive” 
– “and I think there’s a lot of truth in that”, he says.

Critics accuse the chain of corporate blandness, and he concedes that “there 
are instances where the design hasn’t been good enough, and it has given too 
much of an impression of impersonality or airport lounge. Pubs need 
individuality.” He spends three days a week visiting his pubs all over the 
country, and constantly worries about their future. “You lose a lot without 
pubs. They’re an important part of the social and cultural life of the 
country.” But whereas pubs must charge 20% VAT, supermarkets pay “virtually no 
VAT on food sales”, allowing them tosubsidise drinks prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/26/supermarket-beer-sales-overtook-pub-sales-first-time-last-year>
.

Who said it: Pub Landlord Al Murray, or JD Wetherspoon founder Tim Martin?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/who-said-it-pub-landlord-al-murray-or-jd-wetherspoon-founder-tim-martin>
“But most of the big companies say nothing about it. Because the people 
running them are taking too short-term an approach; they’re there for five 
years, they’re not looking 10 or 20 years down the line,” Martin says. He 
worries about millennials binge-drinking cheap supermarket spirits at home, 
instead of learning “social drinking” in pubs, which have “more or less become 
ghettos now for adults. Some sort of system that allowed 16-year-olds to have a 
beer or two in a pub would be good.”

Martin might not share all of Al Murray’s views about Europe, but he is a big 
fan. He’s sure it was Murray who assured an anxious post-referendum public: 
“Crisps will remain at the current price,” and named as his most extravagant 
possession: “My wife, and even she’s a bit mean.” In both instances, it was 
actually him – which, of course, only makes him laugh again. “Should have got 
the crisps right.”
 