
Was it the feelgood factor from the Rio Olympics? Or the arrival of some 
decent weather at last? Was it the abundance of bargains on offer? Or foreign 
tourists arriving in Britain to pick up cut-price luxury goods courtesy of the 
cheaper pound post-Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>?

Whatever it was – and it was probably a combination of all those factors – 
August was a hot month for the retail trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/uk-consumers-keep-up-summer-spending-retail-sales->
. Forget the official figures showing a small 0.2% fall in the volume of sales 
last month: this followed a 1.9% jump in July, which was even stronger than 
originally estimated.

The underlying picture, reflected in the 1.6% increase in retail sales volumes 
over the three months to August, is one of strong consumer confidence.

UK consumers maintain enthusiasm for summer shopping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/uk-consumers-keep-up-summer-spending-retail-sales->
This is perhaps not entirely surprising. Interest rates had been kept at 0.5% 
for more than seven years before the Bank of Englandcut them to a new record 
low of 0.25% last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
. That provided those on variable rate mortgages with a bit of extra spending 
power.

All the other factors that normally lead to more high street spending are also 
in place. Unemployment is low, house prices are going up and wages are rising 
more rapidly than prices. The ferocious competition that isaffecting the 
profits of the John Lewis Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
 is good news for consumers.

Those looking for a Brexit effect in the Office for National Statistics data 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/retailindustry/bulletins/retailsales/aug2016>
 would struggle to find one. The 52% of Britons who voted to leave the EU 
appear to have gone on a celebratory binge, while the 48% who voted to remain 
seem to be getting over the referendum blues with a bit of retail therapy. With 
retail sales growing at an annual rate of more than 6%, the ONS’s comment that 
there did not appear to have been any major fall in consumer confidence since 
23 June is self-evident.

Given the strength of spending, critics of the Bank of England will question 
Threadneedle Street’s decision to cut the cost of borrowing last month.

The Bank would argue that its package of measures helped to lift spirits when 
they were particularly low, although the big jump in retail sales over the 
summer came in July, before its monetary policy committee intervened.

One thing is pretty clear, though. For the time being, the strength of 
consumer spending has rendered any further action by the Bank unnecessary.
 