
Android, the world’s most used mobile operating system, is going through a 
step change. For years, its creator, Google, only made a small number of 
own-brand devices running it for developers and enthusiasts. That changedwith 
the release of the Pixe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/google-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone>
l.


The Pixel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat>
 is Google’s first real attempt to challenge Apple and Samsung’s smartphone 
dominance, but it wasn’t made by the same team that makes Android.

In fact, Google’s hardware team, headed by the ex-Motorola chief executive 
Rick Osterloh, aren’t even in the same building as theAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> team, but instead are situated 
across the street.

The Pixel <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pixel> phones introduced a 
new version of Android to the world, a version more Google-y than any before, 
that broke away from the standard or so-called pure Android experience of the 
open-source operating system underneath.

Hiroshi Lockheimer, Google’s head of Android, Chrome OS, and Google Play told 
the Guardian it was a conscious decision for Google to not change core Android: 
“The Google consumer hardware team’s product vision is a phone for Google fans, 
who have adoptedGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
technologies.

“Samsung takes a different approach, LG and HTC take a different approach: 
that’s the core of Android - they get to customise Android and build own 
experiences on top. The one from Google happens to be for Google fans. It makes 
sense.”

But that act of Google making both Android and a phone that runs it could be 
seen as a big kick in the teeth to long-time licensees of the mobile operating 
system who have driven its success.Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> has been Android’s champion 
for years and there are hundreds of other smartphone and device manufacturers 
who license and use Android on their products.

OnePlus, a rising Chinese smartphone manufacturer, is just one of Google’s 
licensees. It creates a modified version of Android called OxygenOS, which runs 
on the companies smartphones including the recently released OnePlus 3T.

Carl Pei, co-founder of OnePlus, told the Guardian he embraced Google’s 
decision to make its own smartphone for the mass market. He said: “The 
interesting thing about the Pixel series is that Google’s diverging from pure 
Android.

“That gives everyone else much more creative freedom, because before we’ve had 
the purists complaining that every time you made a small tweak that ‘this is 
not pure Android’, but now even the Pixel is not pure Android so that gives you 
more creative freedom to realise your vision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36f23cb1e53ed29244a449f3a8da484cc646345%2F0_0_3880_2328%2F3880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20the%20future%20of%20Android%20look%20like%20in%20a%20world%20with%20the%20Pixel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20the%20future%20of%20Android%20look%20like%20in%20a%20world%20with%20the%20Pixel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36f23cb1e53ed29244a449f3a8da484cc646345%2F0_0_3880_2328%2F3880.jpg>
 OnePlus is just one of Google’s licensees. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the 
Guardian 
Lockheimer’s pleased other manufacturers see it that way: “For Carl and 
OnePlus to feel free with OxygenOS, that’s great, that’s exactly what we wanted 
to see happen. And what he and the team did with OxygenOS, Rick [Osterloh]’s 
doing with the Pixel team. Differentiating for a Google-orientated audience,” 
he said.

‘Android has always been about choice’

Google’s open-source moves with Android – giving it away free with a liberal 
licence to make it your own – but still maintain some control in the form of 
licences with conditions over app bundling and compatibility has put it in the 
firing line of the European commission.

Google is embroiled in a battle with the European commission, accused of using 
its dominance over Android to exclude competitor apps and services. While 
Google’s legal counsel and the European commission thrash outcharges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/20/eu-commission-google-android-skew-market-competition-antitrust-vestager>
,responses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/google-european-commission-android>
 and eventually a likely settlement of some kind, does that change the way 
Android is built?

Lockheimer said: “Android has always been about choice, about enabling others 
to build business on top, whether that’s multiple OEMs adopting the same source 
code because we’re giving it away, millions of developers building businesses 
on top of it, or simply being an open platform to provide consumer choice from 
the high to the low end.

“So I think we’re very much aligned with the goals of the commission. We want 
choice, we want openness, and that’s how we’ve been thinking about it for a 
while. And that’s how we’ve always been operating.”

Time will tell if the commission agrees. Being able to customise Android is 
certainly one of the operating system’s strengths, but it also introduces a 
weakness beyond European commission filings: software update delays.

In a world where products radically change, normally for the better, over 
their lifetimes through software, updates are more crucial than ever. They’re 
the linchpin of modern security, delivering critical fixes for holes that could 
let hackers into the one device that knows more about you, your comings and 
goings and your personal information than anything else.

Google releases annual updates to Android, denoted by a new name such as 
Lollipop, Marshmallow and now Nougat, but it can take months, sometimes a year 
or so before those big updates reach devices made by third-party manufacturers. 
Some put the blame on chip makers, others manufacturers, networks or even 
Google.

Lockheimer acknowledges the difficulties: “We share the source code with chip 
makers such as MediaTek and Qualcomm, as well as manufacturers including 
Samsung and others before we publish Android. But it really is a pipeline.

“If you’re in an operator-driven market, such as the US, they also add their 
customisations, so it adds another layer in the pipeline of development. We’re 
doing things to make Android more modular to speed things up.”

One such effort has been the unpacking of some services specific to Google 
that get updated more regularly into what’s known as Google Play Services - a 
layer that sits on top of the Android operating system and delivers all of the 
Google-ness of the smartphone.

Lockheimer said: “Android is an operating system that’s not tied to any one 
company. The Android Open Source Project, doesn’t know that Google exists, it 
doesn’t call into any Google servers or anything like that. So all the Google 
specific technologies are put into a thin layer on top of Android.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F395120b7b9d3da1a0c0922007270cf1ba9618038%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20the%20future%20of%20Android%20look%20like%20in%20a%20world%20with%20the%20Pixel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20the%20future%20of%20Android%20look%20like%20in%20a%20world%20with%20the%20Pixel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffuture-android-pixel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F395120b7b9d3da1a0c0922007270cf1ba9618038%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Samsung, LG and HTC each customise Android. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg 
via Getty Images 
With Google’s apps and Play Services updatable separate from Android operating 
system underneath, material updates that change the look and field, the way 
Android works can be performed directly without having to go through various 
channels and without significantly changing the underlying system.

Security updates have also been made more modular, although still require 
Android system updates to apply. Here there has been progress from the big 
manufacturers including Samsung, Google and others that have pledged to keep up 
with the Android team’s monthly security update releases.

Cross-pollinating Chrome OS and Android


Even full Android updates are being made easier on the user, according to 
Lockheimer. Google’s other operating system, Chrome OS which runs on laptops 
and desktop computers as an extended Linux-based version of the company’s 
Chrome browser, has been doing seamless updates for years. Now the latest 
version of Android 7 Nougat (N) has the same technology employed.


Lockheimer explained: “Android N does operating system updates in the same way 
as Chrome OS, in the background so that the user doesn’t know it’s happening. 
You just reboot and boom you’re using the new version. It’s literally the same 
technology as used in Chrome OS.”

Much has been said over the years about the slow merging of Chrome OS and 
Android, with speculation that Google would eventually ditch Chrome OS for 
Android and run a desktop version of Android. The introduction of the Android 
Google Play store onto Chromebooks this year did nothing to quell rumours of 
the merge.

Lockheimer said: “We’re not interested in merging the source code of Android 
and ChromeOS, but we are doing is to bring the best of both systems to each 
other. One area where ChromeOS was lacking was app support. We happened to have 
this great ecosystem in Google Play for Android, so why not stick it on 
ChromeOS?

“So not really a merge, more taking the best elements of both and 
cross-pollinating.”

Could Google claim Huawei’s spot in the market?

The future of Android is still unclear. Google’s experiment with the Pixel has 
changed the landscape, whether that’s for the better for all or simply for 
Google remains to be seen. Samsung and Apple dominate the smartphone market, 
selling vastly more smartphones than anyone else, but the race to be the third 
biggest smartphone manufacturer is on. Huawei occupies that spot, according to 
the latest data from analysts firms – could Google take its place with the 
Pixel, and how would everyone else feel about the Android maker out competing 
them?


Pei is bullish: “It’s fair game. If Google makes a product that everyone likes 
and remembers, they will get the number three spot. But if we do it, we get the 
spot behind Samsung and Apple.”

 * Five of the best phablets for 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/26/best-phablets-apple-iphone-7-plus-google-pixel-xl-samsung-galaxy-s7-edge>
 * Pixel is a direct challenge to Apple – and a referendum on Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/google-pixel-phone-market-apple-iphone>
 * Google Pixel review: an iPhone beater but not quite an Android king 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/20/google-pixel-review-smartphone-iphone-android>
 * Google Pixel XL review: very good phablet but with price tag to match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/27/google-pixel-xl-review-phablet-price-smartphone-camera-android-71-nougat> 