
The pound is worth less than €1 at airport bureaux de change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/some-airport-bureaux-de-change-offering-less-than-a-euro-for-a-pound>
, hitting holidaymakers hard, sending the cost of a skiing break into the 
stratosphere and shrinking pension incomes for expats in Spain, but making 
Britain a bargain basement destination for tourists.

Bureaux de change

At Southend airport on Friday morning, Moneycorp was offering holidaymakers 
€0.97 for each £1, while at Heathrow and Birmingham airport, the best on offer 
was just a smidgen over parity with the euro, at €1.004. In November 2015, the 
peak market rate for sterling was €1.425 to the pound; although holidaymakers 
would not have enjoyed such a rate, spending abroad is nowcosting Britons 
15-20% more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/10/brexit-and-the-uk-tourist-industry>
 than before the Brexit vote.

Pensioners abroad

About one-third of the 300,000 British people living in Spain are in receipt 
of a UK state pension and have effectively had alarge pay cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/02/pound-fall-british-pensioners-living-overseas-brexit-vote>
 since the EU referendum. The £119.30 a weekbasic state pension 
<https://www.gov.uk/state-pension/overview> was worth as much as €170 a week 
last year, but is now worth €133 a week.

John Hayward, a financial adviser for British residents on the Costa Blanca, 
based in Jávea, said: “It’s not all doom and gloom. The pound is down a lot, 
but the value of their investments have gone up as the stock market has soared 
since Brexit. You are not hearing too much moaning down at the bowls club. It’s 
still much better than 2009, when both sterling and the stock market were down.”

However, he said it was inevitable that sterling’s plunge would have derailed 
plans for some retirees, with the cost of buying a property in Spain jumping 
significantly in sterling terms since the Brexit vote.

Skiing holidays

Even before the flash crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
 on Friday, the price of skiing holidays, especially to the US, had become 
fantastically expensive. A week’s ski pass in the Rocky Mountains resort of 
Vail now costs British visitors £609, with ski hire another £200.

Diane Palumbo of holiday operator SkiWorld said there had been a remarkable 
surge in canny skiers buying their lift passes and package holidays for the 
2016-17 season ahead of the EU referendum.

Since the decline in the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
, there has been a rise in skiers opting for all-inclusive chalet holidays 
where costs are controlled, Palumbo said, although there is little evidence yet 
that British people are abandoning traditionally popular resorts such as Val 
d’Isère in favour of cheaper breaks in Bulgaria.

“The volumes are still there, but over the longer term, we will see people 
looking at prices and saying ‘maybe we will stay away from skiing for a year’. 
But the truth is that the ski market dropped 25% in 2008 and hasn’t recovered a 
lot since then, and what you have now are the people who really love skiing and 
won’t be put off by the currency,” she said.

Tourists to Britain

Prices on Oxford Street in London and Princes Street in Edinburgh are so low 
that foreigners, particularly wealthy Chinese shoppers, areflocking to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
 to pick up bargains.

This week is China’s “golden week” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/uk-retail-chinese-tourists-golden-week-surge-tills>
 holiday season, and online travel site Ctrip is predicting a 40-60% increase 
in trips to Britain. Goods in the UK are now about 20% cheaper for Chinese 
buyers than a year ago and more than half of Ctrip’s routes to the UK were 
booked up one month ahead of golden week.

Britain has become the number one destination for golden week travellers to 
western Europe and has even elbowed aside Australia, traditionally more popular 
because of its proximity.

Shares in luxury goods brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/jimmy-choo-profit-revenue-grow-fall-sterling-store-openings>
 have been among the biggest beneficiaries of the Brexit vote, with Burberry 
soaring from £10.40 a share just before the EU referendum on 23 June to nearly 
£15, adding about £2bn to the market value of the company.
 