
Did City fail with their recruitment?

A big question mark hovers over the Pep Guardiola-Txiki Begiristain axis that 
controls whoManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> buy. The latter is the 
sporting director and he does more than merely sign off his head coach’s 
demands. Begiristain has substantial influence in transfer strategy though he 
takes Guardiola’s lead so the manager has to accept ultimate responsibility for 
the errors so far.

These can be summed up as the bombing out of Joe Hart for Claudio Bravo, a 
baffling failure to overhaul the back four, and a seriously ageing squad. When 
City announced Guardiola as next manager the club added that they had ended a 
four-year chase to sign him. This seems ample time to assess requirements: a 
left-back, a right-back, and at least one central defender plus injecting youth 
were the absolute priorities.

Yet by 1 September only one centre‑back, John Stones, was bought, leaving the 
rearguard as an accident waiting to occur in most matches. Add in Guardiola 
deeming Hart to be poorer than Bravo. The Chilean has been a near‑disaster, 
just not good enough at the goalkeeper’s fundamental requirement: stopping the 
ball going in.

Related: Pep Guardiola rules Manchester City out of title race after Everton 
thrashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>

Can Guardiola address any of this in this January transfer window? In the 
summer will he start to cull some of the more grizzled players for younger, 
more energetic ones?

Is it time to change the tactics?

Guardiola can be applauded for his belief in scintillating pass-and-move play 
and queried for his determination never to tinker with it. Manuel Pellegrini, 
his predecessor, was criticised for a tactical inflexibility and maintaining 
the mantra he would never change. The Guardiola Way created his breathtaking 
Barcelona side and supremely successful Bayern Munich team. No one would expect 
a U-turn from him but is an adjustment here and there not worth consideration? 
This could be all it takes to turna 4-0 defeat at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 into a win for City. First half good, second half bad was the consensus from 
Goodison Park as Guardiola bemoaned the side’s inability to make several 
chances count: “I would like to know why [it keeps happening].”

It seems a worrying admission: the man in charge is unsure why the headline 
problem of failing to convert is stuck on repeat. The answer seems simple: 
those charged with supporting the 18-goal man Sergio Agüero need to increase 
their scoring return. Raheem Sterling has five league strikes. Nolito and 
Kelechi Iheanacho each have four. Yaya Touré has three. And Kevin De Bruyne has 
two. Of this list only Sterling and De Bruyne have been first-choice all term: 
seven from them in total is not good enough. City’s 41 goals is the lowest of 
the top five teams. And at the other end of the team, the 26 allowed is the 
highest of the top seven.

Could Guardiola be handling the media better?

There have been some interesting offerings in this area from Guardiola. 
Included here are clumsy responses, a curt attitude on occasion, and a 
particularly puzzling performance following the2-1 victory against Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 two weeks ago. The latter had him informing a reporter, “You are the 
journalist, not me,” when asked if Fernandinho should have been sent off, and 
Guardiola later had to apologise to the BBC and Sky for equally awkward 
interviews. When City won their opening 10 matches in all competitions with 
bewitching football Guardiola was rightly praised. There was no tough 
questioning then because all was rosy. When this changed to defeats and sloppy 
displays, dealing with the media was bound to be less enjoyable. This is just 
the way it is so entering briefings in defensive mode was counter-productive. 
Everyone admires a coach who can speak well when he has problems and is really 
not minded to. It is also a litmus test of where any manager is on the 
control chart.

Is his vision of the City project still intact?

The sight of Guardiola slumped in his seat at Goodison Park offered a snapshot 
of a man who seems to have lost his way for the moment. So, too, the team, who 
were dismal in the second half of the 4-0 mauling at Everton. These kinds of 
defeats happen to every manager and every side. This is Guardiola’s City, 
though. What happened to the sleek Rolls-Royce of a City that purred through 
those 10 consecutive victories and which befuddled opponents with full‑backs 
who moved inside to midfield? What happened to Stones as the ball-playing 
centre-back wizard charged with starting attacks?

Can Guardiola really continue to “not coach tackles [as] I just want to create 
chances” when his side have just been humiliated 4-0? What are the players 
thinking? Do they still believe?

Guardiola now has a full week of training to try to address all of this before 
the small matter of entertaining a Tottenham side now in rampant form on 
Saturday.

Related: Everton teenager Tom Davies ensures Pep Guardiola knows his name | 
Paul Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/everton-tom-davies-ensures-pep-guardiola-knows-name-manchester-city>

Can City bounce back against Tottenham?

Guardiola is just over half a season into his tenure so has 17 matches to 
start moving City back up the table from fifth. His team have four league 
matches before they travel to Monaco on 21 February for a Champions League 
last-16 encounter. Win all of these and the picture is far brighter, the bounce 
will return to Guardiola’s step and the defeat at Everton may be viewed as a 
vital turning point in the side’s upward arc. City are only two points behind 
Arsenal in fourth and three behind the second-placed Tottenham Hotspur: this is 
not yet last‑chance‑saloon territory.

Yet the reverse of all of this is true. Fail to bounce back from Sunday’s dark 
defeat with victory on Saturday and the volume around Guardiola will be 
considerably increased. The opponents at the Etihad Stadium are not the 
easiest. Tottenham enjoyed their own 4-0 victory against West Bromwich Albion 
on Saturday, and Mauricio Pochettino has his players performing precisely as he 
wishes. In the reverse fixture in October City were taught a lesson in a 2-0 
defeat that was their first in the league after that fine start. Saturday will 
be a considerable test of Guardiola. We are about to find out if he is up to it.
 