
In the glittering wake of Leif Ove Andsnes’s cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/mahler-chamber-orchestra-andsnes-prom12>
 of Beethoven concertos at theProms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms-2015> – the completion of his four-year
Beethoven Journey <http://www.andsnes.com/journey> with the Mahler Chamber 
Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/24/prom-9-mahler-chamber-orchestra-andsnes-review-beethoven-piano-concertos-1-4>
 that produced unfettered yet ultra-considered music-making – I’m grateful to
David Owen Norris <http://www.davidowennorris.com/> for alerting me to the 
following Beethoven quote.

Mahler Chamber Orchestra/Andsnes – music-making of exceptional quality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/mahler-chamber-orchestra-andsnes-prom12>
It appears in William Kinderman’s 1814 essay on Beethoven’s piano music in the 
Cambridge Companion to Beethoven 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Cambridge_companion_to_Beethoven.html?id=hdGcne8_9XcC&hl=en>
:

“It has always been known that the greatest pianoforte players were also the 
greatest composers; but how did they play? Not like the pianists of today, who 
prance up and down the keyboard with passages which they have practised -
putsch, putsch, putsch – what does that mean? Nothing! When a true pianoforte 
virtuoso played it was always something homogeneous, an entity, if written down 
it would appear as a well thought-out work. That is pianoforte playing; the 
other thing is nothing!”

There’s a complex set of ideas here. Beethoven is arguing for the 
compositional, “well thought-out” conception of great pianists’ improvisations. 
And, after all, he was the greatest of them all in early 19th-century Vienna; 
his last public performance as a concerto soloist – before deafness consumed 
him – was in his own4th concerto <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/eqwq9r#b062k67m> 
in a mammoth concert on 22 December 1808 that also included the 5th and 6th 
symphonies, excerpts from the Mass in C, and the Choral Fantasy.

He also is urging the necessity that the very act of playing be a creative 
rather than reproductive activity: the opposite of all that practising, all 
that “nothing”, all that “putsching”.

It’s a conception of piano-playing opposite to the one that we have now in the 
vast majority of classical-music culture – even the way that Andsnes espoused 
it in his recent Proms performances.

At heart, the difference between our now and Beethoven’s then is the 
difference between a culture of cover versions, and a culture of endless 
creative renewal. And yet after all, it was precisely the finely calibrated, 
minutely practised care and attention of Andsnes and the MCO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/mahler-chamber-orchestra-andsnes-prom12>
’s performances that allowed them to sound so free: they seemed to be created 
anew exactly in proportion to how prepared – or overprepared, in Beethoven’s 
terms – they were.

And all that’s before we get to the piano itself. Beethoven would have heard 
Andsnes’s instrument as being crazily out of tune. Andsnes’ Steinway, which is 
in the now-standardequal temperament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/22/how-equal-temperamnt-ruined-harmony>
, means every note is the same distance apart. It makes every scale sound the 
same whether you’re in D major or A flat major.

Equal temperament is actually a dissonant compromise that means everything is 
playable on the piano. However, it irons out all of the differences between key 
centres and key colours that Beethoven, as every other composer before him, 
used as such a central part of his compositional arsenal, and which he makes so 
spectacularly part of the dramaturgy of the piano concertos. This can be heard, 
for example, in the3rd Concerto <https://youtu.be/ccfMPLpG_Lo?t=16m13s>, where 
the distance between the C minor of the first movement andE major  
<https://youtu.be/ccfMPLpG_Lo?t=16m41s>of the slow movement is a shocking shift 
from one world of feeling to another, which he then makes a joke of at the 
start ofthe third movement <https://youtu.be/ccfMPLpG_Lo?t=26m30s>, translating 
G sharp to A flat.

Then there are the pedalling instructions in the slow movement of the 4th 
Concerto <https://youtu.be/CAbIAcuVuk0?t=53m6s>, which are simply unrealisable 
on a modern piano, as Beethoven moves from three vibrating strings to two, to 
one, gradually softening and etherealising the sound with the mechanism of the 
piano for which he was writing. Modern instruments can only do one kind of 
soft-pedalling, not all those subtle gradations of colour and dynamic.

I told you it was complex! The only truth may be that there is no single 
truth, and thatBeethoven’s concertos 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e4m4fx#b062k6h6>, like all classical masterpieces, 
are the products of a continual process of revision and reinterpretation, of 
whichAndsnes’s performances <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ernrzc#b063d9c3> are 
the latest – and on their terms – magnificent example.
 