
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> once 
boasted that they were the grown-ups, even if they did say so themselves. They 
conserved the best of the past and believed in the sensible management of the 
world as it is, rather than in dangerous fantasies about the world as it might 
be. Hold out as their opponents might, eventually they would understand that 
conservatism was just common sense.

“Once again, the facts of life have turned out to be Tory,” declared Margaret 
Thatcher <http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/109439> in 1976, as she 
prepared for one of the long periods of Conservative rule that have dominated 
British history since the 1880s. Dozens of respectable figures have agreed and
played with variations on the theme 
<http://quoteinvestigator.com/2014/02/24/heart-head/> of: “If you are not a 
socialist at 20, you have no heart. If you are still a socialist at 40, you 
have no head.” Conservatives have condescended to allow that sensible people 
might have wild ideas about subjects they know nothing about. But as Robert 
Conquest, the great historian of the crimes of communism, said in the first of
his three laws of politics: 
<http://www.isegoria.net/2008/07/robert-conquests-three-laws-of-politics/> 
“Everyone is a conservative about what he knows best.”

English conservatives, who are by no means confined to supporters of the 
Conservative party, have the best reason to be smug. Conservatism supplied the 
dominant version of the English national story. It helped ensure that the 
Conservative party was, in a phrase that said it all, “the natural party of 
government”.

The English, a category they could expand to cover the Scots and the Welsh, 
but never the Irish, have not had a revolution since the Glorious Revolution of 
1688. The Glorious Revolution was glorious because it did not lead to civil 
war. (Ireland is always forgotten, as I said.) The country or, rather its 
ruling class, peacefully removed James II, a Catholic Stuart with pretensions 
to absolute rule, and assured the triumph of parliamentary government by 
replacing him with the Protestant William III.

In his speech <http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/v1ch13s7.html>
 to the (then all-male and all-wealthy) electors of Bristol in 1774, Edmund 
Burke explained the ideals of parliamentary government. An MP was their 
representative, not their delegate. He owed the voters only “his judgment; and 
he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices it to your opinion”.

Burke’s denunciation of the French Revolution 16 years later, heralded a 
further strand to the story of England as a safe, sensible nation. When Burke 
publishedReflections on the Revolution in France in 1790, his contemporaries 
thought him mad to predict that an apparently benign revolution wouldend in 
“despotism”. <http://www.constitution.org/eb/rev_fran.htm> By the time 
Robespierre began the reign of terror of 1793, he looked like a prophet.

Ever since then, Anglo-Saxon conservatives have been able to believe, with a 
smidgen of justice, that continentals had the guillotines of the 1790s and the 
death camps and gulags of the 1930s and 1940s because of their utopian 
willingness to tear up society by the roots. The pragmatic, empirical and, 
above all, conservative British were spared because we favoured a respect for 
tradition and gradual change.

Last year, Daniel Hannan, one of the leaders of the Vote Leave campaign, 
published a little noticed and largely absurd book,Inventing Freedom: How the 
English-Speaking Peoples Made the Modern World. It was absurd because the 
English did not invent freedom and because Hannan concluded by praising the 
“intellectually dazzling” Enoch Powell, the brutish enemy of the freedoms of 
Britain’s ethnic minorities. For all his faults, Hannan articulated the 
subliminal feelings of millions who voted Leave. Brussels threatened the 
fundamentals of national life: the rule of law, the sovereignty of parliament, 
the independence of the judiciary, which, in Hannan’s words, had “fended off 
every extremist challenge throughout the 20th century”. A decision to leave the 
EU would protect our best traditions.

You may not like conservatives. But you know where you are with them. Or, 
rather, youknew. Now, Trump, Brexit and the global rise of populism have 
created a crisis in conservatism across the west. You can tell a crisis is real 
when the men and women caught up in it duck hard questions. Today’s 
conservatives don’t want to say who they are and what they mean. They have 
become shifty operators who hate being pinned down. As Boris Johnson admitted, 
in one of his occasional moments of honesty, modern conservatives want to have 
their cake and eat it, too.

When it suits them they remain pragmatists, but that pose does not last for 
long. Everywhere you look you see conservatives sniffing the air and catching 
the scent of the radical right. It tempts them with the most seductive perfume 
in politics: the whiff of power. In Hungary, Poland, Turkey, South America and 
now, with Trump’s victory, North America, populists, who despise the checks and 
balances of liberal democracies, are taking control and giving every indication 
of holding on to it.

Conservatives have learned from Trump that they can break the old taboos. They 
can abuse women, damn whole races and religions, assault the constitutional 
order and repeat lie after lie without barely a pause for breath. Far from 
punishing them, the electorate will reward them. Trump’s victory is a dark 
liberation. Their suppressed thoughts, their guilty private conversations, now 
look like election winners

Don’t think it can’t happen here. Earlier this month, Ukip promised the most 
un-British march imaginable: a protest against the rule of law and the 
sovereignty of parliament. Nigel Farage warned that 100,000 people would turn 
out on 5 December to tell the supreme court not to endorse the high court’s 
ruling that parliament must be consulted before the government takes Britain 
out of the EU. It is never wise to believe Farage’s promisesand it looks 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/pro-brexit-march-supreme-court-led-by-nigel-farage-postponed-1593471?utm_source=social&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=/pro-brexit-march-supreme-court-led-by-nigel-farage-postponed-1593471>
 as if his march won’t happen. Protest or not, millions agree with his reasons 
for turning on “the establishment”.He offered his audience 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37888849> a stab-in-the-back myth, 
always at the forefront of fascist conspiracy theory, and added the equally 
traditional hint of violence. “Believe you me,” he said after the high court 
ruling, “if people in this country think that they’re going to be cheated, 
they’re going to be betrayed, then we will see political anger the likes of 
which none of us in our lifetimes have ever witnessed in this country.”

What we used to call the “Tory press” has succumbed to the seductions of the 
militant right. TheDaily Mail called the judges “enemies of the people”, a 
denunciation echoed in the pages of theSun, the Express and Telegraph. As the 
proprietors of theExpress and Telegraph, along with the proprietor of the 
increasingly strangeIndependent, fell over themselves 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/marieleconte/press-barons-and-tory-mps-partied-for-nigel-farage?utm_term=.ydRdNJYK8#.tqEd21avL>
 to welcome Farage to the Ritz last week, it would be more precise to call the 
“Tory press” the “Ukip press” or the “hard-right press”.

Alleged Conservative politicians are no better than alleged Conservative 
journalists. Everyone noticed how unwilling Theresa May and her ministers were 
to defend the independence of the judiciary. So much for Brexit protecting our 
best traditions. The facts of life in 2016 are turning out to be anything but 
Tory.

Conservatives would once have regarded Farage’s call for protesters to march 
on the supreme court as the cries of a rabble-rouser inciting the mob to 
intimidate her majesty’s judges. They would have remembered that Robespierre 
said the French Revolution owed the enemies of the people“nothing but death” 
<https://twitter.com/NickCohen4/status/795966488524050432> and that Lenin and 
the Nazis agreed that “no mercy” could be shown. Whatever our politics, most of 
us, even now, would be confused if a Ukip supporter or rightwing journalist 
demanded to know if we were members of the “British people”. We might say we 
were British, English, Irish, Scottish or Welsh. We might say we were a citizen 
or subject. We ought to tell them to mind their own business. But to agree that 
we are members of “the people” would still sound alien to most British ears, 
while to hear others describe us as an “enemy of the people” would be plain 
sinister.

If Britain had an imperial judiciary claiming novel powers, the rage on the 
right would be justified. But the judges did everything a traditional 
conservative would have expected of them. They ruled that Burke’s 
representatives in the sovereign parliament must have their say on a decision 
that affected the rights of every British citizen. The Anglo-Saxon freedoms the 
Leave campaign said had “fended off every extremist challenge throughout the 
20th century” were the high court’s freedoms, too. Theyquoted Sir Edward Coke, 
<https://www.ft.com/content/d8d3a14a-a1bf-11e6-aa83-bcb58d1d2193> the Jacobean 
judge who defended the rights of parliament against the Stuarts. They relied on 
the words of the Victorian jurist AV Dicey, who said: “The judges know nothing 
about any will of the people except in so far as that will is expressed by an 
act of parliament.”

Therein lies the judges’ problem. And ours.

If you oppose the new populists you become an enemy of the people

As neo-tribalism replaces neoliberalism, you must forget about the old checks 
and balances democracies erected to govern complicated societies. You must be 
sure to respect the “will of the people” in its unmediated rawness. You must be 
surer still that you are a part of “the people”. For, if you are not, you can 
find yourself an “enemy of the people” just by carrying on as you did before.

Everywhere, authoritarian nationalists are using populism to batter their 
enemies. Even before the failed coup gave Recep Erdoğan the opportunity to 
purge anyone capable of gainsaying him, the Turkish president presented himself 
as the true of the voice of the Turkish people. His critics were, by 
definition, potential traitors.

Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond have accused 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2015/04/the-snp-has-replaced-the-church-of-scotland/>
 fellow Scots of “talking Scotland down”, for doubting the feasibility of an 
independent state. In a modern version of an old fallacy, nationalists hold 
that no true Scotsman or woman can be against the SNP.At a rally in May, 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/trump-voters-opposition-to-democracy-by-jan-werner-mueller-2016-11>
 Donald Trump announced: “The only important thing is the unification of the 
people because the other people don’t mean anything.” Trump’s supporters were 
“the people”. Trump’s opponents were “the other”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc650dde62a87ac5661bad0b6adae1d31b412b187%2F0_0_4868_2921%2F4868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20has%20become%20of%20conservatism%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20has%20become%20of%20conservatism%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc650dde62a87ac5661bad0b6adae1d31b412b187%2F0_0_4868_2921%2F4868.jpg>
 Nigel Farage call Brexit a victory for ‘the real people. for the ordinary 
people, for the decent people’. Photograph: Frederick Florin/AFP/Getty Images 
Nigel Farage called Brexit a victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/nigel-farage-ugliness-bullet-fired>
 for “the real people, for the ordinary people, for the decent people” The 48% 
who voted Remain were, like Scots who voted against independence or Americans 
who voted against Trump, unreal and indecent. Finland even had an authoritarian 
nationalist party called the “True Finns”. Its very name stated that Finns who 
did not support them weren’t proper Finns at all. Recently, it changed to “The 
Finns,” which is not much of an improvement when you think about it.

It feels cack-handed to use the “populist” label. In the west, it describes 
rightwing nationalists, but there are leftwing populist movements in South 
America, most notablyVenezuela’s Chavistas, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n4sdk7Zyaa8> who have led their country to 
ruin. How can one word cover so much ground? To make matters worse, “populism” 
is such a soggy word. By definition, any democratic party that wins an election 
is more popular than its rivals. A “populist” can merely be a victor you don’t 
like, just as a “demagogue” can merely be an orator whose arguments defeat you. 
In his brilliant study,What Is Populism?, 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B01LPMRZ5Y/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1>
 Jan-Werner Müller, of Princeton University, ties the dangling threads 
together. The assertion that they and they alone represent “the people” is the 
defining claim of modern populists. It says more about them than their 
superficial differences in ideology. Obviously, populists know many British, 
Polish, Hungarian, Venezuelan and, now, American people want nothing to do with 
them. But they can dismiss them as illegitimate, elitist, corrupt and 
treacherous. In the populist world, you are either a part of the authentic 
people, united as one, or you are the people’s enemy.

In these circumstances, no one in politics, the press or judiciary who takes 
on the populists can be legitimate. Ukip demanded thesacking of the high court 
judges, 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/brexit-legal-challenge-latest-high-court-judges-ukip-suzanne-evans-sack-article-50-a7395116.html>
 Trump denounced “crooked Hillary” andhis supporters threatened  
<http://europe.newsweek.com/epileptogenic-pepe-video-507417?rm=eu>journalists 
who criticised him. Farage denounced career politicians. The Five Star movement 
was so sure that it represented the real Italy that it said it wanted every 
seat in the Italian parliament because all other Italian politicians were 
corrupt.

Not to be outdone, Geert Wilders said the Dutch house of representatives was 
full of fake politicians. The limiting of the legitimate electorate to “the 
people” also explains populists’ repeated accusations of electoral fraud. For 
how can the true representatives of “the people” lose an election unless it has 
been rigged? That populists are the most astounding hypocrites is too obvious a 
point to dwell on. Farage has made a career in British politics and successive 
generations of Le Pens have turned French politics into a family business. When 
it comes to corruption, crooked Trump had to pay $25m to working- and 
middle-class students, whoalleged he cheated them  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-38021820>out of their savings at his 
phoney university. But the double standards do not worry populists or their 
committed supporters. The leaders of the people will pursue the people’s 
interests. The identity politics of the right dictates that this is the only 
standard you can judge them by.

I’ve already argued that Godwin’s Law 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/godwins-law> cannot apply in our age. It is not 
only reasonable, but essential, to compare today’s rightwing authoritarianism 
with the authoritarianism of the past. Modern populism shares the belief of the 
fascists that the will of “the people” exists independently of, and often in 
opposition to, the views of elected representatives. But despite the shared 
contempt for liberal democracy and the endemic racism, modern populism remains 
a long way from fascism. Nor is it the same as Putin’s tyranny, although it is 
telling that Trump, Farage, Le Pen and Corbyn admire the Russian kleptocracy.

Populists, unlike Putin and the fascists, allow reasonably fair elections, 
although in Hungary and Poland they make life hard for the opposition and, with 
Trump’s victory, we can expect more suppression of the American black vote. You 
cannot rule out that fascism may come closer and voter suppression turn into 
mass disenfranchisement. But at the moment, it is worth noting that no European 
populists in power send dissidents to jail. I accept this is a small 
consolation.

Nor is modern populism interested in giving decision-making power to “the 
people”. The last thing populist leaders want is a modern version of Athenian 
democracy, where the engaged citizen is guiding the affairs of the state. As 
Müller says of the prototype for so many of this decade’s demagogic leaders, 
the ideal in Silvio Berlusconi’s Italy was for a supporter “comfortably to sit 
at home, watch TV (preferably the channels owned by Berlusconi) and leave 
matters of state to Il Cavaliere, who would successfully govern the country 
like a very large business corporation”. The same desire to keep “the people” 
out of politics is on show in the UK today. The old Conservative John Major 
says there’s a“perfectly credible case” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/brexit-sir-john-major-says-perfectly-credible-case-for-second-referendum>
 for the people having a second vote. The supposedly people-loving populists 
forbid it. The “mandate” for Brexit was one vote. All the decisions that follow 
are no concern of the Commons, the Lords and the judiciary, say the government 
and the hard-right press. More tellingly, they are no concern of “the people” 
themselves. No one will ask them if they put staying a full member of the 
single market above controlling immigration. They will have no say on whether 
we stay in the customs union. “The people” are not allowed second thoughts. 
Even if inflation is rising and living standards falling in 2018, “the people” 
cannot change their mind. The old joke wags have made about the Nazis, Hamas 
and every other dictatorship that came to power by winning an election, applies 
to the Brexiteers: “You can only vote for them once.”

Conservatism is disappearing before the march of a new extreme right

The collapse of conservatism before this new right will be most dramatic in 
America. Many conservatives in the Never Trump movement honourably opposed him 
when he was running for the presidency Inevitably, if depressingly, the perfume 
of power is seducing them now he has won. In March,Mitt Romney made the best 
speech 
<http://www.nytimes.com/video/us/politics/100000004249503/mitt-romneys-full-speech-against-donald-trump.html>
 of his career when he warned that Trump’s policies would push the economy into 
recession and Muslims into the arms of Isis. If that were not enough, Trump’s 
“twisted” character, evident in the “bullying, the greed, the showing off, the 
misogyny, [and] the absurd third-grade theatrics”, made him unfit for office on 
its own. Romney’s fine words did not survive Trump’s victory. Last week,he was 
tugging his forelock 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/19/politics/donald-trump-mitt-romney-secretary-of-state/index.html>
 and asking Trump for a job.

Jamie Kirchick, one of the leaders of the Never Trump movement in America’s 
rightwing press, says, as metaphor rather than parallel, that the US elite will 
soon be going through itsversion of the Gleichschaltung, 
<http://www.history-ontheweb.co.uk/concepts/concept72_gleichschaltung.htm> the 
process by which German institutions accommodated themselves to Nazi rule.

In contrast, Theresa May remains a traditional conservative, but only just. 
The pressure she responds to comes from the new right. She shows no desire to 
unite the country. She has forgotten about the 48% who voted to remain and does 
not respond to the complaints of the many liberal members of the parliamentary 
Conservative party. Perhaps she, too, can smell how history is moving. If she 
can, she lacks the strength of character to resist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf12a467c3cd704c0d946e1096c850175f24a3c%2F19_0_4057_2435%2F4057.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20has%20become%20of%20conservatism%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20has%20become%20of%20conservatism%3F%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhat-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf12a467c3cd704c0d946e1096c850175f24a3c%2F19_0_4057_2435%2F4057.jpg>
 ‘Theresa May remains a traditional conservative, but only just. The pressure 
she responds to comes from the new right.’ Photograph: Will Oliver/EPA 
The right she is listening to is becoming ever more extreme. It is easy to 
forget now that the campaign to leave the EU began as a traditional 
conservative movement to defend the sovereignty of parliament and primacy of 
English law. Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and the other Tories in Vote Leave 
avoided the taint of racism by refusing to work with Farage. Their resistance 
crumbled as they sensed populism’s power. By the time of the referendum, they 
were claiming that76 million Turks could be on the way 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/06/leave-talks-turkey/> to the UK, with 
millions more Syrians and Iraqis to follow: scare stories that have, needless 
to say, turned out to be nonsense. Ifyou listen to Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/boris-johnson-doom-and-gloom-donald-trump-nigel-farage-theresa-may>
 or read rightwing journalists, all you find are attacks on Trump’s critics.

Intellectual cowardice explains their capitulation in part: they do not want 
to put themselves in a position where they upset men and women on “their side” 
by displaying a flicker of a critical intelligence. They just carry on as 
before and attack their old liberal enemies. The easy course is to join all the 
other conservatives sniffing the air and deciding that it is safer and more 
profitable to be a fellow traveller with populism than its principled opponent.

It is irresponsible to offer false grounds for optimism at this time of 
liberal defeat. Vast changes are coming and the British left, in particular, is 
in no condition to oppose them. But perhaps one day, years from now, a lesson 
from the left will apply to the right. In the last decade, supposedly sensible 
centre-left leaders said nothing as apologists for radical Islam, supporters of 
tyrants and the heirs of the communists came to dominate leftwing argument. So 
supine were they that, when the far-left moved to take over and destroy the 
Labour party, they could not mount one decent argument against it.

Robert Conquest’s third law of politics applies with special force to those 
who stand back and allow the darkness in their midst to grow: “The simplest way 
to explain the behaviour of any bureaucratic organisation is to assume that it 
is controlled by a cabal of its enemies.”

The control of a cabal of its enemies is the simplest way to explain the 
British Labour party. It could soon be the simplest way to explain western 
conservatism.

• Comments will be opened later
 