
Miami

October average high: 28C 


Hot weather, hot people, and now a hot new hotel from the world's hottest 
hotel chain; the Soho Beach House Miami opens this month in the Floridian city, 
where temperatures are still pushing the mercury over 30C right now.

Just above South Beach, the hotel has all the trimmings expected of the Soho 
brand: 50 ocean-view bedrooms with vintage furniture; a wood-panelled drawing 
room hung with art; lounge beds and beach huts overlooking the Atlantic, 
Cecconi's Italian restaurant; and a Cowshed spa with a gym.

• Rooms from $265 per night for members, $315 non-members; +1 786 507 7900; 
sohobeachhouse.com <http://www.sohobeachhouse.com> goes live on 11 October. 
Flights from London to Miami with Virgin Atlantic (virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com>) from £780 rtn in October. 

Rome

October average high: 22C 


October is one of the best times of year to experience the Eternal City. The 
crowds of tourists thin out, the stifling temperatures drop and the ancient 
monuments and cathedrals are bathed in a soft autumnal light.

Lowcostholidays.com 
<http://www.lowcostholidays.com/italy/rome/rome-city/75/saint-paul.htm> (0800 
111 6271) is offering three nights at the Hotel Saint Paul – a smart, modern 
base in the south of the city with friendly service and several family suites – 
for £968 based on two adults and two children sharing on a room-only basis, 
flying from Stansted on 23 October.

Athens

October average high: 24C 


Athens temperatures are still pushing towards 30C this week, and if you go now 
you'll find the sites much emptier than during high season. The city hosts a 
film festival 21-31 October (panoramafest.com 
<http://www.panoramafest.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=82&Itemid=61&lang=en>
), and a photo festival from now until 22 November (hcp.gr <http://hcp.gr/>), 
so there's plenty going on.

For traditional Greek music and decent food (a rare combo in the city centre), 
try Klimataria Taverna (Klepsidras 5, +30 210 324 1809) in Psirri, a slightly 
rough but hip area, for stews bubbling on the stove and a bohemian interior.

Try the stylish Athens Gate Hotel (athensgate.gr 
<http://www.athensgate.gr/index-eng.htm>; doubles €140 per night) for smart 
rooms with black and white photos, and a roof garden with views of the Temple 
of Olympian Zeus, opposite, and the Acropolis, just 100m away.
 