
Thomas Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/13/huxley-great-dynasties-aldous>
 knew a thing or two about the White Cliffs of Dover. “With vast needles and 
pinnacles standing out in the sea, sharp and solitary enough to serve as 
perches for the weary cormorant, [they] confer a wonderful beauty and 
grandeur,” he wrote in an essay which he simply titledOn a Piece of Chalk.

For Huxley, a 19th-century pioneer of evolutionary biology, the white stuff 
was the perfect substance to demonstrate Earth’s antiquity, made up, as it is, 
of microscopic, calcified creatures whose powdery remains give us the means to 
record events and express ourselves artistically. It even gave the country its 
name, Albion, fromalbus the Latin for white – a reference to the White Cliffs 
of Dover.

So where better to sample a new national walking route than the chalk cliffs 
near Dover? The place that helped define the nation and the site of a recently 
opened section of theEngland Coastal Path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/26/england-coast-path-step-closer>
 which, by 2020, will allow outdoor enthusiasts to walk round the 2,790 miles 
of the nation’s shoreline. This journey will begin at the Scottish border near 
Bamburgh and take walkers down to Kent and the white cliffs, then along the 
south coast to Lyme Regis and to Land’s End before heading up to Chepstow – for 
a brief break to enjoy the 870-mile Wales Coast Path – before rejoining its 
England Coastal Path at Queensferry and then heading to its northwestern 
extremity at Gretna. According to Nature England, this will be the longest 
continuous coastal walking route in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad68256f143c20c3a2d709a0caa7db6892fe1580%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country's%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country%27s%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad68256f143c20c3a2d709a0caa7db6892fe1580%2F0_138_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Green shoots: sea kale on the pebbles at Sandwich Bay. Photograph: Wouter van 
Caspel/Getty Images 
Many of these sections will absorb existing paths that are being tarted up to 
the standards of a national trail while completely new sections are being 
constructed. My walk – from the National Trust’s White Cliffs reception centre 
to Sandwich – would take in both refurbished path and new track and is part of 
the newly opened Kent section of the coastal path.

And although only a few miles long, the section covers a startlingly diverse 
and strikingly beautiful chunk of countryside. The White Cliffs, in mid-summer, 
burst with colour and wildlife:greater knapweed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/16/alys-fowler-knapweeds>, 
scabious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/24/plant-of-week-scabiosa-blue-jeans>
, lady’s bedstraw, wild mignonette, sea kale, wild marjoram and thyme providing 
a multicoloured home for marbled white, chalkmill blue, skipper and meadow 
brown butterflies. Add the odd skylark wheeling overhead and you do indeed have 
a place of “wonderful beauty and grandeur”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e655bbbd0bd5a1e537c22b925495d45ce787b78%2F0_113_4595_2756%2F4595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country's%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country%27s%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e655bbbd0bd5a1e537c22b925495d45ce787b78%2F0_113_4595_2756%2F4595.jpg>
 ‘Spectacular plant and insect life’: a marbled white butterfly. Photograph: 
REX/Shutterstock 
Yet it soon becomes apparent as we begin our walk that these glories are based 
on only wafer-thin support. Patches of bare chalk protrude all along the 
coastal path here and reveal how painfully thin is the soil layer that supports 
its plants and wildlife.

Nor are the cliffs immutable. Their chalk crumbles at a fairly substantial 
rate, eroding at an average of a centimetre a year. Every so often a giant 
chunk collapses into the sea. And for a coastal path this could be bad news. 
You cannot have the ravages of natures regularly wiping out chunks of your 
pathway.

Fortunately, the new trail, which was launched in 2007 by the then environment 
secretary David Miliband, has been established so that Nature England will have 
the power to rebuild, further inland, any path lost to erosion. In addition, 
land between the coastal path and shore can now be used for recreation, for 
example, picnics – a right that was also established when setting up the 
Coastal Path’s legislation.

With its spectacular plant and insect life, together with the hustle of Dover, 
the world’s busiest passenger port, behind you and the sight of the Calais 
coastline to your right, this first section was the most intriguing part of our 
six-mile walk. It is an exhilarating stroll which, after a couple of miles, 
takes you to theFan Bay Deep Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/20/churchill-wartime-tunnels-dover-national-trust>
, a gun battery cut out of the Kent chalk in 1941 that allowed Britain to shell 
enemy shipping in the Channel. Recently restored by the Natural Trust, its 
tunnels, scrawled with 40s graffiti, also provide access to a First World War 
sound mirror, a giant concrete dish which focused sound waves, rather than 
radio waves, as a not-very-successful method for detecting incoming planes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183e518bcc70a2d6cdabf4ffa4b2f4ea8df6cc3d%2F0_134_5174_3106%2F5174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country's%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White%20Cliffs%20of%20Dover%3A%20a%20walk%20through%20the%20country%27s%20past%20and%20present&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fwhite-cliffs-of-dover-a-walk-through-the-countrys-past-and-present%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183e518bcc70a2d6cdabf4ffa4b2f4ea8df6cc3d%2F0_134_5174_3106%2F5174.jpg>
 Ancient stones: Walmer Castle. Photograph: Jonathan Bailey/Getty Images 
At the South Foreland Lighthouse 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/south-foreland-lighthouse>, you head down 
steeply to St Margaret’s at Cliffe and head north to Deal and Henry VIII’s 
Walmer Castle which later provided a home for Pitt the Younger and the Duke of 
Wellington (who died there). From Deal, the path then follows the coast to 
Sandwich along a beach made of steep shingle. The pace here is slow and heavy 
though the place is not without its fascinations, the coast being rich in 
populations of waders and wildfowl.

Two thirds of the way to Pegwell Bay, the path used to turn east to Sandwich, 
but now has an extra three miles of route added to it to take walkers round the 
peninsula at Shellness and down the River Stour to Sandwich, creating a series 
of new ponds and reserves that are already being colonised by egrets and other 
wildfowl. It is a stunning little thoroughfare bursting with history and 
wildlife and as pleasant a few miles as I have ever walked.

Chalk one up to the coastal path.
 