
Bugsy is back in town. I mean Bugsy Malone 
<http://www.lyric.co.uk/whats-on/production/bugsy-malone/>, Sean Holmes’s stage 
revival ofAlan Parker’s 1976 movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/how-we-made-bugsy-malone-jodie-foster-scott-baio-alan-parker>
 in which moppets play mobsters in gangland Chicago during Prohibition. The 
production was a summer hit last year and should deliver this time round. 
Holmes’s trick is to find the playfulness in the show while taking the whole 
thing deadly seriously. Death may be delivered via splurge guns shooting pink 
blancmange – but that doesn’t make it any less serious.

Bugsy Malone review – a sassy, grab-you-by-the-tear-ducts production
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/03/bugsy-malone-lyric-hammersmith-observer-review>
Too often playing dead on stage is an embarrassment for both the actor and the 
audience: the writhing, exaggerated death throes, the fact that we can see the 
corpse is still breathing – often heavily after their exertions. As Tim 
Etchells observed in theprogramme note 
<http://www.forcedentertainment.com/notebook-entry/spectacular-programme-note-by-tim-etchells/>
 for Forced Entertainment’sSpectacular 
<http://www.forcedentertainment.com/project/spectacular/>, in which Claire 
Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/22/taming-of-the-shrew-forced-entertainment-claire-marshall-how-we-staged-shakespeare>
 died over 75 minutes (surely the longest death scene in theatrical history), 
there is often something ridiculous about trying to play dead on stage, 
particularly in a world where we are surrounded by images of death.

“When the actor plays dead no one’s fooled for a moment,” wrote Etchells. 
“We’ve long been gripped by the strange game of playing dead; that particular 
absurd edge of theatre in which the performers are charged with approaching the 
one thing, which above all others, perhaps, can’t ever be convincingly 
represented.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Ffake-blood-dead-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4966ac38b8f01b00d1036386d14e4affe21ab799%2F0_115_2204_1322%2F2204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20needs%20fake%20blood%3F%20Eye-catching%20ways%20to%20play%20dead%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Ffake-blood-dead-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20needs%20fake%20blood%3F%20Eye-catching%20ways%20to%20play%20dead%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Ffake-blood-dead-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4966ac38b8f01b00d1036386d14e4affe21ab799%2F0_115_2204_1322%2F2204.jpg>
 Leafing it to the imagination … A cabbage is butchered in Rose Rage. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
It’s why dying badly on stage has become one of the tropes of comedy theatre 
from the antics of Mischief Theatre’sThe Play That Goes Wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/09/peter-pan-goes-wrong-apollo-theatre-london-review>
 to Spymonkey and Tim Crouch’sThe Complete Deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/09/spymonkey-complete-deaths-shakespeare-400-brighton-festival>
, in which all 74 stage deaths in Shakespeare’s plays are re-created.

The ancient Greek playwrights knew that it is absence, not an actor covered in 
fake blood, that makes us understand the permanence of death – and its horror. 
As Lars von Trier observed inThe Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jul/07/lars-von-trier-the-kingdom>
: “Maybe what we’ve shown has troubled you. Don’t be afraid, keep your eyes and 
ears open. All we can do is try to scare you with stage blood. Only when you 
avert your eyes have we got you. The real horror lies behind the closed doors.”

On stage it is often when death is at its least representational that it is 
most memorable and effective, although whenKatie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
 andIvo van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/02/ultimate-production-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller-theatre>
 used cameras to give us death in close-up, as we saw recently inThe Forbidden 
Zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/05/the-forbidden-zone-fritz-haber-barbican-katie-mitchell-review>
 andKings of War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/21/kings-of-war-review-shakespeare-with-shock-and-awe>
 it became magnified and harrowing.

Bringing back Bugsy Malone: ‘we’ll smell of Angel Delight for months’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/24/bugsy-malone-lyric-theatre> 
Some of my favourite stage deaths include those in Steven Pimlott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/feb/16/guardianobituaries.obituaries>’s 
Antony and Cleopatra, where the characters stood up after their demise and 
walked backwards off the stage as if acknowledging that this is their final 
exit; the cabbages brutally cleaved in half to represent each death inEdward 
Hall’s Rose Rage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/feb/10/artsfeatures7>
; the buckets of red liquid sloshed in John Doyle’s take on Sweeney Todd; and 
the burst balloons in Ellen McDougall’sHenry the Fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/17/henry-the-fifth-unicorn-teenager-review>
 and Dan Hutton’sThe Spanish Tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/21/the-spanish-tragedy-review-london>
. Tell us about the onstage deaths that have left an impression on you.
 