
Bellini operas are like buses. Six months after English National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/english-national-opera-eno> unveiled its 
first ever production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/16/bellini-norma-eno-coliseum-london-translator-george-hall>
 of the composer’s masterpieceNorma, over at Covent Garden, the same work is 
about to appear for the first time in nearly 30 years. A couple of weeks ago, 
at the Edinburgh festival, another version was performed. The production 
starred Cecilia Bartoli, who, despite being incontrovertibly a mezzo, triumphed 
in one of thetoughest soprano roles 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opera/what-to-see/it-was-a-close-run-thing-but-cecilia-bartolis-norma-is-a-furious/>
. In the world of opera, 2016 will be remembered as the year the druidic diva 
returned.

Of these new Normas, the Royal Opera’s reimagining is perhaps the most 
intriguing. Directed by the renegade Catalan collectiveLa Fura dels Baus 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/norma-by-alex-olle>, it relocates Bellini’s 
Roman-occupied Gaul brusquely to the present: druidic robes are replaced by the 
uniforms of hard-right Christian groups; gloomy temples are abandoned in favour 
of sleek modern apartments. Outside the opera world, the company, founded in 
1979, is still best known for the opening ceremony of the 1992 Barcelona 
Olympics, an awe-inspiring if perplexing spectacle in which 2,000 
blue-cape-wearing volunteersimpersonated the Mediterranean sea 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkadV8tQWls>. At Covent Garden, one wonders if 
the shade of Maria Callas – who made her debut as Norma here in the early 
1950s, where itremained her favourite role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/26/from-the-archive-maria-callas-norma-review-1957>
 – knows what she is in for.

Norma/ACO at Edinburgh festival review – Cecilia Bartoli set the night ablaze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/07/norma-bartoli-australian-chamber-orchestra-at-edinburgh-festival-review>
In fairness, although La Fura came to prominence in the exuberant riot of 
Spanish creativity that followed the death of Franco in 1975 (one carnivalesque 
site‑specific 1985 work in London’s Docklands was commended for resembling an “
adult adventure playground <http://artillerymag.com/bunker-vision-10/>”), these 
days their CV is more mature, with premieres at the Verona festival and 
Madrid’s Teatro Real among recent highlights. La Fura is strong in opera: its 
version of Ligeti’sLe Grand Macabre was extravagantly praised when it came to 
ENO in 2009, and a rare revival of Enescu’sOedipe at the Royal Opera House 
earlier this year, collaboratively created by Àlex Ollé, Valentina Carrasco and 
Alfons Flores, moved the critics to near-unanimous ecstasy. They retain some of 
the old take-no-prisoners spirit, though. The set forLe Grand Macabre was 
dominated by a remote-controlled model of a woman’s naked torso, with the 
singers entering and exiting via various orifices – a reference, the company 
explained, to the opera’s obsession with the body and death.

Sitting in a backstage meeting room after a long day of rehearsals with ROH 
music director Antonio Pappano, Ollé says thatNorma is a tougher nut to crack. 
Its reputation as a showcase forbel canto gymnastics is one obvious reason. 
Although the plot is emotionally harrowing – having had a covert relationship 
and two children with the Roman governor Pollione, the priestess Norma is 
stunned to realise he has abandoned her for a younger woman – the story often 
comes a distant second to Bellini’s impassioned music, with its surging 
melodies and sinuous lines. Trickiest of all is his writing for Norma herself: 
the role is a high-wire act that requires tremendous vocal dexterity. One 
suspects some audiences wouldn’t greatly care if the cast were wearing old 
curtains so long as the heroine wafts through her famous prayer for peace, “
Casta Diva <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-9IvuEkreI>”, with the requisite 
impeccable tone.

“Norma tends to be done very traditionally,” Ollé says. “But the situation is 
so extreme and dramatic: religion, fanaticism. The heroine is caught in the 
middle of all this. We’ve attempted to bring it up-to-date, to make the opera 
as full as possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f193200fedd856a50158d766334de143d686bb3%2F0_219_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20La%20Fura%E2%80%99s%20Norma%20is%20playing%20with%20fire%20at%20Covent%20Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20La%20Fura%E2%80%99s%20Norma%20is%20playing%20with%20fire%20at%20Covent%20Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f193200fedd856a50158d766334de143d686bb3%2F0_219_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Alex Ollé rehearses Norma at the Royal Opera House. Photograph: Catherine 
Ashmore 
Pulling open a laptop, he swipes through photographs that influenced Flores’s 
designs: priests in crow-like soutanes; Franco-like dictators sporting 
sunglasses; most eerily, gaggles of children wearing triangular capes and hoods 
resembling those of the KKK (the costume is still commonplace during religious 
festivals in parts of Spain). The nods to druidic practice are clear enough, 
but they are brutal and chilling. The shadowy world of hardline Catholic groups 
such as Opus Dei were one inspiration, Ollé explains; so too was George Bush’s 
notorious announcement after the 11 September attacks that the US would launch 
a “crusade” against Islamist terrorism. One of the production’s most arresting 
visuals is a thicketed corona of crosses – some 1,200 in all – that will 
descend on to the stage.

“Our setting is fictional,” Ollé says, “but the elements come from reality. 
All these things happen in real life.”

If anyone is hoping that the production would provide a few hours of melodious 
relief from the horrors ofIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>
, they had better recalibrate, Carrasco adds: “There’s a lot of politics, but 
that’s all there in the piece. Of course inbel canto you have these universal 
themes, the girl wanting the boy or the other way around, but here it’s a 
tissue of different things. There are personal conflicts. But inNorma 
especially, the personal becomes political.”

The character of Norma herself is particularly fascinating. Composed by 
Bellini for the mesmerically talented 19th-century star Giuditta Pasta, the 
role has been aninspiration for a long line of tragic heroines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2001/nov/02/arts.highereducation>, 
including Verdi’s Violetta and Wagner’s Isolde.

“She’s a lion!” Carrasco exclaims. “Pollione leaves her, and she incites a 
war. There’s a lot of strength there. Actually, part of the difficulty with the 
opera is that the audience is inevitably on her side; you have to make Pollione 
sympathetic, too. He can’t look like an asshole.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYl8GRJGnBY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYl8GRJGnBY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTYl8GRJGnBY&media=>
 Watch Maria Callas singing Casta Diva 
The heroine’s role in this new production was originally intended to be taken 
by the Russian soprano Anna Netrebko, until sheabruptly pulled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/26/soprano-anna-netrebko-withdraws-royal-opera-norma>
 in April, to the ROH’s barely concealed frustration. Now the Bulgarian soprano 
Sonya Yoncheva will follow in the footsteps of Callas and Joan Sutherland, 
another notable Norma.

I ask Carrasco if they’re feeling the pressure. “Of course, it’s hard, 
particularly for Sonya. But then it’s such a hard role anyway: there’s no let 
up in the vocal writing. She barely has any time off stage.”

The two directors say they’re still figuring out one of the opera’s trickiest 
moments, the denouement. Felice Romano’s libretto calls for the heroine to 
throw herself on a sacrificial pyre, along with her two children, a moment that 
rivals anything in Greek tragedy for extremity. Ollé won’t be drawn on the 
details, but hints that their interpretation may surprise purists: “The closer 
what you put on stage is to what is in your mind, the better. But the singers 
need to inhabit it, and if it doesn’t work, there’s nothing. If you don’t 
believe in it emotionally, then the show … ” He mimes a plane smashing into the 
ground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2c236deef8443d464bbc85d8e75029b3097066%2F0_638_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20La%20Fura%E2%80%99s%20Norma%20is%20playing%20with%20fire%20at%20Covent%20Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20La%20Fura%E2%80%99s%20Norma%20is%20playing%20with%20fire%20at%20Covent%20Garden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-norma-is-playing-with-fire-at-covent-garden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2c236deef8443d464bbc85d8e75029b3097066%2F0_638_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
 Director of opera for the Royal Opera, Kasper Holten. 
The question remains of how those purists will respond. The Opera House is not 
renowned for the open-mindedness of its audience, and the announcement that the 
adventurous director of operaKasper Holten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/09/kasper-holten-to-quit-royal-opera-covent-garden>
 will depart next year was greeted in some quarters with a sniff of approval (a 
replacement has not yet been announced). Earlier this year, Katie Mitchell’s 
doomy reimagining of another 1930s classic,Donizetti’s Lucia di Lammermoor 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-35995554>, was booed.

Is Ollé concerned by such things? “I have been booed before,” he shrugs. “Not 
often, but I have been booed. I don’t worry about this. I didn’t seeLucia, but 
audiences sometimes boo when there is something gratuitous on stage. There is 
no gratuitousness in ourNorma: everything is thought through. It is not about 
shocking people: I want to make them think.”

Still, all this talk of fanaticism reminds me of certain parts of the opera 
cognoscenti, I say. There is a saturnine grin. “Conservative people can be 
extremist, not just in Spain but in England, too.”

La Fura dels Baus, literally translated, means “the ferret from the Baus”, for 
the engaging reason that when the company originally came together, they 
struggled to find a name and thought it sounded playful (the Baus is a small 
river near Barcelona, now a dumping ground). Nearly as tantalising is what they 
call the “Furan language”, a phrase that attempts to encompass their 
freewheeling blend of audiovisual wizardry, acrobatics and puppetry. The 
company is as energetically productive as ever: though the core group is run by 
six directors, it now makes a staggering quantity of work across theatre and 
music, as well as continuing to mount the large-scale spectacles that forged 
its reputation.

“Film, too,” Ollé corrects me. “You can’t ring fence creativity. All these 
ideas feed into each other: after directing Berlioz’sDamnation of Faust I also 
developed a version of Goethe as a movie. We collaborate with many different 
people, different specialisms. Everyone brings something fresh. We enjoy a 
challenge.”

I’m dying to ask about one of La Fura’s more prog rock-ish projects, their 
mid-2000s acquisition of a former Norwegian icebreaker, 60m long, which they 
christened “Naumon” (“world in a ship”) and sailed to various ports around the 
Mediterranean, using it as amakeshift theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jul/19/theatre1>. “We didn’t just want 
to have a theatre only in Barcelona, we wanted to have a theatre in many 
places. So why not a boat? But this was a crazy idea – in the end we were 
several million euros in debt.”

He puts his head in his hands. “A theatre company with that much debt. We had 
to work very hard to pay it off. But we don’t regret the adventure.” The 
saturnine grin reappears. “This is La Fura. Why not?”

• Norma is at the Royal Opera House, London WC2, from 12 September to 8 
October.roh.org.uk <http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/norma-by-alex-olle>.
 