
All in all 2016 hasn’t been a great year for women’s rights. The small flicker 
of hope that we might finally have a female president in the US was thoroughly 
doused by Donald Trump.

Last year two women won a Nobel prize; this year there was none. The number of 
female CEOs in the Fortune 500 dropped. And research announced at the World 
Economic Forum found that it will take approximately170 years to close the 
gender pay gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/gender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality>
 around the world. One hundred and seventy years.

So overall it doesn’t look like 2017 is going to be the year women finally 
achieve gender parity. In fact, so far the attempts to move us toward it have 
proved to be, well, a bit half-hearted.

The UK government’s attempt to make pay gap reporting mandatory for all 
companies with more than 250 employees has been met with disgruntled muttering 
and very little action from business.

A few organisations have made some tentative steps towards it, and those 
already reporting their gender pay gaps should be applauded, but for most it 
was just another piece of red tape to be ignored. Much easier to point the 
finger at women and say it’s our fault for not asking.

Donald's misogyny problem: How Trump has repeatedly targeted women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/trumps-misogyny-problem-how-donald-has-repeatedly-targeted-women>
A great deal is made of the need to encourage women to negotiate more 
effectively. However, even if we take that into 2017,research suggests 
<http://fortune.com/2016/09/06/women-men-salary-negotiations/> it’s not going 
to help. While women ask for pay rises as often as men do, they’re much less 
likely to get them. The reality is we expect men to be pushy about salary, to 
ask for more money and to vocalise their worth, so when they do it we’re not 
surprised.

However, society has taught that it’s not polite for women to do the same, so 
when they do, we tend to see them as pushy and arrogant, and that instantly 
makes us less likely to reward them. So while it’s useful to encourage women to 
negotiate their salary more firmly, it’s also not the only way to solve this 
problem and certainly won’t help women in the coming year.

This doesn’t mean equal pay in 2017 is impossible. We might not be able to 
achieve it on a worldwide level, but within the UK, the US and Australia it 
should certainly be achievable.

In 2015, Salesforce did an audit of its pay gap. CEO Marc Benioff was so sure 
the company wouldn’t have a gender pay gap that he made a deal with his senior 
female employees. If they could prove there was in fact a pay gap he would 
instantly fix it.

They proved it and Benioff instantly paid out US$3m 
<http://fortune.com/2015/11/07/salesforce-3-million-close-pay-gap/> 
(£2.4m/AU$4.1m) to fix it. He found every woman who was being paid less than a 
male colleague doing the same job and adjusted her salary accordingly. In the 
grand scheme of things $3m is not much to a big corporation like Salesforce, 
but the amount of goodwill it bought was priceless. There’s absolutely nothing 
stopping other businesses following suit.

And this is the one bright light that has come out of 2016. While it hasn’t 
been a good year for women’s rights, it has been a great year for women 
speaking up and making their voices heard. From politics to Hollywood, women 
around the world have been calling time on the sexist attitudes and experiences 
they’ve encountered and pushed back against them.

If we can keep doing that in 2017 then maybe, just maybe, we’ll be shouting so 
loudly that no company would dare to underpay us ever again.
 