
What does it say about a nation when it doesn’t do justice to its own 
composers? Americans are famous for their patriotism, but do we really walk the 
walk in terms of loving our own culture? You can hear Prokofiev in concert 
halls across the country, but just try programming Piston. (Walter Piston 
<http://americansymphony.org/american-harmonies-the-music-of-walter-piston/>, 
1894-1976, the brilliant American symphonist – see?)

At this summer’s Aspen music festival, we are presenting a group of 
mid-20th-century modernist American symphonies. There will be major symphonic 
works by Piston, George Antheil, Erich Korngold, Peter Mennin, Roger Sessions, 
Charles Ives, Roy Harris and William Schuman. I’m especially happy that 
audiences will hear Mennin’s brilliant and gutsy Fifth Symphony, and Sessions’s 
Violin Concerto. Planning our marketing, phrases such as “all but forgotten”, 
“unjustly neglected”, “unaccountably unknown” kept coming up. As a composer 
myself, who knew many of the composers whose work will be performed, I 
struggled against these descriptions. I have not forgotten these composers and 
their magnificent music. And yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3856d6301732b4ba459a3b2ef49248df4e3971d1%2F303_26_2790_3486%2F2790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3856d6301732b4ba459a3b2ef49248df4e3971d1%2F303_26_2790_3486%2F2790.jpg>
 ‘A brilliant symphonist’ … Walter Piston. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
Some quick research shows that Harris, Mennin, Piston, Schuman and Elliott 
Carter (who together wrote more than 100 concert symphonic works) had, in the 
past five years, a total of just 20 performances by US orchestras.


Meanwhile, a look at the 2015-16 season shows that UK audiences hear as many 
as 19 major works by British composers – Tippett, Walton, Britten, Vaughan 
Williams – performed by each leading orchestra in each season.


A British colleague observed that American works, highly celebrated in their 
own time among musicians, contrast in their current obscurity with comparable 
works by UK composers that are increasingly celebrated in the UK. This got me 
wondering: have US musicians and presenters unjustly ignored their own 
symphonists, or have audiences voted against them?

There is plenty of mid-20th-century classical American music that is securely 
in the repertoire, Copland, Barber, Bernstein in particular.

The composer Ned Rorem declared that all American composers are either French 
or German in their mentality. I might suggest my own split-path contrast: among 
composers whose large-scale works are either more symphonic or more theatrical 
(or perhaps, narrative).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28cfe4c556fad6970565641ba506818e32a3b931%2F0_169_1996_1994%2F1996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28cfe4c556fad6970565641ba506818e32a3b931%2F0_169_1996_1994%2F1996.jpg>
 Alan Fletcher Photograph: Alex Irvin 
Since Mozart, very few composers have been both. Definitely symphonists: 
Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Brahms, Bruckner, Mahler. Coming from the 
theatrical side: all Italians, all French (Franck was Belgian), Weber, Wagner, 
Mussorgsky, Rimsky-Korsakov. Writing important works in both categories, but 
now remembered more as symphonists: Haydn, Schubert. True hybrids: Dvořák? 
Tchaikovsky? Schoenberg, Stravinsky and Bartók are worthy of a more nuanced 
investigation. Britten was certainly theatrical.

Shostakovich, now living on a reputation as a symphonist, might, if Stalin had 
allowed it, have been one of the greatest of all opera composers.

This is just a rough sketch.

But Sessions, Carter, Harris, Piston, Schuman, Mennin – all symphonists. 
Copland, Barber, Bernstein (Gershwin?) – all from the theatre. And it’s in the 
latter group that we find those whose work is still familiar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a583815988f6f7a031cb73d6fcfccc0e6511ab%2F263_979_2153_1291%2F2153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20the%20reputations%20of%20US%20composers%20so%20pianissimo%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Famerican-composers-neglected-aspen-music-festival-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1a583815988f6f7a031cb73d6fcfccc0e6511ab%2F263_979_2153_1291%2F2153.jpg>
 Young American composers pictured in Paris in 1926, from left, Virgil Thomson, 
Walter Piston, Herbert Ellwell and Aaron Copland. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
All the American modernist symphonists were also distinguished university or 
conservatory professors. They didn’t live in the concert world, even if they 
paid it frequent visits. Perhaps they didn’t adapt to concert reality as well 
as others, or perhaps they didn’t garner the support of a broader category of 
working musicians, who would help keep their works in the repertory. A 
conductor-advocate is key.

Perhaps contemporary US orchestra audiences are more conservative than opera 
audiences. Certainly, there are many great new American operas finding 
enthusiastic receptions, and composers such as Philip Glass and John Adams, 
though they have wonderful concert music, have made their reputations with 
opera. The modernist symphonies lack the kind of narrative that might help 
audiences approach them (and of course opera composers can choose a well known 
story if they wish to, from the travails of Richard Nixon to, more recently, 
Moby-Dick, or Cold Mountain). But composers such as Adams and Glass saw 
themselves following in the footsteps of the great European tradition of 
symphonic writing, bringing to it an American sensibility.

Whatever the case, our Aspen festival will this summer do its utmost to 
restore some important music and an important heritage to the repertoire.

Will we in one stroke catch up with our British cousins? I doubt it, but the 
thing about music is that you never know when it will suddenly catch on.

• Alan Fletcher is a composer and president and CEO of the Aspen music 
festival and school.The  <http://www.aspenmusicfestival.com/>festival 
<http://www.aspenmusicfestival.com/> runs until 21 August.
 