
Andrew Buttress, one of tens of thousands of leftwingers to return to Labour 
last year, says he does not dislike his MP,Tristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt>, even though their 
backgrounds are very different – one is from a working-class Stoke background, 
the other is the son of a life peer. “Our politics are completely divergent,” 
said Buttress, who is not the son of Julian, Baron Hunt of Chesterton.


Nevertheless, Buttress, in tune with his fellow party members in Hunt’s seat of
Stoke-on-Trent <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent> Central, 
said he was not seeking the deselection of the television presenter turned MP, 
dismissing such talk as “guff”.

If David Cameron presses ahead with a plan to reduce the number of MPs from 
650 to 600 in boundary changes in 2018, then the equation could change.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members acknowledge hard 
decisions would have to be made with the three Labour-held Stoke seats likely 
to be cut: three into two means at least one casualty. If neighbouring 
Newcastle-under-Lyme is part of the mix, it could be four MPs fighting it out 
for fewer seats.

Revealed: how Jeremy Corbyn has reshaped the Labour party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
Given the shift to the left as a result of the influx of new Labour members 
last year, Hunt, who resigned from the shadow cabinet rather than serve under 
Jeremy Corbyn, would seem like an obvious target. But, after interviewing 
members in all four constituencies, it is not that straightforward.

Gareth Snell, 30, worked for Hunt before leaving to join Unison and is a 
Newcastle-under-Lyme constituency member. “I have not seen anyone talking about 
deselection other than one or two with a grievance,” he said. But boundary 
changes would be different. “As what is likely to happen, the mathematics are 
brutal.”

Although Corbyn has dismissed talk of forcing reselections, central to his 
ambition of remoulding Labour is changing the make-up of the parliamentary 
Labour party. In a series of interviews with constituency members in 
Staffordshire –part of a Guardian survey on the impact of Corbyn on Labour at 
grassroots level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
 – one of the refrains is that the parliamentary Labour party long ago ceased 
to be representative of either party members or the public.

I would like to see an MP representing me who speaks with a Stoke accent and 
did not go to public school
Andrew Buttress, Labour supporter 
Buttress, 51, returned to Stoke after working as a university law lecturer in 
Barcelona. He says Hunt, though respected by members for raising Stoke’s 
profile nationally and for regularly turning up at constituency meetings to 
face down critics, is out of tune with the constituency party. “If I had been a 
member of the party when he was selected, I doubt I would have voted for him. 
He was parachuted in. But I have never considered deselecting him. We both 
broadly want the same thing.”

Having said that, Buttress added: “I would like to see an MP representing me 
who speaks with a Stoke accent and did not go to public school.”

The grassroots revolt that put Corbyn into the leadership last year was never 
just about an individual. It was a reaction against the top-down approach that 
became common place during the Blair years, a feeling of being patronised and 
being taken from granted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fstoke-on-trent-microcosm-labour-soul-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3765388bde798dee9331999c9d4137822882075%2F0_32_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Stoke-on-Trent%20is%20a%20microcosm%20of%20the%20battle%20for%20Labour's%20soul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fstoke-on-trent-microcosm-labour-soul-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Stoke-on-Trent%20is%20a%20microcosm%20of%20the%20battle%20for%20Labour%27s%20soul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fstoke-on-trent-microcosm-labour-soul-jeremy-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3765388bde798dee9331999c9d4137822882075%2F0_32_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tristram Hunt stepped down as shadow education secretary after Jeremy Corbyn’s 
election as Labour leader. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Rose Rosenau, a councillor and left-winger from Labour-held Stoke South, said: 
“The party has not been functioning. It is about grassroots members having 
their say. What voice have we had? Very little. We go to meetings and listen to 
the reports of MPs. We have the enthusiasm now. People can actively see we can 
make a difference.”

The Staffordshire constituencies offer a microcosm of what is happening 
elsewhere in England and Wales, and to a lesser extent in Scotland. Members 
report many of the branches had been moribund, in danger of folding.

Against a background of deindustrialisation and the closure of the potteries 
that made the area’s name, Labour majorities have been steadily slashed – last 
year under pressure from Ukip – and the party’s hold on the council has gone. 
Reflecting apathy and disillusionment,Stoke Central 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stoke-central> last year recorded the 
lowest turn-out in the UK: party members insist it is the second lowest, though 
that is is not much of consolation.

Like the rest of the UK, Labour has enjoyed an influx of new members in the 
Staffordshire constituencies. In Newcastle-under-Lyme, Chris Spence, 38, a 
party member and shopkeeper who sells Indian furniture, said membership in 
January last year had stood at around 210-220, out of whom about 40 were active.

By September last year, the number of members had climbed to more than 550, he 
said, adding that over the last six months there has been an increase in 
political discussions too. The number of members involved in campaigning, such 
as leafleting, had risen from 10% to 25%, he said.

Labour has ‘moral mission’ to tackle inequality, says Tristram Hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/07/labour-must-find-new-ways-to-tackle-inequality-says-tristram-hunt>
The trick for Labour now is not to let all that enthusiasm wither. “We have 
got to get away from rules to talk about policy. People do not want to come and 
listen to old dogs talking about rules and slates. It can be disillusioning,” 
said Steve Jones, 43, a healthcare worker, trade union liaison officer and 
Stoke Central member.

The kind of member Labour is looking to keep is 19-year-old Tilly Smith, who 
has two jobs, both as a shop assistant, and is going to university. She joined 
the party a month after Corbyn was elected leader in September and agrees with 
much of his agenda. “I think renationalisation is a good idea [and] not getting 
into a pointless war,” she said.

Reflecting what other members described as a widespread feeling – one that 
carries a warning for Labour MPs critical of him – she said: “I am a little 
disappointed at the minute that MPs are not trying to work with Corbyn.” She 
expressed concern that Labour is “in danger of squandering this chance”.

The group Momentum was set up last year to try to channel enthusiasm around 
the Corbyn campaign and includes people who are not Labour members. Its 
creation is still being greeted with suspicion by some in Labour, seeing it as 
parallel Corbynite group.

Smith was one of the early members, chairing Momentum’s Staffordshire group. 
She citedthe Oldham byelection last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/labour-sweep-to-conclusive-victory-in-oldham-byelection>
, in which Labour increased its share of the vote, as an example of where 
Momentum volunteers had helped with campaigning.

Some Labour members, from the left as well as the right, are uneasy about 
Momentum, arguing that only Labour members should be discussing policy. While 
left-wingers tend to be excited by the influx of new members into the party, 
others are more cautious, arguing that it remains an open question how much 
they will participate in meetings and campaigning.

Alastair Watson, chair of the Stoke Central constituency party, is on the 
centre-left of the party and voted for Yvette Cooper in the leadership contest. 
She acknowledged there has been at least some change: “We definitely have more 
discussion in the party about the way forward. It is more discursive.”

The constituency party had a discussion last month about the vote on extending 
bombing to Syria. Opposition to bombing was overwhelming. Although Hunt voted 
in the Commons for airstrikes, Watson and most others interviewed, including 
left-wingers, give him credit for turning up to meetings to face any criticism. 
“Tristram stands in front of the meetings and explains his decisions and 
answers members’ questions. He will front up to his decisions,” Watson said.

Hunt was selected unanimously as the Labour candidate for the 2015 general 
election by the 50 or so members. The question is whether Hunt and the other 
Staffordshire Labour MPs will be selected again before the next election or 
even earlier if there is a battle over seats following boundary changes.

It is possible that none of them might be selected. Rob Flello, Labour MP for 
Stoke South, angered members by voting against same-sex marriage. There is a 
left-wing rival ready to run against Ruth Smeeth, Labour MP for Stoke North, 
according to one of the Stoke party members. If Newcastle-under-Lyme is 
included in the mix, Labour’s Paul Farrelly could also be vulnerable, having 
said after the Syria vote that Labour could not win a general election with 
Corbyn as leader.

Rosenau, a councillor and Corbyn supporter, thinks Smeeth might be safe 
because she is a woman. “It would be between Tristram and Rob. The outcome will 
absolutely boil down to how they perform in the next 18 months. It is not 
cut-and-dried,” she said.

 * This article was amended on 15 January 2016 to clarify that Hunt’s father 
is a baron through being made a life peer.
 