
When Jacob TV <http://www.jacobtv.net/composer.html> sits down to watch the 
news, he’s less interested in learning about the state of the world than being 
entertained. “It’s amusement, especially Fox News,” says the Dutch composer. “I 
can’t believe people think like that. And I can’t believe people buy it.” But 
buy it they do, and lucky for TV (short for Ter Veldhuis), because that’s what 
he’s selling with his open-ended multimedia opera,The News 
<http://www.longbeachopera.org/2016-season/the-news>, at Santa Monica’s Broad 
Stage for three performances, beginning on Sunday. A mash-up of news clips 
edited for content and rhythm performed by “anchor women” soprano Maeve 
Hoagland and rhythm singerLoire Cotler 
<http://www.longbeachopera.org/2016-season/the-news#cast>, The News is scored 
to Ter Veldhuis’s delirious postmodern mélange of minimalism, pop, rock and 
jazz.

World figures like Barack Obama, Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin are spliced 
with anchors like Wolf Blitzer, Megan Kelly and Bill O’Reilly, audio from the 
news clips, the band and the live singing “anchors” all combining in the music. 
Not surprisingly it’s often hilarious, ironic, tragic and sometimes poignant, 
as when an ad for artificial tears implies we may be all cried out over the 
state of things.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd9RKAp-57hA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd9RKAp-57hA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd9RKAp-57hA&media=>
“It’s really an invitation into the unseen sonic and rhythm language and 
atmosphere that resonates beneath the surface of our fast-paced listening,” 
says Cotler who specializes in scat singing and the Indian form ofKonnakol 
<http://languageofrhythm.com/indian/konnakol/>, a demanding technique that 
reproduces uptempo notes played on an instrument.

As far back as the early 80s, composers such as Scott Johnson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scott_Johnson_(composer)> and Steve Reich 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Reich> have based music on recorded speech 
and tape fragments (Cotler’s husband, percussionistGlen Velez 
<http://glenvelez.com>, is a longtime Reich collaborator), but The News, now in 
its fifth edition, goes a long way toward lifting the technique out of the 
avant garde and placing it in the mainstream.

Described as the “Andy Warhol of new music”, Ter Veldhuis arrived on the scene 
in the 80s with his acclaimed video oratorio,Paradiso 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AsTE7RRPcRO>, based on Dante’s Divine Comedy. 
The News began on a cold Chicago morning in 2009 when he walked past the ABC 
News studio where anchors were sipping coffee and reviewing copy. Surrounding 
them were cameras and monitors while a glass wall reflecting the city made a 
fitting backdrop. That’s when it hit him – an opera about the news, a fiction 
about non-fiction.

Scouring through clips, he quickly noticed Putin has very little melody in his 
voice, whereas Obama, Trump and Hillary Clinton are the opposite. “Many 
Americans do have a lot of melody and they all speak rather loud. And that is 
very, very important for me as a composer cause I use the melody of speech as a 
leitmotif for my music. It all starts as one-liners that are interesting for 
several reasons – the musical quality, the content.”

Of course a look at the current news cycle would not be complete without 
Donald Trump, who has only recently been added to the show. “I actually think 
there’s a hypnotic quality going on,” observes Cotler. “Anytime there’s words 
being repeated over and over and over again, you can’t deny when something has 
entered into the spheres of your thoughts even if you don’t want it there. He’s 
like a jingle.”

Ter Veldhuis sees a fool when he looks at Trump, but notes that America hasn’t 
cornered the market on bull-headed populists. Similar ideas have taken root 
throughout Europe while in his home country of Holland the rightwing Freedom 
Partyforced the resignation of Mark Rutte as prime minister in 2012 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-17811509> and still holds a significant 
number of seats in parliament. “A new kind of Nazism can turn out of it. With 
Trump I see a little boy,” he explains. “We’ve all been laughing at the guy but 
at the same time, it’s also very dangerous if this man becomes the most 
powerful man in the world.”

According to Ter Veldhuis it all points to the current dysfunction of western 
democracy – the “veto-cracy” of an intransigent US Congress, and unprecedented 
amounts of money flooding the electoral process. “A man like Obama is a smart, 
intelligent guy and he can’t do his job because people prevent him,” says the 
composer. “If you have a lot of money, you can become the president of the 
United States. That’s very scary. Is that still democracy?”

While Ter Veldhuis poses questions, Cotler feels The News might be part of a 
solution. “It offers a new dimension for us to listen and reach beyond our 
superficial experience of words and into a kind of a deeper understanding of 
each other and how we connect in the world.”

 * The News is at Santa Monica Broad Stage from Sunday. Details here 
<http://www.thebroadstage.com/en/Performances/visiting_events/Productions/The-News/>
 