
I was going to start this article with Verdi. Until a week or so ago, my most 
recent experience of music-induced shivers down my spine, goosebumps, feelings 
of exhilaration – we’ll call them “the chills” – came during a performance of 
the Italian composer’s Requiem. It was the Dies Irae, one of themost intense 
and terrifying pieces <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZDFFHaz9GsY> of music in 
the classical canon (and fair enough, it’s meant to represent the Day of 
Judgment). The crashing of the timpani, the wailing of the choir. This I 
thought, would be a fitting introduction for an essay on a most mysterious 
musical phenomenon.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZDFFHaz9GsY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZDFFHaz9GsY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZDFFHaz9GsY&media=>
Unfortunately, while I was driving through town with a friend the other day, 
Taylor Swift came on the radio. A minute or two in – the song was Bad Blood – I 
felt the skin over my arms tighten, then looked down to see all my hairs 
standing on end. I might have wanted to sound highbrow, but it seems my body 
had other ideas.


Why did that happen? It’s not that I don’t like Swift, I just don’t have 
particularly strong feelings about her music. But before we get to that – what 
even was happening? According to neuroscientistJessica Grahn 
<http://www.jessicagrahn.com> I experienced a form of autonomic nervous system 
arousal, the evolutionarily ancient preparation for fight or flight. As well as 
piloerection (those hairs standing on end) if I’d been hooked up to medical 
monitors, they would have detected increased heart rate, perspiration and 
faster, deeper breathing.

Then there’s the emotional component. Arousal by itself, Grahn tells me, is 
emotionally neutral – excitement and fear result in much the same set of 
physiological changes. Only by asking a subject if they’re elated or afraid can 
we tell the difference. Musical chills are usually experienced as pleasurable, 
even ecstatic. If it’s the mind that provides the emotional colouring in, 
what’s going on in there?

Researchers have shown that activity in the nucleus accumbens 
<http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/i/i_03/i_03_cr/i_03_cr_par/i_03_cr_par.html>, 
deep inside the brain, increases during chills. “What’s interesting about 
this,” says Grahn, “is that it’s what we call a reward structure. So it 
responds to all sorts of biological rewards like food, or sex or drugs. And the 
chemical that’s released during musical chills, dopamine, is one that is also 
acted on by things like cocaine or amphetamine or other intensely pleasurable 
experiences.”


Anyone who’s felt musical chills will instinctively recognise this. Not 
everybody does –one experiment 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.3758%2FBF03326460> found that 47% of 
non-musicians had never experienced them, which, in my opinion, is a huge 
misfortune for the people concerned. They are among the most instantaneously 
exciting sensations you can experience. They involve the body and the mind 
together, and often seem deeply significant: giving you access to something 
bigger than yourself, something ineffable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQcIy9NiNbmo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQcIy9NiNbmo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQcIy9NiNbmo&media=>
Often, but not always. Suspecting that some cleverly designed device was 
tugging at my nerve endings during the Swift song, I pinpointed the moment I 
felt the chill (at about 1 minute 34 seconds in on the official video) and 
asked music psychologist John Sloboda what was going on. “This is what is 
described in musicology as an ‘enharmonic change’ when a melody note stays the 
same, but is re-interpreted harmonically. The bass note [when she sings “Now we 
got problems”] forces that re-intepretation. It is also, in the context, a 
somewhat unexpected event.”

Unexpectedness, it turns out, is key. Back in 1991, Sloboda conducted a study 
<http://pom.sagepub.com/content/19/2/110.short?rss=1&ssource=mfc> which 
attempted to match emotional experiences including chills to specific musical 
structures. “There were 10 cases of enharmonic change in my 1991 data,” he 
says. “Four of them were associated with tears, and six with shivers down the 
spine. It was the 4th most frequent elicitor of thrills out of 10 different 
devices.”


What was the first, then? “Appoggiaturas”. What? “The most well-known 
classical example is the opening phrase of the violin tune in Albinoni’s Adagio 
for Strings.” Sloboda says another one can be found at the beginning ofthe 
Beatles’ Yesterday <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rIEVBIP5yc> – “it’s a note 
that falls one step down, and the falling down is a kind of resolution”.

The thing that appoggiaturas, enharmonic change and the other structures 
Sloboda looked at have in common is that they represent dramatic shifts in the 
music – often in a direction we weren’t expecting. In Grahn’s words, they 
“startle” us. And that shock taps into a core evolutionary mechanism – to pay 
attention to a possibly threatening change in the environment. But why should a 
response linked to fear be so pleasurable? “People go to haunted houses around 
Halloween, or they go to watch horror movies, and these are filled with 
startling moments, yet they seek that out. So we do seem to like having these 
challenges, these unexpected surprises. And the nice thing about music is that 
it’s a very safe way to experience these – you’re not actually in danger.”

It still feels like there’s a missing piece of the jigsaw. Bad Blood doesn’t 
mean much to me, so I feel entitled to call myself a victim of very smart 
songwriting, the use of a trick that’s been shown to key into a reward 
structure in the brain and give me a buzz. But another song that came on the 
radio that day was the Pet Shop Boys’ cover ofAlways On My Mind 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2aMaMkDwTA>. That gives me goosebumps because 
of the amazing synth chords in the riff. But it also reminds me strongly of my 
childhood. And it’s poignant too, full of regret for mistakes made in a 
relationship. There are other examples: Like a Prayer works for reasons that 
aren’t simply musical, so does The La’s There She Goes. This has to be about 
more than just conjuring with harmony and rhythm.


And the feelings of transcendence that can accompany chills is the tip of the 
iceberg. Music has an almost unlimited power to move us. Throughout the 1990s a 
psychologist calledAlf Gabrielsson collected accounts 
<http://msx.sagepub.com/content/7/2/157.refs> of “strong experiences related to 
music” (SEM). Some of them make for astonishing reading. There are hundreds , 
but take this example, from an audience member at a performance of Finnish 
tango music:


I was filled by an enormous warmth and heat. I really swallowed all the notes 
that were streaming out in the air, not a single note, effect or sequence 
missed my hungry ears … I was captivated by each of the instruments and what 
they had to offer me. Nothing else existed! I was dancing, whirling and really 
gave myself up to the music and rhythms, overjoyed – laughing. Tears came into 
my eyes – however strange that may seem … Before I was in a very bad state. 
Depressed. It was during the most critical time ever in my life. I found it 
hard to get on with people and had to really exert myself to be able to get to 
grips with things. Afterwards I was bouncy, giggling, lively and filled with 
deep joy … it was so bewildering that it almost felt as a salvation.

When will my life begin? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Linda Blair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/when-will-my-life-begin-google-answer>
As well as “gooseflesh, piloerection, shivers, thrills and heart race [sic]”, 
Gabrielsson reported that tears were and extremely common feature of SEM.

For her part, Grahn points out that “emotion regulation is one of the most 
common reasons people put music on and decide to listen to it”. She explains: 
“They’re in a bad mood and they want to feel better or they’re in a bad mood 
and they really want to wallow in it, they’re exercising and they want 
something motivating and to help them go a bit faster, they’re bored and they 
want something interesting to help pass the time.” But SEM seem like a 
different beast altogether. Why does music have this capacity to make us 
ecstatic?

According to one theory, it helps us form social bonds. “We know that people 
really enjoy moving together, people pay hundreds of pounds to go to festivals 
and experience music in a big group. One thing that you can do when you feel 
the beat is all dance in time. If I don’t have sound, and I’m trying to get a 
whole group of people to move together, they all have to be able to see each 
other in order to coordinate – and you can’t do that with very large groups. A 
drumbeat, on the other hand, could allow a large group to be bound together 
socially, which may have led to greater altruism and more positive affiliative 
feelings,” – an evolutionary benefit.

A second theory links the capacity to enjoy music to the development of 
language. Because language was so useful, Grahn says, “We got very good at 
linking sounds and movements. Those people who found the idea of making these 
sounds pleasurable would likely have a survival advantage.” In other words, our 
capacity to appreciate music, chills and all, evolved for something different: 
speech. “Music simply taps into [linguistic ability] in the same way that drugs 
tap into a system that wasn’t designed for drugs – it evolved to support 
evolutionarily good behaviours like foraging for food and enjoying high-fat 
meals.”

I like my music delivered through headphones, so I’m not a fan of the 
group-bonding theory. I also like the idea that a facility for language – the 
cadences and rhythms of the human voice – goes hand in hand with a love of 
melody. It certainly seems to be that way for Sloboda. “I find myself, because 
I’m a singer, hugely moved by the human voice. That amazing thing when everyone 
is breathing at exactly the same moment and the tuning between the voices is so 
perfect.”


As a music psychologist he has dissected hundreds of scores, subjected them to 
endless scrutiny, examined their structure and effects on our behaviour. Is 
there anything that still gives him the chills?

“The last few minutes of Bach’s Mass in B Minor, the last page or so of the 
Dona Nobis Pacem <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnrHhYSGzd4>. You almost feel 
you’ve gone to heaven,” he tells me. Amen to that.


What gives you the chills? Musicians and critics share their stories

Little Boots: Our Prayer, the Beach Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqXibjCZy5Y>


I’ve been borderline obsessed with the Beach Boys since school, but the piece 
of music that instantly made the hairs stand on the back of my neck contains 
not a single word.

Perhaps the fact that it exists beyond language is why the emotion is so pure 
and the transferral of it so complete. There are not only no words but also no 
instruments; no driving beat to give you that warm fuzzy feeling. Only 
abstract, wordless vocals hanging in the air and reverberating through the 
veins in your body with every cadence. Our Prayer is an abstract acapella piece 
with little structure or regimentation. It’s a religious experience that for me 
goes beyond any hymn or spiritual opus, where Brian Wilson is God and his 
mysterious ways are shown in the melody. Like all truly great pop songs it is 
complex yet deceptively simple, and so masterfully done it doesn’t need to call 
on any instrument but the human voice. Gets me every time.


 * Little Boots’ latest album is Working Girl 
Holly Johnson: I Dreamed a Dream, Susan Boyle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RxPZh4AnWyk>


I have seen musical spectacles from Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars 
to Lou Reed, Diana Damrau’s Queen of the Night, Antony Hegarty and BB King. 
However, in the 21st century, it’s the TV talent show that has prompted some of 
the greatest moments. My favourite is Susan Boyle in a frumpy outfit, smiling 
and clowning for her audition on Britain’s Got Talent. The moment she began to 
sing I Dreamed A Dream – a song from a dreary stage musical that I had never 
seen – her voice unexpectedly soared. The audience and kangaroo court of judges 
erupted in a communal ecstasy at this downtrodden yet undimmed woman, who’d 
tried and tried again for this moment. This was it – beyond fashion, beyond the 
pages of broadsheets and the critical hive mind of what’s cool and what’s 
“art”. The underdog triumphed and we felt it physically, our eyes welling up at 
the sheer humanity of it all.

 * Holly Johnson’s album, Europa, is out now 
James Rhodes: Piano concerto no.3, Rachmaninov 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9AmxZnlRa6Q>


The last three or four minutes – the struggle between soloist and orchestra, 
the ultra-romantic melodies, the slowing down then exploding into the final 
page, the ridiculously lush orchestration and the heroic rush to the finish 
line where after 45 minutes of sweat, angst, heartache, excitement and escape 
you are all, listener, soloist, orchestra, conductor, part of the same electric 
climax (stop smirking at the back).

And the best thing is that there are thousands of other pieces that do the 
same thing – Bruckner’s 7th symphony, Beethoven’s Emperor concerto, Prokofiev’s 
1st piano concerto, Mozart’s Jupiter Symphony, and on and on. Music is the 
ultimate wonder drug with none of the unpleasant side-effects and all of the 
brain chemistry magic.

 * James Rhodes is a classical pianist 
Sonya Aurora Madan: Mr Bojangles, Sammy Davis Jr 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5voM2HExV_Q>

The most poignant song I can think of, right now anyway, is Sammy Davis Jr’s 
version of Mr Bojangles, which I heard last year when our guitarist, Glenn 
Johansson, played it for me. The song is about a down-and-out old street dancer 
who is thrown in jail and is reminiscing about his life and a much-loved dog he 
once owned. Sammy’s version resonates with all the poignancy of a real 
connection to the lyrics. During his upbringing, dancing with his uncle and 
dad, he himself might have seen many a down-on-his-luck performer, and thanked 
God for his own good luck.


His constant experience of racism in 20th century America, and the slight 
get-out clause of being a performer, which offered some respite to a black man, 
must have left a bittersweet taste. I feel transported, elated and saddened all 
at the same time when I hear it.

 * Sonya Aurora Madan is lead singer of Echobelly 
Fuse ODG: Keep Ya Head Up, Tupac Shakur 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HfXwmDGJAB8>

I guess goosebumps are probably the brain’s ingenious way of letting you know 
you are listening to something important and out of the ordinary. For every 
song that has ever had that effect on me, I can remember the exact moment and 
general time in my life when I originally heard it.

Songs like these teach you something and resonate throughout time. Tupac 
Shakur’s line in his song Keep Ya Head Up – “They got money for wars, but can’t 
feed the poor”: that’s relevant to any century in human history.

 * Fuse ODG won best African act in the 2014 Mobo awards 
Caroline Sullivan: Gonna Fly Now (Theme from Rocky) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I33u_EHLI3w>

Rocky’s moment of triumph, as he bounds up the steps of the museum as dawn 
breaks over Philadelphia, is all the more moving because this song is pushing 
him along. I still well up when I hear it – not just because it captures the 
moment when Rocky breaks free from the dashed hopes of his past, but also 
because it reminds me of growing up in 1970s America. It embodies the good 
things of that time: the can-do spirit and the neighbourliness.

That said, I didn’t really connect with it until after I moved to London and, 
feeling homesick one day in the early 90s, watched the film. When it reached 
the Gonna Fly Now scene – heralded by trumpets and disco synths (it’s very much 
of its time, in a musical sense) – and the camera panned across Philly’s 
industrial landscape, I snivelled like an idiot. It still has the same effect 
today.

 * Caroline Sullivan is a rock and pop critic 
John Harris: There Is A Light That Never Goes Out, The Smiths 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DRtW1MAZ32M>

It causes goosebumps as soon as it starts, but also tends to make me well up. 
The reasons – I think, anyway – are twofold. It instantly takes me back to 
being 16, the mixture of excitement and melancholia that often comes with that 
kind of age, and the experience of somehow seeing all of that crystallised when 
I watched The Smiths play at Salford University in 1986 – probably the most 
passionate, heaving collective celebration of music I’ve ever experienced.

But a lot of my reaction is simply down to the song and what it evokes: a kind 
of epic sadness that goes very, very deep. I have to be careful how often I 
play it: once or twice a year, at the most. Which, strangely, is a sign of the 
genius at work.

 * John Harris is a columnist and former editor of Select magazine 
Additional interviews by Caroline Sullivan
 