
The world is awash in paper currency, with major central banks pumping out 
hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth each year, mainly in very large 
denomination notes such as the $100 bill. The $100 bill accounts for almost 80% 
of the US’s stunning $4,200 (£3,152) per capita cash supply. The ¥10,000 note 
(£72) accounts for roughly 90% of all Japan’s currency, whereper capita cash 
holdings are almost $7,000. And, as I have been arguing fortwo decades 
<http://scholar.harvard.edu/rogoff/publications/blessing-or-curse-foreign-and-underground-demand-euro-notes>
, all this cash is facilitating growth mainly in the underground economy, not 
the legal one.

I am not advocating a cashless society, which will be neither feasible nor 
desirable anytime soon. But a less-cash society would be a fairer and safer 
place.

With the growth of debit cards, electronic transfers, and mobile payments, the 
use of cash has long been declining in the legal economy, especially for medium 
and large-size transactions. Central bank surveys show that only a small 
percentage of large-denomination notes are being held and used by ordinary 
people or businesses.

Big bucks: high denomination banknotes - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2016/feb/08/big-bucks-high-denomination-bank-notes-in-pictures>
Cash facilitates crime because it is anonymous, and big bills are especially 
problematic because they are so easy to carry and conceal. A million dollars in 
$100 notes fits into a briefcase, a million euros in €500 notes fits into a 
purse.

Sure, there are plenty of ways to bribe officials, engage in financial crime, 
and evade taxes without paper currency. But most involve very high transaction 
costs (for example, uncut diamonds), or risk of detection (say, bank transfers 
or credit card payments).

Yes, new-age crypto-currencies such as bitcoin, if not completely invulnerable 
to detection, are almost so. But their value sharply fluctuates, and 
governments have many tools with which they can restrict their use – for 
example, by preventing them from being tendered at banks or retail stores. Cash 
is unique in its liquidity and near-universal acceptance.

The costs of tax evasion alone are staggering, perhaps $700bn a year in the 
United States (including federal, state, and local taxes), and even more in 
high-tax Europe. Crime and corruption, though difficult to quantify, almost 
surely generate even greater costs. Think not just of illegal drugs and 
racketeering, but also of human trafficking, terrorism, and extortion.

Moreover, cash payments by employers to undocumented workers are a principal 
driver of illegal immigration. Scaling back the use of cash is a far more 
humane way to limit immigration than building barbed-wire fences.

If governments were not so drunk from the profits they make by printing paper 
currency, they might wake up to the costs. There has been a little movement of 
late.The European Central Bank recently announced it will phase out its €500 
mega-note 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/500-euro-banknote-could-be-scrapped-crime>
. Still, this long overdue change was implemented against enormous resistance 
from cash-loving Germany and Austria. Yet even in northern Europe, reported per 
capita holdings of currency are still quite modest relative to the massive 
outstanding supply in the eurozone as a whole (over €3,000 per capita).

Southern European governments, desperate to raise tax revenue, have been 
taking matters into their own hands, even though they do not control note 
issuance. For example, Greece and Italy have been trying to discourage cash use 
by capping retail cash purchases (at €1,500 and €1,000, respectively).

Obviously, cash remains important for small everyday transactions, and for 
protecting privacy. Northern European central bankers who favour the status quo 
like to quote Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky: “Money is coined liberty.” 
Of course, Dostoyevsky was referring to life in a mid-19th century Tsarist 
prison, not a modern liberal state. Still, the northern Europeans have a point. 
The question is whether the current system has the balance right. I would argue 
that it clearly does not.

€500 'Bin Laden' banknotes to be axed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/500-euro-banknote-could-be-scrapped-crime>
A plan for reining-in paper currency should be guided by three principles. 
First, it is important to allow ordinary citizens to continue using cash for 
convenience and to make reasonable-size anonymous purchases, while undermining 
the business models of those engaged in large, repeated anonymous transactions 
on a wholesale level. Second, any plan should move very gradually (think a 
decade or two), to allow adaptations and mid-course corrections as unexpected 
problems arise. And, third, reforms must be sensitive to the needs of 
low-income households, especially those that are unbanked.

In my new book, The Curse of Cash, I offer a plan that involves very gradually 
phasing out large notes, while leaving small notes ($10 and below) in 
circulation indefinitely. The plan provides for financial inclusion by offering 
low-income households free debit accounts, which could also be used to make 
government transfer payments. This last step is one that some countries, such 
as Denmark and Sweden, have already taken.

Scaling back paper currency would hardly end crime and tax evasion; but it 
would force the underground economy to employ riskier and less liquid payment 
devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/08/high-denomination-bank-notes-should-be-scrapped>
. Cash may seem like a small, unimportant thing in today’s hi-tech financial 
world, but the benefits of phasing out most paper currency are a lot larger 
than you might think.

 * Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard 
University and recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016  