
First it was manufacturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/uk-manufacturing-growth-at-a-30-month-high-says-pmi-survey>
. Then it wasconstruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-construction-industry-growth-new-orders>
. Now the hat-trick of upbeat economic news has been completed by thestrongest 
performance by the services sector in 17 months. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-services-sector-grows-fastest-pace>

It goes without saying that this is not what the Treasury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/brexit-would-cause-diy-recession-says-george-osborne>
 or theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
 expected at the time of the EU referendum last June. At the time, there was 
talk of the economy plunging straight into recession.

UK services sector grows at fastest pace for more than a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-services-sector-grows-fastest-pace>
This week’s reports from purchasing managers point to growth of 0.5% in the 
final three months of 2016 compared with 0.6% in the third quarter. 
Post-referendum forecasts for 2016 were quickly shredded by the Bank of England 
when it became clear that activity had not collapsed. Likewise, predictions for 
2017 may also soon be revised upwards.

There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, the economy had momentum in 
late 2016 which will persist into the first few months of 2017. Secondly, the 
international outlook is looking brighter than it was a few months ago. Donald 
Trump’s tax-cutting agenda means the US economy is going to grow rapidly this 
year and that’s good news for UK exporters.

Finally, the stance of both fiscal and monetary policy in the UK has become 
more growth friendly since the referendum. Philip Hammond throttled back on the 
government’s austerity plans in lastNovember’s autumn statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
, reinforcing the impact of Bank of England’s decision three months earlier to 
cut interest rates and embark on a new round of quantitative easing.

When it cut rates to 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 in August the Bank signalled that a further cut was likely to be needed. 
Clearly, that is no longer going to happen. Official borrowing costs will 
remain where they are for now but there is a good chance of the next move from 
Threadneedle Street being a rate rise.
 