
Tower of Power – Back on the Streets Again

I lived in San Francisco's East Bay for over a decade and developed a hearty 
fondness for it … The flora. The weather. The thugs. The hippies. The hipsters. 
The gutter punks. But alas, I have moved away. When I return – which I do often 
– as soon as I step out of that Bart (Bay Area Rapid Transit) station with my 
suitcases in hand and hope in my heart, this song by Oakland's ownTower of Power
 <http://www.towerofpower.com/> plays in my head. I'M BACK BABY! THE PRODIGAL 
SON HAS RETURNED! Not sure if that's how the song is meant. He might be saying 
he's broke and living on the streets again, but it sounds celebratory to me. 
Goes best with copious amounts of sunshine. (Yoni)

Steely Dan – Kid Charlemagne

In considering songs for this, I knew one would have to be by San Francisco 
legendsSteely Dan <http://www.steelydan.com/>. I chose another funky tune, Kid 
Charlemagne, because its subject is also a San Francisco legend – The rise and 
fall of 1960s LSD chemistOwsley Stanley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/mar/15/owsley-stanley-obituary>. The 
lyrics tell the story so clearly and concisely. One doesn't usually associate 
Steely Dan with high-level poetics but come on, this is good stuff! (Yoni)

Otis Redding – (Sittin' on) The Dock of the Bay

I have loved this song since the first time I heard it 28 years ago. It's sort 
of the flip-side emotion to that I get from Back on the Streets Again. It has 
that inward-looking, reflective vibe. This one was written by folks who were 
strangers in San Francisco (Redding, andguitarist Steve Cropper 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Cropper>). Redding started writing the song 
on a trip to playThe Fillmore <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fillmore> in 
1967. There's such a solitude in this tune. It is woeful but I hear more 
resolve than longing. (Yoni)

Neil Young <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/neilyoung> – On the Beach

Mr Young is, actually, a Canadian, but he has been a South Bay ranch guy since 
he got successful and bought his ranch in the early 1970s. This tune and its 
eponymous album take me back to our early days of touring. I can remember 
listening to this song on a beautiful drive from Eugene, Oregon, down to the 
Bay. I just love some of the lines in this song: "I went to the radio interview 
but ended up alone at the microphone." Love it! (Yoni)

Pavement <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pavement_%28band%29> – Range Life

I didn't listen to indie rock when it was fresh in the 1990s. I was into other 
things at the time that I won't mention here. I first gave this style a chance 
when I moved to Oakland in the early 2000s and it became part of the soundtrack 
of my earliest California memories, and at the forefront of my nostalgia for 
that area. The smells, the strange and unfamiliar weather patterns, the natural 
beauty of that landscape and the excitement of starting a new life with 
inspiring people around. This song brings it all back. (Josiah)

Deerhoof – Milk Man

Had to throw the homies in there. We were always honoured to be mentioned 
alongside these guys in the Bay area scene. We've done many shows together over 
the years andDeerhoof <http://deerhoof.net/> never cease to amaze. Last time we 
played with them was at a festival in Brussels this past winter and it was 
wonderful to see them, as always. This song was one that we heard many times 
when we opened for them on a tour in 2005, when this record first came out. 
When you play with a band many nights in a row certain songs just get stuck in 
your head and don't unstick easily. This is one of those. (Josiah)

Counting Crows – Anna Begins

This was part of my high school soundtrack. In my defence I will say that I 
have only ever heardCounting Crows <http://www.countingcrows.com/>' first 
record (August and Everything After 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_and_Everything_After>) and it is not a bad 
one. Perhaps some of their other records aren't bad either. I wouldn't know. 
Although this band are from the Bay area, I never listened to them in the Bay. 
I only heard them alongside Pearl Jam and many other memorable bands during my 
wonderful Cincinnati high-school experience. I do miss those times. This song 
was one of my favourites from that record. Does it stand the test of time? 
Decide for yourself. (Josiah)

Half-Handed Cloud <http://www.halfhandedcloud.com/> – You Get a Horseshoe!

This is the project of Berkeley's John Ringhofer, whose path we crossed in the 
early days of our California tenure. His music is whimsical yet earnest, and 
his musical inventiveness has always been refreshing and inspiring. Some of the 
first WHY? shows took place at The Ramp, in the basement of the church in which 
John resides. (Doug)

John Fahey <http://www.johnfahey.com/> – When the Springtime Comes Again

Matt Meldon (former WHY? guitarist) hipped me to Fahey when we were living 
together in Berkeley, and thereby led me to attempt incorporating 
finger-picking stylings into my own playing. This tune was the first in this 
vein that I learned, and I can recall biking around Berkeley listening to it, 
all the while marvelling that springtime never seemed to disappear out there, 
let alone come again. (Doug)

Thee More Shallows – Int #1

I first heard Thee More Shallows <http://www.theemoreshallows.com/>' More Deep 
Cuts from Dave Madson (akaOdd Nosdam <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Odd_Nosdam>) 
while I was out in California and it's a record I have recently revisited, 
evoking many memories from my time there. Dee Kesler is such a thoughtful and 
meticulous musician, and it shows when you listen to his songs. He ended up 
helping WHY? record material at his Oakland studio, and (independent lablel)
Anticon <http://www.anticon.com/> put out their third album, 2007's Book of Bad 
Breaks. I'm not sure if they're planning on putting any more stuff out soon, 
but hopefully that's the case because they're hecka tight. (Doug)

WHY? are an alternative indie hip-hop band from Berkeley, California. This 
playlist was chosen by the band's founder, Jonathan "Yoni" Wolf and band 
members Josiah Wolf and Doug McDiarmid. For tour details visit
whywithaquestionmark.com/tour <http://whywithaquestionmark.com/tour>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 