
Caitlin Robbins always struggled to find clothes for her dad that didn’t make 
him look and feel frumpy. As someone with ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease – which 
impacts people’s ability to walk, talk, and ultimately, to breathe – her dad 
wanted comfortable and tailored options. But most of the clothes she could find 
that didn’t restrict his movement, such as pants with an elastic waist and 
pullover tops, only made him look awful.

“My father was always particular about fashion; he wanted to look nice and 
dignified,” says Robbins, a fashion design student. “I wanted to design him 
outfits to be visually different, functional but still stylish.”

Autistic employees can give companies an edge in innovative thinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/17/autistic-employees-can-give-companies-an-edge-in-innovative-thinking>
Robbins’s experience points to a seemingly untapped opportunity for apparel 
makers to serve people with disabilities. One in five American adults, or 53.3 
million people,report having disabilities 
<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2015/p0730-us-disability.html>, according to 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trouble with mobility, 
cognition and living independently are the three most common types of 
disabilities.

Finding well-fitting clothes isn’t just about looking good. Research shows 
that a lack of functional and tailored clothes can makepeople with disabilities 
feel excluded 
<http://www.scmp.com/lifestyle/fashion-luxury/article/2017609/hong-kong-forefront-disabled-clothing-design-revolution>
 during job search or at social events.

So far, the market is mostly served by small companies such as Buck and Buck 
in Seattle and Silverts, which designs clothes for customers with rheumatoid 
arthritis, recovering from strokes or in wheelchairs. Nike has also dabbled in 
this market witha line of sneakers 
<https://www.disabilityscoop.com/2016/03/16/nike-expands-shoe-lineup/22048/>, 
after getting a request from a 16-year-old boy with cerebral palsy. The shoes 
use a wraparound zipper rather than shoelaces, and they also come with a larger 
opening to make it easy to get in and out of. After an online, limited release 
last fall, Nike has since launched new basketball and running shoes with the 
same design.

Per consumer request, Land’s End has offered modified swimsuit designs for 
women with a mastectomy <http://www.landsend.com/pp/StylePage-465031_A7.html> 
since 1995. The modification includes a raised neckline and armhole of a 
conventional swimsuit to cover scar tissue or sensitive skin due to radiation. 
The bra contains a prosthesis pocket and no underwire. Land’s End designers 
personally meet with breast cancer survivors to help guide the design, 
according to Michele Casper, vice president public relations at the company.

And, for a while, J Crew also used to stock a green walking cane for those 
needing additional support.

While the market for this type of specialty clothes is small and difficult to 
quantify, it’s attracting growing interest, especially in design schools. The 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology launched Open Style Lab in 2014 to bring 
together students in design, engineering and occupational therapy to create 
clothes for people with disabilities. Researchers at MIT’s International Design 
Center have created fashions to include fewer sensory triggers such as fraying, 
rough zippers and scratchy tags for children and adults with autism because of 
their sensitivity to certain textures and colors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmainstream-brands-not-designing-clothes-people-disabilities-fashion-school-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1982a3b4b5441d77cd71ad17c9c895042fdef1%2F0_260_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20aren't%20more%20big%20brands%20designing%20clothes%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmainstream-brands-not-designing-clothes-people-disabilities-fashion-school-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20aren%27t%20more%20big%20brands%20designing%20clothes%20for%20people%20with%20disabilities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmainstream-brands-not-designing-clothes-people-disabilities-fashion-school-students%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1982a3b4b5441d77cd71ad17c9c895042fdef1%2F0_260_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Elvira Pena’s learning blanket. Photograph: Elvira Pena 
Outside of the US, designers from Brazil to Hong Kong have made it their 
mission to serve this niche market. Students like Sophie Neff at Nottingham 
Trent University in the UK have created a knitwear collectionfor people in 
wheelchairs 
<http://posabilitymagazine.co.uk/clothes-for-sitting-posture-to-change-fashion-for-wheelchair-users/>
. Neff’s designs include putting pockets on thighs rather than the back of the 
pants for easier access and tight fitting cuffs to prevent the sleeves from 
getting caught in the wheels.


While these efforts are encouraging, they fall short in serving the market 
fully, especially in designing apparel that’s chic and injects self-confidence 
into the wearer, says Luz Pascal, a professor at the Fashion Institute of 
Technology in New York City. Pascal was the professor who encouraged Robbins, a 
student at the institute, to channel her desire to design for her dad into a 
class project. The goal: creating clothes for people with mobility issues, such 
as veterans who lost a limb at war or those whose illnesses make it challenging 
for them to open and close buttons.

Amazing designs resulted. Robbins’s creation included a wool blend jacket and 
pants for her dad with special details such as extra concealed zippers that 
offer a wider opening to pull on and off and unzip more easily when using the 
electric patient lifts for the restroom. Her classmate, Elvira Pena, designed a 
blanket with special panels – with Braille in some cases – to help children 
with visual impairment or other disabilities to learn things such as shapes and 
colors.

The high cost of digital discrimination: why companies should care about web 
accessibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/31/digital-discrimination-netflix-disney-target-web-accessibility-doj>
The students used real-life models for their project, and working with them 
was an uplifting experience for everyone. “It’s rewarding to see someone smile 
because you made them look good,” Pascal says.

But making a business case for creating these specialty designs has proven a 
challenge. Creating affordable clothes requires producing them at scale, which 
is not often possible when designs have to be customized to accommodate 
different types of disabilities. For example, one of Pascal’s students 
fashioned outfits for a veteran who wanted to avoid fabric draping over her 
missing arm. “It demands greater skill and creativity to address this segment 
of the population,” Luz says.

Pena recalls the difficulty of finding a manufacturer and sponsor for her 
learning blanket, which incorporates six detachable panels containing visual, 
sensory, tactile and other educational activities. Factory representatives told 
her the panel design was too complex, and that meant Pena had to simplify her 
product to make it easier to mass produce. “It will require a company that 
wants to help and create outside-the-box products for smaller markets,” she 
says.

Orsola de Castro, founder of the nonprofit Fashion Revolution, which wants to 
make the fashion industry value people, the environment and share profits more 
equally, hopes the market for people with disabilities will become as viable as 
the growing segment that touts the use of sustainable and recycled materials.

“For this niche market to grow, big brands will have to be willing to accept 
lower profits and see values in providing an important service,” de Castro 
says. “Many doubted sustainable fashion as viable – and look at the growth 
we’ve seen.”
 