
Country music is perpetually in contention with itself. All down the years we 
see glamour juxtaposed with grit; we encounter revivalists of a hallowed 
tradition reacting to popularisers who seek new audiences by adulterating the 
mix with pop. We hear the self-same voices singing in celebration of faith and 
in exhortation to sin. Every love song is matched by a tale of cheating hearts.

It’s these permanent tensions that keep country vital. And tension, too, gives 
life to the genre’s home – Nashville, Tennessee – and one of its most enduring 
subjects, whiskey. In the streets of Nashville, and in the barrel houses ofJack 
Daniel’ <http://singlebarrel.jackdaniels.com/age-gate/?from=%2F>s, a short 
drive south in Lynchburg, we can witness other attempts to creatively 
accommodate proprietary and hedonism, tradition and modernity, local charm and 
global ambition.

Nashville itself has a number of pet names: one has that it is “The Buckle of 
the Bible Belt”. The city of just over 650,000 souls is served by some 800 
churches. If you look you can find one on almost every block, from the great 
stone edifices downtown to simple clapboard or fibro constructions in the 
suburbs.

It’s plausible that every one of them is kept busy washing away the sins 
committed on the few blocks of Broadway that they call the “Honky-Tonk 
Highway”. Music City’s neon-lit strip is full of foot traffic from 10am to 3am, 
and bands play for tips in the dozens of bars there whenever they are open.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433738570254%2Fe3e15f9e-c6ca-4f87-91a8-2f252f8af033-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433738570254%2Fe3e15f9e-c6ca-4f87-91a8-2f252f8af033-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Live music in Nashville on the Honky Tonk highway. Photograph: Jason 
Wilson/The Guardian. 
The emphasis, naturally enough, is on country, but as ever, that’s a broad 
church. Those up for party-pumping bro-country can find it, and hundreds of 
like minds, in the three rammed stories of Honky Tonk Central on Broadway and 
4th. Those with a more traditional bent can try Layla’s Bluegrass Inn or 
Roberts’ Western World for more straight forward hillbilly sounds.

Before you do, you may want to line your stomach. On Broadway you’ll find 
plenty of joints selling traditional southern barbecue fare. But the changing 
face of Nashville – it’s the ninth fastest growing city in the country – means 
that there are more refined options appearing.

One of the best of those is Kayne Prime, just over the Cumberland River from 
the main downtown area, in the M Street complex of bars and nosheries. From the 
opening cocktail (I had a superbly crafted Old Fashioned made on Jack Daniel’s 
Single Barrel, in anticipation of a distillery visit), to the duck tacos, to 
the steak (try the NY Strip) to the banana bread, the restaurant presents 
time-honoured American classics with a contemporary sheen. They offer a pointer 
to the ways in which Nashville, Tennessee, and the south might find ways to 
evolve without losing their respective souls.

Two hours away in Lynchburg, Jack Daniel’s are pulling off the same trick. To 
tour the place, set on 4,000 verdant acres in Moore County, is to witness an 
at-times fanatical commitment to traditional methods.

Though changes in whiskey science and regulation have introduced new kinds of 
precision to the craft, the assistant master distiller, Chris Fletcher (whose 
grandfather was himself a master distiller there), emphasises that “the process 
is exactly the same. Maintaining this requires a little faith in what’s been 
handed down.” For example, the ricks burned to make charcoal for mellowing the 
whiskey are made from sugar maple, for no other reason than that this is what 
the founder stipulated.

The current master distiller, Jeff Arnett, is charged with upholding the 
legacy of the biggest selling American whiskey. But he’s equally sure that 
“drinkers think differently about what the perfect whiskey is.” That’s the 
reason that Gentleman Jack was introduced as a cleaner, double-mellowed whiskey 
before Arnett’s time. And it’s also why, at the other end of the scale in terms 
of flavour and price, Arnett started making Sinatra Select in grooved barrels, 
for a big, bold, oaky whiskey.

More controversially (at least for whiskey traditionalists) he has also 
introduced Tennessee Honey (the familiar Old No. 7 flavoured with honey), and 
Tennessee Fire (flavoured with cinnamon). Though the purists may bristle, 
Arnett says these are for people who “aren’t whiskey drinkers yet”. Each is 
designed to be drunk by the shot. Served chilled, Tennessee honey is a 
surprisingly agreeable liqueur.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433738876986%2Fb7029eaa-82c2-4b9b-a3e4-fe7c6c9f6895-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433738876986%2Fb7029eaa-82c2-4b9b-a3e4-fe7c6c9f6895-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Whiskey poured straight from the barrel. Photograph: Jason Wilson/The Guardian.
If Tennessee Honey is the Luke Bryan of whiskey – party drinks with a broad 
appeal, designed to drag in newcomers – Jack Daniel’s single barrel might be 
the Johnny Cash – classical, deep and distinctive. Up in the barrel houses, 
they pick out selected barrels to expose to extremes of weather, to pull the 
whiskey in and out of the wood as much as possible.

If you can manage to get a taste out of the barrel of the stuff that’s not 
quite ready, you’ll find it’s a riot of resiny, tangy flavours and aromas. The 
stuff that’s in the bottles varies because the aim is depth rather than 
consistency. But the ones I’ve tried so far smooth all that out for a long, 
creamy, oaky finish without a hint of bitterness, and a great mellowness even 
at 94 proof.

For all his innovations, Arnett is a whiskey nut, and Single Barrel is 
“definitely the most interesting whiskey we make”. The well-heeled can get 
their own barrel shipped in 250 bottles (they start at $9,000 in the US, and 
$26,000 in Australia). The rest of us can buy it by the bottle at a slight 
premium over Old No. 7. That can add up depending on the tax regime, but in the 
midst of a boom in American whiskey, they’re not having much trouble shifting 
it. They’re expanding capacity in order to meet demand: the problems they’re 
having are the problems of success.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433742354813%2F650d6dcd-4939-4689-9e95-01df25362c7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20whiskey%20tastes%20better%20the%20Nashville%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-whiskey-tastes-better-the-nashville-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433742354813%2F650d6dcd-4939-4689-9e95-01df25362c7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 After the distilling process, the barrels are rolled out. Photograph: Jason 
Wilson/The Guardian. 
Just like Nashville. A city famed for its musical heritage is having trouble 
preserving it because of the scale and pace of gentrification and development 
in those areas of the city which have become more desirable, and which also 
contain some sacred sites of country, rock and roll, and rhythm and blues.

RCA’s studio B, the unassuming building where Elvis Presley recorded more than 
anywhere, and where Chet Atkins crafted the Nashville Sound, has only survived 
because a rich benefactor bought it and leased it back to the Country Music 
Hall of Fame. This means that visitors can soak up the vibe, and busloads do 
every day.

Other iconic bits of popular musical history have been turned into apartments 
or parking lots. Studio A, where Dolly Parton recorded Jolene, was only saved 
from destruction by concerted activism.

As Nashville grows, its inner turmoil is set to continue. It makes it a 
fascinating place to visit, but you should get there soon – it might just get 
loved to death and be no more than a memory in an old country song.
 