
A new law in the US state of Illinois will require salon professionals to 
receive training in domestic abuse prevention 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/01/01/507770649/with-new-law-illinois-stylists-join-the-fight-against-domestic-violence>
. The law aims to train beauty therapists and hair stylists to recognise signs 
of abuse, and will see around 88,000 people trained over the next two years.The 
initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/illinois-domestic-violence-hairstylists>
, launched by a coalition of Chicago-based domestic violence advocacy groups, 
is an innovative way to harness the often intimate relationship between 
stylists and clients.

While the hour-long training will not make salon professionals experts 
overnight, and they will not be legally required to report violence, the hope 
is that the knowledge and awareness will equip them to provide a helpful 
outlet, and potentially guide clients towards existing support services.

It is exciting to consider new ways in which different sections of society 
might be harnessed in the battle against domestic violence, a problem so 
widespread thatmore than one in four women in the UK have experienced it since 
the age of 16 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/information-support/what-is-domestic-abuse/how-common-is-domestic-abuse/>
.

Given the societal myths surrounding the problem, and the fact that victims 
are often made to feel ashamed or responsible for what is happening, even a 
small amount of training could lead to potentially life-changing conversations 
in women’s daily lives. What if we could do more to catch signs of domestic 
violence in the workplace too, or in other everyday situations?

Illinois law turns to hairstylists for help in fight against domestic abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/illinois-domestic-violence-hairstylists>
The Illinois law is reminiscent of the recent Ask for Angela campaign 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-37855009>, which hit headlines in November after a 
photograph of a poster designed by Lincolnshire county council went viral. The 
posters, displayed on toilet doors in pubs and bars, encouraged anybody who 
felt they were in an unsafe dating situation to approach bar staff and ask for 
Angela. This would alert staff and enable them to help potential victims to 
safely exit the situation. The campaign garnered widespread praise, with many 
calling for it to be rolled out nationwide, an initiative that could have great 
potential if supplemented with staff training.

Sadly, however, the idea of introducing such widespread, innovative approaches 
to domestic violence seems unrealistic when we are still struggling to achieve 
the minimum in frontline support for survivors. What good would it do to train 
hairdressers in Sunderland, for example, to spot signs of abuse when it wasthis 
week reported that the city may be set to lose its only remaining women’s 
refuge provider 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/sunderland-domestic-violence-womens-refuges-wearside-women-in-need-a7506186.html>
? Wearside Women in Need, which can accommodate almost 300 women and children 
and runs the only specialist refuge in the north east for black women, told the 
Independent that Sunderland council had informed the charity its funding would 
be entirely withdrawn from June 2017. While the council said that the 2017-18 
budget had not yet been decided, the charity, which has already seen its 
funding cut by a third since 2010, says it will likely be forced to close if 
the proposed cut goes ahead.A petition has been set up 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/drop-plans-to-withdraw-funding-for-wearside-women-in-need?bucket=&source=twitter-share-button>
 to call on Sunderland council to drop any plans to withdraw funding.

The government last year announced a funding boost for women’s refuges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/theresa-may-approves-20m-fund-womens-refuges-new-guidance-council-accomodate-domestic-violence>
, but charities such as Refuge, which has suffered funding cuts to 80% of its 
services since 2011,warned 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/2016/11/03/refuge-welcomes-20m-funding-for-specialist-refuges/>
 that the £20m promised would not meet the gap. And with the UK consistently 
falling below the Council of Europe’s recommendation for at least one family 
place in refuge per 10,000 of the population, while sporadic pots of funding 
are welcome, they fall far short of the amount required to provide the sector 
with long-term sustainability.

What the Ask for Angela posters and the Illinois training have in common is 
the initiative to capitalise on everyday situations where a small intervention 
could make a big difference.



The idea of tackling domestic violence across our society in new and 
innovative ways is exciting, but until we get sustainable funding and support 
for the women’s sector, such progress seems likely to remain a pipe dream.
 