
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has 
been the elephant in the room during the past two US presidential debates. 
Ignoring this issue would be more understandable if this metaphorical pachyderm 
weren’t about to rampage through the lives of Americans, causing upheaval on a 
scale not seen since the start of human civilization.


“I’ve been shocked at the lack of questions on climate change. It really is 
fiddling while the world burns,” said Kerry Emanuel, a leading climate 
scientist. “This is the great issue of our time and we are skirting around it. 
I’m just baffled by it.”

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> have yet to face a 
moderator question on climate change during two debates in which time was found 
to grill Clinton repeatedly over her use of emails and to ask Trump about a 
series of late-night tweets he sent about a former Miss Universe’s sex tape. 
Lester Holt, the moderator of the first debate, was reportedly set to ask a 
climate question but ran out of time.

Wednesday’s final debate is set to retread the same ground, with the debate 
referee, Chris Wallace of Fox News,planning to prod 
<http://www.debates.org/index.php?mact=News,cntnt01,detail,0&cntnt01articleid=71&cntnt01origid=93&cntnt01detailtemplate=newspage&cntnt01returnid=80>
 the candidates on immigration, the economy and “fitness to be president”.

Wallace has also decided to ask about “foreign hot spots”, but it appears 
unlikely that it will segue into talking about the diabolical heat suffered in
Kuwait 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/kuwait-swelters-record-breaking-54c-heatwave-weather-7152911.html>
 andIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 this year.

“It’s like a sort of collective cowardice,” said Emanuel of the omission. 
Michael Mann, another prominent climate scientist, added: “One has to wonder if 
television networks are compromised by the millions of advertising dollars they 
take from fossil fuel interests.”
clinton trump on environment 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e4b4a25f-537e-43b9-8b09-5dc9b34f12f4>
Should the final debate also neglect climate, the only question related to the 
issue across four-and-a-half hours of TV will have come from Ken Bone, he of 
red sweater and short-lived internet fame, who asked about coal mining policy 
as the credits were preparing to roll on last week’s debate. Climate 
campaigners have been unable to contain their exasperation.

“Let’s be clear: a last minute question about energy doesn’t do justice to the 
threat of the climate crisis,” said May Boeve, executive director of climate 
group 350 Action, shortly after the debate.

“This crisis threatens our communities, our economy, and the future for our 
children – we saw that threat with Hurricane Matthew just this week – yet 
climate change doesn’t get a single direct question in the debate.”

Hurricane Matthew <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hurricane-matthew>, which 
resulted in more than 20 deaths, is just the latest example of the type of 
extreme event, fromflooding in Louisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/louisiana-flood-damage-recovery>
 to ahistoric drought in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california-drought>, that will become more 
common as the world warms.

This year hasn’t exactly been short of climate conversation topics – 2016 is 
on track to be the warmest on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/2016-locked-into-being-hottest-year-on-record-nasa-says?CMP=edit_2221>
, beating a mark set just in 2015. The Paris climate accord has beenratified by 
countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/paris-agreement-climate-change-carbon-emissions>
 around the world while the Obama administration has attempted to implement its 
Clean Power Planin the teeth of fierce opposition from 27 states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/clean-power-plan-court-obama-climate-change>
. Alaskabarely had a winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/iditarod-climate-change-sled-dogs-winter-alaska>
 this year while some American communities are already having to relocate due 
to rising seas.

Nearly two-thirds of Americans say that climate change is at least somewhat 
important to them personally,according to the Yale Program on Climate 
Communication 
<http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/publications/climate-spiral-silence-america/>
, although few people talk about the issue with family or friends.

Americans are broadly in favor of developing clean sources of energy but 
there’s a clear political divide about how to approach climate change.Polling 
by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/10/10/clinton-trump-supporters-worlds-apart-on-views-of-climate-change-and-its-scientists/>
 shows half of Clinton’s supporters care about climate change a great deal, 
compared with 15% of Trump supporters.

This division is most starkly demonstrated by the candidates themselves. 
Clinton has talked about installing half a billion solar panels, halting oil 
drilling in the Arctic and, in sobering evidence of this election’s debasement, 
proudly told the Democratic national convention: “I believe in science.”

While some liberal Democrats are suspicious of Clinton’s climate credentials – 
fears were exacerbated by recent leaked emailsthat show 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/clinton-wikileaks-update-leaked-emails-show-hillary-told-climate-change-activists-get-2432359>
 she said those who wanted to shut down fossil fuels should “get a life” – the 
former secretary of state’s plan cannot be compared meaningfully with Trump’s.

The Republican nominee has called climate change a Chinese hoax and 
“bullshit”. He has promised to withdraw the US from the Paris climate deal, 
revive the coal industry while also expanding oil and gas drilling. He has 
darkly hinted at scrapping the Environmental Protection Agency and resurrecting 
the controversial Keystone oil pipeline.

“I wish there was a proper battle of ideas that we could judge accordingly,” 
said Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club. Green groups have 
supported Clinton almost as a default position because she’s the only major 
party candidate who accepts climate science.

While Clinton and Trump differ on issues such as police shootings, immigration 
and the economy, both candidates at least accept that these things actually 
exist. It’s tricky to have a debate on a topic that a participant doesn’t think 
is real.

Trump’s denial is shared by many members of Congress, who have been lavished 
with $29.6m in contributions from fossil fuel companies in the 2016 election 
cycle, according to figurescompiled by ClimateTruth.org Action 
<http://nofossilfuelmoney.org/>. 

Regardless, here are three germane, and pressing, climate change questions 
that Wallace could ask:


An overwhelming majority of climate scientists say that climate change is 
real, caused by humans and a growing threat to our way of life. What would you 
do as president to tackle this clear and present danger?

All of the top 10 hottest years on record have occurred since 1998 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/gallery/graphics/the-10-hottest-years-on-record>
, the year when many climate skeptics claim that global warming somehow 
stopped. The world’s top scientific institutions areunequivocal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/25/record-hot-years-near-impossible-without-manmade-climate-change-study>
 that the burning of fossil fuels is the cause of this warming, with recent 
research showing this brings punishingdrought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/climate-change-megadrought-california-global-warming>
, extreme weather events,poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/17/climate-change-could-drive-122m-more-people-into-extreme-poverty-by-2030-un-united-nations-report>
 andeconomic stagnation 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v527/n7577/full/nature15725.html>. 

The Pentagon has said that climate change is a national security risk due to 
the destruction caused by rising seas and displacement of people. What would 
you do to prepare the US for this?

Millions of people are set to become climate refugees 
<http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/climate-change-and-disasters.html> as crops fail 
and drinking water supplies are sullied by seawater, potentially putting the 
current refugee crisis in the shade.The Pentagon has warned 
<http://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/612710> of the potential for 
conflict and the need for humanitarian mobilization but the two main 
presidential candidates have yet to talk about this.

Rising sea levels are already causing Americans to be uprooted and whole 
cities to be put at long-term risk. What national plan will you put in place to 
ensure that areas such as New York, Virginia and Florida aren’t inundated?

Incidents of nuisance flooding have more than trebled along US coasts since 
the 1960s, with most coastal areas set to be inundated30 days or more a year by 
2050 <http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2014/20141218_sealevelrise.html>. 
Miami Beach is spending $400m on a system of pumps to ward off the sea for just 
a few decades, according to its mayor. Climate change is far from an abstract 
concept for people in towns inLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/louisiana-isle-de-jean-charles-island-sea-level-resettlement>
 andAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/alaska-town-shishmaref-vote-climate-change-relocation>
 who are being relocated due to the rising seas.
 