
One look at this list, and it’s pretty easy to see what they each have in 
common: Muhammad Ali, Diego Maradona, Pelé, Michael Jordan, Usain Bolt, Jack 
Nicklaus, Sir Donald Bradman, Roger Federer.

Whenever the topic of who is the greatest sportsperson of all time comes up 
for discussion, these are the usual suspects. And there’s no denying that each 
and every one of them bestrode, or bestrides, their sport in a way most of 
their competitors have never come close to.

Serena Williams is Centre Court’s champion of black female power | Charlie 
Brinkhurst-Cuff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/serena-williams-champion-black-female-power-black-lives-matter>
Of course, there’s something else they all share: gender. Traditionally, when 
we talk of sporting achievement at this level, no female athlete receives a 
mention – until, that is, earlier this week. In an advertising campaign timed 
to coincide with the US Open tennis championships, the sportswear giant Nike 
threw a new name into the argument:Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>.

The first reaction of most people when you concede publicly that Nike may have 
a point is one of derision and dismissal. “Serena, in the same class as Pelé? 
You’re mad!” But then, as they listen to the case for the American’s inclusion 
in such elite company, they begin to realise that it’s not such a preposterous 
notion after all.

Several characteristics define sporting greatness in an individual: 
domination, longevity, changing the game, and overcoming adversity; and – of 
course – the person must win the sport’s big prizes. Who can deny that in each 
of those categories Serena at least equals, and in many ways surpasses, the 
aforementioned men?

In terms of domination, Serena has quite simply “owned” her greatest rivals, 
to the point where even to suggest that there’s ever been any meaningful 
competition between them is stretching things.

Only two other players have held the No 1 spot more than twice over the past 
decade, Kim Clijsters and the now disgraced Maria Sharapova. Serena’s 
head-to-head record against the Belgian: 7-2. Against the Russian, she has been 
even more destructive: Sharapova hasn’t beaten Serena in 11 years – that’s 18 
consecutive matches.

Arguably, only Bolt has proved to be so much better than the opponents he has 
had to face, and he doesn’t run against them nearly as often as Serena must 
face her rivals.

Longevity? Again, Serena is right there. She first became world No 1 at the 
age of 20; she’s now 34, and in the intervening years has held top spot an 
incredible six times, including for the past three and a half years, a run she 
will extend should she reach the final of this year’s US Open.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a206fe29a785f544a081463fffdd32e322b101d%2F0_11_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Serena%20Williams%20is%20the%20greatest%20sportsperson%20ever%20%7C%20Michael%20Eboda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Serena%20Williams%20is%20the%20greatest%20sportsperson%20ever%20%7C%20Michael%20Eboda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a206fe29a785f544a081463fffdd32e322b101d%2F0_11_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 With her fourth round win at the US Open, Serena overtook Roger Federer’s 
match-winning record. Photograph: John Walton/PA 
Federer held the record for winning the most matches of any pro tennis player, 
with 307. The reason I’m using past tense to mention that achievement is because
Serena’s fourth-round victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/serena-williams-us-open-record-grand-slam-win>
, 6-2, 6-3 over Yaroslava Shvedova on Monday, meant she overtook the Swiss 
legend to become the “winningest” player of all time – male or female – with 
308.

Furthermore, she is the only player to have won 10 grand slams in two 
consecutive decades. And, as anyone who has even a passing interest in the 
sport is aware, if Serena wins another grand slam tournament before she calls 
it quits, she will surpass the record for the most slam victories in the open 
era, anachievement she currently shares with Steffi Graff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/serena-williams-wimbledon-margaret-court-steffi-graf>
.

It doesn’t end there. Serena has redefined what a woman can do on a tennis 
court. She is more athletic than any other female player in history. She serves 
more accurately, and faster. She’s one of the most intelligent players to have 
ever played the sport. She hits the ball harder than anyone else ever has, and 
she suffers from fewer weaknesses to her game.

And then throw in her unbelievable comebacks from injury, the worst being when 
she was forced out of the sport for a year, 2010-2011, having suffered from a 
pulmonary embolism that left her “on her deathbed”. Because of her inactivity 
on the court, her ranking dropped to 175; a year later she was back at No 1. 
It’s hard to contest that she doesn’t deserves to be mentioned alongside the 
absolute best there has ever been.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b18b14ae31efba8ab3484813777ae2d4598828a%2F0_305_2680_1608%2F2680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Serena%20Williams%20is%20the%20greatest%20sportsperson%20ever%20%7C%20Michael%20Eboda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Serena%20Williams%20is%20the%20greatest%20sportsperson%20ever%20%7C%20Michael%20Eboda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fserena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b18b14ae31efba8ab3484813777ae2d4598828a%2F0_305_2680_1608%2F2680.jpg>
 Pele celebrates scoring the first goal in Brazil’s winning 1970 World Cup 
final. Photograph: UPH 
But perhaps what is even more incredible, and the thing that truly elevates 
Serena to top spot, is that she has succeeded despite never having received the 
levels of support from her sport that any of the others on the list have from 
theirs. Pelé has been lauded since he was 17; in Argentina Maradona is regarded 
as a demigod; Ali (eventually) was loved, as is Bolt; Jordan is still revered, 
so are Bradman, Federer and Nicklaus. Not so Serena.

Probably because she is a black superstar in a previously predominantly white 
sport, she has had to tread that dirty road of the pioneer who is regarded as 
an impostor. In some circles, people would like nothing more than for the 
Williams sisters, Serena in particular, to pack up their rackets and go away – 
or at least stop winning everything in sight – and allow the sport to return to 
“normal”.

That she has redefined what normal means in a way that no other athlete ever 
has is perhaps whySerena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> can justly be considered 
the greatest of all time.
 