
In the 1990s, a simple survey in Vienna led urban planners to rethink their 
whole approach to infrastructure development. The questionnaire asked residents 
why and how they used public transportation, and the results were striking 
because men and women had very different responses. Men’s typical route was 
short and simple: often to and from work. Women’s responses, however, were 
complex and varied, usually including multiple trips a day on the metro as well 
as on foot: dropping off children at school, going to the doctor, getting 
groceries, visiting an older family member, back to school for pick up.

This prompted a moment of realisation for Vienna’s city planners: 
infrastructure has a gendered aspect to it; women and men have different needs 
and uses for public structures and systems. As a result, the planners adapted 
transportation projects to women’s needs, adding street lights so women were 
safer walking at night and widening sidewalks to make it easier to move around 
with walkers, strollers or wheelchairs.


Similarly, cities in Bangladesh recently sought to serve women more equitably 
in infrastructure improvements. They recognised that this begins with 
understanding what women need. The programme made sure women had representation 
in local governments and a voice in urban planning – down to the very 
construction of buildings.The project 
<https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/28743/gender-case-study-ban.pdf>
 [pdf] built separate toilet facilities for women at markets and transportation 
hubs across the country – identified as a key need. In addition, it increased 
women working in construction projects by 50%.

Four myths about slums: 'Don't assume people want to leave'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/28/four-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave>
It’s not just transportation systems; women and men use public spaces, 
buildings, and even access basic services differently. In areas where resources 
of all kinds are more limited, these disparities become especially acute, 
affecting women’s safety, movement and income. This is particularly true in 
parts of the global south, where urban planning struggles to even keep up with 
basic use – much less encourage gender equality.

There are a few target areas where infrastructure improvements make a big 
difference in women’s lives – and livelihoods.

Safety in public places

Basic safety is a top concern for women in public spaces across the world. The 
statistics are sobering, more than 83% of Egyptian women have been sexually 
harassed on Cairo’s streets; a rape is reported every 29 minutes in New Delhi 
and only 12% of women in Lima feel safe in the city,according to the UN 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2011/6/un-launches-initiative-to-make-cities-safer-for-women-and-children>
. Originally launched in 2009, UN Women’s Safe Cities campaign aimed to prevent 
sexual violence in pilot cities, and recommended two straightforward 
infrastructure improvements in Delhi: more streetlights and improving roadside 
toilets.

Public toilets, particularly, are often insecure for women. The World Health 
Organisation (WHO) estimates that one in three women around the world do not 
have access to separate toilet facilities and must use communal facilities 
instead, which increases their risk of sexual violence.A study 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0122244> in 
Cape Town’s Khayelitsha township showed that doubling the number of properly 
functioning public toilets in the area would reduce sexual assaults by 30%.


Can cities be feminist? Inside the global rise of female mayors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/12/global-rise-female-mayors> 
A city’s layout imposes a significant time burden on women

Where resources like water or schools are located matters as well. WHO 
estimates that 72% of the burden of collecting water at standpipes, wells, 
rivers and other storage units falls on women. The multiple trips a day to and 
from water sources eat up women’s time, drawing them away from other activities 
like education and employment.

Incorporating women’s needs starts with better data

The good news is cities around the world have made progress 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/244362-1265299949041/6766328-1270752196897/Gender_Infrastructure2.pdf>
 [pdf] incorporating the needs of both genders in infrastructure planning, but 
this has not yet beeninstitutionalised everywhere 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dpr.12128/epdf?r3_referer=wol&tracking_action=preview_click&show_checkout=1&purchase_referrer=www.google.com&purchase_site_license=LICENSE_DENIED_NO_CUSTOMER>
.

As a first step, we need a better understanding of how women and men 
experience and use public spaces. Sometimes the implications are 
counter-intuitive to typical planning. For example, urban investments that 
focused on “cleaning up” and beautifying cities in India drove off roadside 
hawkers and street vendors. But it was theseextra eyes 
<http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/of-safety-and-inclusivity/article5135071.ece> 
and people on the street that helped women feel and stay safe.


Currently, the limited amount of urban datasets that track and trend data on 
gender make it hard to develop infrastructure programmes that factor in women’s 
needs. According to theHunger Report <http://hungerreport.org/missingdata/>, 
92% of gender specific economic data and 76.9% of gender health data is missing 
from sub-Saharan Africa. Cities and municipal authorities should mandate that 
existing surveys or other forms of input from residents mirror the demographics 
of the area – proportional to the gender balance and also by age.

Architecture and prisons: why design matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/28/architecture-and-prisons-why-design-matters>
Empowering women as leaders of urban research and local governance via 
community social audits, like a recent audit by the Social Justice Coalition on
access to sanitation in Khayelitsha, 
<http://www.internationalbudget.org/publications/social-justice-coalition-report-of-the-khayelitsha-mshengu-toilet-social-audit>
 South Africa, have shown to be powerful tools. They better inform gender-based 
strategies through data and experience, while simultaneously acknowledging and 
promoting women’s voices in policy decisions.

We now have a real opportunity to take action. As the world prepares for the 
forthcomingHabitat III <https://www.habitat3.org/> conference in Ecuador next 
week, we need to encourage government officials, development organisations, and 
private sector partners to prioritise gender-inclusive infrastructure planning 
across the world’s cities.

Additionally, local governments and planning departments need support in 
educating and recruiting more female planners in ways that mirror the 
demographic and social make up of local environments. Doing so will go a long 
way towards making cities work for all.


Andrew Fleming is a consultant and Anja Tranovich is a global communications 
associate atDalberg <http://www.dalberg.com/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 