
What are you having for lunch? A store-bought sandwich that crumbles all over 
your keyboard as you digest the latest depressing world news? A $10 salad, 
eaten in front of your computer, as you toggle mindlessly between Facebook and 
your work?


If you’re like the majority of American office workers, whatever you’re having 
for lunch, you’re probably dining al desko. Some80% of employees 
<http://www.right.com/wps/wcm/connect/right-us-en/home/thoughtwire/categories/media-center/Just+OneinFive+Employees+Take+Actual+Lunch+Break>
 don’t take a regular lunch break. Rather, we cram in our calories solo, and 
swiftly: on average it takes just15 minutes to eat 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-20243692> lunch. And while it may seem sad 
that so many of us are masticating alone, with only the glow of our screens for 
company, a lot of people actually prefer it that way. Inone study 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/failure-to-lunch.html?_r=0>, a 
quarter of millennial employees agreed with the statement “I eat alone to 
multitask better”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf805fe8c36aad3fcd829d7eee1416e0c99be70%2F0_328_3550_2129%2F3550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf805fe8c36aad3fcd829d7eee1416e0c99be70%2F0_328_3550_2129%2F3550.jpg>
 Nine to Five: working ladies who lunch. Photograph: www.ronaldgrantarchive.com 
Lunch, as we know it in Anglo-American society today, was cooked up during the 
industrial revolution. Longer hours at factories situated a long way from home 
meant the office lunch became ingrained in the routine of working life. A 
regular occasion rather than an occasional snack.

At the turn of the century, speed and efficiency shaped the lunch break. 
“Haste seems to be a controlling factor in the luncheon of the worker,”noted 
<http://exhibitions.nypl.org/lunchhour/exhibits/show/lunchhour/quick> Munsey’s 
Magazine in 1901. The need for speed when it came to workday feeding launched 
new quick-serve food concepts such as cafeterias and automats. Workers might 
not have been eating at their desks, but they were still scarfing sustenance 
alone.

The fabled power lunch was another innovation designed to optimize 
food-fuelled productivity. The concept was invented by the Four Seasons New 
York in the late 1970s; theyhad the idea 
<http://www.marketplace.org/2012/07/09/business/made-ny-how-power-lunch-was-spawned>
 of designing a meal that would be conducive to doing business. The tables were 
set far apart to give businessmen (and they were mainly men) privacy. You could 
buy wine by the glass and get a good meal in under an hour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e1b665279a3f3ea7b2f5b00d63eacb85b55046b%2F146_206_1854_1113%2F1854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e1b665279a3f3ea7b2f5b00d63eacb85b55046b%2F146_206_1854_1113%2F1854.jpg>
 The power lunch: increasingly a relic of a bygone era. Photograph: CBS 
As technology makes face-to-face meeting and eating increasingly redundant, 
the power lunch of yore has lost its appetite appeal. Indeed, Four Seasons 
restaurant isshutting its doors in July 
<http://nypost.com/2016/04/29/four-seasons-closing-leaves-130-employees-jobless/>
, marking the end of an eating era.

In its stead come power bowls and other good-for-you fast food alternatives 
aimed at a generation of more health-conscious workers, people with standing 
desks and mindfulness apps.

In one study, a quarter of millennial employees agreed with the statement 'I 
eat alone to multitask better'

The power lunch has also been replaced with a slew of new, 
powered-by-technology lunch startups, all promising to spice up your workday 
meal.UberEats <https://ubereats.com/nyc/> offers fast delivery from local 
restaurants, meaning that your options to go broke buying lunch have 
significantly expanded. New York’sMaple <https://maple.com/> delivers a 
rotating menu of celebrity-created lunch options for a flat $12 fee.Arcade 
<http://www.eatarcade.com/> lets you order meals by text. Bots have also 
emerged as a new way to more seamlessly order lunch from within productivity 
platforms. Taco Bell,for example 
<http://www.wired.com/2016/04/future-work-ordering-taco-bell-slack/>, has 
integrated with workplace messaging company Slack to offer an AI-powered 
ordering service. Users talk with the bot, order food and pay through Slack.

Then there are new lunch services that help you get you out of the office, 
even if just to pick up your food.MealPass <https://mealpass.com/>, started by 
a founder of ClassPass, is a subscription-style lunch model that offers a daily 
selection of weekday lunch options for $119 a month, which works out to around 
$6 a lunch. You log on to the service before 9.30am, pick one of the options 
available near your office, and pop out to collect it at a designated time. I 
tried it out for a couple days and it definitely injected variety into my usual 
lunch routine – which generally consists of going to the nearest purveyor of 
foodstuffs and buying the same sandwich every day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf5ac66c08894c1406bde92c3b8ed41df93fe03%2F0_48_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20we%20eat%20lunch%20at%20our%20desks%3F%20Because%20capitalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fdesk-lunch-power-lunches-ubereats-maple-soylent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf5ac66c08894c1406bde92c3b8ed41df93fe03%2F0_48_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 UberEats: bringing local restaurants straight to your desk. Photograph: 
UberEats 
Here’s the thing though. While it’s theoretically nice to have all this 
variety, I’m not sure people are all that desperate for it. I quite like a 
predictable lunch. But maybe that’s because my tastebuds are English – 
apparently32% of British office workers 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/foodanddrinknews/11537804/Britains-favourite-lunch-The-humble-cheese-sandwich.html>
 eat the same thing (usually a cheese sandwich) every day, with the average 
worker having done so for nearly four and a half years.

All of these lunch-based innovations lead me to the rather terrifying 
conclusion that we may now be living in the golden age of office lunches. In 
the 1980s, lunch, like sleep, was “for wimps”. However, as technology has 
changed the way we work and the sort of work we value, there has been arenewed 
focus on both sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/01/sleep-habits-eight-hours-health-wellness-arianna-huffington>
 and proper nutrition as essential tools for productivity. Meanwhile, tech 
giants such as Google and Facebook have made a free lunch an expectation for 
many workers. Lunch is no longer for wimps – it’s good business andgood for 
business 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2015/03/05/390726886/were-not-taking-enough-lunch-breaks-why-thats-bad-for-business>
.

Lunch is no longer for wimps – it’s good business and good for business

This doesn’t mean we’re all going to start lingering over lunch, however. Far 
from it. Rather, I reckon we’re going to move towards a more data-heavy diet. 
The rise of the “quantified employee 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/joshbersin/2014/06/25/quantified-self-meet-the-quantified-employee/#754e74b6216d>
” means employers will soon be able to ensure we’re eating and sleeping in the 
most efficient manner. There has already been a 300% increase in sales of 
Soylent, a meal-replacement drink beloved by Silicon Valley types obsessed with 
efficiency. Indeed Soylent has ambitions to take a large bite out of the lunch 
market. “If you take an historical view, you see that food is in a constant 
process of evolution. We’re just a part of that,” the CMOtold Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-15/with-soylent-sales-up-300-percent-its-founders-have-eyes-on-europe>
. I’m afraid he is right.

So enjoy your limp sandwich while it lasts. The only thing more depressing 
than a sad desk lunch is a sad desk meal-replacement beverage lunch. Best 
consumed solo, of course, as you mutter, between sips: “I eat alone to 
multitask better.”
 