
The most dramatic economic effect of the UK’s Brexit vote has been the 
collapse of sterling. Since June, the pound has fallen by 16% against a basket 
of currencies. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/british-shoppers-told-to-expect-price-rises-after-steep-fall-in-pound>
Mervyn King, the previous governor of the Bank of England,hailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/fall-in-sterling-is-a-welcome-change-says-mervyn-king-brexit-vote>
 the lower exchange rate as a “welcome change”. Indeed, with Britain’s 
current-account deficit running above 7% of GDP – by far the largest since data 
started being collected in 1955 – depreciation could be regarded as a boon. But 
is it?

Economists would typically argue that the way to balance a country’s external 
accounts is through a fall in its currency, which would make imports more 
expensive and exports cheaper, causing the former to fall and the latter to 
rise. Higher import prices – a net loss for the country – would be offset by 
the higher employment and wages generated by the more competitive position of 
the country’s exports.

But in order for currency depreciation to work its magic, more demand for 
exports must be forthcoming when the exchange rate falls (or, as economists 
say, the price elasticity of demand for exports must be high). But various 
studies have shown that the price elasticity of demand for UK exports is low. 
For example, arecent paper <http://www.etsg.org/ETSG2015/Papers/525.pdf> by 
Francesco Aiello, Graziella Bonanno, and Alessia Via of the European Trade 
Study Group finds that “the long-run level of exports appears to be unrelated 
to the real exchange rate for the UK”.

This means that British consumers and producers will have to bear the entire 
brunt of devaluation: their import consumption will be rationed through a sharp 
rise in price inflation, with no offsetting gain for exports. This is by no 
means merely a theoretical proposition. In 2008-09, when the rest of the world 
was on the verge of deflation, the UK was enduring an inflationary recession, 
with GDP contracting at a top rate of 6.1% annually, while inflation reached 
some 5.1%. This occurred because sterling fell more than 21%, peak to trough, 
from 2007 to 2008.

UK public finances show bigger-than-expected deficit – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/oct/21/portugal-bond-yields-hit-6-week-lows-ahead-of-key-ratings-review-business-live>
Moreover, although the current-account deficit narrowed to around 1.7% of GDP 
in 2011, the improvement was only temporary. After 2011, it started to widen 
once more, even though the pound never clawed back its losses. In economics 
jargon, the UK seems to be suffering from an extreme variant of the 
Houthakker-Magee effect – named after two economists who discovered in 1969 
that price elasticities for imports and exports could diverge substantially, 
giving rise to a permanent tendency towards current-account imbalance.

The reason appears to be the massive contraction of the UK manufacturing 
sector – from about 28% of gross value added in 1978 to less than 10% today. As 
the economist Nicholas Kaldor pointed out long ago, because manufacturing has 
higher returns to scale than services, manufacturing exporters tend to beat 
service exporters.


In addition, structural reforms since the mid-1990s have ensured that British 
exporters are deeply integrated within global supply chains. As a result, many 
of Britain’s exports require imported inputs; so when sterling depreciates and 
import prices rise, the knock-on effect on export prices renders them less 
competitive. The most recent OECD data show that the import content of UK 
exports is around 23%, compared with around 15% for US and Japanese exports.

For now, the UK is relying on capital inflows into the City of London to limit 
sterling’s fall. But, as the exchange rate collapse of 2008 showed, this source 
of foreign demand for sterling is highly unstable. When the worm inevitably 
turns and these flows reverse, both sterling and exports will take another hit.

The worst-case scenario would involve a sharp fall in the value of sterling, 
followed by sticky inflation that reinforced the rise in British export prices, 
fueling further currency depreciation. This doom loop would stop only when 
British consumers suffered a fall in real income of a magnitude not typically 
seen outside developing countries.

The more likely outcome is a sort of slow rotting effect, with periodic 
depreciations gradually driving down living standards for all who earn their 
living in sterling.”

What is to be done? Only rapid government action to substitute goods currently 
imported with domestically produced goods will do the trick. The classic 
solution is import controls. But other measures that are less damaging to trade 
rules and international amity are available.

Stop Brexit and save the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/stopping-brexit-can-save-eu-anatole-kaletsky>
The national investment bank that the Labour party is now advocating could be 
given a mandate to invest in industries with a high import substitution 
potential. An alternative would be to subsidise such industries directly from 
the exchequer, with subsidies tied to the quality-adjusted price of the import 
being substituted. As the domestically produced goods became competitive with 
the foreign goods, the subsidies would gradually be removed and the industry 
allowed stand on its own two feet.

Ideally, the British government should aim to bring down imports as a 
percentage of GDP from the current high of around 30% to pre-1974 levels of 
around 20%. This may prove too ambitious, and the UK may have to settle for 
somewhere around 25% of GDP. But if something is not done, Britain risks 
permanent impairment of prosperity. A depressed economy can be reflated, and an 
inflationary economy can be depressed. But losing access to crucial foreign 
markets as a result of currency movements outside the country’s control is 
largely irreversible.

•Robert Skidelsky is professor emeritus of political economy at Warwick 
University, a fellow of the British Academy in history and economics, and a 
member of the British House of Lords.

© Project Syndicate  <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 