
I think you’d struggle to find a more-read author in the 1980s than Stephen 
King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>. Throughout the 70s and 
early 80s, King carved a path for himself as the world’s foremost writer of 
horror fiction. His books were a double threat: they were both immaculately 
written and presented, on their most basic levels, subjects that were designed 
to terrify readers. Each book focused on a topic that drilled into our own 
neuroses, either real or imagined: the vampires found in Salem’s Lot, the 
isolation presented by The Shining, the rabid dog that was Cujo. You could 
almost target the books to the fears of the individual: oh, you’re scared of 
cars? Well, have I got a horror novel to sell to you!

Stephen King's The Body made me feel like I was 11 again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/20/stephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy>
Then, in 1986, King wrote It. Suddenly, he wasn’t writing about the one thing 
that scared you; he was writing about everything that did.

It seems that King was taking lessons from himself when he wrote It. Indeed, 
he called the novel “the summation of everything I have learned and done in my 
whole life to this point”. Those references and nods are clear to King’s 
Constant Readers (the name he gives to his fans): for It’s main narrative 
thrust, it almost seemed as if he looked at the teenage friendships he’d 
written in 1982’s The Body (later adapted into film as Stand By Me) and took 
the basic setup of that book, deciding to push it further. What if there’s a 
group of friends who find something? What if it’s something they have to keep 
as a secret, something which deeply affects their lives – not just as children, 
but as adults as well? Fears aren’t something, King realised, that are confined 
to us as children. Those same terrifying thoughts often rear their heads in our 
adult lives, often manifesting in vastly different, far more complicated ways.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPqqBpAqnGKg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPqqBpAqnGKg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPqqBpAqnGKg&media=>
The novel is really one of two halves, two timelines that alternate throughout 
the novel. The first of these narratives takes place in 1957, when the central 
group of protagonists – the self-titled Losers’ Club, seven kids in their young 
teens – are dealing with life in the small town of Derry. In the aftermath of 
the loss of George, the six-year-old brother of Bill, the group’s de facto 
leader – the young boy’s arm torn off when he reached into a gutter to retrieve 
his paper boat – they all encounter the titular malevolent presence in one way 
or another.

Only, It doesn’t simply appear to the Losers’ Club in the same way each time: 
instead, it manifests as the thing that they’re most afraid of. For two of 
them, the fear is a stereotype, a Wolfman and a Mummy stolen straight from the 
classic Universal Pictures horror films of the 1940s. For the others, the fear 
gets more insidious: it takes the form of one of their own number; as a group 
of local boys who died where these kids play; and for Beverley, the group’s 
only girl, it comes in the form of torrents of blood (the same metaphorical 
horror as King once used in Carrie, his debut novel). Gradually, over the year, 
the Losers’ Club start to realise that there’s a pattern to deaths in the area; 
that It is a malevolence which recurs every 27 years or so, killing kids and 
then retreating until the next cycle.

James Patterson calls off his fictional Murder of Stephen King
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/23/james-patterson-calls-off-his-fictional-of-stephen-king>
At the same time, we meet up with the Losers’ Club in 1984. No playing with 
nostalgia here, no fears about growing up; this section deals firmly with the 
having grown, having lost what you once had. The death of youth rears its head 
large here, with the kids having grown up to be successful adults, but not 
necessarily happy ones. Their fears – the deeper fears, this is, rather than 
the more overtly visual horrors of their youth – haven’t faded. They’re still 
scared of being usurped; of being alone; of being forgotten; of the abuse they 
suffered as children. This last point is perhaps the most important, as it’s 
over the course of this section that the depth of the torments they suffered as 
kids is writ large enough for us to fully understand: this isn’t a novel about 
scary clowns and giant spiders (though both are there on the page), but about 
the depths of pain that teenagers suffer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fwhy-stephen-kings-it-still-terrifies-30-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80d9f200b535c263977bfb44ee9431ba79c28cd%2F0_167_1290_774%2F1290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Stephen%20King's%20It%20still%20terrifies%2030%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fwhy-stephen-kings-it-still-terrifies-30-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Stephen%20King%27s%20It%20still%20terrifies%2030%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fwhy-stephen-kings-it-still-terrifies-30-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe80d9f200b535c263977bfb44ee9431ba79c28cd%2F0_167_1290_774%2F1290.jpg>
 Tim Curry in the small-screen adaptation of It. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/Lorimar Television 
Everything becomes about a cycle, and how hard cycles are to break. The town 
itself – it wasn’t the first time that King wrote about a town which was 
haunted by its own past, and it wouldn’t be the last – was trapped in the 
largest, but beyond that, each character was as well. Trapped in cycles of 
feeling useless; of unrequited love; of hate; of pain; of abuse. It’s the final 
one that rings loudest these days: seeing Beverley repeating her own cycles of 
abuse in her adult life is truly devastating.

The novel’s ending – which I won’t spoil here – relies on something that feels 
obvious from page one; that the Losers’ Club are going to have to try to 
remember what it was like to be kids – to be naive and innocent, to have fears 
be something that feels as though they can be overcome – in order to finally 
defeat It. As King wrote, he “sees children as either victims or forces of 
good” – it’s the adults who ruin things in his books. Recapturing that goodness 
is a theme that rings through readings of the novel – and it’s a novel I’ve 
read a fair few times – and perhaps the only theme that really matters.

Ten things I learned about writing from Stephen King
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/30/ten-things-i-learned-about-writing-from-stephen-king>
I first read the book as a teenager, the same age as the Losers’ Club were; 
and now I’m the age they were when It came back to Derry. I can see their 
terrors of growing old, their worries about their failures, about what’s been 
lost to them thanks to the passage of time; and I can see them just as clearly 
as King’s protagonists could – as, I’m sure, King did himself. I’m not scared 
of the same things that scared me when I was a kid; at least, not on the 
surface. But dig deeper, as King did with his Losers’ Club, and those fears are 
absolutely still present.

That’s why, in the 30 years since publication, the public’s obsession with It 
hasn’t really waned. We’re obsessed because we all have fears. We all have 
things that scare us, be that the aforementioned clowns and spiders (and 
really, thanks Tim Curry for ensuring that an entire generation of children who 
like to watch horror movie adaptations of their favourite novels will be 
scarred for life), or things that lurk far deeper in our psyches. This book 
speaks to everybody. It’s King’s scariest novel, and I doubt that will ever 
change.

And there’s a new movie adaption of It due to hit cinemas in 2017, with a new 
cast of kids (including Finn Wolfhard, last seen in the King-tribute Netflix 
show Stranger Things) and a brand new Pennywise, all designed to scare a new 
generation witless. It’s been 30 years since the release of the novel, and 27 
years since Pennywise hit TV screens. It is, as the lore of the book would have 
it, about time he came back.
 