
Walk round many suburbs on a winterâ€™s night and your nose will tell you that 
wood burning is being used for home heating. A recentUK government survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/517572/Summary_results_of_the_domestic_wood_use_survey_.pdf>
 found that 7.5% of UK homes now burn wood. The vast majority use it for 
supplementary heating or decoration. Wood burning is most popular in the 
south-east where it is used by around 16% of households and it is least popular 
in northern England and Scotland where it is used by less than 5%.

We think of wood burning as being natural and therefore less harmful to the 
environment when compared with fossil fuels. However, particle pollution from 
UK wood burning is now estimated to bemore than double diesel exhaust 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/350/bmj.h2757/rr-1>.


All is not pristine in New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/28/pollution-new-zealand-wood-fires-insulation-world-weatherwatch>
Swiss scientists have been investigating 
<https://dx.doi.org/10.1038%2Fsrep27881> what happens to wood smoke once it 
leaves your chimney. They burnt logs in a stove and collected the smoke in a 
chamber. UV lights were used to simulate sunlight and they waited. Slowly the 
particle pollution in the chamber increased, insome cases by up to three times 
<http://www.atmos-chem-phys.net/15/2825/2015/acp-15-2825-2015.pdf>. If this 
laboratory experiment reflects what happens in our cities; then pollution from 
wood burning is even greater than we thought.

Setting aside the machinery used in forestry and deliveries, wood burning 
could be carbon neutral. But carbon dioxide is not the only pollutant that 
affects our climate. Diesel and coal smoke are well known sources of black 
carbon that absorbs heat adding to climate change. The smoke and the extra 
particles that form from wood smoke is brown, whichalso adds to climate warming 
<http://www.atmos-chem-phys.net/16/3413/2016/>.
 