
Death will happen to us all, but it’s not something we like to talk about or 
prepare for. The UK population is now older than it has ever been – by 2039, 
more thanone in 12 of the population 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationprojections/bulletins/nationalpopulationprojections/2015-10-29>
 is projected to be aged 80 or over – and the death rate has risen. There were 
602,786 deaths in the UK during 2015, according to the cumulativeEngland and 
Wales 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths>
,Scotland 
<https://www.nrscotland.gov.uk/statistics-and-data/statistics/statistics-by-theme/vital-events/general-publications/births-deaths-and-other-vital-events-preliminary-annual-figures/2015>
 andNorthern Ireland 
<http://www.nisra.gov.uk/archive/demography/publications/annual_reports/2015/DeathsInfo.pdf>
 figures, up 5.4% from 2014. But some digitally-focused entrepreneurs have 
spotted an opportunity in the rise, and see this traditional industry as ripe 
for disruption.


New challenges

Death in the modern age comes with an entirely new set of issues – how to 
handle our online legacies, such as our tweets, Facebook posts, playlists and 
other virtual creations. It is a question that has occupied Suelin Chen, 
founder and CEO of online end-of-life planning serviceCake 
<https://www.joincake.com/welcome/>. The platform differs from others as it 
also provides a concierge facility to handle posthumous profiles online.

“Most people haven’t thought about what they would want to happen to their 
online accounts after they’ve passed away. We help people understand that there 
might be precious memories or even actual assets in their Dropbox, Gmail, 
Facebook, Instagram accounts, etc,” she says.

Chen says the terms and conditions for each site vary and this can be a 
potential problem for grieving relatives. Also, digital legacy is such a new 
concept, it is often missed by traditional will makers. “[Wills] are not 
typically updated enough to manage how often the digital landscape of our lives 
change. Legacy-building in the digital age is a whole new frontier.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftech-businesses-taboo-subject-death-technology-entrepreneurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0779965ceb057f90fb4bebb0eb484dedb9582ca3%2F328_712_5094_3056%2F5094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20tech%20businesses%20are%20tackling%20society%E2%80%99s%20most%20taboo%20subject&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftech-businesses-taboo-subject-death-technology-entrepreneurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20tech%20businesses%20are%20tackling%20society%E2%80%99s%20most%20taboo%20subject&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftech-businesses-taboo-subject-death-technology-entrepreneurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0779965ceb057f90fb4bebb0eb484dedb9582ca3%2F328_712_5094_3056%2F5094.jpg>
 The Farewill team. CEO Dan Garrett is in the centre. 
Dan Garrett, founder and CEO of London-based startup Farewill 
<https://farewill.com/>, is aiming to make it easier for people to update their 
wills. The business enables people to create a will online for £50 and make 
updates for just £5 a year. Before launching, Garrett spent time interviewing 
funeral directors to gain an insight into their work. He discovered that more 
than half of all people fail to draw up a will and of those who do, most 
documents are old and unreflective of the owner’s final wishes.

Garrett and all of his team have training in writing wills and the business 
has created around 2,000 so far. “There are a lot of costs and problems if you 
die intestate,” he points out. Latest figures estimate the averagecost to an 
estate of dying without a will is £9,700 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/11177605/The-cost-of-dying-with-an-outdated-will-is-9700.html>
 because of unclaimed assets and poor tax planning.

For some, the financial burden of organising a funeral can also be vast. 
Insurance company Sun Life found that theaverage cost of a death in the UK is 
£8,802 
<https://www.sunlife.co.uk/blogs-and-features/how-much-does-a-funeral-cost-in-the-uk-today_/>
 once funeral costs, probate and the send off have been paid for. A 2014 report 
by the University of Bath estimates that100,000 people cannot afford to die 
<http://www.bath.ac.uk/ipr/news/news_0004.html>. 

People are unfamiliar with buying a funeral. They either haven’t done it 
before, or not for a long time
Kim Bird 
Among the business’ investors are Zoopla and Lovefilm founder, Alex 
Chesterman, venture capital company Kindred Capital, and Wonga founder, Errol 
Damelin. Garrett says the nature of his investors is a sign of his own 
ambition. “Alex Chesterman changed the whole real estate market so I was really 
excited to bring him on board – we want to do the same with the death industry. 
The industry is ripe for disruption. I think the fact it hasn’t been is more of 
a reflection of it being a taboo, than of technical difficulty,” he says.

Increasing transparency

Perhaps because of its taboo nature, the death and funeral industry lacks the 
transparency of other sectors. Kim Bird is attempting to alter this with her 
Cardiff-based companyAbout the Funeral <https://www.aboutthefuneral.com/>, 
which was founded in 2012. The business received £250,000 from the investment 
consortium InspireWales, including GoCompare founders Hayley Parsons and Kevin 
Hughes (Hughes is on her board), and aims to bring price comparison services to 
the funeral market. “People are unfamiliar with buying a funeral. They either 
haven’t done it before, or not for a long time.”

Bird, who previously worked in the funeral industry as a bereavement support 
volunteer, says there are calls from both the public and parliamentarians 
(includingFrank Field MP, chair of the work and pensions select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/30/grieving-low-income-families-pushed-into-funeral-poverty-say-mps>
) for greater transparency in the industry. She points toresearch from YouGov 
<http://www.nafd.org.uk/news/funerals-matter/> suggesting 85% of people want 
funeral prices published online. “The main challenges have been the nature of 
the market. It is a traditional industry – changing it is a big challenge,” she 
says.

It is early days for her company, which has so far signed up 100 funeral 
directors to its subscription service, but Bird believes now she has the 
funding and an experienced board, she is well placed to make a difference. 
“These days, the internet is where most people go for information and About the 
Funeral is just an extension of that. Many industries have been disrupted in 
this way – the insurance industry has been through it and now price comparison 
is the norm for that sector.”

Derrick Grant, who recently launched his funeral director’s network Willow 
<http://thinkwillow.com/>, says he was shocked by the sheer cost of funerals 
and felt that grieving families were all too often getting a raw deal. “Having 
watched a friend struggle to pay for his wife’s funeral, I wanted to understand 
why it was so expensive. After doing research, it became obvious that a lot of 
the cost is simply because we don’t have the time or access to question the 
traditional funeral process,” he says.

Grant launched his business in December 2016 with a handful of independent 
funeral directors connected to his site. Users fill in a simple questionnaire 
and are directed to the provider who most closely matches their needs. The 
business makes money through the sale of funeral products such as coffins, 
flowers and celebrant services. Grant says people often pay large sums for 
these and it is easy to undercut his competition. He believes he is also making 
the process easier.


“There are a lot of questions to answer at a time when most people aren’t 
concerned with paperwork and chasing phone calls,” Grant says. “Booking a 
cremation can take several phone calls to agree a time and date. Digitising 
processes so the public and funeral directors are on equal footing and can make 
decisions faster will make huge differences in the industry. Talking about 
death is becoming easier, but it’s still difficult to understand what to do 
when you lose someone.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 