
With some of the largest remaining tracts of true wilderness in Europe, 
Scandinavia and Iceland offer a multitude of adventure opportunities and, if 
you head off the beaten track, they can work out a lot cheaper than you might 
expect. The centuries-old tradition ofallemansrätten (every man’s right) means 
people can roam and wild camp just about anywhere so long as they do not 
disturb or destroy the environment. Foraging is also permitted, and provides a 
seasonal abundance of delicious berries, mushrooms and fish. Travelling by 
train, bike or on foot takes you into these magnificent landscapes.

Sweden: the Inlandsbanan slow train

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d998542a3979c855e5066f642a65f76ec957a6%2F0_1513_8776_5266%2F8776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d998542a3979c855e5066f642a65f76ec957a6%2F0_1513_8776_5266%2F8776.jpg>
 The Inlandsbanan railway heads north to the Arctic Circle 
Completed in 1937, the Inlandsbanan railway snakes for 800 miles up through 
the rugged and forested heartland of Sweden from the southern county of Dalarna 
to Swedish Lapland, inside the Arctic Circle. The line is divided into two 
sections – north and south of Östersund – and just one train travels in each 
direction along each section each day. This means that although the journey can 
be done in two days, you can also easily make it last a week or more. Built to 
transport timber, the line fell into disuse as roads improved and is now 
operated as a summer passenger service (mid-June to the end of August, so worth 
planning a trip for next summer). The landscape changes from forest and lakes 
in the south to tundra and huge wild rivers in the north. The timetable varies 
each year, and the train stops frequently at trackside restaurants and platform 
food stalls for delicacies such as smoked trout from the Vojmån river, or warm 
cinnamon buns. The driver will often stop for interesting wildlife, too – 
moose, reindeer, and maybe even a bear or lynx. Those who want to learn more 
about the wildlife can arrange a trip with guide Marcus Eldh, founder ofWild 
Sweden <http://www.wildsweden.com/>. The banks of the Ljusnan river in Röjan 
are the place to look for the protected black vanilla-orchid – the provincial 
flower of Jämtland. On a hot day the train might stop so everyone can swim in a 
remote, crystal clear lake.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f89bd533ec34d356cb6ed90b03e7ab9f9e2deb9%2F0_217_6012_3608%2F6012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f89bd533ec34d356cb6ed90b03e7ab9f9e2deb9%2F0_217_6012_3608%2F6012.jpg>
 A lake in the southern Swedish county of Dalarna, where the journey begins 
Some of the stops are big, old wooden station buildings, while others are 
simply a sign and some steps in the middle of the forest. With over 65 stops, 
it’s easy to hop on and off and wild camp, or stay at one of the many small 
hotels and guesthouses along the route (seeinlandsbanan.se 
<http://inlandsbanan.se/en/travel/eat-do-stay#.V7LgOTYrKrM> for details). My 
favourite stops for wild camping are by the lake at Kvarnsjö and at the top of 
the small mountain at Kåbdalis with its far-reaching views.
• An Inlandsbanan card 
<http://inlandsbanan.se/en/travel/inlandsbanan-card#.V7LhTDYrKrM>, costing SEK 
1,995 (£183, seat reservation £5 per journey) allows unlimited travel for 14 
days. The line starts at Mora station about three hours by train from 
Stockholm’s Arlanda airport. From Gällivare, the northern terminus, there’s a
sleeper train <https://www.sj.se/en/home.html#/> on the main east coast line to 
Stockholm. Other ways of getting back include flights from Kiruna (norwegian.com
 <http://www.norwegian.com/> or sas.se <https://www.sas.se/en/>) to Stockholm 
or, highly recommended, a Hurtigruten ferry past the Norwegian fjords to 
Bergen. Hurtigruten and Inlandsbanan offer a joint ticket

Denmark: Bornholm by bike
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F598a791dc3d45bf9a6e248c0c467c38105289e91%2F0_295_3312_2372%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F598a791dc3d45bf9a6e248c0c467c38105289e91%2F0_295_3312_2372%2F3312.jpg>
 White sandy beach on Dueodde, the most southerly point of Bornholm. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The idyllic Danish island of Bornholm lies in the Baltic off southern Sweden, 
reached by train from Copenhagen and ferry from Ystad, Sweden. Its 158km 
network of roads, lanes, and tracks is perfect for exploring on a hired bicycle 
(trybornholms-cykeludlejning.dk <http://www.bornholms-cykeludlejning.dk/>, from 
DK75/£9 a day). For an island of just 588 sq km the variety of landscapes are 
breathtaking. At the northern tip of the island, known as the Hammer, the 
remains of a medieval castle sit above sheer granite cliffs. The most southerly 
point, Dueodde, has a beautiful beach with white sand so fine it was once used 
for hourglasses. As it’s an island, nowhere is very far from the sea for a 
cooling dip on a hot day.

In the wooded Døndalen valley in the north of the island, Denmark’s longest 
waterfall tumbles 20 metres into the valley. To the south, 12km-long Ekkodalen 
was originally called Kodalen (cow valley) but at some point,ek was added and 
it became Echo Valley. It’s fun trying to find the best spot to send an echo 
(more information atekkodalshuset.dk <http://www.ekkodalshuset.dk/>). This is 
also dinosaur country. In 2000 a geology student found a tooth from a 
100-million-year-old dromaeosaur. TheNatur Bornholm 
<http://www.naturbornholm.dk/top/forside.aspx> centre in Aakirkeby displays 
some of the best fossils discovered on the island and has tips on the best 
places to go hunting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0348e6cdd02695bc85c2a17662487bbd24cb8333%2F0_445_6669_4001%2F6669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0348e6cdd02695bc85c2a17662487bbd24cb8333%2F0_445_6669_4001%2F6669.jpg>
 Smoked herring on rye bread, known as ‘sunshine over Gudhjem’ for the raw egg 
yolk it is topped with. Photograph: Alamy 
The island is also well-known for food. Hasle Røgeri <http://hasleroegeri.dk/> 
smokery on the west coast is the place to try smoked herring fillet on rye 
bread – known as “sunshine over Gudhjem” for the raw egg yolk it is topped 
with. For new Nordic cuisine,Kadeau <http://www.kadeau.dk/>in the south-west 
prepares dishes from locally sourced and foraged fish, fruit, herbs and 
berries, using traditional smoking and pickling techniques.

Accommodation options include wild camping on a beach, the Hullehavn 
<http://www.hullehavn.dk/> woodland campsite on the east coast (from £9pppn, ), 
and theGreen Solution House eco-hotel 
<http://www.greensolutionhouse.dk/?lang=en> near the capital, Rønne (doubles 
from £152 B&B), which was built from recycled or biodegradable materials. Its 
waste water is cleaned using algae which is the converted to gas to generate 
electricity.
• Fly to Copenhagen and take a train (oresundstag.se <http://oresundstag.se/en>
) over the Øresund Bridge to Ystad. The ferry to Rønne takes 1 hour 20 mins (see
faergen.com <http://www.faergen.com/routes/bornholmerfaergen.aspx>)

Norway: hike the Narvik mountains and fjords

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0cdc73b87f1566546b8b698a11d4614d5c0378%2F0_0_5470_3282%2F5470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e0cdc73b87f1566546b8b698a11d4614d5c0378%2F0_0_5470_3282%2F5470.jpg>
 Ofotfjord, the port town of Narvik, is the starting point for exploring this 
stunning wild coast Photograph: handout 
In the stunning Ofotfjord, the port town of Narvik is the springboard for 
hiking, swimming and exploring a stunning section of Norway’s wild coast. The 
summer midnight sun, combined with the Gulf Stream and the shelter offered by 
the mountains results in a relatively mild climate for such a northerly 
location - and help make this a fantastic area for exploring.

The weather is often still good into mid-September, when the autumn colours 
appear to bring the mountains to life and the northern lights start to light up 
the clear night skies. Stay in Narvik and explore the coast and up into the 
mountains, or maybe do the opposite and venture into town only for supplies.

Beautiful Skjomenfjord runs south off Ofotfjorden and is framed by steep 
mountains and peaks. The clear water is perfect for a bracing swim. On its 
western side, in the shadow of Reintind there are over 80 rock carvings, 
believed to date from around 5000BC. Although there is no obvious path, the 
carvings are worth searching out and are remarkably distinct. Located along the 
water’s edge this is not as difficult as it may sound.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09510d03ecb0f9686569365ef87ca00882864f11%2F229_0_1691_1015%2F1691.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09510d03ecb0f9686569365ef87ca00882864f11%2F229_0_1691_1015%2F1691.jpg>
 Traditional kåta tents near Narvik 
Another great hike is the Rallarvegen, a trail built by navvies working on the 
railway line built to carry iron ore across the mountains to Kiruna in Sweden. 
A particularly spectacular section follows a precipitous path between mountain 
and fjord for 15km from Katterat on the Swedish border down to the head of the 
Rombaksfjord. It’s not unusual to find the remains of parachute containers 
dropped by the Germans during the heavy fighting in the second world war. 
There’s a boat and bus along the fjord back to Narvik from here (see
visitnarvik.com <http://www.visitnarvik.com/Home> for details). Look out for 
white-tailed fish-eagles and otters and the impressive wreck of the German 
destroyer Georg Thiele, which was scuttled in the fjord in 1940.

For something more technical, Stetind, 80km south-east, is Norway’s national 
mountain, a steep, smooth granite peak 1,400 metres high. Reaching the summit 
requires specialist equipment and a guide, but it’s possible to hike as far as 
the approach (seevisitstetind.com <http://visitstetind.com/en/> for routes and 
local guides). The starting point for the hike is about an hour’s drive along 
the fjord from Narvik.

Long before mines and railways arrived, the nomadic Sami people would spend 
the summer in settlements along this coast in this area before heading back to 
Sweden for the winter. Some Sami families now welcome guests for a day tending 
reindeer or learning birch bark weaving (from £62pp), or a stay in a traditional
kåta tent (njalasoukaadventures.no <http://njalasoukaadventures.no/>). Visit 
Narvik <http://www.visitnarvik.com/no/nyheter> (as above) is great for finding 
budget accommodation ranging from eco-hotels, such as turf-roofedFjellkysten 
eco-lodge <http://www.fjellkysten.com/> (doubles from £94 room only, ), to 
traditional Sami camps such as Pippira Siida 
<http://pippirasiida.blogspot.co.uk/> (cabin for two from £33, ). Wild camping 
is of course also very practical in the mountains.
• Norwegian  <http://www.norwegian.com/uk/>flies to Narvik from Oslo from £57 
one way

Iceland: Route 1 by bus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27f9f46d9b12abc569c3a03944475672d143b0db%2F0_299_4487_2692%2F4487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27f9f46d9b12abc569c3a03944475672d143b0db%2F0_299_4487_2692%2F4487.jpg>
 There are hot springs, including naturally fed tubs, along Route 1 
One bus ticket allows visitors to see as much of Iceland as they can for as 
long as they want between mid-June and mid-September on the Route 1 ring road. 
The Circle Passport ticket allows easy access to famous natural wonders either 
beside, or a short walk from, a bus stop. Hot springs along the route range 
from naturally fed tubs such as the ones by the east coast village of 
Djúpivogur to spectacular subterranean Stóragjá near Lake Mývatn. A few miles 
away,Mývatn Mature Baths <http://www.myvatnnaturebaths.is/en/prices-hour> even 
does massages as well.

The bus goes through ochre-coloured, steamy volcanic regions and over remote 
plateaus of black volcanic sand. The horizon is dominated by the peaks of the 
highlands, intermittently illuminated by sunlight reflecting off the numerous 
glaciers. Jökulsárlón lagoon, on the south coast, may be bathed in a blue glow 
from floating icebergs. Calved from the Breiðamerkurjökull glacier, this 
ancient ice makes its way out to sea, but when large pieces wash back up on to 
the black volcanic sand, they sparkle like cut diamonds in the sunlight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573fbd73fec38ed5f971a8df58555318b6ed6aef%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Scandinavia%3A%20adventure%20without%20breaking%20the%20bank&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fscandanavia-adventure-holidays-norway-sweden-denmark-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573fbd73fec38ed5f971a8df58555318b6ed6aef%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
 Skógafoss waterfall, south-east of Reykjavik, is just off Route 1 
Mighty, glacial rivers have carved deep canyons, punctuated by immense and 
spectacular waterfalls. Of the many on the route, the 30-metre-wide 
horseshoe-shaped Goðafoss (Waterfall of the Gods), on the Skjálfandafljót 
River, is likely to make the greatest impression in a landscape that, time and 
again, leaves visitors feeling both awed and inspired.

In summer, the Hotel Edda <http://www.hoteledda.is/en> chain uses rural 
boarding schools all along the route as budget hotel and hostel style 
accommodation. Many small towns and villages have excellent local restaurants 
such asRandulff’s Sea House <http://www.mjoeyri.is/en/veitingar.html> in 
Eskifjorður, which serves seafood in a 19th-century fisherman’s lodge that also 
houses an interesting museum.GoDo Iceland <https://godoiceland.com/activities> 
is a good resource for activities, from £60pp. It’s worth acquiring a book of 
Icelandic sagas: they’re a great to read while soaking in the earth-warmed hot 
waters, looking over a landscape crafted by fire and ice over thousands of 
years.

• A Circle Passport 
<https://www.re.is/iceland-on-your-own/passports/circle-passport> costs about 
£277 online or from the central bus station in Reykjavik. The ticket is valid 
between 13 June and 7 September. There is at least one departure a day and 
travellers can hop on and off along the route, going either clockwise or 
anti-clockwise, but not double back

Ben Love is the author of Wild Guide Scandinavia which lists 500 affordable 
wild adventures (£16.99, also available as an app, 25% off and free p&p with 
code ‘TheGuardian’ atwildthingspublishing.com 
<http://www.wildthingspublishing.com/product/wild-guide-to-scandinavia-book-norway-iceland-sweden-denmark/>
)
 