
Wilfried Zaha has resisted Gareth Southgate’s attempts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/gareth-southgate-wilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast>
 to persuade him to pledge his future to England and will link up with Ivory 
Coast next week before the Africa Cup of Nations. The Crystal Palace winger 
will join Michel Dussuyer’s squad immediately after the home game against 
Swansea City next Tuesday.

Palace have received special dispensation to select their youth-team graduate 
for that fixture despite Ivory Coast’s players being due to convene in Abu 
Dhabi on Monday for a 10-day, pre-tournament training camp. The tournament in 
Gabon runs for three weeks from 14 January and the Ivorians open their Group C 
campaign against Togo on 16 January, meaning Zaha, who made two substitute 
appearances forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> in 
friendly fixtures dating from Roy Hodgson’s spell in charge, could be away 
until early February.

That would rule Zaha out of league games against West Ham, Everton, 
Bournemouth and Sunderland, together with the early stages of Palace’s FA Cup 
campaign.

The new Palace manager, Sam Allardyce, has already conceded his absence would 
represent “a massive blow” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/sam-allardyce-wilfried-zaha-cyrstal-palace-africa-cup>
 having discovered for sure only this week that the 24-year-old was intent on 
representing the country of his birth.

Southgate, who coached the winger at under-21s level, had held talks with Zaha 
but appears to have failed to persuade him to stick with England.

The player has grown disillusioned with a lack of opportunities with England, 
despite his impressive form in the Premier League over the last 18 months. The 
youngster left Abidjan with his family at the age of four to move to south 
London.

Zaha’s decision to go to Gabon could also frustrate Tottenham Hotspur’s 
anticipated pursuit of the player next month. Spurs had derisory bids for Zaha 
dismissed in the summer – the first amounted to little more than £12m – and 
were expected to return with an improved offer in the region of £25m in 
January, though the fact Zaha could be absent for the entire month may wreck 
the possibility of a move.

Palace’s hierarchy are intent on resisting offers for a player who has been a 
rare bright spark over a difficult Premier League campaign to date.

The forward, Palace’s most consistent performer to date this season, was one 
of six England players included in Dussuyer’s provisional 24-man squad. They 
include theManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> defender Eric Bailly, 
who has struggled of late with knee problems, and Stoke’s striker, Wilfried 
Bony, who is on loan from Manchester City. The under-used Bournemouth winger 
Max Gradel, Sunderland’s centre-half Lamine Koné and the Aston Villa forward, 
Jonathan Kodjia, are also included.

Ivory Coast squad

Goalkeepers Sylvain Gbohuo (TP Mazembe), Badra Sangare (AS Tanda), Mande 
Sayouba (Stabaek)

Defenders: Serge Aurier (PSG), Mamadou Bagayoko (St Trond VV), Eric Bailly 
(Manchester United), Simon Deli (Slavia Prague), Ousmane Viera Diarrassouba 
(Adanaspor), Wilfried Kanon (ADO La Haye), Lamine Koné (Sunderland), Adama 
Traoré (FC Bâle)

Midfielders Victorien Angban (Grenada), Cheik Doukoure (FC Metz), Franck 
Kessié (Atalanta), Yao Serge N’guessan (AS Nancy), Geoffroy Serey Die (FC 
Bâle), Jean Michaël Seri (OGC Nice)

Forwards Wilfried Bony (Stoke City), Max Gradel (Bournemouth), Salomon Kalou 
(Hertha Berlin), Jonathan Kodjia (Aston Villa), Nicolas Pépé (Angers), Giovanni 
Sio (Stade Renne),Wilfried Zaha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wilfried-zaha> (Crystal Palace)
 