
In Nasa language it’s called a pivot. It’s a policy change, a U-turn or a 
departure from a goal set by the previous US president. Until the election of
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, space insiders 
and even Nasa itself had a pretty good idea what, under a Hillary Clinton 
presidency, that pivot was going to be. It wasn’t going to be popular but it 
was necessary.

People had been whispering it for more than a year. Even as the Nasa PR 
machine talked endlessly about “the journey to Mars”, those in the know 
understood that it was little more than a pipe dream. Following the election, a 
“transition team” would be sent to take stock at Nasa, and the agency’s goals 
would gradually pivot away fromMars <https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars> 
and to the moon.

Returning astronauts to the moon with the cooperation of other space agencies 
around the world was achievable and there was a definite appetite for it. The
European Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency> and Russia were 
both interested in taking part and the International Space Station was seen as 
the blueprint for the kind of multinational cooperation that could make it 
happen. In essence, it was what both Hilary Clinton’s Democrats and Washington 
Republicans were looking to make happen.

Nasa has no idea what the budget is going to be, whether the journey to Mars 
is going to be cancelled

“The space policies were not very different. People would joke that you could 
take an editorial by a Republican space person, change a couple of words here 
and there and then put Clinton’s name on it. We were all assuming that Clinton 
would win. I knew who the people were that would show up at Nasa the next day 
to begin the transition process,” says Keith Cowing, a former Nasa employee who 
now editsNasawatch.com <http://nasawatch.com/>.

Then, of course, Trump won. At first it seemed no big deal, but then 
surprising events started to unfold. A day or two after the election, none of 
the expected Republican advisers were named as part of the Trump transition 
team for space. “They were either thrown off because they were lobbyists or had 
decided that they did not want to be involved,” says Cowing, who has been 
reporting onNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> from Washington DC 
for 20 years. “Suddenly it went from what seemed to be clarity to complete 
mystery.”

This week, however, some clarity finally emerged. Christopher Shank, who held 
senior policy jobs at Nasa and sat on Congress’s House Science Committee, will 
lead the transition team. One of the first things he is going to have to look 
at is the rocket that Nasa are building to supposedly take astronauts to Mars:
the Space Launch System (SLS) 
<https://www.nasa.gov/exploration/systems/sls/index.html>.

SLS is controversial because it is so expensive. It is part of a 
multi-billion-dollar-per-year programme that will only fly four times between 
2018 and 2026. In many ways it is Nasa’s flagship programme, but it is sucking 
a huge amount of money out of the agency’s budget on the what-if scenario of 
human Mars missions.

It is also looking egregiously expensive when compared with the progress being 
made at private companies, such as Elon Musk’s SpaceX, which is developing a 
large rocket of its own, theFalcon Heavy <http://www.spacex.com/falcon-heavy>.

Lori Garver <https://www.nasa.gov/about/highlights/garver_bio.html>, who was 
part of Barack Obama’s transition team in 2008 and went on to become Nasa 
deputy administrator from 2009 to 2013, says that the single best thing the 
Trump administration can do for Nasa is cancel SLS.

“Nasa should invest more in the technologies that are too advanced for the 
private sector, and the technologies that are of real benefit to society,” says 
Garver. “There is too much of a disconnect from the benefits to the people who 
have funded the organisation.”

She says that the agency has become insular. “Astronauts want to go to Mars or 
the moon or wherever. But why do they want to go there? We went to the moon in 
the 1960s to beat the Russians and advance technology in the cold war and be 
world leaders. But what’s our reason now?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F706acf1411adc806bb386daf56f8be89f4d61a29%2F0_17_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Trump%20go%C2%A0to%20Mars%3F%20Nasa%E2%80%99s%20nervous%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Trump%20go%C2%A0to%20Mars%3F%20Nasa%E2%80%99s%20nervous%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F706acf1411adc806bb386daf56f8be89f4d61a29%2F0_17_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Elon Musk, CEO of SpaceX, announcing the company’s Falcon Heavy rocket. 
Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/Getty Images 
Beating the Chinese perhaps? They have been making huge advances in space and 
it is clear that landing their own astronauts on the moon is on the horizon.

Garver is dismissive of that kind of thinking: “Playing out a back-to-the‑moon 
scenario with China is tough because we’ve already been. Six times. Do we 
really want to put in a bunch of resources to say we went a seventh time?”

Yet the prospect of reviving the glory days of the Apollo moon landings plays 
nicely into the Trump rhetoric of making America great again.

“My biggest concern with Trump is that he keeps saying our space programme is 
worthy of a third-world nation. What is he even talking about? We have the best 
space programme on the planet. It is the envy of the world. I think his 
transition team is going to find that Nasa is in good shape, and just a few 
corrections could make it even better,” says Garver.

A clear concern is that Trump intends to slash the climate change budget. The 
fear comes primarily froman op-ed published on spacenews.com 
<http://spacenews.com/trumps-space-policy-reaches-for-mars-and-the-stars/> on 
19 October written by Robert Walker and Peter Navarro, who at the time were 
senior advisers to the Trump campaign.

They wrote: “Nasa’s core missions must be exploration and science – and 
inspirational! These are the fundamental underpinnings of a Trump civilian 
space programme. Nasa should be focused primarily on deep-space activities 
rather than Earth-centric work that is better handled by other agencies.”

Trump is well known as a climate-change denier. He infamously tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en-gb> that 
global warming was a conspiracy theory of the Chinese to damage US 
manufacturing. This has panicked some.Speaking to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
, Kevin Trenberth, senior scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric 
Research, said that eliminating Earth science at Nasa “Could put us back into 
the ‘dark ages’ of almost the pre-satellite era.” He added, “Space research is 
a luxury, Earth observations are essential.”

Walker has suggested that some Earth observation missions could be placed 
under the jurisdiction of other US agencies such as the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (Noaa). According to Garver though, Noaa simply does 
not have the capability to take over developing these hi-tech missions. She 
says that those saying they do are simply uninformed, but they have the ear of 
the president.

“I think you could have a fairly rash decision to cut Nasa’s budget for this, 
to not increase Noaa’s and so lose the capability to advance the technology 
necessary to do this,” says Garver.

“Donald Trump has pledged to ‘drain the swamp’ in his first 100 days. But Nasa 
has no idea whether they are part of this 100 days or not. They do not know 
what the budget is going to be, whether Earth science is being carved out of 
Nasa or the journey to Mars is being cancelled. They are just sitting there 
waiting to be told, and this may go on for months,” says Cowing.

Another discovery of water in space – how boring. We must search for alien 
life | Stuart Clark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/discovery-water-jupiter-space-alien-life-europa>
The general lack of clarity currently emanating from the Trump camp is not 
helping anyone, and that includes Nasa’s international partners. With the worst 
timing possible, the EuropeanSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> 
Agency held a long-scheduled ministerial meeting this week to discuss its space 
programme for the coming years. But not knowing what Nasa’s priorities are 
makes life very difficult.

“The global spaceflight community, rightly or wrongly, does look to the United 
States for leadership in civilian space activity,” says David Baker, the editor 
ofSpaceflight magazine. As an engineer, Baker worked for Nasa on the Apollo 
programme.

ESA is currently in the plum role of building a large part of the spacecraft 
for Nasa’s new human capsule, known asOrion 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Human_Spaceflight/Orion>. This makes ESA a 
crucial partner in any return to the moon or eventual mission to Mars. Yet 
stories abound of how American manufacturers are keen to see those lucrative 
contracts returned to US soil. And Donald Trump may have a very sympathetic ear.

“It’s not just a wall around Mexico that Trump is thinking about, it’s a wall 
around the continental United States,” says Baker.

To protect itself from the current vagaries of Nasa, Baker thinks ESA should 
look eastwards: “I’m a great believer that ESA should be moving towards Russia, 
and I’m also a great believer that we should be moving much closer to China. 
With those associations, I don’t think there is necessarily going to be the 
same driven urgency to get with Nasa to do the big bold things that Europe 
wants to do.”

We all know that the Trump presidency is going to be felt around the planet. 
Now it seems that the repercussions will also extend into space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5857632d3199ae2f53ad52af8abb1b60bec11eaf%2F0_74_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Trump%20go%C2%A0to%20Mars%3F%20Nasa%E2%80%99s%20nervous%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Trump%20go%C2%A0to%20Mars%3F%20Nasa%E2%80%99s%20nervous%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwill-trump-go-to-mars-nasa-budget-transition-space-launch-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5857632d3199ae2f53ad52af8abb1b60bec11eaf%2F0_74_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
 An image of early melting on the Greeland ice sheet taken by Nasa’s Earth 
Observing-1 satellite on 15 June 2016. Photograph: ALI/Earth Observing-1/NASA 
Blast off: five calls Trump has to make

The Space Launch System
This enormously expensive, gigantic rocket is eating up money. Trump could see 
it as a flagship of American national power, or cancel it and turn to the 
private companies such as Elon Musk’s SpaceX, who are developing large rockets 
of their own.

The journey to Mars
A human trip to Mars is not going to happen within a Trump presidency, but the 
decisions he makes could affect Nasa for decades. Trump could cancel the 
programme outright or use it as a rallying cry for making America great again. 
If he does the latter, he is going to have to find some serious cash to pump 
into it.

Earth observation
There seems no doubt that cuts are coming here. The only question is how much 
of the programme survives. Earth observation satellites could be removed 
completely from the Nasa budget.

Human moon missions
Trump will probably press for returning astronauts to the moon but only as a 
stepping stone to Mars. The level of cooperation with Russia and Europe to 
achieve this, however, may be lower than those partners would like.

China
The wildcard. Trump could either invite them on board the International Space 
Station as partners, figuring that there are commercial benefits, or he could 
paint them as rivals to be beaten and thus spur grandstanding Nasa projects 
like a return to the moon or mission to Mars.SC
 