
Established 125 years before Shakespeare penned Romeo and Juliet, the Banca 
Monte dei Paschi di Siena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
 was founded in 1472 to help finance the city state of Siena, as well as its 
artistic renaissance. For more than 500 years the world’s oldest bank has 
operated successfully, through wars, revolutions and other political upheavals. 
In the 1990s it was Europe’s most profitable bank.

Quiet crisis: why battle to prop up Italy's banks is vital to EU stability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
How things change. This week the European Central Bank agreed the financial 
details of (another) bailout package for the banca, which was previously 
rescued in 2013. Its financial prospects, along with those of the Italian 
banking system, appear to be deteriorating. One of the main credit rating 
agencies just put the country on negative outlook – a warning of worsening 
economic prospects.

Italian banks have amassed £290bn in bad loans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
– around 18% of all loans in the country and one third of bad loans in the euro 
area. More than 75% of these are loans to companies. Banks cannot write these 
off, as it would render many institutions insolvent – they do not have 
sufficient capital to clean up their balance sheets.

Regulators, chiefly the Banca d’Italia, are aware of the situation, but are 
faced with cumbersome corporate restructuring and insolvency procedures, as 
well as long judicial processes and tax rules that discourage rapid write-offs. 
Critics point the finger at regulators they say have been too slow to act, and 
to “evergreening” – the process by which bad loans are rolled over in the hope 
they will eventually be repaid.

So the country has a problem. Italian economic growth has barely moved over 
three years and is likely to remain the slowest inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. GDP per capita – an indicator 
of individual prosperity – has fallen significantly and the north-south divide 
seems to be growing. This again is reflected in the banking system. Southern 
banks typically have more than 20% of bad loans on their books. Hardly any 
banks are making returns greater than 6% to 7%.

Until reforms are pushed through, the prospects of Italy emulating the bad 
experiences of Japan in the 2000s increase. To recall, Japan had abanking 
collapse in 1998-1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/30/japan.japan>, following years 
during which the authorities and banks knew there was a problem but, for 
various reasons, were slow to act.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fitaly-failing-banks-new-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66da18b63c0c9f526f652fcf3ac3f836ed5dfa53%2F0_58_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20failing%20banks%20trigger%20financial%20collapse%20across%20Europe%3F%20%20%7C%20Philip%20Molyneux&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fitaly-failing-banks-new-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20failing%20banks%20trigger%20financial%20collapse%20across%20Europe%3F%20%20%7C%20Philip%20Molyneux&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fitaly-failing-banks-new-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66da18b63c0c9f526f652fcf3ac3f836ed5dfa53%2F0_58_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Japanese authorities’ failure to act was partly to blame for a decade of 
economic stagnation. Photograph: Toru Hanai/Reuters 
The Japanese crash resulted in major restructuring, including bank mergers and 
capital injections. Poorly performing banks were shut or absorbed. Various 
“bad” banks were set up by the state to take the bad loans away from banks and 
enable them to clean their balance sheets.

In Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> these actions occurred 
through 2000-02. The upheaval had a serious, negative impact on the economy. 
Growth collapsed, interest rates fell to near zero, and the government and 
monetary authorities engaged in unorthodox policies to boost the economy – 
namely quantitative easing – where the central bank created new money to buy 
back bank assets.

The outcome was that Japan’s banking system hardly grew in the following 
decade, nor did its economy. The longer it takes the authorities to act inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, the greater the likelihood that 
something similar to the Japanese disaster could play itself out.

In Italy’s case, however, there will be one crucial difference: while Japan’s 
experience was wholly domestic, an Italian banking collapse would likely havea 
strong contagious effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
, spreading to other European countries with serious bad loan problems, such as 
Austria, Greece, Spain and Portugal. UK banks are less vulnerable as they have 
already reduced their exposure in Italy and have relatively low bad loans.

There are moves to improve the Italian insolvency system and these changes 
need to be hurried up. There are also plans to incentivise the sale of bank bad 
loans through investment vehicles and other initiatives. These reforms will 
yield benefits over time, but the speed of implementation is critical. Banks 
need stronger incentives to clean up their balance sheets, while unviable banks 
should be removed from the system. Industry restructuring should be forced and 
corporate governance shaken up.

None of this will be easy, but if action is not taken, Italy could become the 
new Japan.
 