
Skirmishes between classical music lovers over a yearned-for new London 
concert hall, intended to welcome conductorSimon Rattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle> back to our shores, have grown 
alarmingly ferocious this year. Should it be a sleek, City-funded adjunct to 
the Barbican or a new Queen’s Hall, perched dramatically on the edge of the 
Thames? Accusations of empire-building or, even worse, of a failure to 
appreciate acoustic science have beentraded with increasing passion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/03/new-london-concert-hall-museum-london-blackfriars-simon-rattle>
.

Suddenly, it all looks like wasted energy. The £5.5m promised by George Osborne
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/long-term-economic-plan-for-london-announced-by-chancellor-and-mayor-of-london>
 vanished,it has just been confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/04/government-pulls-funding-for-world-class-london-concert-hall>
, when the former chancellor’s grip was wrenched off the exchequer in May. And, 
as Walsall’s New Art Gallery and Inverleith House in Edinburghhave recently 
joined those museums and libraries also fighting for survival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/23/art-galleries-closure-perfect-storm-stupidity-walsall-edinburgh>
 in a tough funding environment, it is harder than ever to make a case for 
funding another place in which to listen to classical music in London.

The only hope for those who believe, as Rattle indicated 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-31431555>, that the capital suffers from the lack 
of a suitable, state of the art venue is that one or more rich philanthropists 
will now step forward.

Government pulls its funding for London concert hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/04/government-pulls-funding-for-world-class-london-concert-hall>
But Britain does not have a big habit of this sort of giving. The creative 
sector’s reliance on Arts Council grants and local authority funding has let 
the best-heeled fans of ballet, art and music enjoy these pleasures with a lot 
less tugging on their silky sleeves than they would have felt in America, where 
a surname chiselled on the wall of the new wing of an art gallery offers an 
essential bit of social cachet.

Will we ever source a glittering new stream of arts donors to tap? 
Understandably, health, education and now climate change tend to jump to the 
head of the queue for help. And anyway, arts institutions have to tread 
carefully. How many other rich backers would be happy to fund an opera with the 
kind of alarming rape scene that upset someGuillaume Tell audiences at the 
Royal Opera House in June 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/30/william-tell-nudity-and-scene-greeted-with-boos-at-royal-opera-house>
? Corporate sponsors often have broader shoulders and are less thin on the 
ground, but rarely come problem-free. Last year, the Royal Festival Hall shook 
off the perceived dirt of oil company money when it dropped Shell as backer of 
its international piano series.

It is clearly also tricky for a highbrow art form to present itself as 
relevant to everyone when it has to court and then accept money from 
special-interest groups. This is a real obstacle, despite the fact donations 
from the wealthy, like the original sugar baron Tate, can end up genuinely 
providing art for the masses.

There was a philanthropic tradition in the arts in the past, of course. Among 
the old greats is the north-east’s William Armstrong, the engineer who lived 
through most of the 19th century and set up the Great North Museum. A little 
after him came the Welsh Davies sisters, Gwendoline and Margaret, who founded 
one of the country’s first music festivals,Gregynog 
<http://gregynogfestival.org/>.

New London concert hall ‘too expensive and in wrong place’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/03/new-london-concert-hall-museum-london-blackfriars-simon-rattle>
In the 1990s, Dame Vivien Duffield, who inherited £45m from her father, 
property developer Charles Clore, famously raised half the funds for the £214m 
rebuilding of theRoyal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house>. The Paul Hamlyn 
Foundation funds youth workshops at the National Theatre, while the dealer
Anthony d’Offay offered 725 artworks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/mar/02/artnews.anthonydoffay> at 
a knock-down price to the national galleries of Scotland and the Tate.

Last month, a new award for emerging philanthropists, the Achates prize 
<http://www.achates.org.uk>, attempted to give the charitable sector a large 
nudge in the right direction. Yet even if a new generation of individual 
philanthropists does come forward, is a London concert hall a worthy project? 
Some musicians, such as cellist and head of the Birmingham Conservatoire,Julian 
Lloyd Webber, argue that the current Royal Festival Hall can work well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/09/julian-lloyd-webber-royal-festival-hall-acoustics-new-concert-hall-london>
, while others, such as theObserver’s Fiona Maddocks, sing the praises of rival 
venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/25/simon-rattle-lso-new-london-concert-hall-row>
 in Birmingham, Newcastle and Manchester.

There is some evidence that even Rattle does not care that much. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/03/simon-rattle-says-he-was-not-lured-to-the-lso-by-a-new-concert-hall>
 His decision to leave the renowned Berlin Philharmonic to take up the baton at 
the London Symphony Orchestra next year, the great man has now clarified, was 
never dependent on the capital scrambling to build him a better venue.

Some hope, however, dawns on the horizon. With the Tate’s Nicholas Serota soon 
to place his calm, controlling hand on the Arts Council’s tiller, London stands 
a fair chance of holding up its cultural head in Europe. The right course to 
steer, surely, is one that promotes the quality of British culture and makes 
sponsorship seem a true privilege.
 