
The new president of Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>, Pedro 
Pablo Kuczynski, may be the only leader currently in office to have this 
unusual distinction: founding an NGO committed to providing sustainable water 
access for those who need it most.

Peru harnesses ancient canal system to tackle Lima water shortage | Dan Collyns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/22/peru-harnesses-ancient-canal-system-to-tackle-lima-water-shortage>
President Kuczynski, commonly known as PPK, founded Agua Limpia 
<http://www.agualimpia.org/> in 2007, and although he had to step down from the 
organisation’s board when he took office in July, he has made water provision 
his top priority.

Peru is “very deficient in water and sewerage. We’ve polluted rivers, lakes 
and the ocean”, he told the Guardian. He said Peru would be looking for 
international cooperation to improve access to clean water.


In his inaugural speech, the former World Bank economist said that by the time 
he leaves office in 2021 all Peruvians should have 24-hour access to potable 
water and be connected to the sewerage system.


“I have to be realistic,” he added with a caveat. “Public investment 
programmes take time. If we do it in seven years, it would still be a great 
achievement.”


With backing from the Inter-American Development Bank, Agua Limpia is 
currently focused on the micro-finance programmeCrediagua 
<http://crediagua.com/> which provides water and sanitation in rural and 
peri-urban areas, said representative Patricia Bautista.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb249f4b5500cbe79997b30efd8eb6156afa97a8%2F0_145_3148_1889%2F3148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20new%20president's%20grand%20vision%20end%20Peru's%20water%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20new%20president%27s%20grand%20vision%20end%20Peru%27s%20water%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb249f4b5500cbe79997b30efd8eb6156afa97a8%2F0_145_3148_1889%2F3148.jpg>
 Residents of the Pachacutec shanty town, north of Lima, extract water from 
cylinders to their houses. Photograph: Eitan Abramovich/AFP/Getty Images 
Access to water for Peruvians has steadily improved in the last quarter of a 
century from74.3% in 1990 to 86.7% in 2015 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.H2O.SAFE.ZS?end=2015&locations=PE&start=1990>
, according to World Bank data.


Conserving watersheds, particularly those which supply Peru’s capital Lima and 
the arid coastal strip where more than 70% of Peruvians live, is the proposal 
of a key project in Kuczynski’s government plan.


Sierra Azul 
<http://ppk.pe/plan-de-gobierno/inversion-social/sierra-azul-cosecha-agua/>, a 
programme managed by the agriculture ministry, will focus on the upper parts of 
the watershed in the Andes mountains to improve hydrological regulation.


It pledges to rebuild Andean canal systems, build dams, reservoirs and 
filtration trenches, and support small farmers with the aim of rehabilitating 
1,000 sq km of agricultural terraces known asandenes – many of which date back 
to the time of the Incas – as well as ensuring the irrigation of 5,000 sq km in 
the Andes mountains.


The programme would also seek public-private funding of $88.1m (£72m) for 
infrastructure projects and to boost the agriculture ministry’s budget by 
$29.3m.


On thin ice: the farmers adapting to Peru's melting glacier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/15/peru-glacier-melt-metals-farmers-adaptation-pastoruri>
“The president is exactly right to put water at the centre of a green growth 
agenda,” says Gena Gammie, associate director of theForest Trends Water 
Initiative <http://www.forest-trends.org/program.php?id=63>.


While it is vital to build infrastructure to pipe more water to more people, 
Peru should not forget green infrastructure – “critical ecosystems that 
[ensure] clean water arrives in the cities”, she said.


The Sierra Azul proposal bears similarities to the established restoration of 
ancient canal systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/22/peru-harnesses-ancient-canal-system-to-tackle-lima-water-shortage>
 above Lima, which aims to help the second largest desert city (after Cairo) 
cope with the seasonal extremes of floods and droughts.


Peru’s national water regulator, Sunass <http://www.sunass.gob.pe/>, began a 
five-year programme of diverting 1% of consumer tariffs from Sedapal, the 
city’s water board, to ecosystem services. A further 3.8% of tariffs, 
approximately $89m, will be used for climate change adaptation and disaster 
risk mitigation.


The promotion of green infrastructure is key to the long-term provision of 
water for the capital city, says Fernando Momiy, president of Sunass.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a49b1bbe27073213cac195bfff2fb33cd2ed778%2F0_380_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20new%20president's%20grand%20vision%20end%20Peru's%20water%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20new%20president%27s%20grand%20vision%20end%20Peru%27s%20water%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fwater-access-peru-president-kuczynski-ppk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a49b1bbe27073213cac195bfff2fb33cd2ed778%2F0_380_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Ashaninka Teresa Lopez washes pots after cooking breakfast for her family, 
along a stream in the hamlet of Saweto, Peru. Photograph: Martin Mejia/AP 
“PPK has shown a commitment to preserve the sources of water. He knows that 
providing water to people is not just a question of grey infrastructure but 
also green infrastructure,” he says. “He understands, having worked for many 
years as an investor, that sustainability is fundamentally important. As a 
president he is someone who can convince business leaders that a future without 
water doesn’t exist. There’s no trade or industry which is sustainable without 
water.”


Around a third of all Peruvians – 10 million people – live in Lima, and the 
city is dependent on three rivers that flow from the Andes; the Rimac, Chillon 
and Lurin. Overall, around 4 million Peruvians lack access to safe water, and 8 
million do not have adequate sanitation.


“Clean water is key to bringing down all the poverty indicators, and PPK knows 
this,” said Carolina Trivelli, a former minister for inclusion and social 
development.


However, experts agree, the implementation of public policies or investments 
typically can be slow in Peru. About $135m has been raised from the percentage 
collected on water tariffs, says Gammie, yet none of it has been spent on 
ecosystem services yet.

“Peru is poised to be a leader in green infrastructure in Latin America. It’s 
developing a whole new model which is bottom-up and user driven,” she said. 
“But it’s not yet been able to implement a green public investment project.”

The three wonders of the ancient world solving modern water problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/19/water-scarcity-drought-peru-kenya-india>
Kuczynski’s experience in development, in the business sector as a former Wall 
Street banker, and his time holding several ministerial posts inspires hope 
that he can cut through the red tape, corruption and conflicts which often hold 
up public and private investment projects.


Last month, Peru’s Congress granted special legislative powers to his 
government allowing it to legislate by decree over a 90-day period across five 
strategic areas, one of which includes water and sanitation.


Momiy says: “We have a president who is focused on the issue of water and I 
have a lot of faith in what he can achieve in the future.”


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 