
Larry Scott, the chief executive of the women's tour, is a man of considerable 
experience and tennis wisdom: "There's no substitute for winning a lot of 
matches. I've rarely seen a player come back from an extended injury and 
perform the way he or she did before. The game moves on." Scott said this in 
2004. The next year Venus Williams won Wimbledon for the third time with 
minimal preparation, and on Saturday her younger sister, Serena, won her third
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title in 
only her sixth tournament of any kind since September 2005. The Williams 
sisters make fools of everybody.

And long may they continue to do so, would be the cry of many. They are comets 
of the tennis world these days, blazing into view from time to time and then 
disappearing, dazzling but rarely inconsequential. Just when the received 
wisdom, like Scott's three years ago, is that the sisters are not taking tennis 
seriously, or that their injuries are career-threatening, they re-emerge to 
turn the form and values of their sport upside down. "I am what I am," said 
Serena after beating Maria Sharapova 6-1, 6-2, referring to both her size and 
her quite astonishing ability. Sinatra may have warbled My Way to the point of 
tedium. The Williams have lived the song.

There really is little point being critical of the way they choose to flit in 
and out of tennis, no matter how much it causes Scott and the WTA to gnash 
their teeth and ponder roadmaps of the future with sinking stomachs. Whatever 
is proposed in the way of mandatory tournaments and minimum commitments, Venus 
and Serena will drive a coach and pair through it, just as Pete Sampras and 
Andre Agassi always did on the men's tour. And Scott and his cohorts are 
powerless to prevent it because the Williams generate huge amounts of money and 
there are no other American women on the circuit worth a row of tennis balls.

Just as Venus took Sharapova, the then reigning champion, out in the 
semi-finals of the 2005 Wimbledon with a display of quite ferocious hitting, so 
Serena disposed of the US-based Russian in brutal fashion. Sharapova, the 
nominal world No1 and schoolyard bully against most other women, was reduced to 
a quivering wreck. When she won her second slam title in New York last year 
there were intimations of maturity and variations, but faced with Serena's 
cudgel she reverted to type. There were no slices, no drop-shots, few angles, 
and if she did not go down with a whimper the banshee wails were of no 
consequence or help.

The Williams, when they put their minds to it, still play power tennis better 
than anybody else, and Serena, for whom this was her eighth slam title, the 
best of all. But the chronic lack of variety in the women's game makes for 
tedious watching. One longs for somebody with the brain, variety of shots and 
anticipation of Martina Hingis who is also physically strong enough to 
withstand and counter the huge hitters. But to walk around the outside courts 
during the final week and watch the junior girls did nothing for the spirit of 
optimism. Here were youngsters welting the ball at one another with no thought 
of guile or subtlety. It was depressing.

"Maybe in a year or two the women's game will move a level up and we will see 
them mixing it up," said the four-times slam champion Jim Courier, who was not 
noted for the subtlety of his own tennis but who is a perspicacious observer of 
the game. Maybe. But this was a poor tournament for the women, not helped by 
Justine Henin-Hardenne's absence and Am√©lie Mauresmo's early exit. And so it 
was, underprepared and less than fully fit, thatSerena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> stole the day, albeit that 
her success underlined the lack of quality in the women's top 20 and the 
propensity of the majority in the top 10 to choke when the slam pressure is on.

The men's game has the quality but, with Federer in his pomp, generally lacks 
drama. The women's game is short on quality but makes up for it with soap- 
opera dramatics. Serena believes that she and Venus will be competing for more 
major titles this year. Maybe they will, maybe they won't; as always, it is 
impossible to know with any degree of certainty. "Serena Williams - yeah, she's 
back. And this time to stay," she said. We shall see, but, whatever the future 
holds, Serena's place is tennis history is assured, as is that of her sister. 
And deservedly so.
 