
After years of hibernation, will the US economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> rouse itself for a big 
comeback over the next couple of years? With an incoming Republican 
administration hellbent on reflating an economy already near full employment, 
and with promised trade restrictions driving up the price of import-competing 
goods, and with central-bank independence likely to come under attack, higher 
inflation – likely exceeding 3% at times – is a near-certainty. And output 
growth could surprise as well, possibly reaching 4%, at least temporarily.

Impossible you say? Not at all.

The economy already seems to be growing at a 3% annual clip. And even 
steadfast opponents of Trump’s economic policies would have to admit they are 
staunchly pro-business (with the notable exception of trade).

US economy adds 178,000 new jobs making Fed rate hike likely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/us-jobs-report-economy-fed-rate-hike>
Consider regulation. Under Barack Obama, labour regulation expanded 
significantly, not to mention the dramatic increase in environmental 
legislation. And that is not even counting the huge shadow Obamacare casts on 
the healthcare system, which alone accounts for 17% of the economy. I am 
certainly not saying that repealing Obama-era regulation will improve the 
average American’s wellbeing. Far from it. But businesses will be ecstatic, 
maybe enough to start really investing again. The boost to confidence is 
already palpable.

Then there is the prospect of a massive stimulus, featuring a huge expansion 
of badly needed infrastructure spending. (Trump will presumably bulldoze 
congressional opposition to higher deficits.) Ever since the 2008 financial 
crisis, economists across the political spectrum have argued for taking 
advantage of ultra-low interest rates to finance productive infrastructure 
investment, even at the cost of higher debt. High-return projects pay for 
themselves.

Far more controversial is Trump’s plan for a massive across-the-board income 
tax cut that disproportionately benefits the rich. True, putting cash in the 
pockets of rich savers hardly seems as effective as giving cash to poor people 
who live hand to mouth. Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton, memorably spoke of 
“Trumped-up trickle-down economics”. But, Trumped-up or not, tax cuts can be 
very good for business confidence.

It is hard to know just how much extra debt Trump’s stimulus program will add, 
but estimates of $5tr over 10 years – a 25% increase – seem sober. Many 
leftwing economics commentators, having insisted for eight years under Obama 
that there is never any risk to US borrowing, now warn that greater borrowing 
by the Trump administration will pave the road to financial Armageddon. Their 
hypocrisy is breathtaking, even if they are now closer to being right.

Exactly how much Trump’s policies will raise output and inflation is hard to 
know. The closer the US economy is to full capacity, the more inflation there 
will be. If US productivity really has collapsed as much as many scholars 
believe, additional stimulus is likely to raise prices a lot more than output; 
demand will not induce new supply.

On the other hand, if the US economy really does have massive quantities of 
underutilised and unemployed resources, the effect of Trump’s policies on 
growth could be considerable. In Keynesian jargon, there is still a large 
multiplier on fiscal policy. It is easy to forget the biggest missing piece of 
the global recovery is business investment, and if it starts kicking in 
finally, both output and productivity could begin to rise very sharply.

Those who are deeply wedded to the idea of “secular stagnation” would say high 
growth under Trump is well-nigh impossible. But if one believes, as I do, that 
the slow growth of the last eight years was mainly due to the overhang of debt 
and fear from the 2008 crisis, then it is not so hard to believe that 
normalisation could be much closer than we realise. After all, so far virtually 
every financial crisis has eventually come to an end.

Of course, all of this is an optimistic spin on a Trump economy. If the new 
administration proves erratic and incompetent (a real possibility), dejection 
will quickly overwhelm confidence. But beware of pundits who are certain that 
Trump will bring economic catastrophe. On election eve, the New York Times 
columnist Paul Krugman unequivocally insisted that a Trump victory would lead 
to a stock market collapse, with no recovery in sight. Investors who relied on 
his insights lost a lot of money.

Yes, it still could all end very badly. The world is a risky place. If global 
growth collapses, US growth could suffer severely. Still, it is far more likely 
that after years of slow recovery, the US economy might at last be ready to 
move significantly faster, at least for a while.

 * Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard 
University and recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016
 