
Apparently some people are unimpressed by Bordeaux’s new Cité du Vin 
<http://www.laciteduvin.com/en>, but having been bowled over by my first visit 
there last month, I’m hard pushed to understand why, not least because 
it targets every sense: sight, sound, touch, taste and smell. I left 
gutted that I’d missed out on one multisensory experience in which prosecco is 
apparently tasted to the aroma of an Italian meal being cooked, but I did get 
to sniff the components of individual grape varieties in The Buffet Of The Five 
Senses, and to experience a little of what it must have been like on a cargo 
ship centuries ago, transporting wine across the seas.
 El Brindis Monsant 2014: drink while listening to David Bowie. 
If wine is to come alive for people, it needs more of this sort of 
synaesthetic approach. Music, for instance, can actually change your perception 
of food and drink, according to research carried out byProfessor Charles Spence 
at Somerville College, Oxford <https://www.psy.ox.ac.uk/team/charles-spence>. 
And, as it happens, Oddbins has been pursuing this line of thought for a while 
now, pairing its wines with different soundtracks. The exotically smokyCantine 
San Marzano Talo Malvasia Nera (on offer at £10.62; 13.5% abv), from Salento, 
is somewhat whimsically recommended withPaul Simon’s Diamonds On The Soles Of 
Her Shoes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-I_T3XvzPaM>, while Samuel Delafont’s
Libre Cours Rouge 2015 <http://www.oddbins.com/libre-cours-rouge-red-wine> 
(£10.50; 14% abv), an exuberant blend of pinot noir and grenache, is partnered 
withPaul Anka’s A Steel Guitar And A Glass Of Wine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tK6mZmR6YrE> (though, personally, I’d go for 
Lou Reed’s Dirty Blvd <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7z3TPwOT31g>).

Great Western Wine in Bath, meanwhile, has teamed up with a company called 
Stylus Vinyl <http://www.stylusvinyl.com/> to pair a classic album with one of 
its wines. This month, they’ve matchedDavid Bowie’s Hunky Dory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hm7DCVURAbw> with El Brindis Monsant 2014 
<http://www.greatwesternwine.co.uk/massard-el-brindis-montsant> (£12.50 on its 
own, or £35 with the record and an original print; 14.5% abv), former sommelier 
Franck Massard’s ballsy blend of samso and garnacha.

You may disagree about the appropriateness of the soundtrack, but it’s a 
welcome departure from seeing wine purely as a commodity, and instead start to 
view it as part of a broader, cultural experience. Sipping, rather than 
swigging, if you will. It also helps the wine last longer, which if you’re 
allowing yourself only an occasional glass this month, has much to be said 
for it.

My own idea of indulgence would be a glass of vin santo – 2009 Dei Vin Santo 
di Montepulciano 
<https://www.leaandsandeman.co.uk/wine/2009-VIN-SANTO-DI-MONTEPULCIANO-Dei-22041-00.html?pack=26635&term=vin+santo&page=0&sortOption=2&resultsPerPage=12>
(14% abv) is a good one at £23.95 a half-bottle from Lea & Sandeman – with the
Soave Il Vento trio from Cosi Fan Tutte 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gMY3Ou9L5xE>. But maybe that’s just me.

matchingfoodandwine.com <http://www.matchingfoodandwine.com>
 