
Berlin

Christmas markets originated in Germany in the late middle ages and have since 
spread their warm glühweiny glow around the world. But if you're looking for 
something a little less trad, try the Holy Shit Shopping Lounge in Berlin. It 
offers festive treats from local designers, and DJ sessions replace the usual 
piped carol muzak.
• 11 and 12 December, Galerie Hopping, Spandauer Strasse, Mitte (
holyshitshopping.de <http://www.holyshitshopping.de> – German only). EasyJet (
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies London-Berlin from £16 one way. 
Stay at the nHow hotel (Stralauer Allee 3,+49 30 290 2990,
nhow-hotels.com/berlin/en <http://www.nhow-hotels.com/berlin/en>; doubles from 
€127) in the up-and-coming Mediaspree district

Lyon

Many cities pride themselves on their Christmas lights (think Malaga, Leipzig, 
Singapore – and Blackpool, of course). But the real luminary in this field is 
Lyon with its Fête des Lumières. For four nights, Lyon's historic buildings are 
given a 21st-century makeover in one of the world's greatest displays of light 
art and music.
• 8-11 December (fetedeslumieres.lyon.fr <http://www.fetedeslumieres.lyon.fr>
). Travelling from London by Eurostar (eurostar.com <http://www.eurostar.com>), 
via Paris, takes just under five hours and costs from £109 return. The Collège 
Hotel (5 Place Saint-Paul, +33 4 72 100505,college-hotel.com 
<http://www.college-hotel.com>; doubles from €115) is a revamped school with 
sleek white bedrooms

Chicago

Look a little further afield and Chicago is a bracing place for a break. The 
brave can even go skating on the world's highest ice rink, which opens on the 
94th-floor observatory deck of the John Hancock Center (hancockobservatory.com 
<http://www.hancockobservatory.com>) in January. 
• Hayes & Jarvis (0844 855 4488, hayesandjarvis.co.uk 
<http://www.hayesandjarvis.co.uk>) has 10% off short breaks to Chicago in the 
new year, staying at The Palmer House Hilton, a five-star hotel within walking 
distance of Lake Michigan and Grant Park. Departing on 10 January, a four-night 
package costs £599pp, including Delta Airlines flights from Heathrow

Vienna

Vienna is famed for its cosy fin-de-siècle coffee houses and its ball season. 
Put the two together at the Ball of the Viennese Coffee House Owners at the 
Imperial Palace – highly regarded by locals because of its authentic Viennese 
ambience.
• 25 February. Tickets to the ball cost €110 (£97). Book through 
kaffeesiederball.at <http://www.kaffeesiederball.at>. EasyJet flies Gatwick to 
Vienna from £28 one way. Stay at The Hotel Hollmann Beletage (Köllnerhofgasse 
6, +43 1 961 1960,hollmann-beletage.at <http://www.hollmann-beletage.at>; 
doubles €120)

Budapest

Budapest gets chilly in winter, but a cinnamon pastry and a hot steam bath 
will soon warm you up. The Budapest Winter Campaign (budapestwinter.com 
<http://www.budapestwinter.com>) features money-saving offerss at many top 
hotels and a free ticket to one of the city's most popular spas.
• Mamaison (mamaison.com <http://www.mamaison.com>) has a winter warmer 
package at boutique Budapest hotel Andrassy for €281 for two nights. Wizzair (
wizzair.com <http://www.wizzair.com>) flies to Budapest from Luton from £30 one 
way
 