
The future is here – not in the shape of Facebook, Twitter and all the rest, 
but in a drastic change to one of civilisation’s basic requirements: getting 
humans from place to place. On Wednesday, Uber added a second American city to 
an experiment that will soon expand: having alreadydone so in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
, it transported paying customers around San Francisco in cabs whose every move 
was controlled by computer.

Uber riders in Pittsburgh can hail self-driving Ford Fusions in test program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
Trials of driverless vehicles are happening every day. Pulled away from old 
certainties by digital upstarts, the corporate giants who make trucks and cars 
are frantically trying to come up with new business models.

In an act of gorgeous synchronicity with the Uber experiment, Donald Trump’s 
media people announced on the same day that Uber’s chief executive,Travis 
Kalanick – who once joked that he would move to China if Trump won the election 
– would be joining the president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/tech-industry-wont-save-us-donald-trump-excesses>
’s so-called strategic and policy committee. Made up of big economic hitters 
from such distinctly 20th-century corporations as General Motors, Walmart, 
General Electric and PepsiCo – as well as Elon Musk, the space travel and 
electric car magnate – its brief is simple enough: as a Trump statement puts 
it, the people involved will be “called upon to meet with the president 
frequently to share their specific experience and knowledge as the president 
implements his plan to bring back jobs and Make America Great Again”.

At which point, we should allow ourselves a collective smirk. There are many 
things that Uber is interested in, but the issue of jobs is not one of them. 
What happened this week in San Francisco proved the point: in case of trouble, 
Uber people might have been sitting behind the wheels of an unspecified number 
of computerised Volvo SUVs, but their role was passive, verging on negligible. 
Such is the company’s vision of its future: althoughUber is currently 
struggling to justify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
 its awful treatment of drivers, the human element will soon be done away with, 
as the company becomes a byword for the wonders of automation, and digital 
processors take control.

Though Uber presumably sees clashes with the authorities as good PR, it did 
not take long for the California Department of Motor Vehicles to insist that 
the company had no official permit for the trials, and order it to stop. More 
seriously, during the time that the cars were circuiting San Francisco’s 
streets, there were at least two reports of red lights being run, which were 
duly seized on as proof that the technology was simply not ready. But with 
customary chutzpah,Uber blamed the people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 overseeing the tests, rather than the technology. “These incidents were due to 
human error,” said a statement. “This is why we believe so much in making the 
roads safer by building self-driving Ubers.”

Accidents will happen, and they underline the understandable worries of 
driverless-technology sceptics. Uber’s involvement makes it easy to think the 
worst. But be in no doubt: the huge progress of driverless technology and the 
billions behind it will swiftly cast these mishaps as mere hiccups. Driverless 
car trials have been taking place in the US for the past few years: 20 
companies have been given permits in California alone, and that state has 
published draft regulations toallow completely driverless cars on the road 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/california-proposes-lighter-regulations-on-driverless-car-testing-2016-10>
, so long as they are in communication with a remote control centre. Tests have 
also been going on in Iowa and Pennsylvania, among other states.In a move full 
of symbolism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/detroit-north-american-auto-show-self-driving-cars>
, trials will soon beginin Michigan 
<http://www.leftlanenews.com/michigan-approves-driverless-testing-93537.html>. 
The American company nuTonomy startedtrialling self-driving taxis in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/self-driving-taxis-roll-out-in-singapore-beating-uber-to-it>
 in August. Meanwhile, autonomous trucks have been trialled in Nevada, Colorado 
and, closer to home,Germany <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-34444603>.

As well as working with Uber, General Motors owns a $500m stake in the 
ride-hailing company Lyft – where senior figures reckon that by 2020 driverless 
travel will form most of its business – and has also has spent over $1bn on an
autonomous-car company called Cruise 
<http://fortune.com/2016/03/11/gm-buying-self-driving-tech-startup-for-more-than-1-billion/>
. Ford has announced its own driverless car project, and aims to have afleet of 
hireable cars on the road by 2021 
<https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2016/08/16/ford-targets-fully-autonomous-vehicle-for-ride-sharing-in-2021.html>
. In the UK, we have our own slightly anticlimactic version of these 
innovations – among them, a comparatively paltry £20m given for research by the 
government, and one trial that involved small cars called Pods doingrepeated 
laps of the pavements outside Milton Keynes station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/self-driving-car-first-uk-test-milton-keynes-driverless-lutz-pathfinder>
. But the same developments will soon arrive here too, in spades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftrump-uber-driverless-future-jobs-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe14fe73c1ac86ff980ad4cdef5bb8cb76fc8b095%2F0_127_3530_2119%2F3530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20Trump%20and%20Uber%2C%20the%20driverless%20future%C2%A0could%20turn%20into%20a%20nightmare%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftrump-uber-driverless-future-jobs-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20Trump%20and%20Uber%2C%20the%20driverless%20future%C2%A0could%20turn%20into%20a%20nightmare%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftrump-uber-driverless-future-jobs-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe14fe73c1ac86ff980ad4cdef5bb8cb76fc8b095%2F0_127_3530_2119%2F3530.jpg>
 An autonomous self-driving vehicle test in Milton Keynes. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
Undoubtedly, the prospect of a driverless future is replete with liberating, 
almost utopian elements. If towns and cities steadily go driverless and car 
ownership drops, parking will become progressively less of an urban issue, and 
a whole mess of issues around the shortage of space could be transformed. 
Moreover, plenty of lives will be transformed by driverless travel. Many 
autistic people find driving impossibly taxing. Older people, people with 
physical disabilities and thousands of others for whom driving has never had 
any appeal will see autonomous transport as a gift. Viewed from another 
perspective, if the driverless vehicle means the end of the age of petrolheads 
andJeremy Clarkson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson>, why 
worry?

The answer lies in some pretty obvious fears. If unprecedentedly cheap taxi 
rides become the norm, what will be the fate of buses and trains? Won’t all 
those fleets of cars cause unbelievable congestion? Are we ready for the loud, 
arrogant demands for the rebuilding of urban space that will come from Uber, 
Lyft, Tesla,Waymo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/waymo-google-self-driving-car-division>
 (Google’s new offshoot) and all the other driverless giants? And what if the 
driverless ride is the means not to some great feat of collective emancipation, 
but individualism taken to the nth degree – the same dystopian isolation 
captured in Iggy Pop’s hymn to self-possessed detachment The Passenger (“I am a 
passenger/I stay under glass”)? As evidenced by such movies as Total Recall and 
Minority Report, the driverless ride has long been central to plenty of visions 
of dystopia. There may well be a very good reason for that.

Trump to meet tech firms including Apple, Facebook and Google
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-tech-summit-immigration-automation>
In the end, though, these are airy-fairy worries compared to the biggest 
concern of all: jobs. There are3.5 million truck drivers in the US 
<http://www.alltrucking.com/faq/truck-drivers-in-the-usa/>, as well as 233,000 
cab drivers 
<https://www.bls.gov/ooh/transportation-and-material-moving/taxi-drivers-and-chauffeurs.htm>
 (an official estimate, which seems low),330,000 Uber drivers 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/uber-doubles-its-drivers-in-2015-2015-10?r=US&IR=T>
 and 660,000 bus drivers.

In the UK, at the last count, there were 297,600 taxi or private-hire-vehicle 
driver licences in England alone, and600,000 people are registered drivers of 
heavy goods vehicles 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/trucker-becoming-endangered-species-lorry-6527984>
. The traditional logic of the job market has made sitting behind a wheel a 
fall-back option – if all else fails, you can always drive a cab. But no more: 
what was once one of the labour market’s most dependable redoubts is now among 
its more precarious elements.

What does this mean for politics? Even if Trump now affects to be a friend of 
his country’s cutting-edge companies (“I’m here to help you folks do well,” he 
told this week’sgathering of big cheeses from Facebook, Amazon, Google and the 
rest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-tech-summit-immigration-automation>
), the anti-modern tenor of the campaign that won him the presidency says much 
more. Automation, which is so far eluding most mainstream politicians, will 
carry on sowing the alienation and dismay on which the president-elect and his 
fellow populists gleefully feast – and the driverless revolution will take 
everything to a whole new level. In that sense, we ought to prepare for 
turbulence that may soon make the events of 2016 look like so much melodrama.

Meanwhile, Trump sits down with Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, and everything becomes clear. 
They annoy the authorities and sow disruption, and as people’s anxieties rise, 
he reaps the rewards. It’s a marriage of awful convenience, with a driverless 
car ready to whisk the two parties off into a future that gets more unknowably 
complex every day.
 