
I helped a newly engaged friend move her belongings last month from New York 
to San Francisco, where she was relocating to live with her fiance. We departed 
the city on a Friday morning in her yellow Fiat, made quick stop in 
Philadelphia, and then set out on a route that took us through South Dakota, 
Wyoming, Utah, Nevada and finally California. A plot synopsis of our trip would 
read: two successful women, one large dog, one tiny car. No schedule. Anda lot 
of Tay Tay <https://instagram.com/p/5kDIlZnUg5/?taken-by=jopiazza12>. Over the 
next 10 days our Instagram feeds, full of fantastic pictures of us adventuring 
through the county, sent most of my friends into paroxysms of joy and envy in 
equal parts. It was the from which stuff iconic movies are made.

Except they aren’t. Not about women, anyway. And I’m never more aware of this 
than when I’m on the road. And I have been on the road a lot, almost always by 
myself or with another woman.

Including this most recent trip, I have driven across the United States 
upwards of seven times, depending on how you define across; I’ve gone coast to 
coast twice, in both directions. The first time was during the two weeks 
leading up to the first anniversary of September 11; we were in a 1977 Triumph 
Spitfire convertible that stalled when it exceeded 70 mph. Every place we 
stopped for help people remarked on our New York plates and went out of their 
way to be kind to us. One time I drove from Florida to Canada, alone, taking 
back roads to avoid the monotony of the interstate. In 2008 I drove between the 
presidential conventions, from Denver to Minnesota. Once, desperately in need 
of time away from the internet, I flew to Vegas with my best friend, rented a 
Mustang convertible and did a seven-day loop that included Palm Springs, 
Flagstaff, the Grand Canyon and parts of old Route 66. Once, over the course of 
five weeks, I drove the entire perimeter of the country. This was in April of 
2003 and the country had just gone to war with Iraq; flags were flying 
everywhere, and every American landmark was on high alert and under intense 
security.

There is something intensely clarifying about being on the road. One day on 
the road feels like seven or eight at home. Life, regular life and all its 
restrictions recede; as though your former self is separating from you, pushed 
upwards and out by the increasingly big sky you are driving under, until it 
becomes a thin distant reality that hardly seems connected to you at all. You 
are suddenly able to see yourself as an individual, disconnected from your life 
and the people in it. You become whatever is happening in that moment. You are 
the gas tank, the weather, the road signs, the cafe menus, the people you meet 
and the hotel bed you sleep in. You are living outside time. It is heady stuff.

I’m likely not telling you anything you don’t already know to some degree. Go 
West is both this country’s rallying cry and its promise. The promise of new 
life, of freedom, of the ability to start over, whomever you are, wherever you 
came from. The story of America is the story of being on the road.

At least, if you’re a man.

The story of women on the road, when we do get it, is almost always one of 
fear or invisibility.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> 
traveling alone are habitually escaping from something or are stripped of any 
agency at all. When they do travel safely and/or happily, it’s because they are 
accessories to heroic men whose journeys they are aiding - as if they are shiny 
hubcaps, or rattling engine parts, along either to make our hero look better, 
or to be shed in a bid for even more freedom.

Whereas men have Jack Kerouac, women get Marion Crane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FSlo44VO-lE> and Thelma & Louise. Don’t 
misunderstand, I love Thelma & Louise — and have a collection of trucker hats 
and teesto prove it <https://instagram.com/p/5R-N93IcYk/> — but despite their 
thrilling, albeit short-lived independence, their story is essentially one of 
fear and rape, and ends with them driving themselves off a cliff.

Metaphor or otherwise, this is not a cultural touchstone I’m interested in 
evoking when people see me driving on a highway alone or with a friend. 
Primarily because the assumption that a woman is only there by force or because 
she has no other option is not only not my reality — nor presumably the reality 
of the 72% of American womenwho will vacation solo this year 
<https://www.yahoo.com/travel/the-rise-of-the-solo-lady-traveler-by-the-numbers-85084024117.html>
 — it is so far from my reality I don’t even recognize it as a language I speak.

And that is the crux of the problem. The only widely recognized language we 
have for women on the road is that of women on the run.

And yet, the truth is all of my road trips have been the result of good 
decisions I’ve made in my life. They stand as proof of my success as well as my 
independence. They are evidence of my ability to make my own choices, of the 
freedom I have as a woman to go where I want and do what I want, when I want.

That I enjoy this freedom is a privilege, to be sure, and a new one at that – 
I belong to the first generation 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/09/30/352661280/marriage-pattern-shifts-seen-by-some-as-destabilizing-society>
 of financially independent women who appear to choosing independence over 
marriage, and often over children. But it’s also a privilege I’ve worked for 
and earned. I’m proud of it, and I want to see it reflected back to me in a way 
that allows me to celebrate it and share it. Mostly I want a better, more 
triumphant story of women on the road so that others can see me in it.

I’ve never been more aware of the need for this than on my most recent trip. 
Four days before we set out, Sandra Bland had been found dead in her jail cell 
in Texas. She had been driving herself from Illinois to a new job in Texas when 
she was pulled over for failing to signal a lane change, and despiteknowing all 
her legal rights 
<http://www.texasstandard.org/shows/current/10-things-about-the-sandra-bland-traffic-stop-every-texan-should-know/>
 was jailed, the latest black American to die in police custody after 
essentially doing nothing more than moving about freely.

If there is no good narrative for women on the road, there is even less of one 
for black Americans,let alone black American women 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/shani/between-the-world-and-she#.ttE6nMryw>. And while 
the terrible and longstanding race realities in this country can’t be fixed by 
a good story, don’t think for one second that good stories don’t matter and 
aren’t integral to change. Or that their absence doesn’t have consequences.They 
do <http://blackstockimages.co/>, and it does 
<https://medium.com/thelist/the-long-way-home-on-the-death-of-sandra-bland-and-driving-while-black-e7a15ee1e8e5>
. In her excellent essayGreen Screen: The Lack of Female Road Narratives and 
Why it Matters 
<http://theamericanreader.com/green-screen-the-lack-of-female-road-narratives-and-why-it-matters/#_ftn1>
, Vanessa Veselka says, “the only thing more dangerous than having simplistic 
narratives is having no narrative at all, which is deadly.” We needs stories to 
reflect the truth of our experience, but we also need them to function as maps 
pointing us in the direction of where we’d like to go. Men, especially white 
men, have the latter in spades (see: the entire canon of John Wayne movies).

Meanwhile, the journeys we collectively celebrate having to do with women 
almost exclusively involve the wedding aisle and the birth canal. Don’t believe 
me? Go visit the “women’s interest” section of a magazine aisle.

Perhaps it’s not a surprise then that the best road trip stories involving 
women, and the ones I’ve cleaved to long into my adult life, are about girls. 
Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz remains the best example of a female on the 
archetypal ‘hero’s adventure 
<http://billmoyers.com/content/ep-1-joseph-campbell-and-the-power-of-myth-the-hero%E2%80%99s-adventure-audio/>
.’ Laura Ingalls Wilder’s books are the definition of the American pioneer 
dream. My belovedHarriet M. Welsch 
<http://www.amazon.com/Harriet-Spy-Louise-Fitzhugh/dp/0440416795>, and her 
wanderings around a corner of New York, have always struck me as the younger 
version of Leopold Bloom or even Holden Caulfield. But all these tales end 
before puberty hits. After that? Go on back to the magazine aisle.

This may be changing. Slowly. As more women venture out alone, the lament  
<http://www.bookslut.com/blog/archives/2014_04.php#020615>over lack of female 
road narratives 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-et-jc-jackie-kerouac-12-womens-road-books-20140416-story.html>
 grows louder. In recent years there have been a few female adventure stories 
that have really hit pay dirt, suggesting, as with so many women-centric plots, 
that the problem is not that the audience does not exist, nor that the story 
does not resonate. It’s just that we’re not telling them enough. Cheryl 
Strayed’s Wild and Elizabeth Gilbert’s Eat, Pray, Love are the best, most 
recent examples, and I devoured them both. Reaching farther back, I find Beryl 
Markham, the British-African racehorse trainer, safari pilot and the first 
woman to fly her plane east to west over the Atlantic, who wrote the incredible 
memoirWest With the Night  
<http://www.amazon.com/West-Night-Beryl-Markham-ebook/dp/B008NVZF5S/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1438809139&sr=1-1&keywords=beryl+markham+west+with+the+night>
and is currently being revisited in the form of a best-selling novel.

Still, as great as they are, these women represent exceptions. They are 
iconoclasts. Markham flew a plane across the Atlantic, Strayed hiked the 
Pacific Crest Trail. These are extraordinary accomplishments, not easily 
mimicked (well, I supposed Gilbert’s is, if you have the money). Meanwhile, all 
Jack Kerouac had to do was get in a car and go. All Peter Fonda and Dennis 
Hopper had to do was get on their bikes and go (meanwhile, despite being 
criminalthey are wild 
<http://www.tcm.com/mediaroom/video/193236/Easy-Rider-Movie-Clip-Born-To-Be-Wild.html>
 and admirable; Thelma and Louise, on the other hand, are dangerous and crazy). 
Kerouac was an exceptional writer, but what he was writing about was not 
especially exceptional, merely the latest entry in a long line of men 
journeying forth into the unknown to seek adventure and self-realization. Which 
is exactly what I, and many women I know, do, albeit invisibly, with some 
regularity.

Years ago, not long after my weeklong trip from Las Vegas to the Grand Canyon, 
I scanned the polaroids we had taken (this was before Instagram) and made a 
little book I titled We Are Not on the Run. I’d grown tired of the Thelma & 
Louise comparisons, and the sideways glances of cashiers and customers who 
seemed puzzled by the fact no men eventually joined us. At the time I felt as 
though the phrase was defiant, a challenging riposte. These days, I see it as 
an expression of joy.
 