
It was a sunny but breezy Saturday afternoon in Vancouver, and the US women’s 
national team had just finished their morning training. The session, of course, 
took place on an artificial training pitch that had been plopped in the middle 
of a park with lush, green grass everywhere else.

USA at the Women's World Cup: what we learned from the group stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/17/usa-at-the-womens-world-cup-what-we-learned-from-the-group-stage>
The Guardian asked USA forward Abby Wambach about her new role as a substitute 
in a World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/16/abby-wambach-usa-womens-world-cup-nigeria>
. Wambach seemed to have something else on her mind, though. She said her focus 
was on getting on the end of a cross against Sweden, which she did, but: “If 
it’s on grass, I think it goes in.”

In one fell swoop, the turf issue that had been such a major talking point in 
the months before the tournament was back. Wambach had blamed the playing 
surface for her failure to score goals, and news outlets latched on to it. 
High-profile voices in the media called it aweak excuse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aV29SjtXV-M> that “borders on absurd 
<http://espn.go.com/espnw/news-commentary/2015worldcup/article/13076391/artificial-turf-excuse-us-women-struggling-attack>
.”

Any excuse for the USA’s failures to score goals certainly wasn’t going to be 
met with sympathy. The Americans have had their chances that they’ve failed to 
finish in ways that have nothing to do with the playing surface. Simply put, 
the American attack has been underperforming.

But was Wambach completely wrong?

In the USA’s scoreless draw against Sweden, Wambach nearly scored a 
game-winner in the 72nd minute. She dived head-first into the goal area and 
connected well on a cross, driving it low toward the turf. But the ball took a 
high and unnatural bounce toward the hands of goalkeeper Hedvig Lindahl, who 
didn’t have to reach out to guide the ball over the crossbar.

“The ball as it comes off my head against Sweden hits a dry turf and bounces 
higher,” Wambach said. “If it hits grass, it’s harder for a goalkeeper to 
react. If the ball bounces higher, the goalkeeper has more time to react off 
the turf.”

Wambach hasn’t been entirely alone in her complaints. Japan’s captain Aya 
Miyama said “dribbling was difficult 
<http://www.vancouversun.com/sports/Reviews+mixed+about+Place+artificial+turf+installer+says+pitch/11125796/story.html>
” on BC Place’s new turf, which was installed specifically for the Women’s 
World Cup.

Once Wambach’s comments made the rounds, the US women were back on message. 
Forward Sydney Leroux said: “I’ve been playing as hard as I play on grass. It’s 
a World Cup and, yes, it is different but nothing can be changed now.” Defender 
Ali Krieger said: “Everyone’s playing on the same surface and we just have to 
adapt to it.”

Women's World Cup: fans' photos from the group stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/19/womens-world-cup-fans-photos-from-the-group-stage>
This tournament in Canada is the first-ever senior World Cup to be held by 
FIFA on artificial turf. The men’s tournament has always been held on real 
grass, and is planned to be on grass in the next iterations planned through 
2022 in Qatar. Recently resigned Fifa president Sepp Blatter said last year 
that “artificial pitches are the future”.

The debate about whether artificial turf causes more injuries 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/01/us-football-idUSBRE84002Q20120501> 
than natural grass continues to rage, with plenty of evidence to support both 
sides. Fifa, in defending the use of artificial turf, hascited professionals 
<http://www.fifa.com/womensworldcup/news/y=2014/m=11/news=ekstrand-the-total-risk-of-injury-is-the-same-on-football-turf-as-it-i-2472281.html>
 who say it is safe.

But now, in the thick of the tournament, the debate has shifted to one about 
the game itself – about winning, and entertainment value.

“I think that there are a lot more goals in this tournament if it weren’t for 
the turf, having probably been on the losing end of that battle a few times 
now,” Wambach said.

Some teams have had no trouble scoring. Look at Germany, which posted a 10-0 
blowout over Ivory Coast. Ecuador isn’t likely to think this tournament has too 
few goals, either – the World Cup debutants conceded 17 goals over three group 
games.

But across the tournament, when blowouts against the weakest teams are 
discounted, this could shape up to be a conservative tournament where goals are 
concerned.

The average goals per game at the end of the group stage was 2.97, but that 
was skewed by some of the lopsided results that come as a result of expanding 
the tournament from 16 teams to 24. Take out thoseblowouts against new teams, 
and the average drops by nearly a goal per game and belowthe average for the 
2011 tournament 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/16/sports/soccer/abby-wambach-says-us-would-be-scoring-more-on-grass.html>
. As knockouts begin and games tighten, the average could further shrink.

After her game-winner against Nigeria, Wambach reiterated her assessment of 
the turf – but acknowledged her responsibility for not scoring.

“Scoring goals is not that easy, and I’m not making any excuses. I need to 
finish chances that are handed to me,” Wambach said. “But the turf does make 
the ball bounce differently and you think differently about that game. That’s 
just the reality and that’s what my comments meant.”

Wambach seemed acutely aware of the renewed debate she started and the 
criticism she spurned toward the US women’s national team. Whether she was just 
speaking off the cuff or not, she has no problem with the small uproar she 
caused.

“It’s awesome that we’re talking about women’s football,” Wambach said. “It’s 
awesome that we’re having some of these discussions. It’s awesome that we’re 
analysing and hyper-dissecting things that we’ve said. To me, that shows 
growth. Even if it’s hard on my PR guy, I say: ‘Hey man, this is all good 
stuff. We’re talking about women’s football one way or another.’ ”
 