
People still think of Woodstock as the hippy home of the 1969 Woodstock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/woodstock> festival. But the festival never 
actually took place here; it was in Bethel, 60 miles away. There are still a 
lot of leftovers from that era – you’ll see old-timers hanging about who will 
never change – but Woodstock’s a very contemporary and dynamic place these 
days. It’s quite political and liberal, though, which also dates back to the 
1960s: people have strong opinions and express them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434551923628%2F5e682f24-85e0-4eaa-a45d-f7cd8b609bb4-643x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434551923628%2F5e682f24-85e0-4eaa-a45d-f7cd8b609bb4-643x1020.jpeg>
 Woodstock film festival co-founder Meira Blaustein 
Woodstock’s one of the oldest arts colonies in the US. It was established at 
the end of the 1800s, when artists came here from Holland. Everybody here is 
either an artist, married to an artist or related to one. There’s a real 
creative vibe around town. You feel it in the air, and there’s always something 
arty going on. There are tons of great galleries, like theWoodstock Artists 
Association <http://www.woodstockart.org/>, which shows local work, or the 
fabulousKleinert/James <http://www.woodstockguild.org/exhibitions/> for 
international work. I moved to here in summer 2000 to start the Woodstock film 
festival, in large part because I knew there were many artists living there and 
that it would be a good community that would appreciate a film festival.

Bob Dylan used to say you only had to throw a stone and you’d hit a musician 
here.It’s true – they’re everywhere! One of my favourite music venues is the 
Bearsville Theater <http://bearsvilletheater.com/>, which was the idea of 
Albert Grossman, the man who discovered Dylan. It gets many great acts – plus 
it has restaurants and a bar. Another cool place is theMidnight Ramble 
<http://www.levonhelm.com/midnight_ramble.htm> held at Levon Helm’s barn in the 
woods, where he used to hold sessions himself. Kingston, 10 miles south, has 
become the hipster capital of the Hudson valley.Backstage Studio Productions 
<http://bspkingston.com/> is the place to go: lots of Brooklynites play there 
and there’s a very happening bar.

It has become a filmy destination since we launched the festival 15 years ago. 
A lot of film people have moved here and tons of movies and TV shows are made 
here. I call it Indiewood on the Hudson. You’ll drive down a country road and 
see filming going on on either side. So many great people hang out here – from 
Daniel Craig and Rachel Weisz, who have a house here, to David Bowie. There’s 
an abundance of celebrities but it’s the opposite of the Hamptons. It’s not a 
playground for those who want to be seen; it’s a playground for those who want 
to hide away and just enjoy their lives.
 Memories of the 1969 festival are still alive in Woodstock. Photograph: Alamy 
You really feel close to nature here. Whichever direction you walk, you’ll 
find yourself near a brook or a river, a pond or a lake. I love to walk around 
the Ashokan reservoir. It’s pristine, surrounded by mountains, and makes me 
feel like I’m in Switzerland. Cooper Lake is beautiful too – last time I went I 
saw thousands of froglets. And there are many swimming holes if you fancy a 
dip: my favourite is Big Deep. It’s in the woods and you can just dive in then 
sit on the rocks to dry off – perfect on a warm summer’s day.

The Dalai Lama has visited the beautiful Tibetan monastery just north of 
Woodstock. It’s at the start of a challenging hike to Overlook Mountain, on the 
edge of the Catskills. At the end of the hike there’s an old hotel that’s now 
in ruins. There’s a saying that if you stand under the shadow of the hotel 
you’ll always come back to Woodstock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647348481%2F81bf9e22-4528-4c32-b450-7b437060abed-2060x833.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434647348481%2F81bf9e22-4528-4c32-b450-7b437060abed-2060x833.jpeg>
 A liberal, independent spirit still pervades the town. Photograph: Naomi 
Schmidt 
The film festival is an exciting time to visit. You’ll see lots of people 
walking around dressed in black, as they do, but it’s really unpretentious. 
There are films shown in four venues, plus parties every night and live 
concerts. Top producers, screenwriters and actors are all hanging out with 
emerging filmmakers and visitors. People are really friendly, though, and 
everybody’s talking movies.

There are some cool independent shops in town. The Golden Notebook 
<http://www.goldennotebook.com/> is a brilliant bookshop and the owner’s a 
sweetheart. It’s been there forever and on any given weekend there are a few 
book readings. Daniel Craig and David Bowie like to shop at my favourite men’s 
clothing shop,Changes <http://changesformen.com/wordpress/>. Every Saturday 
there’s a flea market in the centre of town – whenever I have friends over they 
always leave with something from there. AndCastaways 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Castaways/269508196499279?sk=info&tab=overview> 
is a brilliant secondhand store, great for ornate dresses. The area’s good for 
antique hunting too: the nearby towns of Saugerties and Hudson have endless 
stores and people come from all over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646716316%2Fbaacbd55-c630-4e4c-8f2a-59526b77488c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woodstock%20film%20festival%20co-founder%20Meira%20Blaustein%20on%20what%20she%20loves%20about%20the%20NY%20town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fwoodstock-film-festival-meira-blaustein-new-york-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434646716316%2Fbaacbd55-c630-4e4c-8f2a-59526b77488c-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Emerson Resort and Spa is where stars tend to head when visiting Woodstock 
You’ll see Anne Hathaway having lunch with her friends in Oriole 9 
<http://www.oriole9.com/>. Nobody makes a fuss. It has the best mint tea – 
packed with fresh leaves.Cucina <http://www.cucinawoodstock.com/> is another 
favourite. Chef Gianni Scappin serves delicious Italian food in a converted 
rambling farmhouse. He taught Stanley Tucci how to cook for his movie Big Night.
New World Home Cooking <http://www.ricorlando.com/nwhc/menus.html> is another 
great place with organic food, a fun atmosphere and great outdoor area – I love 
the spicy stringbeans andpot au chocolat dessert.

The Waterfall House <http://waterfallrental.com/> is a great holiday rental, 
right by the Tannery Brook waterfall.The Emerson Resort and Spa 
<http://www.emersonresort.net/> is a world-renowned hotel where actors Tim 
Robbins and Keanu Reeves have stayed. The Woodstock Inn on the Millstream 
<http://www.woodstock-inn-ny.com/> is very modest and lovely: every room 
overlooks the water and years ago during the festival Peter Gabriel stayed 
there with his daughter.Hotel Dylan <http://thehoteldylan.com/> is a new place 
that has quickly become a favourite – every room has a movie theme. And
Woodstock Way <http://www.woodstockway.com/> inn is in town but in the middle 
of the woods by a brook, with private cottages.
 Kayakers on the Hudson River. Photograph: Zack Seckler/Corbis 
If you have more time, kayaking on the Hudson is fun. Lots of people here have 
boats and love playing about on the water. Or you can go tubing in Saugerties, 
where the river’s smaller. If you visit in winter there’s skiing, snow-shoeing, 
snowboarding on Hunter and Belleayre mountains. Woodstock’s a brilliant place 
for the great outdoors whatever the time of year.

• The Woodstock film festival <http://woodstockfilmfestival.com/> runs from 30 
September-4 October
 