
As the fifth largest organisation in the world 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/niallmccarthy/2015/06/23/the-worlds-biggest-employers-infographic/#48aba1b251d0>
, the NHS can provide lucrative opportunities for small business. But from the 
outside, it’s often seen as an unwieldy, unnecessarily bureaucratic body that’s 
difficult to break into.

For Jason Williams, business development director at seeDATA 
<http://www.seedata.co.uk/>, a partnership came about through an agreement with 
the local academic health science network (AHSN), which the company had worked 
with previously to build a bespoke customer relationship management platform.

“They came to us with the idea of developing a system that could be used in 
the south-west to help hospitals run patient safety improvement projects,” 
Williams says. “In working with them, we realised there was also a much wider 
need in other parts of the country as well. [We found] a gap in the market.”


The result, the Life QI System, allows NHS organisations – from hospitals to 
GP practices, AHSNs, clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) and other healthcare 
providers – to share findings and best practice. There are 310 groups now using 
the system, across 10 of the country’s 15 AHSNs, which wereset up three years 
ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2013/apr/26/academic-health-science-networks-role>
 to enable healthcare innovation to be adopted quickly across the NHS.


Williams believes the scale of uptake would have been impossible for a small 
company to achieve on its own. The south-west AHSN made introductions, and 
promoted the platform in other parts of the country.


“It would be a mammoth task for us to go to 200 hospitals and set up a 
national procurement exercise,” says Williams. “You think of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as one organisation, but actually 
it’s lots and lots of organisations, with lots of levels within it. 
Understanding the hierarchy, and how various parts of it work, can be 
difficult.”


Life QI’s success, Williams says, is due to the way the company worked with 
the NHS to identify and solve a problem it had. For other firms looking to make 
a move into the area, he advises doing “something relatively small that you can 
get off the ground, prove it works and grow it from there, rather than trying 
to solve world hunger all in one go”.


Identifying opportunities


Perhaps the more traditional route to working with the NHS has been through 
the tender process. The government spends £230bn on the public sector every 
year and hasa target that 25% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/243685/SME_consultation_-_publication_version_-_18september.pdf>
 (pdf) of that goes to small businesses. It claims to beexceeding this 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/small-business-benefited-from-121-billion-in-government-spending-in-2014-2015>
 at 27.1%, although only 10.9% is direct.


In 2011, in a bid to improve the chance of small businesses winning tenders to 
work with the public sector, the government launchedContracts Finder 
<https://www.gov.uk/contracts-finder> – a site for contracts of more than 
£10,000 with the government and its agencies in England.Scotland 
<http://www.publiccontractsscotland.gov.uk/search/search_mainpage.aspx>, 
Northern Ireland <https://e-sourcingni.bravosolution.co.uk/web/login.shtml> and 
Wales <https://www.sell2wales.gov.wales/> each have their own procurement 
websites.


One firm with vast experience of the tender process is the public sector 
consultancyPrederi <http://prederi.com/>, which has worked with clinical 
commissioning groups and NHS foundation trusts. It’s a competitive environment, 
and managing director Stewart Johns says small businesses have to network to 
get advance notice of upcoming opportunities.

While small businesses can win tender bids, many will already be skewed 
towards the big firms by the time they reach procurement websites. Prederi’s 
team have had to become adept at spotting the signs.


“We read the requirements very carefully,” says Johns. “Firstly [we look for] 
whether there’s an incumbent, which happens quite a lot, as they’re likely to 
get the tender again. There can be questions about the number of people they 
might want at any one time, and if the bid has to be in within a week that 
might make you think someone is in line for this already. It’s experience that 
tells you.”


To be in with a chance, he explains, entrepreneurs have to “be proactive, get 
out and talk to people, and explain why you’re the experts, you’re the people 
who can help, you’re the people who’ve done it before”.

Unlocking innovation


There is arguably a growing sense in the NHS that innovation needs to be 
embraced. In 2015, theNHS innovation accelerator 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/innovation/nia/> (NIA) programme was 
launched by Sir Bruce Keogh, national medical director of the NHS commissioning 
board. One year on, 345 NHS providers and commissioners are using NIA 
innovations. Participants are given access to mentorship from high-profile 
experts, advice on procurement, marketing and economics, peer-to-peer support 
and access to a bursary of up to £30,000.


At the 2016 NHS conference 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sGvDQv8YWQA&feature=youtu.be&list=PLUQr-7EYOp6QL1gklMzT1Lvzs5kw5jJY3>
, Keogh said: “The NHS should be ideally equipped for the uptake of new 
innovations, but it’s a nut that we’ve found really difficult to crack over the 
years. Through the NIA programme, we’ve been able to match entrepreneurial 
endeavour with need in the NHS… [and have] been able to show very real and 
tangible benefits for patients and rapid uptake of new innovations.”


One such business is HealthUnlocked <https://healthunlocked.com/>, co-founded 
by Matt Jameson Evans, an ex-orthopaedic surgeon. The company has developed a 
social network for health, providing peer-to-peer support and promoting self 
care. Its online forums are embedded into the NHS Choices website (under the 
community tab) and the recommendations platformHealthUnlocked Local 
<https://healthunlocked.com/local?term=%20&location=> is being piloted by South 
Devon and Torbay CCG and Dorset CCG to help doctors prescribe social solutions 
(referral to a community group, running club or charity for support, for 
example) where appropriate, rather than medication.


“We know that 70% of people have never met someone with the same medical 
condition [that they have] before,” Jameson Evans says. “We’re providing a 
bridge so that people can access a mentor through [what is] often quite a long 
journey through illness.”


HealthUnlocked is now the most visited social platform for patients in the 
world, attracting 5m visits a month across 600 communities. The model works, 
Jameson Evans says, because of the collaboration with patient organisations, 
which are experts in their fields and monitor the forums. While the majority of 
traffic currently comes from the UK, the company has recently opened an office 
in New York and is planning on taking the model there.


Jameson Evans knew more than most about the NHS due to his background as a 
doctor, but says that in general working with the organisation can be 
complicated for entrepreneurs. “They’ve realised the barriers to entry for 
small businesses are incredibly hard in the NHS,” he says. “[But] I think the 
doors are opening. It’s a good time to be an SME that has solutions. No one’s 
saying it’s easy, but it’s a really good time.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 