
One whole month and up to 10 hours per day is what it will take Noemí Martínez 
to weave a poncho for which she will charge a maximum of 200,000 Colombian 
pesos (£54). Though this amount will barely cover the cost of the materials, 
she says she does it “out of love for the wool”.

Martínez is part of a group of seven women and two men who have been working 
together for three years, aiming to “rescue” traditional sheep wool shearing 
and weaving techniques, in a shop leased by the Tenjo city council in 
Cundinamarca, Colombia.

Supported by the city council and Artesanías de Colombia, Martínez is 
preserving the techniques and way of life of her parents and grandparents under 
Iberartesanías, a successful initiative that forms a part of the Ibero-American 
programme for international cooperation.

Following on from the Ibero-American Conference of Heads of State and 
Governments in 2012, Iberartesanías has been promoting the creation of public 
policy to support the production of crafts and improve the competitiveness of 
craft businesses.

“We’ve been given a huge amount of support — they bought us the spinning wheel 
and have leased us this shop,” she says as she continues to wind a hank of 
brown yarn with the skill of someone who has been in contact with these 
textiles since childhood.

Martínez explains at length all the processes that wool must go through before 
it becomes a piece of clothing. She adds that in addition to receiving public 
grants, it would be good to partner with other producers in order to increase 
their profit margins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b0401be0a7c53245ecfe4f215196d2329da120%2F0_188_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20with%20craft%3A%20a%20way%20of%20life%20for%20many%20Colombian%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20with%20craft%3A%20a%20way%20of%20life%20for%20many%20Colombian%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b0401be0a7c53245ecfe4f215196d2329da120%2F0_188_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 For the past three years, this group of women and men have been trying to 
rescue traditional ways of shearing and weaving sheep wool. Photograph: 
Macarena Soto/SEGIB 
Although so far she has not earned so much moneyseveral of her workmates have 
earned enough to enable them to help out at home using income from the sales.

The weavers share a building on the main square of Tenjo with other 
craftworkers who make jewellery with stones and precious metals, carve wood to 
create cooking utensils and decorative items, or sell traditional, local and 
organic foods.

Sandra Briñes, a member of a women’s peasant association who work to cultivate 
and process quinoa, explains that there were around 25 women when they started 
this business. Quinoa is the main staple food for many Andean peoples and it 
finds dozens of presentations and uses in this shop in Tenjo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f552f2602e97a78213dd75f255811dc98d4935a%2F0_271_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20with%20craft%3A%20a%20way%20of%20life%20for%20many%20Colombian%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20with%20craft%3A%20a%20way%20of%20life%20for%20many%20Colombian%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsegib-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fworking-craft-way-of-life-colombian-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f552f2602e97a78213dd75f255811dc98d4935a%2F0_271_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Quinoa is the main staple food for many Andean peoples. Photograph: Macarena 
Soto/SEGIB 
Before it can be sold, quinoa must undergo a meticulous production process and 
women are present throughout each phase. They are in charge of the cultivation, 
harvest, treatment, packaging and sales at the shop. The growing demand for 
their products attests to their quality.

“We sell flour, pasta, cookies, granola, quinoa as a grain,” Sandra says. She 
uses the opportunity to remind us of the potential of this superfood, whose 
protein content, they say, is similar to that of meat and fish.

Though she is aware that this work “is very good for you and for helping the 
family”, she’s also concerned with her neighbours’ understanding of the 
benefits of the product. “I eat it a lot and so does my baby. She has it as a 
flour or in a bottle. It’s a great food and it’s also provided us women with 
the opportunity to work with it and earn a living from it,” she says proudly.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by SEGIB, sponsor of the Latin 
America Now series
 