
1) Is Gareth Southgate really the best man for England job?

Currently there are no outstanding teams in international football. In part 
this is down to concentration of money in the club game, which has led to the 
world’s best players converging at fewer clubs than ever before. But to look at 
the winners of the lastWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> and European 
Championship, and to look at the South American giants, is to look at a fallow 
period across the board. Which is to say that it has never been easier to 
succeed, which is to say that England stand on the verge of opportunity. Though 
they do not have top-level players in every position and though they do not 
have any world stars, yet few countries have as deep a selection nor as wide an 
array of attacking talent.

The question, then, is whether Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> is the man to extract 
the maximum from it. That he is English is a plus, not because of modish 
nationalist sentiment but, because the point of the enterprise is to find the 
best national football team, the manager is an essential part of the enterprise 
and, as such, his or her identity should be subject to the same rules that 
govern the player. More specifically no elite football nation would outsource 
such an important role and there is also a moral imperative, as pithily noted 
by Frank Sobotka in the Wire. “We used to make shit in this country, build 
shit,” he said. “Now we just put our hand in the next guy’s pocket.”

Because international managers get very little time with their players they 
need not be great coaches and because they are dealing with those who have 
reached the top, their ability to motivate is also not crucial. Rather they 
must correctly identify their best individuals and arrange a system which suits 
them, then work out how to combat the strengths of their opponents. How little 
evidence there is of Southgate’s ability to do this is amazing, which is not to 
say it is beyond him but to marvel at how we find ourselves here.

• Southgate set for England job but work has only just begun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/england-world-cup-2018-gareth-southgate-scotland-wembley>

• FA plucks Southgate for England job from a bare cupboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/fa-gareth-southgate-england-manager-candidates>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4b9321743a9b76d39e7f0986214a35ed3307ec%2F0_273_5172_3104%2F5172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d4b9321743a9b76d39e7f0986214a35ed3307ec%2F0_273_5172_3104%2F5172.jpg>
 Gareth Southgate is unbeaten after three England matches and seems set to be 
given the job full-time. Photograph: Michael Regan/The FA via Getty Images 
2) Wales pay for Coleman’s lack of positive thinking

After a disappointing home draw with Georgia last time out Chris Coleman 
altered his formation from the 5-3-2 that has been so successful to a 4-2-2-2. 
Mindful of another opponent aiming to play on the counter, he inserted an extra 
attacker in the shape of Hal Robson-Kanu and moved Gareth Bale slightly deeper; 
his boldness was rewarded when the pair combined to putWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> ahead. But the goal came at the 
end of a period that had been controlled by Serbia, their sharp technique and 
intelligent movement overriding the Bale factor. But they did not create any 
serious chances, nor did they in a dull second half, and as the clock ran down 
Coleman might have urged his players forward in pursuit of a clinching second 
goal. However, he chose not to but, stranger still, did not restore the system 
with which his team are most comfortable. So, when he withdrew Joe Ledley – 
exhausted, no doubt, but whose scurrying tenacity in front of the back-four 
made him the game’s outstanding player – Serbia sniffed a chance and a minute 
later were level. Publicly Coleman professed satisfaction with what he had 
seen, though privately he would be within his rights to wonder why they were 
not better. And, while he was at it, he would also do well to challenge his own 
contribution.

• Wales 1-1 Serbia: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/wales-serbia-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fchris-coleman-wales-game-against-republic-of-ireland-not-a-must-win-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Coleman%3A%20'Wales%20game%20against%20Republic%20of%20Ireland%20not%20a%20must-win'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fchris-coleman-wales-game-against-republic-of-ireland-not-a-must-win-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Coleman%3A%20%27Wales%20game%20against%20Republic%20of%20Ireland%20not%20a%20must-win%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fchris-coleman-wales-game-against-republic-of-ireland-not-a-must-win-video&media=>
Chris Coleman: ‘Wales game against Republic of Ireland not a must-win’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/13/chris-coleman-wales-game-against-republic-of-ireland-not-a-must-win-video>
3) Martin O’Neill must work out plan to stifle Bale

Given that in Vienna there is a shoulder where death comes to cry and a tree 
where the doves go to die <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytdjYjM-cLg> it was 
no great surprise that between September 2012 and October 2016 Austria were 
unbeaten in home qualifiers. So for Ireland to leave the Ernst Happel with a 
win was quite some achievement; they now lead Group D by two points and are 
well-placed to win it. But their next game, at home to Wales, poses a different 
and specific problem: can they contain Gareth Bale? Though Austria’s David 
Alaba and Marko Arnautovic are very good indeed, they are not world-beaters 
like Bale and, should Wales exert similar pressure to Austria, it is unlikely 
that Ireland would make it to half-time without conceding. Individually they do 
not have the tools to cope with Bale, so Martin O’Neill must devise a plan for 
the collective. Most likely this will involve deep, disciplined defending – 
after all, a draw would be a reasonable result for Ireland, whereas Wales need 
to win. But there is more to it than that. Bale’s goal against Serbia on 
Saturday came, in part, because Vladimir Stojkovic charged out of his goal for 
no reason, and similar happened at the European Championship, when Matus 
Kozacik and Joe Hart were spooked simply by his presence behind a dead ball. 
So, perhaps more than anything, O’Neill must prime his men to stay calm; easier 
said than done.

• Austria 0-1 Republic of Ireland: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/austria-republic-of-ireland-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2a50a1e3d78e1c888f526e069b405671e7de04%2F0_84_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2a50a1e3d78e1c888f526e069b405671e7de04%2F0_84_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Gareth Bale scores for Wales against Serbia and will be a major threat to 
Republic of Ireland in their next game. Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
4) Croatia’s star-studded midfield can beat anyone

Croatia’s performance against Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
 was one of the highlights of the European Championship. Not only did they come 
from behind to beat the world’s most competent frontrunners but they did so in 
thrilling style and fielding a team studded with youngsters. So it is not at 
all surprising to see them at the top of Group I, nor will it be if they make a 
serious impression in Russia. In particular they have a midfield of conviction 
and imagination, as good as any in the world. Against Iceland it featured Milan 
Badelj, Mateo Kovacic and Ivan Rakitic, with Luka Modric, now fit, replacing 
Kovacic at half-time, to complete a trio of box-to-box schemers comfortable in 
any facet of their job – a rarity in the modern game. And with exciting players 
such as Ivan Perisic and Marcelo Brozovic outside them, along with a tangible 
sense of national pride that inspires less feted players to play above 
themselves, they have a team good enough to beat anyone.

• Croatia leave troubles at home to play best football in years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/24/croatia-portugal-divided-trouble-best-ever>

Ander Herrera: ‘Spain has the best midfield in the world by a long way’ | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/ander-herrera-spain-debut-england-wembley>
5) Spain need to find room for brilliant Isco

Spain’s 4-0 win over Macedonia was not as straightforward as the scoreline 
suggests, the margin established thanks to an own goal, a ricochet and two late 
goals. This is only to be expected, as Julen Lopetegui seeks to rebuild, but 
whatever he does, he does not have players anywhere near as brilliant as those 
bestowed upon his predecessor. In particular, his squad lacks spark, David 
Silva and his shuffle its only reliable provider, which is not to say that 
Vitolo and Thiago Alcantara are not good players – they are – but they are not 
definitive players, at least not yet. In which circumstance, perhaps he should 
find a starting spot for Isco whose off-the-cuff brilliance can punctuate the 
possession carousel.

• Julen Lopetegui: why I am passionate about English football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/spain-england-julen-lopetegui-wembley>

• Spain are fitting opponents for Southgate’s England template 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/13/england-spain-gareth-southgate-wembley-template>

6) Deschamps must build his France team around Pogba

Didier Deschamps has done a spectacular job in contriving to remain manager of 
France. Endowed with perhaps the world’s most talented squad, he has extracted 
from it close to the minimum; his preference for André-Pierre Gignac ahead of 
Anthony Martial is a sacking offence in and of itself. Nor has Deschamps 
discovered the best way of using Paul Pogba. Because his is a unique, 
transcendental talent, he can succeed in a variety of positions and against 
Sweden he played well shielding the back four. But this does not mean that 
picking him there is the smartest thing to do, even if, alongside him, Blaise 
Matuidi has emerged from last season’s slump. Such behaviour might be excusable 
had Pogba not explicitly stated that he is most useful when stationed on the 
left of a midfield three, by amazing coincidence the self-same position in 
which he excelled for Juventus. Of course, he might be wrong but, if he 
believes to the contrary, it barely matters and, given his age – he is still 
only 23 – he should be learning his position, not being shunted hither and yon. 
When a manager is lucky enough to have a player like Pogba, he must build 
around him, not shove him where there happens to be a space.

• Payet scores winner as France beat Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/world-cup-qualifiers-france-sweden-germany-san-marino>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ff1d94a2b6556822f7e27daf632cc2d23efc045%2F0_244_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ff1d94a2b6556822f7e27daf632cc2d23efc045%2F0_244_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Paul Pogba of France in action against Sweden. The Manchester United 
midfielder is the key man for Didier Deschamps. Photograph: Jean Catuffe/Getty 
Images 
7) Germany benefit from Serge Gnabry’s renewed confidence

Since leaving Arsenal, Serge Gnabry has exploded. He was superb throughout 
Germany’s Olympic campaign, finishing as joint-top scorer, and now has four 
goals in nine games for Werder Bremen. These exploits were enough to earn him a 
debut for his country and on Friday night he scored a hat-trick against San 
Marino. Now Arsène Wenger is no fool – he knew how good Gnabry was and did not 
want him to leave. In which context Gnabry deserves praise for his decision; 
ignoring such praise from such an eminent figure cannot be easy. But, unwilling 
to sit around and wait, Gnabry ignored his ego and did exactly that, so fully 
deserves the rewards earned by his bravery and confidence.

• Klose confirms retirement and joins Germany coaching staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/miroslav-klose-retirement-germany-coaching-staff>

8) Northern Ireland carry on their summer showing

After a strong summer showing in France, the pressure was on Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> to continue improving 
through World Cup qualifying; no longer would an occasional decent result 
obscure eventual failure. And in Azerbaijan they met a side in good form, their 
last three games yielding wins over San Marino and Norway, along with a point 
in Prague against the Czech Republic. But in Belfast they were barely given a 
look-in, dominated in midfield and brutalised from set pieces by a side 
intimately acquainted with its method. Confidence beats pressure every time.

• Northern Ireland 4-0 Azerbaijan: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/northern-ireland-azerbaijan-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82746c038ad782b5f3ec2d883cc3999f0328b0ad%2F0_56_5225_3135%2F5225.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202018%20qualifiers%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20latest%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fworld-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82746c038ad782b5f3ec2d883cc3999f0328b0ad%2F0_56_5225_3135%2F5225.jpg>
 Kyle Lafferty celebrates after scoring the opening goal at Windsor Park. 
Photograph: Charles McQuillan/Getty Images 
9) Belotti’s got the lot for Italy

Excelling against Liechtenstein is no big deal but even so Italy will have 
been heartened by their performance on Saturday. And, having struggled with 
attackers for more than a decade, they may have found a star in Andrea Belotti. 
Doubtless his cause was helped by playing with a partner – Ciro Immobile – and 
two wingers, Antonio Candreva and Jack Bonaventura, in a bold 4-2-4 formation. 
But there was more to it than that. As a youngster Belotti played in midfield 
and on the wing and is comfortable playing as the main striker or in behind – 
versatility that will not be lost on Giampiero Ventura, who managed him at club 
level before taking the national job. In Liechtenstein Belotti showed the full 
range of his talents. His first goal was a tap-in but only because he 
anticipated where the ball dropped while his second followed an intelligent run 
and dextrous first touch. But the highlight of his evening was the craning, 
stretching header that put Immobile through for Italy’s third goal. The 
question now is whether Ventura has the moxie to stick with such an offensive 
approach.

• Italy finally have system to maximise talent at their disposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/italy-best-available-talent-spain-meeting>

10) Strachan deserves a chance with Scotland

Gordon Strachan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gordon-strachan> is 
under pressure as manager of Scotland, which is fair enough; they have not 
played well under him nor have they improved all that much. But the idea that 
someone else could come in and necessarily improve things is a funny one – the 
world is no more replete with necessarily better managers eager for the job 
than it is with necessarily better players able to do a job. And at least 
Strachan knows his squad; any replacement, whoever it might be, would have to 
start from the beginning. So, though he might be privately encouraged to look 
again at some of the players he has discarded and though the evidence for 
keeping him is not overwhelming, the SFA would do well to hold their nerve and 
give him a chance. They might think it cannot get any worse but verily it can.

• Scotland’s surrender must be Strachan’s final failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/12/scotland-gordon-strachan-wembley-england-failure>
 