
The world’s largest hedge fund is building a piece of software to automate the 
day-to-day management of the firm, including hiring, firing and other strategic 
decision-making.


Bridgewater Associates has a team of software engineers working on the project 
at the request of billionaire founder Ray Dalio, who wants to ensure the 
company can run according to his vision even when he’s not there, theWall 
Street Journal reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-worlds-largest-hedge-fund-is-building-an-algorithmic-model-of-its-founders-brain-1482423694>
.

Mark Zuckerberg out-robots his AI robot in saccharine holiday video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-jarvis-artificial-intelligence-video>
“The role of many remaining humans at the firm wouldn’t be to make individual 
choices but to design the criteria by which the system makes decisions, 
intervening when something isn’t working,” wrote the Journal, which spoke to 
five former and current employees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbridgewater-associates-ai-artificial-intelligence-management%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ac8ade09b127f3be5a7f31f2b45e6cd635bd57%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%E2%80%99s%20largest%20hedge%20fund%20to%20replace%20managers%20with%20artificial%20intelligence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbridgewater-associates-ai-artificial-intelligence-management%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%E2%80%99s%20largest%20hedge%20fund%20to%20replace%20managers%20with%20artificial%20intelligence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fbridgewater-associates-ai-artificial-intelligence-management%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ac8ade09b127f3be5a7f31f2b45e6cd635bd57%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Ray Dalio, president and founder of Bridgewater Associates. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
The firm, which manages $160bn, created the team of programmers specializing 
in analytics and artificial intelligence, dubbed the Systematized Intelligence 
Lab, inearly 2015 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-27/bridgewater-is-said-to-start-artificial-intelligence-team>
. The unit is headed up by David Ferrucci, who previously led IBM’s development 
of Watson, the supercomputer thatbeat humans at Jeopardy! in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/feb/17/ibm-computer-watson-wins-jeopardy>
.

The company is already highly data-driven, with meetings recorded and staff 
asked to grade each other throughout the day using a ratings system called 
“dots”. The Systematized Intelligence Lab has built a tool that incorporates 
these ratings into “Baseball Cards” that show employees’ strengths and 
weaknesses. Another app, dubbed The Contract, gets staff to set goals they want 
to achieve and then tracks how effectively they follow through.

These tools are early applications of PriOS, the over-arching management 
software that Dalio wants to make three-quarters of all management decisions 
within five years. The kinds of decisions PriOS could make include finding the 
right staff for particular job openings and ranking opposing perspectives from 
multiple team members when there’s a disagreement about how to proceed.

The machine will make the decisions, according to a set of principles laid out 
by Dalio about the company vision.

“It’s ambitious, but it’s not unreasonable,” said Devin Fidler 
<http://www.iftf.org/devinfidler/>, research director at the Institute For The 
Future, who has built aprototype management system called iCEO 
<https://hbr.org/2015/04/heres-how-managers-can-be-replaced-by-software>. “A 
lot of management is basically information work, the sort of thing that 
software can get very good at.”

Automated decision-making is appealing to businesses as it can save time and 
eliminate human emotional volatility.

“People have a bad day and it then colors their perception of the world and 
they make different decisions. In a hedge fund that’s a big deal,” he added.

Will people happily accept orders from a robotic manager? Fidler isn’t so 
sure. “People tend not to accept a message delivered by a machine,” he said, 
pointing to the need for a human interface.

“In companies that are really good at data analytics very often the decision 
is made by a statistical algorithm but the decision is conveyed by somebody who 
can put it in an emotional context,” he explained.

Futurist Zoltan Istvan, founder of the Transhumanist party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/16/transhumanist-party-immortality-zoltan-istvan-presidential-campaign>
, disagrees. “People will follow the will and statistical might of machines,” 
he said, pointing out that people already outsource way-finding to GPS or the 
flying of planes to autopilot.

However, the period in which people will need to interact with a robot manager 
will be brief.

“Soon there just won’t be any reason to keep us around,” Istvan said. “Sure, 
humans can fix problems, but machines in a few years time will be able to fix 
those problems even better.

“Bankers will become dinosaurs.”

It’s not just the banking sector that will be affected. According to a report 
by Accenture, artificial intelligence will free people from the drudgery of 
administrative tasks in many industries. The company surveyed 1,770 managers 
across 14 countries to find out how artificial intelligence would impact their 
jobs.

'This is awful': robot can keep children occupied for hours without supervision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/29/ipal-robot-childcare-robobusiness-san-jose>
“AI will ultimately prove to be cheaper, more efficient, and potentially more 
impartial in its actions than human beings,” said the authors writing up the 
results of the survey inHarvard Business Review 
<https://hbr.org/2016/11/how-artificial-intelligence-will-redefine-management>.

However, they didn’t think there was too much cause for concern. “It just 
means that their jobs will change to focus on things only humans can do.”

The authors say that machines would be better at administrative tasks like 
writing earnings reports and tracking schedules and resources while humans 
would be better at developing messages to inspire the workforce and drafting 
strategy.

Fidler disagrees. “There’s no reason to believe that a lot of what we think of 
as strategic work or even creative work can’t be substantially overtaken by 
software.”

However, he said, that software will need some direction. “It needs human 
decision making to set objectives.”

Bridgewater Associates did not respond to a request for comment.
 