
The world’s largest oil, coal, cement and mining companies have been given 45 
days to respond to a complaint that their greenhouse gas emissions have 
violated the human rights of millions of people living in the Phillippines.

In a potential landmark legal case, the Commission on Human Rights of the 
Philippines (CHR), a constitutional body with the power to investigate human 
rights violations, has sent 47 “carbon majors” including Shell, BP, Chevron, 
BHP Billiton and Anglo American,a 60-page document 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/seasia/ph/PageFiles/735232/Climate_Change_and_Human_Rights_Petition.pdf>
 accusing them of breaching people’s fundamental rights to “life, food, water, 
sanitation, adequate housing, and to self determination”.

The move is the first step in what is expected to be an official investigation 
of the companies by the CHR, and the first of its kind in the world to be 
launched by a government body.

The complaint argues that the 47 companies should be held accountable for the 
effects of their greenhouse gas emissions in thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> and demands that they explain 
how human rights violations resulting from climate change will be “eliminated, 
remedied and prevented”.

It calls for an official investigation into the human rights implications of 
climate change and ocean acidification and whether the investor-owned “carbon 
majors” are in breach of their responsibilities.

Philippines investigates Shell and Exxon over climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/may/07/climate-change-shell-exxon-philippines-fossil-fuel-companies-liability-extreme-weather>
The Philippines, an archipelago of more than 7,000 islands, is one of the most 
vulnerable countries in the world to climate change.

Four of its most devastating super-cyclones have occurred in the last decade, 
and the country has recorded increasingly severe floods and heatwaves that have 
been linked to man-made global warming.

Typhoon Haiyan, known locally as Yolanda, was one of the most powerful storms 
ever recorded, killing more than 6,000 people and displacing 650,000 others in 
2013.

The legal complaint has been brought by typhoon survivors and non-governmental 
organisations and is supported by more than 31,000 Filipinos.


“We demand justice. Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> has taken our homes 
and our loved ones. These powerful corporations must be called to account for 
the impact of their business activities,” said Elma Reyes from Alabat Island in 
Quezon, who survived super typhoon Rammasun in 2008 and is part of the group 
submitting the complaint to the CHR.

The full legal investigation is now expected to start in October after the 47 
companies have responded. Although all 47 will be ordered to attend public 
hearings, the CHR can only force those 10 with offices in the Philippines to 
appear.

 These include Chevron, ExxonMobil, BP, Royal Dutch Shell, Total, BHP 
Billiton, Anglo American, Lafarge, Holcim, and Taiheiyo Cement Corporation. The 
CHR has the power to seek the assistance of the UN to encourage any which do 
not attend to co-operate.

“The commission’s actions are unprecedented. For the first time, a national 
human rights body is officially taking steps to address the impacts of climate 
change on human rights and the responsibility of private actors,” said Zelda 
Soriano, legal and political adviser forGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> Southeast Asia, one of the 
groups which has brought the complaint to the CHR.

“This is an important building block in establishing the moral and legal 
‘precedent’ that big polluters can be held responsible for current and 
threatened human rights infringements resulting from fossil fuel products. From 
the Netherlands to the US, people are using legal systems to hold their 
governments to account and demand climate action,” she said.

The list of the 47 “carbon majors” being asked to respond to the CHR is based 
on research byRichard Heede, director of the Climate Accountability Institute 
in Colorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/20/90-companies-man-made-global-warming-emissions-climate-change>
. In 2013he calculated that just 90 global companies  
<http://climateaccountability.org/pdf/MRR%209.1%20Apr14R.pdf>had produced 
nearly two-thirds of the greenhouse gas emissions generated since the start of 
the industrial revolution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fworlds-largest-carbon-producers-face-landmark-human-rights-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F126e499a9a2397ff481e8fa7787f62a8ad8ee97d%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World's%20largest%20carbon%20producers%20face%20landmark%20human%20rights%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fworlds-largest-carbon-producers-face-landmark-human-rights-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%27s%20largest%20carbon%20producers%20face%20landmark%20human%20rights%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fworlds-largest-carbon-producers-face-landmark-human-rights-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F126e499a9a2397ff481e8fa7787f62a8ad8ee97d%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 A Filipino nun joins the Climate Solidarity prayer march in Manila, 
Philippines, November 2015. Photograph: Aaron Favila/AP 
Together these companies emitted around 315 gigatons of CO2 equivalent into 
the atmosphere, or nearly 22% of estimated global industry greenhouse gas 
emissions from 2010 to 2013, said Heede.

“We pray that the CHR heed the demand to recommend to policymakers and 
legislators to develop and adopt effective accountability mechanisms that 
victims of climate change can easily access,” said Father Edwin Gariguez, 
executive secretary of Caritas Philippines and a recipient of the Goldman 
environmental prize.

The CHR is not a court and would have no power to force companies to reduce 
emissions or fine them. However, it can make recommendations to government and 
would add to the worldwide pressure to persuade shareholdersto divest from 
heavy carbon emitters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/23/a-beginners-guide-to-fossil-fuel-divestment>
.

The investigation is the latest in a growing tide of climate liability cases 
being brought against governments and corporations. In June, the Netherlands’ 
high court ruled on the world’s first climate liability suit,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/dutch-government-ordered-cut-carbon-emissions-landmark-ruling>
ordering the Dutch government to take stronger action against climate change to 
better protect its citizens.

However, several court cases launched in the US 
<http://abovethelaw.com/2016/04/novel-climate-lawsuit-survives-dismissal-for-now/>
 urging the US government to take more action against climate change have been 
dismissed.
 