
Last week, I bought a selection of clothes recommended by an online personal 
stylist: a pair of skinny Topman jeans, a perfectly fitting white T-shirt from 
Jack & Jones, and most daringly – for me, anyway – some khaki chino shorts by 
Pull&Bear.

We’d carried out the consultation online, with me sharing not only obvious 
information like my size, desired price range and “daringness” (with “daring” 
defined as wearing floral shirts or shorts with blazers), but also helping her 
work out my actual style preferences by telling her brands I like and flicking 
through endless pictures of well-dressed men to highlight the looks I want.

This is no AI horror story, though. My stylist Sophie Bailey-Hine is very 
real, and her and her colleagues atThread <https://www.thread.com/>, a British 
startup that was founded in 2012, are currently helping 480,000 men find a new 
image, dress well, or simply sort out their clothes shopping.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75f3e44317e91b6f5fc090139ac48b028112e67%2F0_0_699_576%2F699.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75f3e44317e91b6f5fc090139ac48b028112e67%2F0_0_699_576%2F699.png>
 A typical (for me) Thread recommendation. Photograph: Thread 
There is one small twist: Thread has just eight stylists. Bailey-Hine herself, 
one of the company’s senior stylists, has 50,000 clients. Every Thursday, every 
single one of them gets a selection of new outfit ideas. This week, Bailey-Hine 
recommended me “a great outfit for dinner or drinks”, “shorts that you can wear 
to work” and a selection of white trainers, as well as some ideas for outfits 
for work or the weekend.

The shorts were a dud (I’m not sure I have the confidence although the 
Guardian is one place no one would bat an eyelid), but the rest contained some 
gems. I can’t afford to spend £50 a week on clothes, but that’s not a huge 
problem: the feedback on what I like and don’t like will help Sophie pick her 
ideas for the future. The service itself is free, though that doesn’t make it 
immune to the criticism it is, like many startups, engaged in the process
memorably described by the New Yorker’s Charles Murray 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/05/27/change-the-world>, of “solving 
all the problems of being 20 years old, with cash on hand, because that’s who 
thinks them up.” Thread makes its money on a cut of all sales.

Actually buying clothes from the company is an alarmingly frictionless 
experience. Once your order is placed – and every order over £50 is shipped for 
free – Thread bundles it together with those of other customers and places bulk 
purchases through its partners. Those are the companies that actually provide 
and store the clothes; retailers such as ASOS and Urban Outfitters, as well as 
smaller boutiques and fashion houses. Only recently has Thread begun to 
warehouse any clothes at all, and it now pre-purchases stocks of its most 
popular few items. Either way, once the entire order is in Thread’s hands, it 
assembles and ships it out, usually within a couple of days.

I hate shopping

Kieran O’Neill, Thread’s 28-year-old co-founder and chief executive, is a 
serial entrepreneur who started his first company, a YouTube-style streaming 
site, aged just 15. That was eventually earning him £5,000 a month, a nice 
amount for a high school student, but eventually the ability for users to 
upload content went awry and landed him a lawsuit with Disney. That suit was 
settled, costing O’Neill $100,000, but it left him soured on the platform, 
which he sold eventually sold to Carl Page, brother of Google founder Larry, 
for $1.25m. After that, he became known for Playfire, a games-focused social 
network that he again sold, in May 2012, to games retailer Green Man Gaming.

This time, he says, he wants to stick around. That’s not just because of 
personal ambition, although he does say that he hopes Thread can fulfil his 
current goal, “to learn how to be the chief executive of a 500-employee 
company” (Thread has just 32 staff members). It’s also because he set out to 
build a company that he would personally rely on.

“I was interested in dressing well, but didn’t particularly like shopping very 
much. Oxford Street on a Saturday was my idea of hell, and online there was an 
overwhelming number of things you could look at. And so I kind of had this 
problem.

“All through, my goal with this business is not really to build a niche quirky 
retail thing. The majority of men want to dress decently, and don’t 
particularly love shopping that much. So if you can find a way to spend way 
less time on it, with a much much better result, I think it’s what the majority 
of men would use. And so I see this as building a new default for how the 
majority of men buy clothes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd21a5173c2435ddf601c774a35d251d2685b1d%2F0_187_5620_3372%2F5620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd21a5173c2435ddf601c774a35d251d2685b1d%2F0_187_5620_3372%2F5620.jpg>
 Thread’s style director Shaunie Brett checks stock. Photograph: Thread 
The startup won a position in the prestigious Y Combinator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/y-combinator-oakland-universal-basic-income-pilot-project>
 accelerator in San Francisco, a sort of three-month boot-camp for startups, 
which led to one of its first paying customers being Instagram CEO Kevin 
Systrom. But after graduating, it moved from San Francisco back to London, and 
after a stint in trendy Shoreditch is now further east in a decidedly less cool 
part of Whitechapel.

The decision to return home was driven in part, O’Neill says, by a desire to 
be involved in London’s fashion-tech scene, already at the time led by 
companies includingNet-a-Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/may/14/net-a-porter-fashion-digital-revolution>
,Asos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/asos-sales-brexit-benefits-pound-eu-referendum>
 andFarfetch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2013/sep/13/farfetch-jose-neves-digital-fashion-video>
. It wasn’t the only decision the company would make in its early days that 
went against prevailing wisdom: equally unusual was its choice, shortly after 
launch, to focus on exclusively on menswear, commonly an afterthought in the 
fashion world.

It’s a choice that infuriated some early users, including O’Neill’s wife, who 
had grown to appreciate the service just as much as the men who currently make 
up its customer base. (Before I met O’Neill, my girlfriend made me promise to 
ask him when it would launch for women, purely based on seeing the experience 
over my shoulder. The answer is “in the medium term”, he says.)

It was an obvious choice given O’Neill’s founding ethos to build something 
he’d want to use, but it was also forced by the circumstances: in its original 
form, with stylists selecting clothes for both genders, Thread was little more 
than a mechanical turk. In contrast to the hyper-efficient company it’s become, 
the first months of activity saw each stylist working with as few as a hundred 
clients, and doing all the work manually.

“The goal was to build an experience that worked for the customer, and then 
work on the scalability second,” O’Neill said. And from a purely human approach 
in 2013, the scalability has come in droves.

The computer will see you now

Machine learning is firmly in buzzword territory today. The term is used 
broadly to mean any technology which involves a computer teaching itself how to 
carry out tasks, as well as more narrowly to refer to a specific type of 
learning, deep learning, which works on a particular system called a deep 
neural network. But whichever definition you use, it’s become one of those 
terms that gets sprinkled liberally on startup pitches, to make them more 
appealing to investors, journalists and customers. I’ve even heard reports of 
companies specifically adding a machine learning element to their plan, not 
because it improves the product, but just because it improves the pitch.

So it’s odd that Thread doesn’t mention machine learning, either to me (their 
initial correspondence referred only to “a powerful algorithm”) or their 
customers, for whom the pitch is fully on the stylists. Because the company 
does use the technology, and uses it heavily. There’s no other way, 
practically, that stylists like Sophie would be able to provide an effective 
service to as many as 50,000 men every week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd93d553dff961352cd9d7a5321a168929c8b152%2F0_77_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Would%20you%20trust%20a%20stylist%20with%2050%2C000%20clients%20to%20get%20your%20look%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fthread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd93d553dff961352cd9d7a5321a168929c8b152%2F0_77_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 One of Bailey-Hine’s colleagues, thread stylist Sophie Gaten, at work. 
Photograph: Thread 
From day one, the stylists were working as much to teach the algorithm how to 
aid them as they were to get the best clothes to customers. In the early days, 
it stumbled over easy, but ultimately useless, correlations: customers who 
bought grey T-shirts would also buy white T-shirts, for instance. Technically 
accurate, but also useless information for a stylist to have.

Now, the algorithm works better, letting a stylist lay out the skeleton of an 
outfit while filling in the specifics and targeting who actually receives it as 
part of their picks. So Bailey-Hine gets to describe an outfit with a blue 
blazer, T-shirt, chinos and a leather belt, but it’s the algorithm that 
specifically picks a pair of Diesel chinos in my size, and recommends that she 
suggest the whole outfit to me, and not someone who has repeatedly ignored 
chino suggestions in favour of jeans.

It also allows for the stylist’s own taste to filter through. “I’m obsessed 
with simple Scandinavian clothes,” Bailey-Hine tells me, “while my fellow 
stylist Sam is big into street style and Freddie is our very own suiting expert 
– everyone has their own thing.” And while it may be impossible to connect on a 
one-to-one level with tens of thousands of people, Sophie says she still feels 
close to some clients. “It can be incredibly fulfilling to hear what a 
difference a few clothing tweaks can make to their confidence and personal 
growth, be it career- or relationship-wise.”

In a world where fears of robots “taking jobs” is rife, Thread offers some 
hope. Yes, eight stylists are doing the jobs of hundreds or thousands in a 
pre-AI age; but those eight are working with AI, not for it. And besides, 
Sophie says, “one of the best things I can do as a stylist is to look at photos 
of a guy and within a few seconds think, ‘OK, he’d look better if he was 
wearing a slimmer jean, he could make that navy suit look more interesting with 
a knit tie, and he’d look really good in a light Private White V.C jacket for a 
sharper take on his utilitarian vibe.’


“I don’t think a computer will master that for a decade or so, so I’m safe for 
a while.”
 