
Major new operas have a habit of revealing their secrets over time. Written on 
Skin,George Benjamin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/george-benjamin>’s 
chilling parable about the transformative potential of art, is receiving its 
first revival at Covent Garden since itsUK premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/10/written-on-skin-review> in 2013. 
ThoughMartin Crimp <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/martin-crimp>’s text, in which 
the protagonists narrate their own stories in the third person, can seem 
mannered after repeated hearings, deepening familiarity with Benjamin’s score 
increases one’s awareness of its beauty, its violence and the forensic yet 
immediate way in which it probes psychological extremes.

The double-casting of one role and two substantial changes elsewhere, 
meanwhile, remind us of the work’s growing attraction for new interpreters.
Barbara Hannigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/11/barbara-hannigan-conducting-britten-sinfonia>
, for whom Agnès was written, was spellbinding on opening night, thoughGeorgia 
Jarman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGgFt57kUAI> takes over later in the 
run.Iestyn Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/28/iestyn-davies-countertenor-farinelli-interview>
, sounding glorious, makes the Boy a more overtly roguish, albeit less 
otherworldly figure than Bejun Mehta, who created him.Mark Padmore 
<http://www.markpadmore.com/> replaces Allan Clayton as the sinister male angel.
Victoria Simmonds <http://www.victoriasimmonds.net/> as his female counterpart, 
andChristopher Purves <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/christopher-purves> as the 
sexually troubled Protector, remain exceptional in the roles they played four 
years ago. Benjamin himself conducts.
 Cold meddling … Iestyn Davies as the Boy) and Ben Clifford (Angel Archivist). 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Katie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/17/on-my-radar-katie-mitchell-cultural-highlights-happy-valley-tacita-dean-caryl-churchill-argerich>
’s production, however, arouses more mixed feelings. The angels, coldly 
meddling in worldly affairs, are reimagined as archivists trying to rationalise 
historical brutality, the emotional significance of which eludes them. But 
Mitchell’s busy use of a split-level, multiple-room set can be distracting, 
most notably in the climactic final encounter between the Protector and Agnès, 
weakening its impact as a result.

 * At the Royal Opera House, London, until 30 January 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/written-on-skin-by-katie-mitchell>. Box 
office: 020-7304 4000. Watch the trailer for Written on Skin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WsuTSOKYEF4>  