
It stops you dead in your tracks: it is as though you've stumbled across a 
modern-art Lego village. Even the lurid, graffiti-clad walls of Miami's dusty 
back streets can't prepare you for the spectacle of the Wynwood Arts District. 
From Bridget Riley-style monochrome patterns to Mexican psychedelia, this 
square mile of pristine modular buildings is covered from roof to pavement in 
cutting-edge street art. A world away from the power-walkers and 
sun-worshippers of South Beach, Wynwood is fast becoming known as one of 
America's most creative neighbourhoods.

The empty warehouses left behind by a shrinking textile industry in this once 
Puerto Rican neighbourhood began to attract artists a decade ago. In 2009, 
property speculatorTony Goldman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/16/nyregion/tony-goldman-real-estate-visionary-dies-at-68.html?_r=1&>
, the man who revitalised New York's SoHo and turned Miami's South Beach into 
an art-deco paradise, gave the area a shot in the arm. He bought a block in the 
centre of the area and turned it over to artists, gallerists and restaurateurs.

Now, with more than 70 galleries plus studios, cafes and bars, it's the cool 
younger brother of Miami Beach's art scene. Jose Nava Lujambio of the Wynwood 
Arts District Association says that duringArt Basel 
<https://www.artbasel.com/en/Miami-Beach> – the art fair held here each 
December – "the art collectors go to Miami Beach, but the artists come here".

I walked up to Wynwood from the apartment in the waterside district of 
Edgewater that I found throughAirbnb <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/>. Long before I 
reached Wynwood's main drag, North West 2nd Avenue, I was met by luminous 
shopfronts and surreal murals. The graffiti writers here have clearly felt the 
need to raise the stakes, given the exalted company they are keeping.
 Murals in the Wynwood arts district. Photograph: Michele Eve Sandberg/Corbis 
In the heart of Wynwood, Gallery Diet <http://gallerydiet.com/> , on the 
corner of NW 23rd, has a humble facade belying its ambitious, eclectic 
contents. On my visit, the bold creations of Israeli sculptorOhad Meromi  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-9BlhxCfnkI>stood proudly beside video art by 
Oliver Laric <http://oliverlaric.com/> and ink-stained originals by underground 
comic artistPeter Bagge <http://www.peterbagge.com/>. If one gallery sums up 
Wynwood's ability to punch above its weight, Diet would be it. Only a discreet 
price list on the counter reminds you this is a working gallery, not a private 
collection.

At the other end of the spectrum, EVLWorld <http://evlworld.com/> at 2345 NW 
2nd, is the official gallery/shop of legendary graffiti artist Erni Vales. He 
doesn't miss a chance to put his pop art on as many saleable items as possible: 
mugs, watches, phone covers. There are original works, too, but they're in 
a far more rarefied price bracket.

At Kawaii Universe <http://www.kawaiiuniverse.com/> (a gallery at 2405 NW 2nd 
dedicated to the Japanese worship of cuteness (kawaii), artist Valentina Crespo 
turns art's relationship with commerce on its head. Painstakingly handmade 
stickers masquerade as mass-produced, disposable manga decals, and you can walk 
out with a beautiful piece for a couple of dollars.

These three hugely contrasting galleries are a stone's throw from each other, 
and there are many others. Art Walk guided tours on Fridays and Saturdays (
wynwoodartwalk.com <http://www.wynwoodartwalk.com/>, $30pp) are highly 
recommended. Afterwards, check out the social hub of Wynwood, during the day at 
least –Panther Coffee <http://www.panthercoffee.com/> at 2390 NW 2nd. Its 
reputation for a superlative cup has spread far beyond its walls, and customers 
were queuing out the door during the most recent Basel. And if you really want 
to pay tribute to your surroundings, theWynwood Kitchen and Bar 
<http://www.wynwoodkitchenandbar.com/home.html> at 2550 NW 2nd and designed in 
part byShepard Fairey <http://www.obeygiant.com/> of Obama Hope  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barack_Obama_%22Hope%22_poster>poster fame, has 
cocktails named in honour of him and other renowned street artists.
 Wynwood Walls. Photograph: Aaron Davidson/Getty 
It also has the bonus of an outdoor area right beside the Wynwood Walls 
<http://thewynwoodwalls.com/>, the jewel in this remarkable district's crown. A 
private park (entrance is free), the Walls are a showcase for, as Goldman 
declared in 2009, "the greatest street art ever seen in one place". The murals 
are breathtaking, and the park immaculate.

The place that best embodies Wynwood's split personality is Lester's 
<http://lestersmiami.com/> at 2519 NW 2nd. By day, lattes are sipped as locals 
gaze into the screens of their iPads and MacBooks. At night, art students, 
artists and patrons turn the cafe into a bacchanal, soundtracked by – during my 
visit, at least – a young man with a keyboard worshipping at the altars of 
synth-pop titans Giorgio Moroder and Jan Hammer. Well, it is Miami, after all.

And I was surprised to find that in this city of flash cars and ostentation, 
the humble bicycle is an unexpectedly agreeable way to get around. You can hire 
a bike in Miami Beach (around $35 a day), and cycle to Wynwood past the 
millionaires' playgrounds of Hibiscus and Star Islands and along the beautiful 
Venetian Causeway. Locals occasionally run a cycling version of theArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Walk, and there are plans for 
Wynwood's cycle paths and crosswalks to be given a makeover by commissioned 
artists.

However, as Wynwood's reputation grows, Nava Lujambio concedes the 
inevitability of commercial enterprises pushing up rents at the expense of 
resident artists: "Already, we're hearing of some people leaving to go to 
Little Havana because it's cheaper."

It is feasible, given the dedication to preserving its artistic status, that 
Wynwood won't become a style-over-substance shadow of its former self. But I 
wouldn't recommend waiting to find out: Wynwood's time is now.

• Flights were provided by Virgin Atlantic (0844 209 7777, virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com>), which flies to Miami from Heathrow from £540 
return. Accommodation was provided by Airbnb (airbnb.co.uk 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk>), with double rooms in Edgewater, Miami from £40 a 
night
 