
New York’s Metropolitan Opera has announced that Yannick Nézet-Séguin is to be 
the company’s new music director 
<http://www.metopera.org/About/Press-Releases/YannickNezet-Seguin/>. The 
41-year-old French-Canadian conductor succeeds James Levine, who held the 
position for 40 years but retires at the end of this current season.

Yannick Nézet-Séguin: 'I had a dream, and that dream came true'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/15/yannick-nezet-seguin-interview-mahler>
Nézet-Séguin <http://www.yannicknezetseguin.com/> will not take up his 
position officially until the 2020-21 season due to existing commitments. 
During the interim period, Nézet-Séguin assumes the title music director 
designate and will conduct two operas a season, although he will be involved 
from the outset in the company’s artistic planning.Levine will be music 
director emeritus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/15/james-levine-retiring-metropolitan-opera-house-best-momentshttps://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/15/james-levine-retiring-metropolitan-opera-house-best-moments>
.

Nézet-Séguin made his Met debut in 2009 conducting Bizet’s Carmen – a 
“bracing, fleet and fresh account of the score” from which “the singers 
benefited immensely,”wrote the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/02/arts/music/02carmen.html>’s reviewer. 
Nézet-Séguin has since conducted Don Carlos, Rusalka and La Traviata there, and 
opened the 2015-16 season with Verdi’s Otello, about which theWall Street 
Journal wrote 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/otello-at-the-metropolitan-opera-review-1442959284>
: “If the action on the stage sometimes flagged, there was plenty in the pit, 
where the superb conductor, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, etched a high-tension 
dramatic arc.”

His Wagner debut at the New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
 theatre comes later in the season with a production of Der Fliegende Holländer.

I believe the Met is the greatest opera company in the world with the best 
principal singers on the planet
Yannick Nézet-Séguin 
Although he has conducted widely in the UK, Nézet-Séguin has done little opera 
in the country. His choice of orchestral and operatic repertoire tends broadly 
towards 19th and early 20th-century European music, his eye for detail and 
sensitive touch bringing fresh takes on great canonical works by the likes of 
Mahler, Mendelssohn and Saint-Saens. But a Rusalka at Covent Garden in spring 
2012 met with strong reviews: “Nézet-Séguin’s conducting gives the performance 
a dramatic shape: measured to begin with, it gradually builds in intensity 
until the climax is authentically shattering,”wrote Andrew Clements in the 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/28/rusalka-review>. 

The conductor is midway through a Mozart opera recording series for Deutsche 
Grammophon with the Chamber Orchestra of Europe and continues to work across 
the continent – guesting at institutions including the London Philharmonic, the 
Berlin Philharmonic and Vienna Philharmonic. His successful tenure as music 
director of the Rotterdam Philharmonic comes to an end in summer 2018.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Y_tLuudGGk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Y_tLuudGGk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Y_tLuudGGk&media=>
In the US, he has been music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/09/philadelphia-orchestra-nezet-seguin-review>
 since 2012: his contract there has recently been extended to 2025-26.

“Becoming the music director of the Metropolitan Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> is the fulfillment of a lifelong 
dream for me,” said Nézet-Séguin. “I believe [it] is the greatest opera company 
in the world with the best principal singers on the planet.”

Not only in New York – how the most powerful man in opera took the Met to the 
world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/02/new-york-metroplitan-opera-house-peter-gelb>
“Yannick was the clear choice,” said general manager Peter Gelb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/02/new-york-metroplitan-opera-house-peter-gelb>
. “He is the right artist to lead us forward into a new chapter in the history 
of the Met.”

Jessica Phillips, clarinettist and chair of the Met’s Orchestra committee said 
“The Met Orchestra enjoys a tremendously fruitful, positive relationship with 
Maestro Nézet-Séguin. He embodies the ... respect for rich tradition that opera 
lowers around the world have come to cherish. We look forward to working 
together to shape this new era at the Met.”

Nézet-Séguin is only the third person to hold the title of music director in 
the Met’s history. Come 2020 and the official commencement of his role, he will 
conduct five productions per season as well as take on artistic responsibility 
for the company’s orchestra, chorus and music staff.

“I will make it my mission to passionately preserve the highest artistic 
standards while imagining a new bright future for our art form,” said 
Nézet-Séguin on a live link from Japan, where he is currently on tour with the 
Philadelphia Orchestra. “I want to make people realise how opera is important 
in their lives.”
 