
WHY DID ENGLAND KEEP UP THAT MANNEQUIN CHALLENGE SHAMBLES INTO INJURY-TIME?

Remember ‘The Past’? Things were better back then, weren’t they? Loads of good 
people were still alive, lunatics remained on the fringe of society rather than 
at the top of it and grown adult MPs didn’t waste everyone’s time by raising 
questionsabout a chocolate bar in parliament 
<https://twitter.com/newschambers/status/798858448339222528>. Football was 
better in The Past too. Sure, you could only watch one game a month on telly, 
pitches were swamps that swallowed any hint of skill or athletic endeavour, if 
you were lucky that thing dropping on you from the upper tier was warm and 
unlucky if it was a brick, grounds were deathtraps and 90% of authority figures 
regarded anyone who went to a game as simian scum. But, on the up side, players 
did go out of an evening and get trousered with impunity, on-pitch violence was 
veritably encouraged and those who meted it out were invited outside 
afterwards. Yes, football was better in The Past.

The good news then, is that following England’s 2-2 draw with Spain on 
Tuesday, it looks like a couple of the brave poppy-wearin’ boys are looking to 
bring those fine traditions of The Past back. Firstly, Wayne Rooney was absent 
from Wembley on account of a knee-gah, and he clearly attempted to soothe his 
pain by politely joining a wedding held at England’s team hotel until the wee 
small hours. Pictures appeared to show him droopy of eye and red of lip, which 
the more cynical might determine was caused by the necking of much wine but, in 
reality of course,was nothing of the sort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/wayen-rooney-spokesman-celebrations-defends-england>
.

Wayne Rooney’s spokesman defends celebrations after Scotland match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/wayen-rooney-spokesman-celebrations-defends-england>
“Wayne, along with the rest of the England squad, was on a night off duty,” 
actually-I-think-you’ll-finded a spokesman for the player. “Rather than going 
out, he chose to stay at the team hotel to relax and celebrate a fine England 
victory against Scotland. During the course of the evening he was approached by 
numerous fellow guests for autographs and pictures. As he has always been, 
Wayne was happy to sign, pose for photos and chat with guests. It is sad that 
one or two of them have now sought to turn Wayne’s friendly good nature to 
their advantage.” Shame on them.

With the disappointing clarification that Rooney wasn’t actually harking back 
to The Past, it’s over to Eric Dier and Ander Herrera to keep the flame 
a-burnin’. The two midfielders, each perfectly willing and able to start fights 
in empty rooms, seemingly came to blows both physical and verbal during 
Tuesday’s game, and the Tottenham man was thoroughly unimpressed. “I think it’s 
pretty clear what he did and I can feel it on my cheek now,”Dier harrumphed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/england-eric-dier-ander-herrera>
. “I’ve made a pass and it was a long time afterwards [that] he’s elbowed me in 
the face. I know what he did, and I don’t like that kind of stuff. I don’t mind 
people kicking each other at times and stuff, but that’s just dirty and not 
needed.”

But such are the rules of The Past, all of this can be solved in two ways: 
either a quick ‘sorry’ from the aggressor and a masculine shake of hands, or a 
stramash at a later date to discover which of the two is the greater man. Which 
would you prefer, Eric? “I don’t need him to apologise. I’ll see him soon.” 
FYI: Manchester United v Tottenham Hotspur is scheduled for 11 December. So, 
hats off to Wayne and Eric (names comfortingly from The Past, too) for trying 
at least to restore life to how it once was. And if you can do something about 
all the other stuff too lads, that’d be much appreciated.

ANDY WOODWARD

“I want to get it out and give other people an opportunity to do the same. I 
want to give people strength. I survived it. I lost my career, which was a 
massive thing for me, but I’m still here. I came through the other side. Other 
people can have that strength” – the former professional footballer is finally 
able to talk publicly about the horrific abuse he suffered from the age of 11 
by one of his coaches, in the hope that others will come forward too.Interview 
by Daniel Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY


“This is the defeat that hurts the most in my five years here, there’s no 
doubt about it. It is a bitter pill to swallow” – Jürgen Klinsmann is on the 
ropes with USA! USA!! USA!!! aftera 4-0 gubbing again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/usa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann>
st Costa Rica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/usa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann>
, their second defeat in two World Cup qualifying games. Soccerball president 
Sunil Gulati’s response: “We won’t make any decisions right after games. We’ll 
think about what happened today and talk with Jürgen and look at the 
situation.” Watch this space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff451606371e0a4d501f16c329b1ebfbc58c8d6ac%2F0_38_4855_3226%2F4855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff451606371e0a4d501f16c329b1ebfbc58c8d6ac%2F0_38_4855_3226%2F4855.jpg>
 USA! USA!! US … oh. Photograph: Moises Castillo/AP 
FIVER LETTERS

“If Tuesday’s England game really was an audition for Gareth Southgate, I 
thought he did superbly. Dynamic, attacking play to unsettle even the best in 
the world, demonstrably ‘making your own luck’, proving that we can do 
penalties, and continuing to impress despite changing personnel, before 
eventually wilting away dramatically at the deciding end – it turns out you 
really can capture England’s entire major tournament cycle in a single game” – 
Tom Sharp.

“At times like these, with so much going on in the world, who cares about 
international friendlies? I, for one, gave Tuesday’s England game a wide berth 
to focus on far more important matters, like where the eff have all the 
Hatchimals gone? Seriously, anyone know? Oh and I know there’s some on eBay, 
but I’m not made of money and since I got the ‘World’s Best Dad’ mug last year, 
the pressure is totally off this year. I’m like Leicester, struggling to find 
the motivation or summon the effort required to win it back to back” – Alan 
Belton.

“Given that there is no evidence that avoiding ‘relations’ after midnight will 
help prevent muscular knack, perhaps a better explanation of Pep Guardiola’s 
rule (yesterday’s Fiver) is that he wants to stop players raiding the fridge 
for a post-coital snack in the very early hours. Did Samir Nasri say if 
Manchester City players areforbidden from getting wet, and need to avoid bright 
lights 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.imdb.com%2Ftitle%2Ftt0087363%2Ffaq&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEAoV8gHGFsXAd2odPfKRmdO3h-VQ>
 as well?” – David Wall.

“May I point out to Éanna McIntyre (yesterday’s Fiver letters) that Fiver 
reader letters along the lines of ‘tea-timely missives like this one have 
nothing to do with high-quality journalism’ are near-textbook versions of your 
average Fiver letter. Indeed, I continue to wonder during my daily perusals of 
the letters section whether The Fiver hasn’t somehow been havingus on, given 
how we still religiously continue to read it even as we criticise its poor, 
sub-mediocre journalism. But of course that would be giving The Fiver far too 
much credit” – Yash Anand.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isDavid Wall, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Following their face-saving 3-0 win over Colombia, Leo Messi led his Argentina 
team out in front of assembled hacksand told them where to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/lionel-messi-argentina-media-boycott-colombia>
. “We have decided not to speak any more with the press,” he tooted. “We’ve 
received many accusations, a lot of lack of respect and we never said anything. 
We’re very sorry it has to be like this but we have no option.”

Football League chief suit Shaun Harvey is having a heck of a season, having 
had to break off talks with the FAover their ‘whole game solution’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/fa-efl-talks-potential-expansion-stall>
. Basically: no winter break or fifth division.

Also making a swift impact … Tactics Tim! The Swindon Town director of 
football hot-footed down to the touchline during their FA Cup replay at home to 
Eastleigh,and promptly oversaw a 3-1 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/fa-cup-first-round-replays-eastleigh-tim-sherwood-swindon-town>
. “There will have to be more hard work and the players need to quickly get on 
board with plenty of new ideas that Tim has brought to the club,” cheered head 
coach Luke Williams.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b8390873c06033b371f64517b251de8a760d6b1%2F399_93_3101_2123%2F3101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b8390873c06033b371f64517b251de8a760d6b1%2F399_93_3101_2123%2F3101.jpg>
 Strong start. Photograph: David Davies/PA 
Steve Evans has washed up back in the game as manager of Mansfield Town, 
arriving in impeccable style. “The fans will get everything,” he roared. 
“They’ll get Steve Evans’ life and if you go and ask Massimo Cellino, the owner 
of [Nasty] Leeds, if you go and ask Tony Stewart, the owner of Rotherham, you 
can’t ask Bruce Winfield who is sadly no longer with us, the guy who led the 
revolution down at Crawley Town along with the Carter family, then they would 
say you get my life.”

Més que un club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/barcelona-sign-55m-a-year-shirt-sponsorship-deal-with-japanese-internet-retailer-rakuten>
.


Liverpool will play two matches in less than 46 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/liverpool-fail-in-bid-to-avoid-playing-two-matches-in-under-46-hours>
 over the new year period after their request for a late kick-off at Sunderland 
was snubbed by the Premier League. Manchester City are in the same boat, albeit 
without as much travelling. Two games in two days?Not always a bad thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/dec/22/theknowledge.sport> …

And Queen’s Celtic manager Brendan Rodgers is unsure where talk linking the 
club withformer LA Galaxy merchandise $tevie Mbe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/steven-gerrard-los-angeles-galaxy-career-mls>
 has come from. “He decided to go to America and I’m sure he has had a good 
spell there,” cooed Rodgers. “[$tevie] will sit down now and come back and 
decide what he wants to do. In terms of the speculation … players coming into 
the club will always remain private.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Graham Parker on the state of the USA! USA!! USA!!! soccerball team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/16/usa-costa-rica-analysis-jurgen-klinsmann-world-cup-qualifier-hex>
.

Ronald Koeman may have poked a hornet’s nest of simmering resentment at 
Everton with his discussions of other clubs and other ambitions,reckons Paul 
Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/16/ronald-koeman-everton-romelu-lukaku-liverpool>
.

Football grounds named after truly ancient figures, hard-shotted heroes and 
players whose names match their numbers are among thetreasure trove of nerdery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/football-grounds-named-after-the-very-very-long-dead>
 under the microscope in this week’s Knowledge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F984ed553716761a3f6db3be5732880114d0518ff%2F0_1401_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Yes%2C%20football%20was%20better%20in%20The%20Past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-fiver-england-spain-the-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F984ed553716761a3f6db3be5732880114d0518ff%2F0_1401_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 Philip II: hanging on to his ground name. Photograph: Alamy 
“Is this a library?” trills Paul MacInnes at the numbing lack of atmosphere at 
so many Premier League matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/16/premier-league-quiet-crowds-crystal-palace>
. Not only is it a dull development, it’s potentially damaging the brand. Poor 
the brand.

Adam Lallana may have only been able to play 23 minutes of England’s draw with 
Spain, but his bright and inventive display confirmed that he is now the 
grown-up in England’s attacking trio,purrs Barney Ronay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/adam-lallana-england-draw-with-spain-at-wembley>
.

Goals! Goals! Goals! Our pick of the best of the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/best-goals-week-lionel-messi-coutinho-memphis-barcelona>
, starring Memphis Depay, Philippe Coutinho and Olga García.

Zonal marking dept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/nov/16/sport-picture-of-the-day-whos-on-the-near-post>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

IT WAS JUST TACTICAL BANTER?
 