
‘All Italians know the government has a problem when it comes to making 
decisions. It’s just that people are divided over how to make the situation 
better.” So said one Italian government official last week as he denied that 
Sunday’s referendum was a verdict on Matteo Renzi’s government, the euro or the 
European Union.

Unfortunately, the referendum has become a judgment on all three, along with 
the constitutional amendments it is supposed to be about, making it difficult 
to unpick the views of voters when all the votes are finally counted.

No wonder unofficial polling put the number of undecided voters going into the 
weekend at 6 million, which is a huge number of undecideds when around 12 
million votes will probably win the day.

Prime minister Renzi is desperate to win, not only to avoid triggering his 
promise to resign if he loses, but also to push through legislation that has 
spent much of the last couple of years trundling back and forth between the 
lower house of deputies and the upper house, the senate.

Both have equal status and reject each other’s legislative initiatives. The 
proposed constitutional changes would demote the senate to being a body of 100 
members appointed by regional leaders who can discuss regional matters and have 
oversight of changes to Italy’s relationship with Brussels.

No longer, says Renzi, will attempts to liberalise high street chemists and 
usher in competition get stuck in the system for two years while senators and 
deputies with equal status cry foul. Senators will have a different job.

There are economists and business leaders who describe the reforms as crucial 
to Italy’s ability to claw its way back to health. Its industrial output is 
some 10% smaller than it was in 2007 and the unemployment rate stands at twice 
its pre-crash level, at 13% (the UK’s is 4.8%).

Others believe the reforms are a distraction from dealing with the collapse in 
manufacturing, and rescuing a banking sector that needs a massive injection of 
funds.

Beppe Grillo, the leader of the radical Five Star Movement, together with the 
virulently right-of-centre Northern League, form the most vocal opposition, and 
have done their utmost to make the referendum a verdict on the euro and 
Brussels.

A No vote can only help their cause in bringing a referendum on Italian 
membership of the eurozone nearer.

Few people believe the reforms are the best way to bring about more effective 
government, but they understand it took a great deal of wrangling to even 
arrive at a compromise package, and that what is on the table is unlikely to be 
available for a long time.

There is a silver lining to a No vote. Renzi could be persuaded by the 
president to form another government with a view to tackling the electoral 
system. Before elections that must be held in 2018, he could produce a system 
that recognises the need for a winner from Italy’s three main political blocs, 
including Silvio Berlusconi’s old party, Forza Italia. If so, a clear winner 
would solve many of the country’s problems.

The government could also make strides to shore up the banking sector, which 
needs around $40bn by most estimates, to offset the mounting losses from 
decades of bad loans.

Monte dei Paschi, Italy’s third-largest bank, needs to raise €5bn of equity 
and sell off €28bn of bad loans. Long ago, Italians might have swallowed their 
pride and tipped all the non-performing loans into a bad bank. Now they are 
paying JP Morgan to construct a more complicated vehicle. That’s not ideal 
either – but it’s probably more important to get this right than switch around 
the constitution.

Privatised rail’s fundamental flaw


The annual, inexorable rise in rail fares is traditionally accompanied by 
train company representatives taking a ritual kicking on the airwaves, while 
angry passengers fume over the extra money they will have to shell out for the 
dubious pleasure of getting to work.

Sometimes, train operators merit a smidgen of sympathy when they point out 
that most fare rises are dictated by ministers. But while regulated fares, set 
by government to match July’s RPI inflation figure, will rise 1.9%, last week’s 
figures showed that the overall increase in January will be 2.3%. Certain 
operators – most notably Virgin Trains, on the east coast route that was last 
year still in public hands – have chosen to drive even harder, adding a 
whopping 5.5% on average to the fares they control.

Given current inflation rates, Virgin’s fare rise should justly provoke anger. 
But the reasons behind it should also bring concern, from supporters of 
privatised rail as much as anyone else.

The increase comes as Virgin’s east coast operation attempts to keep pace with 
premium payments – fare revenues handed to the government – that are due to 
rise 23%, on plan to deliver a cumulative £3.3bn to the Treasury by 2023. Other 
firms who have eyed franchises are aghast at the scale of winning bids, and the 
Department for Transport has had to reassure the industry that it does not 
expect such sums again, as it struggles to keep enough participants to make the 
battered franchising system viable.

Virgin’s immediate problem on the east coast is that passenger growth is much 
lower than predicted. Few would weep to see a dent in the profits of the joint 
venture between Stagecoach and Richard Branson; but the recent history of this 
franchise is littered with private firms, from Sea Containers’ GNER to National 
Express, throwing back the keys when the going got tough.

Virgin’s solution appears to be a renewed squeeze on the travelling public. 
One way or another, the riches that the DfT anticipated for the right to run 
the lucrative London-Edinburgh route might yet prove to be more fool’s gold.

No festive advertising bounce

Turns out that trampolining dogs, calamitous cats and skating yetis don’t make 
us buy more stuff. Christmas does. That was the message from asurvey of 11,500 
consumers into Christmas TV adverts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/christmas-ads-retailers-john-lewis>
 by MoneySavingExpert.com. Despite retailers’ claims that their seasonal 
tearjerkers pull in the punters, just 1% of those polled said the campaigns had 
a “big impact” on where they shopped. A further 2% said they had “an impact”, 
and a crushing 69% said they had no impact whatsoever.

It would seem the likes of John Lewis and Sainsbury’s have become too subtle 
for their own good. A not insignificant 6% of people said they liked some of 
the adverts but could never remember who they were for, while 9% said they were 
“turned off” by the ads and deliberately avoided the stores behind them. And 
yet, retailers are spending more than ever before on the great festive push, 
making ad agencies the real winners this Christmas.
 