
For 78 years, the Schaller & Weber deli <http://www.schallerweber.com/> – 
standing among brick tenements and postwar high-rises on a heavily trafficked, 
unprepossessing corner of the Upper East Side – has sold fattykielbasa smoked 
sausage and Black Forest ham to the remnants of the neighbourhood’s German 
population.

Like many businesses here in Yorkville – an Upper East Side 
micro-neighbourhood on the eastern, less fashionable side of Manhattan – 
Schaller & Weber knew its audience: would-be grandes dames in rent-controlled 
apartments along York Avenue, young families attracted by Yorkville’s low rents 
who are willing to put up with its poor transport links, and the odd bachelor 
banker trying to stay close to the Upper East Side proper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fyorkville-new-york-new-bars-restaurants-radar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee8dc9d9edbe45bd7f9a999366194caffac71f69%2F0_174_2002_1866%2F2002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yorkville%20%E2%80%93%20causing%20a%20buzz%20on%20the%20Upper%20East%20Side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fyorkville-new-york-new-bars-restaurants-radar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yorkville%20%E2%80%93%20causing%20a%20buzz%20on%20the%20Upper%20East%20Side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fyorkville-new-york-new-bars-restaurants-radar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee8dc9d9edbe45bd7f9a999366194caffac71f69%2F0_174_2002_1866%2F2002.jpg>
 Schaller’s Stube serves high-end sausages to Yorkville’s younger crowd 
Until now. In August, the founder’s grandchildren opened Stube 
<http://schallerstube.com/>, a new street-facing counter selling sausage 
sandwiches on brioche-style rolls from Balthazar, one of the city’s most famous 
bakery-restaurants. Traditional kielbasa is available, but other options 
include bacon cheddar bratwurst, and bauernwurst with daikon-carrot slaw and 
Sriracha chilli sauce. Most cost around $5.

Stube is just one of many newcomers to Yorkville: a neighbour-hood long 
regarded as hopelessly staid. But the low rents – it’s the cheapest in 
Manhattan south of Harlem – are attracting young people priced out of Brooklyn, 
as well as property investors keen to capitalise on the arrival of the Second 
Avenue subway line (scheduled for December 2016).

Yorkville’s classic businesses are still there: 100-year-old Glaser’s Bake Shop
 <http://www.glasersbakeshop.com/> is still cash-only and, depending on the 
baker’s conversational mood, a two-person queue can take 20 minutes or more to 
get through. But new bars – cheaper, if no less ambitious, than their downtown 
counterparts – have opened to cater for Yorkville’s younger set.
 Seamstress has brought the speakeasy craze to the Upper East Side 
In 2013, DTUT <https://www.facebook.com/DTUT-611538915526498/timeline/> set up 
shop on Second Avenue, serving coffees by day and fondue and hot mulled cider 
at night, with live music and quiz nights in the mismatched seating area. 
Earlier this year,Seamstress <http://www.seamstressny.com/> – whose creative 
director, Pam Wiznitzer, made her name at the Dead Rabbit bar in the financial 
district – brought the speakeasy craze to the Upper East Side. The vaguely 
gothic bar is behind curtains at the back of what appears to be a Victorian 
leather-goods shop. Last month, one of Second Avenue’s classic sports dives, 
Molly Pitcher’s Ale House at no 1641, was replaced by The Daisy, a craft 
cocktail bar from the owners of the West Village’s popular Agave restaurant and 
tequila bar. And Yorkville is also about to get its most “downtown” outlet yet: 
a branch of vaguely literary mini-chain Irving Farm Coffee Roasters.

Yet Yorkville’s charm lies mostly in the co-existence between lifers and new 
residents. On a brownstone-studded street off Second Avenue, The Auction House, 
unmarked, candlelit and reminiscent of a Victorian bordello, has served smoky 
mezcal since long before passwords for parties became de rigueur. Some nights 
the bartender will put on the football for a raucous college crowd. Other 
nights, when it’s almost empty and the candles have all but died, he’ll put on 
some scratchy 1920s jazz, and the midnight remnant will dance the Charleston 
until closing time.

Here in Yorkville, you never know.
 