
The head of Yosemite national park is stepping down in the wake of reports of 
“horrific working conditions”, bullying, and rampant sexual harassment at some 
of America’s most beloved landmarks.

Superintendent Don Neubacher, who is accused of publicly “humiliating” and 
intimidating workers, said in an email to staff that he “regrets” leaving but 
wanted to “do what’s best” for the popularCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> park that has faced a widening 
misconduct scandal in recent months.

His unexpected departure comes a week after a tense US congressional hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/us-national-parks-sexual-harassment-employees-report>
 that covered revelations that at least 18 employees have come forward with 
allegations of severe harassment, misconduct and bullying at Yosemite.

Officials also discussed complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/us-national-parks-sexual-harassment-employees-report>
 of sexual exploitation, intimidation and retaliation at Yellowstone national 
park, another iconic site in Wyoming, Montana and Idaho.

Sexual harassment reportedly rampant among US national parks employees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/us-national-parks-sexual-harassment-employees-report>
The national park service “acted to move Don Neubacher from his role as 
superintendent … in order to preserve the integrity of the ongoing 
investigation into allegations of a hostile work environment”, spokesman Andrew 
Muñoz told the Guardian in an email on Thursday.

Earlier this week, Neubacher apologized to his staff, writing 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politics-government/article104283731.html#storylink=cpy>
 in an email: “It was never my intention, in any way, to offend any employee.” 
But criticisms of the superintendent have continued to mount as the US 
Department of the Interior has pushed forward with aninvestigation 
<http://www.sacbee.com/news/politics-government/article104742551.html> at 
Yosemite.

Additionally, at Grand Canyon national park in Arizona, the interior 
department’s inspector generalreported 
<https://www.doioig.gov/sites/doioig.gov/files/Misconduct_GrandCanyonRiverDistrict_Public.pdf>
 in January that male employees preyed on female colleagues, demanded sex and 
retaliated against those who refused.

They really have to change the culture. It’s not just hiring females and 
putting them into the work environment
Mary Hinson, former Yosemite ranger 
In June, investigators further cited 
<https://www.doioig.gov/reports/investigative-report-sexual-misconduct-law-enforcement-supervisor-canaveral-national>
 a “pattern of harassment” at Canaveral national seashore in Florida, where a 
law enforcement supervisor allegedly made an unwanted sexual advance toward a 
subordinate. The superintendent there was recentlyreassigned 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/09/21/park-service-reassigns-superintendent-who-oversaw-hostile-culture-at-park/>
.

“They really have to change the culture. It’s not just hiring females and 
putting them into the work environment,” Mary Hinson, a former Yosemite ranger, 
said in an interview on Thursday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c1a97e7364a6b8e7764aa0a17aef13ead2cf88%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yosemite%20chief%20resigns%20as%20national%20parks%20embroiled%20in%20sexual%20harassment%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yosemite%20chief%20resigns%20as%20national%20parks%20embroiled%20in%20sexual%20harassment%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03c1a97e7364a6b8e7764aa0a17aef13ead2cf88%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Mary Hinson worked at Yosemite from 1993 to 2001. Photograph: Courtesy Mary 
Hinson 
Hinson, who worked at Yosemite from 1993 to 2001, said it was difficult for 
qualified women to get the jobs and promotions they deserved, and that once 
they held positions, they faced sexism and harassment on a regular basis.

“The cards are kind of stacked against you … Then you come into an environment 
that’s male dominated, primarily white males, and that’s been the culture since 
the beginning of the National Park Service.”

Female rangers faced frequent comments about their looks and were often 
unfairly assigned to administrative jobs instead of operational duties, Hinson 
added.

The fresh allegations suggest there have been few improvements since she left 
a decade ago.

Last week, Kelly Martin, Yosemite’s chief of fire and aviation management, 
told lawmakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/us-national-parks-sexual-harassment-employees-report>
 that dozens of park workers “are being bullied, belittled, disenfranchised and 
marginalized from their roles as dedicated professionals”. She and other 
colleagues alleged that Neubacher had “publicly humiliated” workers and 
questioned their professional credibility.

'I was born to do this': national park rangers on their triumphs and tragedies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/27/national-park-service-100-rangers-interviews>
Andrea “Andy” Lankford, who worked as a ranger at Yosemite in the 1990s, said 
in an interview that the news reports indicate that the problem “actually seems 
to have gotten worse”.

“With the superintendents, a lot of blame does lay on them,” she said. “They 
establish that culture and they let it thrive.”

Lankford recalled that when she was hired to do a night patrol at Yosemite, a 
manager told her she was a “test case” to see if a woman could actually do the 
job.

“It was 1993 … and I thought it was outdated and backwards,” said Lankford, 
52, who has written abook 
<https://www.amazon.com/Ranger-Confidential-Living-Working-National/dp/0762752637>
 about her time in the park service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94290e3ec4944c3fe664325b4ba0b69e16d77b27%2F0_0_2599_2237%2F2599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yosemite%20chief%20resigns%20as%20national%20parks%20embroiled%20in%20sexual%20harassment%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yosemite%20chief%20resigns%20as%20national%20parks%20embroiled%20in%20sexual%20harassment%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fyosemite-national-park-sexual-harassment-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94290e3ec4944c3fe664325b4ba0b69e16d77b27%2F0_0_2599_2237%2F2599.jpg>
 Andrea Lankford: the problem ‘actually seems to have gotten worse. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Andrea Lankford 
On another occasion, “I was told I got my job because I had breasts,” she said.

At one point when she was assigned to do a supervisor shift, a male colleague 
sat in the designated seat to block her from doing the job.

“It felt really awkward, embarrassing and humiliating.” 

There have long been allegations 
<http://www.hcn.org/articles/grand-canyon-national-parks-15-year-failure-to-address-its-systemic-sexual-harassment-problems>
 of serioussexual misconduct 
<http://highline.huffingtonpost.com/articles/en/park-rangers/> within the 
National Park Service, which celebrated itscentennial in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/climate-change-national-parks-threat>
.

Congressman Elijah Cummings of Maryland noted last week that an agency 
taskforce was discussing this same issue 16 years ago.

The service said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/us-national-parks-sexual-harassment-employees-report>
 it has set up a hotline for complaints and is improving training.

Neubacher, who is now on leave and will officially retire in November, did not 
directly address the scandals in his retirement letter but said that after a 
discussion with a regional director, “it was determined that new leadership was 
needed”.

Yosemite is “world renowned and deserves special attention”, he added.

A spokesman said Neubacher was not available for interviews. 

Hinson, 51, noted that Yosemite, Yellowstone and Grand Canyon – known as the 
three “crown jewels” of the park service – have repeatedly failed to appoint 
women to chief ranger positions.

“Things have to change for the National Park Service if in fact their goal is 
to have their workforce truly represent the people we serve.”
 