

Can Gareth Malone <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gareth-malone> 
make this lot sing like angels? Photograph: BBC/Mike Hogan

You get quite a funny feeling seeing someone you know personally on 
television, similar to when you see a TV star in real life and think you know 
them. Last night I, along with the rest of the 100-strongLSO Community Choir 
<http://www.lso.co.uk/lsodiscovery/forthelocalcommunity/comm_choir.asp?id=80>, 
tuned in with great anticipation to BBC2'sThe Choir, to watch our beloved 
maestro, Gareth Malone, attempt to train a bunch of tone deaf little horrors to 
sing like angels. As episode one aired, he charmed the nation, as he charms 
schoolgirl sopranos and pensioner basses alike at our rehearsals each week.

The critics seem surprised, however, that the old hackneyed formula of making 
a choir of young ruffians sound good, in aSister Act II 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0108147/> style, could be as engaging as it was. 
In her weekend preview of the three-part documentary series, Caitlin Moran
pointed out <http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,22871-2475737.html> in the 
Times, that the reality TV concept of giving the high-art gift of classical 
music to the "downtrodden masses" has graced our screens already in Channel 
Five'sThe Singing Estate <http://www.five.tv/programmes/thesingingestate/>. But 
she goes on to admit that the BBC has kicked Five's arse: "Five never thought 
to make the choir a choir of schoolchildren -- they made do with much less 
telegenic adults, many of them quite haggard, and none of them ripe with the 
possibility of an exciting under-age pregnancy, or voice-breaking.''

James Walton of the Telegraph is surprised the Beeb managed to find enough 
children left in Britain who hadn't already been in some kind of "unique social 
experiment" to form a choir, but was looking forward to being touched by the 
transformation of the teens in future episodes as they battled it out at the 
World Choir Games in China. While Nancy Banks-Smith, of our very own Guardian, 
found these lively auditions were herfavourite bit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv_and_radio/story/0,,1964205,00.html>: "The 
breaking voices, the rapper with one black glove giving it a bit of that. Raul, 
who could only sing in Hindi. Rhonda, who danced as she sang."

Overall, the general consensus seemed to be that it was Gareth who made the 
thing work, probably because there was something fond and familiar about him. 
The Evening Standard said he could pass for Martin Fowler's "long-lost bookish 
cousin", The Times hailed him the Jamie Oliver of school choirs, and 
Banks-Smith likened him to Harry Potter.

Gareth is an inspiring fellow indeed, and I have no doubt he will achieve 
success with the choir in China and make a huge impact on the lives of these 
young singers - as he has done for us. What do you think?
 