
The average westerner’s carbon emissions destroy 30 square metres of Arctic 
sea ice every year, according to new research.

The work indicates that, even with current efforts to cut emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/world-on-track-for-3c-of-warming-under-current-global-climate-pledges-warns-un>
, the Arctic will lose all its ice in summer within about 20 years.


Plummeting Arctic sea ice cover is one of the most obvious signs of climate 
change and isincreasingly linked to extreme weather events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/01/rapid-arctic-ice-loss-linked-to-extreme-weather-changes-in-europe-and-us>
 such as storms and floods in Europe and severe cold snaps in the US.

The new study revealed a linear link between emissions of CO2 and the loss of 
Arctic sea ice, which has shrunk by half in the last 40 years. The link enables 
people to understand their own contribution to climate change, according to the 
leader of the work, Prof Dirk Notz, at the Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology 
in Hamburg, Germany.

“It allows us, for the first time really, to intuitively grasp how we all 
individually contribute to global warming,” he said. “The observed numbers are 
very simple. For each tonne of CO2 that a person emits anywhere on this planet, 
three square metres of Arctic summer sea ice disappears.”

“So far the global warming debate has always been about very large numbers 
like billions of tonnes of CO2 or very small numbers like 0.1C of temperature 
change,” he said. “Our study allows us to understand that it is really our own 
individual actions, every day, that contribute to ongoing global warming.”

The research, published in the journal Science 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/science.aag2345>, analysed 
the declining extent of Arctic sea ice from 1953 to 2015 and found it tracked 
the emissions of CO2 from fossil fuel burning and other human activities. The 
relationship fits well with the underlying physics.

As a result, it is possible to calculate how much Arctic sea ice is lost as a 
result of an individual’s emissions. The average annual emissions of a citizen 
of the 35 rich nations in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) is 10 tonnes per year, leading to 30 sq m of ice being lost. 
Citizens of the US, Canada and Australia have a higher carbon footprint - about 
16 tonnes - each causing almost 50 sq m of ice loss per year. In the UK, the 
average emissions are 7.5 tonnes per year, meaning 22.5 sq m of ice loss.
CO2 emissions and Arctic ice loss by country 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/sea_ice-zip/giv-140675hgNEGoM1d5>
Prof Len Shaffrey, at the University of Reading in the UK, said the new 
research was sound and showed a new way of linking Arctic sea ice loss and 
personal CO2 emissions: “It means on average we are [each] responsible for the 
loss of tens of square metres of summer Arctic sea ice. That’s a pretty 
sobering thought.”

The link also allows the calculation of how much CO2 can be emitted in future 
before the Arctic is entirely ice-free in September, usually the month of the 
smallest extent. The scientists found 1,000 gigatonnes (GT) of CO2 was the 
limit. If all the carbon-cutting pledges currently made by the world’s nations 
are implemented, the Arctic will be ice free in summer in about 22 years, 
according to the new research.

“There is not a god-given year when the ice will be gone but there is this 
number of 1,000GT - once we have emitted that amount, the [summer] Arctic sea 
ice will be gone,” Notz said. “If emissions don’t change at all from today’s 
level, which is extremely unlikely, then the ice will be gone in 25 years. If 
emissions continue to rise then the ice will be gone sooner than that.”

The 1,000GT carbon budget is also the limit for keeping climate change below 
the internationally agreed threshold of 2C. This means that even if theParis 
climate treaty <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>
, which enters into force on Friday, is successful, the Arctic will still 
become ice-free in summer.

However, the Paris treaty also includes an aspiration to limit the temperature 
rise to 1.5C, which would require radical cuts in CO2 emissions, including 
sucking the gas out of the air and burying it. If this was achieved, the Arctic 
ice cap would remain year round.

Arctic sea ice fell to its second lowest recorded extent in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
, and scientists say this matters for a number of reasons. “By losing Arctic 
sea ice, we are losing a very effective refrigerator, as sea ice today reflects 
most of the sunlight and keeps the Arctic cool,’ said Notz. “If we lose this 
refrigerator, theGreenland ice cap will melt much more rapidly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/greenlands-huge-annual-ice-loss-is-even-worse-than-thought>
, for example, and drive up sea levels.”


Other scientists are increasingly linking the loss of Arctic sea ice to a 
weakening of a high level wind, called the jet stream, which is in turn linked 
to increasing extreme weather events, such as storms and floods in western 
Europe, severe cold snaps in the US and drought in California. “The jury is 
still out on how robust these studies are but there is mounting evidence,” said 
Notz.

“Also, we are destroying a landscape from this planet which is extremely 
beautiful and future generations would have nothing to look at but open water 
in September, so for me that is an ethical thing,” he said.
 