
A petition to compensate women born in the 1950s who are facing a higher state 
pension age than they expected has gathered more than 100,000 signatures on the 
parliamentary website.

The government announced changes to the state pension in 1995, designed to 
bring the qualifying age for women in line with that for men by 2020. This 
increase, from 60 to 65, was accelerated in the 2011 Pensions Act, so that the
women’s retirement age was 65 by 2018, and a new pension age of 66 by October 
2020 was set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jan/13/pensions-bill-rise-state-pension-age>
.

Both changes meant that women born after 1950 were not eligible for a state 
pension as early as they expected, and those born after 1953 had their pension 
age revised up further.

While some have had a decade’s notice of the change, some women were told they 
would have to work another 18 months before qualifying for a state pensionless 
than two years before they expected to retire 
<http://paullewismoney.blogspot.co.uk/2015/11/women-given-just-2-years-notice-of.html>
.

The campaign group Women Against State Pension Inequality (Waspi) says the way 
the changes have been implemented as unfair. Itspetition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/110776>, which had attracted 103,066 
signatures by Monday afternoon, calls on the government to “Make fair 
transitional state pension arrangements for 1950’s women”.

It says the group “agree with equalisation, but don’t agree with the unfair 
way the changes were implemented – with little/no personal notice … faster than 
promised … and [with] no time to make alternative plans. Retirement plans have 
been shattered with devastating consequences.”

The government must consider a debate on all petitions with more than 100,000 
signatures. A backbench debate led by the SNP MPMhairi Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/09/mhairi-black-interview> is 
already set to take place on 7 January.

Tom McPhail, a pensions expert at financial advisers Hargreaves Lansdown, said 
the government would face a high cost if it did decide to change its plans. He 
said there were around 360,000 women aged 61 and that paying them all the state 
pension – currently an average of £117.45 a week for women – for an extra 12 
months would cost around £2.2bn.

A previous concession, which saw the rise delayed by six months from April 2020
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/oct/13/state-pension-age-rise-delay> 
and reduced some women’s waiting time for a pension reduced from two years cost 
the government more than £1bn.

“Many outside government argue that some of them have been ill-treated,” he 
said. “The twin problems they now face are some are more deserving of 
compensation than others; and that any concession by the government could 
quickly run into billions, which is why the government’s current position 
continues to be that no further concessions will be made,” he said.

“The DWP’s communications around the state pension changes generally have been 
pretty poor – if they had got that right in the first place we might not have 
this problem now.”


The pensions minister, Ros Altmann, who had previously called for the 
government to consider transitional arrangements 
<http://www.rosaltmann.com/womens_spa_release_committee_stage_8july2011.htm> 
for the women affected, will not be able to take part in the debate as she sits 
in the House of Lords.

A DWP spokesman said: “The existence of different state pension ages for women 
and men represents a long-standing inequality, and the abolition of this 
discriminatory situation is long overdue.

 “The last government introduced future changes to the state pension age for 
women and men, following extensive debates in both houses of parliament.”
 