
Ava DuVernay: 'The black body is being used for profit and politics'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/30/ava-duvernay-selma-13th-interview-criminal-justice-system>
Behind Ava DuVernay’s enviable efficiency are bleak roots. “I feel like I have 
a short window,” the director ofSelma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma> 
recently told US magazine the New Republic. “I don’t know what’s there beyond 
four films, because none of us have done it.” Although she recently accepted a 
Disney gig set to make her the first black woman to direct a $100m movie, 
DuVernay understandably suspects that a single setback could see her career 
flounder in a way that a white, male counterpart’s might not.

And so she’s adopted a refreshingly energetic, experimental approach that’s in 
stark contrast to the fussy oeuvre-building of so many others. Case in point: 
she’s followed up her lauded, Oscar best film nominee with the last thing 
anyone in Hollywood would have expected: a documentary.13th isn’t just any doc, 
either: it’s an outspoken, clear-headed, effortlessly damning treatise that 
joins the dots from colonial America to Black Lives Matter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&media=>
Available via Netflix, the film tracks a devastating path from the US 
constitution’s 13th amendment – which abolished slavery and involuntary 
servitude – to 2016, when one-in-three black American males can expect to be 
imprisoned during his lifetime. This process of criminalisation is charted 
through all manner of euphemistically named initiatives, from Jim Crow to Stand 
Your Ground. Initially barrelling through the decades at pace, the film dilates 
as it approaches the present day, reflecting the peculiarities of human memory 
that allow history to repeat itself.

Crisis in Six Scenes: Woody Allen's TV show is proof he's finally lost the plot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/28/crisis-in-six-scenes-woody-allen-miley-cyrus>
DuVernay’s camera rarely sits still, sliding across the faces of her 
interviewees – who range from civil rights activists to rightwing politicians – 
as though in frantic search of answers. Meanwhile, a bold edit by co-writer 
Spencer Averick transforms what might, in less imaginative hands, be a 
straightforward talking-heads doc into a searing film essay, full of strong 
music cues and daring stylistic choices. Nearly every time someone utters the 
word “criminal”, it’s stamped across the screen in mile-high, all-caps letters, 
turning the chief linguistic weapon of a racist propaganda war back on itself.

There are moments when this rollicking train comes slightly off the tracks. In 
an attempt to spare 13th a tired formality, DuVernay awkwardly disguises the 
film’s voiceover as the words of an interviewee; the effect is halting. For the 
most part, though, this is a blistering state of the nation address from a 
film-maker who’s shown herself to be what so many of her more cushioned peers 
are not: responsive.

13th is out now on Netflix
 