
About 1,000 Cubans intent on reaching the United States have opted to cross 
intoPanama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> in the perilous Darien 
Gap jungle region rather than submit to deportation and return to their 
homeland.

Most of the hundreds of Cubans who had been stranded since May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/cuban-migrants-stranded-colombia-panama-human-trafficking>
 in miserable conditions in the steamy Colombian town of Turbo near the 
Panamanian border have now departed, said William Gonzalez, the government 
ombudsman for the region.

The government said Monday that only 350 remained. Gonzalez said they included 
80 remaining at a makeshift shelter where sanitary conditions were poor. 
Fourteen Cubans who accepted voluntary repatriation were flown toCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> on Saturday on a Colombian military 
plane.
map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/may/2016-05-26T19:17:27.html> 
A spokesman for the Cuban migrants, 34-year-old Aliex Artiles, told the 
Associated Press on Tuesday that rather than face deportation, many of his 
compatriots had ventured into the Darien Gap, a lawless and roadless expanse 
where rebels and criminal syndicates operate.

“They took the dirt path into the jungle,” said Artiles. “I calculate there 
were more than 1,000.”

He said others had headed south for Ecuador, which had long been a transit 
country for Cubans until its government began cracking down.

Cubans who fear that detente with Havana will lead the US government to end 
the preferential immigration treatment that Cubans now get when reaching US 
soil have been heading by the thousands for North America.

Migrants stranded in Colombian bottleneck as Panama closes its border
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/cuban-migrants-stranded-colombia-panama-human-trafficking>
But they’ve been stymied by a crackdown on migration by Central and South 
American nations that have their borders to the Cubans.More than 7,000 Cubans 
were stuck in Costa Rica for weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/30/central-american-countries-agree-airlift-of-cuban-migrants-seeking-to-enter-us>
 earlier this year when Nicaragua closed its border to them. They were 
eventually airlifted to Mexico and El Salvador to continue their journey. 
Thousands of others took shelter in Panama before it tightened its border with 
Colombia.

The migrants stranded in Turbo had requested safe passage to Mexico, but its 
government turned them down.

Colombia’s migration office said in a statement Monday that “to permit the 
passage of irregular migrants to other countries is to open the door to 
criminals dedicated to human trafficking; this would also multiply the number 
of irregular migrants, given our strategic geographical position for networks 
dedicated to migrant trafficking”.

The government says it has deported more than 5,500 such migrants since May, 
mostly Cubans and Haitians.

The migration office said none of the Cubans in Turbo had sought asylum in 
Colombia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>. But Gonzalez, the 
ombudsman, said one family of four had approached him with the request and the 
case was being considered.

Artiles, the spokesman, told the AP he planned to leave Turbo on Wednesday.

He would not say where he was going.
 