
Just as the Skibbereen Eagle grandly warned Kaiser Wilhelm in 1914 that it had 
its eye on him, so film reviewers feel moved to bellow their disapproval at the 
Academy. Only todayI have been reflecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/14/oscars-delirium-madness-critics-star-struck>
 on movie journalists’ excitable habit of taking awards nominations far too 
personally. Now I found myself doing it as well: snarling, bridling, whimpering 
and finally standing up and stepping away from my laptop so that I could 
petulantly stamp my foot for about five minutes.

For heaven’s sake. Can it really be true that Mike Leigh’s Mr Turner has been 
overlooked in the best film and best director categories, withanother zilch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/11/birdman-soars-over-the-competition-at-2015-golden-globe-nominations>
 for Timothy Spall as best actor? Has David Oyelowo, who so memorably portrayed 
Martin Luther King in Selma, been ignored in this category as well? Selma at 
least has a best picture nomination, but no best director nomination for Ava 
DuVernay.

Paul Thomas Anderson: ‘Inherent Vice is like a sweet, dripping aching for the 
past’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/28/paul-thomas-anderson-intereview-inherent-vice-mark-kermode>
And very little for Paul Thomas Anderson’s outstanding Inherent Vice: and 
nothing in way of best picture or best director. Richard Linklater’s marvellous 
Boyhood has six nominations, but that is fewer than the decent but middling 
film The Imitation Game, about wartime codebreaker Alan Turing — and only as 
many as Clint Eastwood’s fantastically dull and mediocreAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, which has been hugely 
overrated. Bradley Cooper (usually a smart and talented actor) was, frankly, 
not particularly well cast or well directed in this ho-hum picture and the idea 
of him getting a best actor nomination ahead of Oyelowo or Spall or Ralph 
Fiennes is pretty silly.

In the documentary list, too, I feel my hackles rising at the omission of 
Steve James’sLife Itself <https://www.theguardian.com/film/life-itself>, his 
portrait of the late Roger Ebert. No animation nomination for The Lego Movie. 
No best original score nomination for Mica Levi, for Under The Skin. But the 
time has come to call an end to these complaints for the time being, and 
spotting gaps is arguably an over-familiar type of jiu-jitsu that film 
journalists like to pull on award-nomination lists.

Basically, it is good news that Birdman and The Grand Budapest Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-grand-budapest-hotel> have performed so 
strongly: excellent films in that “indie-literate” middle ground that many in 
the industry have been worrying had been neglected in the general rush to 
big-budget, big-box-office superhero pictures. And this really is a kind of 
underdog good-news story for Wes Anderson’s Grand Budapest Hotel, which might 
so easily have completely vanished over awards season, without anybody 
particularly noticing. It might, for example, have suffered the fate of Paul 
Thomas Anderson’s superlative Inherent Vice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbirdman-foxcatcher-theory-of-everything-into-the-woods-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420804729131%2Fcrop_KP-64852_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Birdman%2C%20Foxcatcher%2C%20The%20Theory%20of%20Everything%20and%20Into%20The%20Woods%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbirdman-foxcatcher-theory-of-everything-into-the-woods-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Birdman%2C%20Foxcatcher%2C%20The%20Theory%20of%20Everything%20and%20Into%20The%20Woods%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fbirdman-foxcatcher-theory-of-everything-into-the-woods-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420804729131%2Fcrop_KP-64852_640.jpeg>
There are some heartening points in the acting categories. Laura Dern’s 
intelligent and sensitive performance in Wild, as the mother of Cheryl Strayed 
(Reese Witherspoon), has deservedly got her a best supporting actress 
nomination. And Marion Cotillard has made it to the best actress list for the 
Dardennes’ heartwrenching workplace dramaTwo Days, One Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/two-days-one-night>. For my money, Cotillard 
is clearly ahead of the others in this list, good though they are all are: 
Julianne Moore, Rosamund Pike, Felicity Jones and Reese Witherspoon. But I 
think Hilary Swank might be entitled to be disappointed that she didn’t make it 
for her performance in The Homesman and if the Academy was in the market for 
non-US actors, well … how about Berenice Béjo for The Past?

The Big Mo, or Momentum, continues to build behind Whiplash, by the brilliant 
young director Damien Chazelle, and surely no-one will be able to find a 
bookmaker ready to take a bet on JK Simmons for best supporting actor.Whiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/whiplash> is a film which had generated 
enormous audience enthusiasm and priceless word-of-mouth: its easily 
summarised, unusual-but-not-too-unusual premise is a great hook: the sadistic 
teacher torments the highly-strung jazz-drummer. I have said before that I 
think it is a very good movie which perhaps does not support some of the more 
goggle-eyed critical responses: but it’s exciting and smart, and I am cheering 
Chazelle and Simmons on.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fwhiplash-jk-simmons-damien-chazelle-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400845012390%2FJK-Simmons-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whiplash's%20JK%20Simmons%20and%20Damien%20Chazelle%3A%20'The%20idea%20of%20the%20self-destructive%20artist%20is%20seductive'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fwhiplash-jk-simmons-damien-chazelle-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whiplash%27s%20JK%20Simmons%20and%20Damien%20Chazelle%3A%20%27The%20idea%20of%20the%20self-destructive%20artist%20is%20seductive%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fwhiplash-jk-simmons-damien-chazelle-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400845012390%2FJK-Simmons-017.jpg>
It is traditional to complain that comedy is overlooked in awards ceremonies — 
and I have done my own share of whingeing on this account — so it’s great to 
see properly funny films rewarded in this way.Birdman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman>, arguably, has a solemn dimension to 
it, but not really The Grand Budapest Hotel, despite being inspired by a writer 
(Stefan Zweig) who famously committed suicide in despair at the rise of the 
Nazis.

Whiteout in the limelight? #OscarsSoWhite mocks Academy snub of actors of 
colour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscarssowhite-mocks-awards-show-inequality>
Rather as I feared, the film that I personally felt strongest about — Richard 
Linklater’s masterly Boyhood — might actually be fading in this Oscar race, and 
that’s despite an extremely strong showing in the Golden Globes. You never 
know: best picture, best director, best screenplay and other acting awards 
could well go to Boyhood. Oscar night could be an even spread between it, 
Birdman, The Grand Budapest Hotel and Whiplash. But I would still love to see 
best adapted screenplay go to Paul Thomas Anderson’sInherent Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inherent-vice>.

 