
The new tax year will see a raft of financial changes, from a new flat rate 
state pension to an increase in the amount people can earn through letting a 
spare room.

Savers get a new personal savings allowance

Basic rate taxpayers can now earn up to £1,000 a year in savings interest 
before they have to pay any tax on it, while those on a higher rate are getting 
a tax-free allowance of £500 a year. Anyone earning up to £17,000 a year can 
take all of their savings interest tax-free, while anyone earning more than 
£150,000 a year will have it taxed at 45%.

“In the current environment it would take a significant pot of money before 
tax needs to be paid,” says Nationwide building society’s head of savings, Tom 
Riley. “The rules mean the majority of savers will have no tax to pay on any 
interest earned.”

A basic rate taxpayer with £50,000 in savings earning interest of 1.5% a year 
would previously have paid £150 tax on their £750 returns, but will now keep 
the lot; while a higher rate taxpayer will see their tax bill reduced from £300 
to £100.

New pension rules will see 6 million workers lose up to £37 a month
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/28/new-pension-rules-will-see-6-million-workers-lose-up-to-37-a-month>
The state pension is overhauled

Anyone reaching state pension age from Wednesday will qualify for the 
government’s new single flat rate payment, which offers up to £155.65 a week. 
It replaces the previous system of a basic state pension and an additional 
state pension with a single payment – but as before, how much you get will 
depend on how long you’ve been making national insurance contributions. The 
charityAge UK says 70,000 retirees will be worse off under the new system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/07/state-pension-shakeup-simpler-fairer-nasty-surprise>
 because they have made fewer than 10 years’ contributions, and so will get 
nothing.

Figures from the Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/14/under-30s-will-be-worse-off-as-a-result-of-state-pension-changes-says-dwp>
 show that around three-quarters of people who reach pension age in the first 
15 years of the new system will be better off, with 80% of those reaching state 
pension age in 2016 getting an average of £7 more a week. However, by 2040 
there will be slightly more losers than winners, with the average “loss” put at 
£11 a week.

Reduction of landlords’ wear and tear allowance

Up to now, landlords with buy-to-let properties have been allowed to claim a 
10% wear and tear allowance on any furnished home they are letting, even if 
they have not had to spend any money on replacement items or refurbishment. As 
of now, they can only reclaim what they have spent, which will mean more 
paperwork for landlords.The government forecasts it will take £205m in 2017/18 
as a result of the change 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/reform-of-the-wear-and-tear-allowance/reform-of-the-wear-and-tear-allowance>
, and has suggested it will encourage property investors to improve conditions 
for tenants.

Rent-a-room allowance rises to £7,500

The amount that homeowners can earn tax-free from taking in a lodger or 
holidaymaker rises for the first time since 1997, increasing by £3,250 
overnight (and rising by another £1,000 in April 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/16/landlords-and-traders-receive-2000-tax-allowance-to-boost-sharing-economy>
). Under the new limit, a landlord or landlady can make up to £144 a week 
without facing an income tax bill.

We’re not building enough new homes, so we have to use the ones we already 
have as effectively as possible
Matt Hutchinson, Spareroom.co.uk 
The director of flat-sharing website Spareroom.co.uk, Matt Hutchinson, says: 
“We’re not building anywhere near enough new homes, so we have to make sure 
we’re using the ones we already have as effectively as possible. Incentivising 
even a small percentage of homeowners sitting on the 19m empty bedrooms in 
owner-occupied properties to let them out would do just that.”

The lifetime allowance for pensions falls

The total amount that can be invested in an individual’s pension pot has been 
cut from £1.25m to £1m. On investments above that amount the government will 
charge tax at 25%, or at 55% if the additional money is withdrawn as a lump 
sum. The change will hit public sector workers as well as those in the private 
sector, and meansanyone expecting a final salary pension of more than £43,478 a 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/07/public-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes>
 could breach the limits.

Capital gains tax is cut

The tax paid by investors who sell assets has been reduced. The change, which 
was announced in March’s budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/16/budget-buy-to-let-lobby-accuses-george-osborne>
, means higher rate taxpayers will pay 20% on investment gains rather than the 
previous 28%, while those who aren’t higher rate taxpayers will pay 10% instead 
of the previous 18%. The change does not apply to property.

The annual amount that can be made before tax is unchanged at £11,100.

The personal allowance rises to £11,000

The amount anyone can earn before paying tax rises by £4oo a year, while the 
amount you can earn before paying tax at 40% has increased to £43,000 from 
£42,386 in 2015/16.

Four reasons to take out a lifetime Isa – and two why you shouldn’t
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/19/lifetime-isa-budget-first-time-buyers-workplace-pension>
Isas can hold peer-to-peer investments

The annual Isa allowance – £15,240 for 2016/17 – can now be held in a new 
“innovative finance Isa”. This means that investments in peer-to-peer lenders, 
like Zopa, Funding Circle and Lending Works, can now earn returns free of tax. 
In theory, anyway: none of the best-known providers have yet received their 
regulatory approval, so savers who want to use them will have to wait until 
they do to open an account. The innovative finance Isa can be used alongside 
the traditional cash and stocks and shares accounts, with the total allowance 
spread however a saver chooses.

Workers from outside the EU will have to earn £35,000 to apply for indefinite 
leave to remain

Unless on a list of shortage professions, skilled workers from outside the EU 
who have been living here for less than 10 yearswill need to earn at least 
£35,000 a year to settle permanently in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/12/eu-workers-deported-earning-less-35000-employees-americans-australians>
.
 