
Invest in research: The effectiveness of goals and policies aimed at reducing 
gender-based inequalities continues to be undermined by knowledge gaps. We need 
a better understanding of how gender inequalities are produced, reproduced or 
challenged during the transition to adulthood and between the generations.
Professor Jo Boyden, director,Young Lives <http://www.younglives.org.uk/>, 
Oxford Department of International Development, Oxford, UK,@yloxford 
<https://twitter.com/yloxford>


Put money where our mouths are: Our next challenge after the adoption of the 
SDGs will be to move towards implementation. In order to do so we will need new 
and ambitious financing commitments at thethird international conference on 
financing for development <http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/ffd3.1.html>. An ambitious 
agenda for achieving gender equality must be matched by ambitious resources.
Lucie Faucherre, junior policy analyst,Gender Equality and Women’s Rights OECD 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/>, Paris, France, @luciefaucherre 
<https://twitter.com/luciefaucherre>


Include youth voices: Today, young people under 30 make up a staggering 50% of 
our world’s population. With 3.5 billion of them, it’s the largest generation 
of youth the world has ever seen. Their needs, voices and perspectives – not 
least those of girls – must be central in high-level, global conversations and 
in the SDGs.Katja Iversen, chief executive, Women Deliver 
<http://www.womendeliver.org/>, New York, US, @katja_iversen 
<https://twitter.com/Katja_Iversen>

Work with men and boys: We need to address the patriarchal system and work 
with men and boys so that there is a clear shift in their attitude towards 
viewing women and girls as right holders rather than objects of gratification 
or commodities.Saket Mani, UN global youth advocate, World We Want 2015 
<http://www.worldwewant2015.org/>, Pune, India, @SaketMANI 
<https://twitter.com/SaketMANI>


Take a holistic approach: Some member-states advocated for a smaller number of 
goals to make the whole package more accessible. It is positive that all 17 
goals remained in the final outcome. The SDGs should be a holistic set only 
considered together in order to maximise impact and avoid the isolated silo 
approach that would take the “sustainable” out of the SDGs and look more like 
the MDGs.Nebila Abdulmelik, head of communications, Femnet (African Women’s 
Development & Communication Network) <http://femnet.co/>, Nairobi, Kenya, 
@aliben86 <https://twitter.com/Aliben86>


Don’t take the easy route: The MDGs have not gone far enough because they 
prioritised “easy” and “communicable” action, which resulted in leaving out the 
more difficult and structural problems, for example violence against women and 
girls. Girls’ and women’s rights are never easy. We would rather see a longer 
and complex framework that addresses the structural causes of gender 
discrimination and inequality than a shorter set of goals.Kasia Staszewska, 
women’s rights policy adviser,ActionAid UK <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/>, 
London, UK,@KasiaStasz <https://twitter.com/KasiaStasz>


What gets measured, gets done: SDGs is not the ideal framework but it is a 
huge step from MDGs. What is needed to enhance the SDG goals and targets is a 
comprehensive indicators set that will be sex- and age-disaggregated. At the 
moment it is too easy for girls to slip through the cracks of monitoring.Anush 
Aghabalyan, head of advocacy,World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts 
<http://www.wagggs.org/en/home>, London, UK, @Anushik_Ag 
<https://twitter.com/Anushik_Ag>


Adapt to the local context and embed accountability: The question is how these 
broad targets and indicators are then adapted to suit the country and regional 
context. The SDGs must have a strong focus on implementation, monitoring and 
resourcing. Accountability has to be embedded in the national and regional 
mechanisms.Nyaradzayi Gumbonzvanda, general secretary, World YWCA 
<http://www.worldywca.org/>, Geneva, Switzerland, @worldywca 
<https://twitter.com/worldywca>


Understand it’s everyone’s problem: One of the main issues has been that 
gender inequality has been seen as a woman’s problem.Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> inequality is a societal and a human 
rights problem, with a multiplier effect on economies, communities and nations 
that is truly overwhelming.Katja Iversen


Work with religious and cultural leaders: We have to work with faith and 
cultural communities to change norms so that girls are valued the same way as 
boys and are given equal opportunities.Nyaradzayi Gumbonzvanda


Meet the feminists changing the world for girls from Kenya to Egypt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/13/meet-the-global-feminists-changing-the-world-for-girls-from-kenya-to-egypt>
Show that everyone benefits: All evidence shows that when societies invest in 
girls and women everybody wins. Investing in girls and women is not only the 
right thing to do, but the sound thing to do. We know it creates a ripple 
effect of sustainable change that benefits families, communities, and nations. 
When 10% more girls go to school, a country’s GDP increases by an average of 3%.
Katja Iversen


Recognise and redistribute unpaid care work: It is important to recognise, 
value, reduce and redistribute unpaid care work. The gendered division of 
labour must be dismantled as these are the structural causes and conditions 
that keep women and girls subjugated.Nebila Abdulmelik


Cultivate a meaningful education system: It’s good to see the SDGs have a 
strong focus on education. We need to go beyond the ability to read and write 
so that girls are equipped to access decent employment or be entrepreneurs. 
This requires a good investment in the education sector, including the quality 
training of teachers, motivation and good working conditions, and having the 
tools and materials to use.Nyaradzayi Gumbonzvanda


Listen to girls: SDGs can deliver transformative change for girls only if they 
have been consulted and their priorities and needs have been taken into 
account. Girls should be viewed as agents of change and not as beneficiaries – 
therefore their engagement in the implementation of the SDGs is crucial. For 
this we need to recognise the leadership potential of girls. We have witnessed 
firsthand the massive contributions that girls and young women as volunteers 
delivered for MDGs.Anush Aghabalyan


Be bold: It’s no longer enough to do trickle-down pilot projects. What is 
required are bold commitments and interventions that enable us to go scale.
Nyaradzayi Gumbonzvanda

How girl activists helped to ban child marriage in Malawi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/26/girl-activists-child-marriage-malawi-let-girls-lead>
Engage the private sector: The business community plays a key role in making 
sure investment in girls and women happens. It is very interesting to see how 
inequality is being discussed in Davos and among industries. The world is 
waking up. Katja Iversen

Nurture grassroots women’s organisations: Research across 70 countries  
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/feminist-mobilisation-and-progressive-policy-change-why-governments-take-action-295457>
and throughout four decades (1975 to 2005) has shown a strong link between 
autonomous feminist movements and government action to end violence against 
women. However many women’s rights organisations are struggling to survive in 
the current financing environment.Kasia Staszewska

Talk about failure: We need to encourage donors to take risks and to create an 
environment more open and tolerant about failure. Shifting discriminatory 
social norms and behaviours will take time.Lucie Faucherre


Believe in the possibility of rapid change: It is important to emphasise that 
it is possible to change social norms in less than a lifetime. We see that in 
multiple places, even in some of the issues that some deem sensitive, FGM 
(female genital mutilation) and young people’s access to modern contraceptives. 
The real change come when the demand comes from the communities and young 
people themselves.Katja Iversen

We need to talk about periods: why is menstruation still holding girls back?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/28/we-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back>
Dig out the roots, rather than cut off a branch: I worry that the current 
focus on specific practices, such as early and forced marriage, rather than 
underlying structural factors might not produce the kind of outcomes we seek. 
It is important to understand the reasoning behind these practices, for example 
why in poor communities in many countries early marriage is considered 
protective of girls, and to explore what other options might exist within 
communities, families and young people (boys and girls). For example, making 
schools more accessible to girls can make a difference, helping to delay 
marriage. Sometimes the solutions are simple, such as separate latrines for 
girls and boys or organising things so that girls can be accompanied on their 
way to and from school. Jo Boyden

Teach sex education: One issue that it is crucial to address in the SDGs, and 
not least in the implementation, is the need for comprehensive sexuality 
education. Right now it is not included but we know how crucial it is for all, 
especially girls. Prevention is better and cheaper than cure, and it seems to 
me that we could to some extend prevent a lot of the issues we are fighting 
today if good, comprehensive sexuality education was in place in all schools.
Katja Iversen


Read the full Q&A here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/21/live-qa-how-can-the-sustainable-development-goals-do-more-for-girls>

Is there anything that we’ve left out? Leave your thoughts in the comments 
below.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 