
Thursday will mark 30 years since the London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> swept away 
centuries of tradition and beckoned in the modern, global City of London. It 
signalled the end of leisurely gentleman’s hours and liquid lunches, ushering 
in computer screens and many more American accents in the once closed shop of 
London’s financial markets.

But the vote to leave the EU earlier this year means the reminiscing sparked 
by the 30th anniversary of the reforms brought in by Margaret Thatcher’s 
government is tinged with anxiety about whetherLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> can retain its status as one of the 
world’s biggest financial centres.

The shape of the UK’s trade deal with the remaining 27 members of the EU in 
the post-Brexit world is the topic of much debate across the City – and other 
financial hubs around the world. The new buzzword is “passporting”, the means 
by which members of the EU are able to do business in each other’s countries 
without impediment.


Last week, France’s ambassador to the UK, Sylvie Bermann, told an audience of 
London-based bankers that Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/european-banks-warn-off-political-intrusion>
was ready to house the bankers affected by the fallout of the Brexit vote. 
Frankfurthas sent delegations to London to set out its case for relocation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/frankfurt-in-front-the-city-poised-to-become-londons-gateway-to-europe>
, while Dublin and Luxembourg are also regarded as alternative centres to the 
UK capital. Anthony Browne, chief executive of the British Bankers’ Association,
warned this weekend that bankers’ “hands are quivering over the relocate button”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/22/leading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fanniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdf5ccf3d0a48d80153f2b926d7f6306f1538cef%2F0_66_2124_1276%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=30%20years%20after%20big%20bang%2C%20will%20Brexit%20cost%20City%20of%20London%20its%20status%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fanniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=30%20years%20after%20big%20bang%2C%20will%20Brexit%20cost%20City%20of%20London%20its%20status%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fanniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdf5ccf3d0a48d80153f2b926d7f6306f1538cef%2F0_66_2124_1276%2F2124.jpg>
 The London Stock Exchange trading floor as computerised dealing began. 
Photograph: PA Archive/PA 
It is a far cry from 27 October 1986, when after years of negotiations with 
the government, the LSE switched on computer screens and shut down its dealing 
room. “Open outcry”, where traders dealt shares face to face, was scrapped. The 
big bang also meant the scrapping of fixed commissions on share dealing and of 
ancient distinctions between stockbrokers, who advised clients, and jobbers, 
who bought and sold shares on their behalf.

Thatcher’s government regarded the previous set-up as anti-competitive and 
inefficient and wanted the City to adopt new technology to compete as finance 
went global.

 “It was an anachronism that had had its day,” said Nigel Boardman, a partner 
at the law firm Slaughter and May, who began working at his firm in the 70s and 
was a partner by the time the big bang arrived.

 The effect was to make many small City firms obsolete as the most prestigious 
were snapped up by US investment banks and rivals from Switzerland, Germany and 
elsewhere. The City boomed as London became a global financial centre, bridging 
the time zones of the Americas and Asia and allowing foreign banks access to 
the EU. This year it has evenled to an attempt to merge the London Stock 
Exchange and Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/lse-shareholders-expected-to-back-deutsche-borse-merger-london-stock-exchange>
.


Job numbers rose. In early 1986, financial services employed 976,000 people in 
Britain, government figures show. By 1990 the number had jumped to 1.18 million 
and it peaked at 1.21 million in 2008. Today, even after the financial crisis 
and 30 years of automation and cost cuts, there are 1.15 million people 
employed in finance – 174,000 more than before the big bang.

Richard Lumb, chief executive of Accenture’s global financial services 
business, said it also democratised share ownership – and brought in £65bn of 
tax revenues. This was one of the benefits of the bonus culture that took over 
the City in the wake of the big bang.

“Brexit will change the City in some ways,” said Lumb. “But I’m more 
optimistic than pessmistic.” He pointed to factors such as the skilled 
workforce in London and the tax and legal environment.

The lobby group TheCityUK has calculated that “hard Brexit” 
<http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/global/en/2016/oct/Brexit_POV.PDF>
 – in which the UK does not have access to the single market of the remaining 
27 EU countries – could put 35,000 jobs at risk.

Boardman, though, sees some positives from leaving the EU – for instance, 
freeing the City from a tax on financial transactions that is being introduced 
in 10 European countries orthe cap on bonuses that has forced up City salaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/04/bankers-bonus-cap-architect-says-sue-uk-government>
. “On the other hand, if financial passporting is lost that would be adverse … 
If you already have offices in the EU it may be you can more easily manage the 
loss of the passport … but if you don’t it could be more difficult.”

Previous anniversaries of the big bang have also coincided with controversies. 
In 2011,the 25-year milestone was marked by soul searching about the impact 
that the implosion of the banking sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/oct/09/big-bang-1986-city-deregulation-boom-bust>
 had had on the economy and inequality.

But, Boardman said, the current controversy about financial services 
post-Brexit is about more than just London. “The future of the City is an 
extremely important thing for the country and I don’t think we should talk 
about it as the future of the City. It’s the future of the country to a very 
significant extent because the whole country benefits from the City’s 
activities.”

 