
Radio invites the imagination to a conjure a clear picture of a programme, and 
in my mind, Jenni Murray and Jane Garvey have always been practically sisters. 
I love Woman’s Hour with a fanatical passion, and had pictured the pair sharing 
an office and endless conversations, collaborating closely on the programme 
together.

In fact, I am astonished to discover: “We barely know each other.”

I think Murray must be joking. “No, no. We hardly ever meet.”

“Well, we did go for lunch,” Garvey corrects her drily. “Oh yes,” Murray 
agrees. “But we never see each other, because we work on different days.” Is 
Woman’s Hour not a joint enterprise? “Absolutely not,” says Garvey. “We usually 
co-present a Christmas special. But the truth is, the programme rolls on, and 
we are just contracted to present it.”

This revelation comes about half an hour into our interview, and although 
startling, does help to explain something I had been puzzled by from the moment 
we met. We greeted each other in the programme’s open-plan office in London’s 
Broadcasting House, where we’re meeting to mark its 70th anniversary. But 
before we had even made our way to the green room, I was struck by how distant, 
almost wary, they seemed. The curiously anaemic chemistry lacked any trace of 
easy familiarity, and Garvey didn’t take the seat next to Murray, but sat 
apart. The temperature did gradually warm up, and the distance between them 
didn’t feel hostile. But it is clear from their answers to my very first 
question – When did you start listening to Woman’s Hour? – that on top of 
barely knowing one another, the presenters could not be more different.

Murray, 66, has been presenting Woman’s Hour for 29 years 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/womanshour/about/jenni_murray.shtml>, but claims 
to have been listening to it for 66. Born in Barnsley, as a baby she was fed at 
2pm every day, just as Woman’s Hour came on the radio, a fact that leads Murray 
on to more childhood radio anecdotes, all delivered with the polished flair of 
an accomplished raconteur. With long, red nails and dramatic eyelashes, Murray 
is a fabulously glamorous performer, and radiates star quality. She wraps up 
the monologue by reminding us of the consternation Woman’s Hour, even then, 
provoked by talking about taboos such as cancer. Her manifest pride in the 
programme and its history is very affecting, and goes on at some length. 
Garvey, meanwhile, doesn’t even try to compete for airtime, but listens in 
expressionless silence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a018432b9efff5a5943c99df37c661a30c8d46%2F60_1026_4180_2508%2F4180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=70%20years%20of%20Woman's%20Hour%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20listeners%20like%20frank%20conversations%20about%20sex%E2%80%98&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=70%20years%20of%20Woman%27s%20Hour%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20listeners%20like%20frank%20conversations%20about%20sex%E2%80%98&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a018432b9efff5a5943c99df37c661a30c8d46%2F60_1026_4180_2508%2F4180.jpg>
 Murray in the Woman’s Hour studio circa 1994. Photograph: Gemma Levine/Getty 
Images 
Garvey grew up in Liverpool 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1rtmf0y9DWkzm3Pwb0cHP2g/jane-garvey> 
listening to Radio 1 and Radio Merseyside. She joined Radio 5 Live on its first 
day in 1994, and didn’t listen to anything else for 13 years. The 52-year-old 
had barely even heard Radio 4, let alone Woman’s Hour, when she joined the 
programme in 2007, andquickly ruffled some devotees’ feathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/feb/04/bbc.radio1> by expressing 
reservations about its “middle-class women talking about cookery”.

Makeup-free and unadorned, she is as self-effacing and understated as Murray 
is flamboyant. How she holds her own becomes clear when she mentions Radio 4 
and Murray chips in: “It wasn’tRadio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> when I started listening. It was the 
home service.” Garvey clips back with: “I’m not old enough to remember the home 
service.” “Steady on, dear,” Murray purrs.

Asked to name one reason why it has endured for 70 years 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06sp7md>, with four million listeners, Murray 
says: “It has always been respectful of the fact that women are not all one 
thing. They have a huge range of interests, and it has always tried to reflect 
that. So we might go from Germaine Greer to cooking; the range has always been 
there.” Does that include addressing women who are vehemently anti-feminist?

“It is not a feminist programme,” Garvey says at once. “No, it’s not,” Murray 
agrees firmly. “We do not make feminism an assumption.” I’m surprised by this, 
so I ask if a woman who was emphatically not a feminist could ever present the 
programme. An abrupt pause is followed by a falsetto “Mmm, mmm,” from Murray, 
and “I’m not sure about that,” from Garvey. She thinks it through for a moment. 
“Let’s be honest about this. I think it’s highly unlikely that the programme 
would be presented by someone who stated in public that she doesn’t have any 
truck with feminism.”

They may not assume a feminist audience, but do get annoyed by the 
misapprehension that their listeners get the vapours over explicit discussions 
about sex. “Our listeners are women of the world, people who have lived,” 
Garvey says. “They’re very happy to hear frank conversations about sex.” Only 
that morning,Murray had interviewed the author of a book 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07wn3zn> that encourages girls to stop 
thinking their job in bed is to service boys’ needs, and start pursuing their 
own sexual pleasure, too. Murray admits she had a moment of minor alarm when 
the words “penis in her mouth” were uttered, and is “sure there will be people 
who thought I allowed it to go too far”. But for Garvey, these are the 
programme’s finest moments, and she thinks the only people they offend are not 
Woman’s Hour listeners, but titillated hacks.

“We did an item about dick pics recently, and I made my debut on page 3 of the 
Sun, under the headline, ‘Radio knob’ 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/archives/news/1172303/radio-knobs-explicit-morning-talk-about-penis-pictures-on-bbc-radio-4-womans-hour-shocks-listeners/>
. It’s so trivialising. Maybe readers of the Sun genuinely don’t know their 
daughters are receiving dick pics – but if they don’t, they probably should. 
Maybe silly old middle-aged executives in the Sun don’t know, either. But I 
don’t think a single listener complained. They are sensible people. What really 
annoys me is people going, ‘I can’t believe Woman’s Hour is talking about dick 
pics!’ Woman’s Hour has always been talking about what’s going on in people’s 
lives. My beef is with the rest of the media for still doing all the tired, 
titillating stuff about sex, and not talking about any of the complicated 
things, like the ones discussed on Jenni’s show today.”

If I were queen for a day, I’d abolish sex education | Jenni Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/03/abolish-sex-education-jenni-murray>
I get the impression that Murray is the more squeamish of the two, while 
Garvey thinks the items about sex are the listeners’ favourites. “A couple of 
years ago we did an item about the rise in cosmetic labiaplasty, and why this 
is connected to porn, and if you’re a straight woman you probably haven’t seen 
that many vaginas or vulvas, so let’s have a conversation about what women look 
like there. That was a completely straight conversation. I interviewed a woman 
gynaecologist and we just talked about what women’s genitalia looked like. It 
wasn’t titillating, it wasn’t funny, it was just – guess what – they come in 
all shapes and sizes. That’s the kind of thing you’re just never going to hear 
anywhere else.”

The closest thing they can find to Woman’s Hour anywhere else on air or in 
print is probably, Garvey thinks, Stylist magazine. Murray suggests Good 
Housekeeping. “Yes, Good Housekeeping for the older readers,” Garvey agrees. 
“Not necessarily older,” objects Murray. “Good Housekeeping has a similar broad 
appeal to the one that we have.” “Well, I’m not a reader of Good Housekeeping,” 
murmurs Garvey. “Well, nor am I,” says Murray quickly. Garvey shoots a doubtful 
glance. “Aren’t you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8319fffd1a74c77d0d4544a2ba2b76b54323624%2F21_513_3684_2210%2F3684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=70%20years%20of%20Woman's%20Hour%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20listeners%20like%20frank%20conversations%20about%20sex%E2%80%98&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=70%20years%20of%20Woman%27s%20Hour%3A%20%E2%80%98Our%20listeners%20like%20frank%20conversations%20about%20sex%E2%80%98&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2F70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8319fffd1a74c77d0d4544a2ba2b76b54323624%2F21_513_3684_2210%2F3684.jpg>
 Jane Garvey, Adrian Chiles and Marcus Buckland in the BBC’s 5 Live studio, 
where Garvey starting working on the station’s first day of broadcast in 1994. 
Photograph: BBC 
Its Garvey’s turn to look faintly squeamish when Murray laments her generation 
of feminists’ failure to bequeath their hard-fought entitlement to sexual 
pleasure to today’s young women.

“We’ve passed down to our children so many principles of feminism, but not 
their entitlement to good sex. That’s really shocked me. We’ve known for a long 
time that porn is where young people have been going for their information 
about sex. Why, when we know porn is so ubiquitous, have we not as parents 
thought, ‘Ah, we have to teach our children this?’” She goes on: “I have to say 
that with my boys, I like to think I did. We talked a lot about it. Because it 
was so important. I didn’t want my boys to grow up to be men who didn’t 
understand that women quite liked sex too, and that there were things they 
could learn that would make it better for them.”

Garvey is blanching, and suggests quietly: “I think you’re probably a rarity 
in having those conversations.”

Murray has been with her husband for more than 30 years, and has two grown-up 
sons. Garvey is divorced from Adrian Chiles, and guards her teenage daughters’ 
privacy much more closely. Whereas Murray has always taken the view that “life 
is copy”, Garvey says: “I don’t particularly have that impulse. I’m quite a 
private, self-contained person.”

When Woman’s Hour began 70 years ago, 30% of its listeners were men, and it is 
40% today, a fact about which both are very happy. Both say nice things about5 
Live’s Men’s Hour <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00t32zg>, and say they 
welcome anything that encourages men to open up and talk. Garvey says she is 
also a fan of a recent innovation onRadio 4 called Late Night Woman’s Hour 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02zhq5l>, hosted by Lauren Laverne and 
targeted towards a younger, possibly racier audience. “I think it’s a great 
idea. There’s a nice feel to the programme. I think it works. There’s a good 
mood to it.” Murray, on the other hand, claims not to have heard a single 
edition.

That can’t possibly be true, I say. But she insists it is, because she goes to 
bed before the programme goes out. There are, I point out, these things called 
podcasts. “Yes,” says Garvey. “I listen to podcasts.”

“Ah,” says Murray. “I do say on the programme, ‘It’s really easy to podcast, 
all you have to do is go to the website.’ But I don’t know where to start.” 
Garvey looks incredulous. “Jenni, Jenni. Hang your head in shame.” But surely 
she must know how to use the BBC’s iPlayer, at least? Murray is mute, and her 
silence answers the question. Intervening briskly, Garvey cries: “Right! Can I 
say, I think podcasts are a brilliant invention – and I’m moving the subject 
gently on.” We’re all laughing, but still I cannot believe that Murray has 
never once been curious enough about an offshoot of the show she has presented 
for nearly 30 years to find a way to listen.

“Honestly, I’ve got a BlackBerry,” she protests, “and you can’t download 
anything on it.”

Late Night Woman's Hour to become permanent Radio 4 fixture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/27/late-night-womans-hour-become-permanent-radio-4-fixture>
“We’ll have a whip-round to buy you a smartphone, then,” mutters Garvey. “I 
don’t want a smartphone because I can’t type on that because my nails are too 
long!” I suggest the real reason why she won’t listen to Late Night Woman’s 
Hour is because she would rather it didn’t exist. She assumes an expression of 
faux innocence. “I’m sure I’d love it if I listened to it.” Then she giggles, 
“Oh God, the Guardian’s going to be appalled that I’m so technologically inept! 
You’re not going to write this, are you?”

Murray has, unlike Garvey, watched ITV’s Loose Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, and even appeared on it, but 
was unimpressed by the lowbrow “intelligence of the conversation”. Transferring 
Woman’s Hour to television has been suggested many times, but always rejected 
as too expensive, and neither presenter is keen on the idea. Both have, 
however, been trying for years to get the daily 15-minute drama serial ditched, 
alas without success.

As both presenters strike me as formidable, I’m surprised they haven’t won 
that battle – but nothing like as surprised as when I ask about their pay. The 
programme has been talking about equal pay for 70 years; theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> couldn’t possibly pay its presenters 
less than the salaries of male presenters on other flagship Radio 4 programmes, 
could it?

“Neither of us knows what other presenters of either gender earn,” Murray 
tells me, rather carefully. “It’s long been BBC policy to keep such things a 
secret. We both agree that pay audits should be made compulsory in all places 
of work, so that at least everyone knows.” Much more will, of course, be known 
about the gender balance of BBC pay when the names of all presenters earning 
more than £150,000 are published next year. “You won’t find either of us on 
that list,” Murray says.

What? In that case, the BBC absolutely is paying them less than their male 
counterparts on Radio 4, many of whom earn several hundred thousand pounds a 
year. I am scandalised. How can this be possible in 2016?

“I think,” Murray says, “we can leave you to draw your own conclusions.”

•The 70th anniversary edition of Woman’s Hour presented by Jenni Murray and 
Jane Garvey will broadcast on BBC Radio 4 at 10am on Monday 10 October.
 