
After nearly three weeks of tournament football the 2015 Asian Cup will draw 
to a close this weekend, with host nationAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> having to overcome an 
impressive South Korean team if they are to win the tournament for the very 
first time. Before the tournament kicked off we asked readers to share their 
perspectives of the latest Asian Cup, and tell us about their experiences as 
spectators soaking up the atmosphere from the stands. And it’s clear that no 
matter which two teams were competing on the pitch, the tournament has been an 
overall success both on and off the field of play.
 Pre Match Australia vs Kuwait Photograph: dwinkz49/GuardianWitness 
Australia met Kuwait in the opening game on 9 January in the Melbourne 
Rectangular Stadium, and despite the unfancied Kuwait side taking an early 
lead, the Socceroos bounced back comprehensively and recorded a 4-1 win in the 
end.

Meanwhile South Korea began their tournament with a rather less emphatic win 
against Oman, a Cho Young-cheol goal being decisive in a 1-0 win. It was one of 
six group games staged at Canberra Stadium, andDougie Herd was there to witness 
all of them. Dougie emigrated to Australia from Scotland in 1999, and he’s an 
avid fan of his new homeland’s football contests. “I even took the trip to 
Brazil for Australia’s three World Cup group game defeats last summer. Buying 
tickets at the Asian Cup was a straightforward process, although, as expected, 
there was a much higher interest for the games the Socceroos were involved in.”
 A storm and a tea cup: Dougie Herd enjoying South Korea vs Oman despite the 
thunderstorm hitting Canberra before kick off Photograph: 
Dougiedownunder/GuardianWitness 
 Looking at the attendance figures for the group games this rings true. Over 
25,000 watched Australia beat Kuwait in the first group game, followed by over 
50,000 spectators watching the Socceroos cruise to a 4-0 victory over Oman in 
Sydney and another high gate of over 48,000 people witnessing their narrow 
defeat to South Korea. The flip side of this was crowds of less than 5,000 
people attending Qatar’s final match against Bahrain in Sydney, but considering 
this game was a dead rubber in terms of tournament progression, as both sides 
were bowing out at the earliest stage, crowd figures have been genuinely 
impressive and interest has overall been high.
 A crowd of over 50,000 hasn’t been disappointed tonight Photograph: Clare 
Lawrence/GuardianWitness 
Rather than overseas visitors, Dougie suggests that a core of each nation’s 
support in the stands was made up by enthusiastic ex-patriots. “Many followers 
of teams such as South Korea, Iraq and China travelled long distances to get to 
Brisbane and Canberra for their games.”And they were well rewarded with some 
excellent performances from their national teams. South Korea look very capable 
of spoiling Australia’s party in the final, having comfortably beaten both 
Uzbekistan and Iraq in the knock out stages so far without conceding a goal. 
Iraq may have lost 2-0 to South Korea in the first semi-final, but the team can 
be proud of their performances in the group stages, not to mention the battling 
3-3 draw in the quarter-finals against neighbours Iran, before keeping their 
their nerve in a thrilling 7-6 penalty shoot out. China had no trouble getting 
out of their group, winning all three games, but succumbed at the first knock 
out hurdle in the quarter-finals against Australia, arguably having faced 
sterner opposition for the first time in the tournament.
 Iraq v Palestine, Canberra Stadium, 21 January 2015 Photograph: 
Dougiedownunder/GuardianWitness 
Joel Fruci was too young at 15 to attend the last Asian cup hosted by Qatar in 
2011, but this time though he was right there. “There was genuine passion among 
the supporters, with plenty of colourful flags and noise to go with it. 
Melbourne’s multicultural community contributed greatly to the excitement and 
enthusiasm felt in the stands. This Asian Cup has been a showcase of quality 
football and diversity.”

As a Melbourne resident, Joel had the opportunity to attend five matches at 
the Melbourne Rectangular Stadium, including Australia’s first win of the 
tournament against Kuwait, Iran’s relatively comfortable 2-0 victory over 
Bahrain, newcomers Palestine’s humbling 5-1 defeat to Jordan, Uzbekistan 
sealing their advancement to the quarter-finals with a 3-1 win over Saudi 
Arabia before being defeated 2-0 by South Korea in the knock out stages.
 Uzbekistan beat Saudi Arabia 3-1 in Melbourne to seal their Quarter Final 
place Photograph: Joel Fruci/GuardianWitness 
Effie Karageorgos also experienced the Asian Cup for the first time in person. 
“I attended the Japan - Jordan group game with a Japan supporting friend, and 
was impressed by the atmosphere in the stands. The Japanese fans outnumbered 
their Jordan counterparts and the Samurai Blue also impressed on the pitch.”

Palestine and Iraq had already been defeated by Japan before their 2-0 victory 
over Jordan, but Japan’s Asian Cup adventure was cut short in the 
quarter-finals when spot kick misses by Shinji Kagawa and Keisuke Honda gifted 
the United Arab Emirates a 5-4 penalty shoot out win after a 1-1 draw in Sydney.
 Japan vs Jordan in Melbourne, 20 January 2015 Photograph: Effie 
Karageorgos/GuardianWitness 
While the tournament has proven to be a success, we were also interested in 
asking our readers what, if anything, could have been done differently? Dougie 
has been particular impressed with the set up. “Being a wheelchair user, the 
designated seating space has been excellent, and the volunteers who are always 
a great asset to the organisation of these tournaments have been very helpful.” 
On another practical noteClare Lawrence was full of praise for the well 
organised Socceroos buses. “A bus service ran every ten minutes picking up 
supporters along the way at designated stops. While often crowded, they at 
least meant that there was no need to fight rush hour traffic or worry about 
stadium parking yourself.”

Effie is happy that the tournament was distributed around Australia as much as 
it was. “Residents of Sydney, Brisbane, Canberra, Melbourne and Newcastle have 
all been given a fair chance to witness the event.” Joel had one negative 
comment regarding the tournament’s organisation.“Despite there being travel 
distances to consider, I was disappointed about the exclusion of Perth and 
Adelaide as host cities.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422288422144%2Fdcf89e40-c84e-466f-9331-4ec400b6ebca-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20great%20Australian%20showcase%3A'%20readers'%20perspectives%20of%20the%202015%20Asian%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20great%20Australian%20showcase%3A%27%20readers%27%20perspectives%20of%20the%202015%20Asian%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422288422144%2Fdcf89e40-c84e-466f-9331-4ec400b6ebca-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
 A group of enthusiastic fans struggling to get their sign together during 
China vs North Korea, 18 January 2015 Photograph: 
Dougiedownunder/GuardianWitness 
Another interesting point our readers have made hinges on the Australian TV 
coverage of the event, or lack of. Dougie suggests that Football Federation 
Australia sold its soul too cheaply by signing the rights to the group stages 
over to Foxtel. “FFA missed the opportunity to open the tournament up to casual 
viewers through free to air broadcasting. It might be a long time until 
Australia host a football tournament of similar stature, and rather than being 
‘dazzled by cash’ FFA could have looked at this tournament as an opportunity of 
building a long term future for the game.”

Clare agrees with this, claiming she was lucky to have access to Foxtel as it 
meant she wasn’t completely reliant on social media for the scores.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422288495913%2F423474b2-b673-45d3-9221-56c2508e758d-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20great%20Australian%20showcase%3A'%20readers'%20perspectives%20of%20the%202015%20Asian%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20great%20Australian%20showcase%3A%27%20readers%27%20perspectives%20of%20the%202015%20Asian%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fguardianwitness-blog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fa-great-australian-showcase-readers-perspectives-of-the-2015-asian-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422288495913%2F423474b2-b673-45d3-9221-56c2508e758d-bestSizeAvailable.jpeg>
 The Samurai Blue give their thanks to their always cheerful fans after their 
2-0 win in Melbourne against Jordan, 20 January 2015 Photograph: Christopher 
Corneschi/GuardianWitness 
All in all the 2015 Asian Cup has been a great spectacle for the thousands of 
attending fans. A lot of the teams have been evenly matched, and games have 
been finely balanced. Palestine found it tough going in their first Asian Cup 
outing, conceding 11 goals in their three group games, but Jaka Ihbeisheh 
provided them with a great moment when scoring their first ever Asian Cup goal 
in the 5-1 defeat to Jordan. Uzbekistan are showing progress that bodes well 
for their next World Cup qualifying campaign. Iraq will remember their 
thrilling victory over Iran in the quarter-final for a long time, and they can 
still secure a third place finish if they defeat the UAE in the third-place 
match. Whether the trophy will be lifted by rapturous host nation Australia or 
the defensively sound and impressive South Koreans, the 2015 Asian Cup has been 
a showcase of Australia’s diverse communities and a real triumph both on and 
off the field.
 