
Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enrique-pena-nieto>, has rejected any 
suggestions of his country paying for a border wall and pledged to sign an 
updated free-trade agreement with the European Union as he seeks to diversify 
the economy away from the United States.


Speaking in uncharacteristically stern and straightforward language, Peña 
Nieto told an audience of Mexican diplomats: “All matters that define our 
bilateral relationship are on the table including security, immigration and 
commerce.”


But he said any negotiations must include touchy topics for Americans, 
including putting an end to the flow of illegal guns across the border and 
arming deadly drug cartels.

“It is evident that we have differences with the new United States government 
on some issues, such as a wall thatMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> absolutely will not pay for,” Peña 
Nieto said. “At no time will we accept anything that goes against our dignity 
as a country and our dignity as Mexicans.

Related: Mexico reels at nightmare vision of a Donald Trump White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mexico-trump-white-house-nafta-border-wall-remittances>

“Basic principles such as sovereignty, the national interest and the 
protection of our citizens are non-negotiable.”

Peña Nieto’s pronouncement contradicts the insistence of the US 
president-elect,Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
that Mexico will cover the costs of fencing off its frontier with the United 
States.

“I want to get started. I don’t want to wait a year and a half,” Trump said of 
the wallat a press conference on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-attacks-cnn-buzzfeed-at-press-conference>
.

The tougher talk from the Mexican side comes as the country confronts the 
consequences of Trump scolding automakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/fear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers>
 for expanding production there – taking to Twitter to jawbone them into 
shifting production from Mexico to the United States.


Ford has already cancelled an investment of $1.6bn to build a factory in 
north-central Mexico, while Fiat-Chrysler boss Sergio Marchionne has said high 
tariffs would make the production of anything in Mexico“uneconomical” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/fiat-chrysler-mexico-plants-detroit-auto-show-2017-trump>
.


Trump’s tweets and promises to impose penalties on Mexican exports have 
hammered the peso. Mexico’s currency reached a record low during his press 
conference, dipping below 22 per US dollar.


Rex Tillerson, the secretary of state nominee, sounded more subdued than Trump 
on the Mexico topicin Senate hearings on his nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/rex-tillerson-senate-congressional-hearing-key-points-live>
.

“I would never characterise an entire population of people with any single 
term,” he said when asked about Trump’s maligning of Mexicans as “rapists” and 
robbers.

“Mexico is a longstanding neighbour and friend of this country,” Tillerson 
said. “We’re going to engage with Mexico because of their importance to us in 
this hemisphere and we have many, many common issues, common areas of concern.”

Related: NAFTA: 20 years of regret for Mexico | Mark Weisbrot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/04/nafta-20-years-mexico-regret>

Peña Nieto listed Mexico’s concerns in any negotiations with Trump: stopping 
illegal weapons from entering the country; helping Mexico deal with the waves 
of migrants from around the world trying to transit Mexican territory “in their 
desire to reach the United States”; and maintaining the flow of remittances – 
more than $20bn in 2016 – sent by Mexicans to their families back home.

The president also promised to seek out new markets for Mexican exports – 
starting with an updated European Union trade deal, which he expected to be 
signed within 12 months – as Trump threatens to rip up Nafta and slap a 35% 
tariff on Mexican-made goods.

An Ipsos poll <http://ipsosmexicoblog.mx/57-donald-trump-y-el-tlcan> found 57% 
of Mexicans said they would sooner abandon Nafta than give in to Trump’s 
demands.
 