
Frontiers are always changing, advancing. Borders are fixed, man-made, 
squabbled about and jealously fought over. The frontier is an exciting, 
demanding – and frequently lawless – place to be. Borders are policed, often 
tense; if they become too porous then they’re not doing the job for which they 
were intended. Occasionally, though, the borderis the frontier. That’s the 
situation now with regard to fiction and nonfiction.

For many years this was a peaceful, uncontested and pretty deserted space. On 
one side sat theSamuel Johnson prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samueljohnsonprize>, on the other the Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>. On one side of the fence, to 
put it metonymically, we had Antony Beevor’sStalingrad 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stalingrad-3.html>. On the other, Arundhati 
Roy’sThe God of Small Things 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/god-of-small-things.html>. Basically, you 
went to nonfiction for the content, the subject. You read Beevor’s book because 
you were interested in the second world war, the eastern front. Interest in 
India or Kerala, however, was no more a precondition for reading Roy’s novel 
than a fondness for underage girls was a necessary starting point for enjoying
Lolita. In a realm where style was often functional, nonfiction books were – 
are – praised for being “well written”, as though that were an inessential 
extra, like some optional finish on a reliable car. Whether the subject matter 
was alluring or off-putting, fiction was the arena where style was more 
obviously expected, sometimes conspicuously displayed and occasionally 
rewarded. And so, for a sizeable chunk of my reading life, novels provided 
pretty much all the nutrition and flavour I needed. They were fun, they taught 
me about psychology, behaviour and ethics. And then, gradually, increasing 
numbers of them failed to deliver – or delivered only decreasing amounts of 
what I went to them for. Nonfiction began taking up more of the slack and, as 
it did, so the drift away from fiction accelerated. Great novels still held me 
in their thrall, but a masterpiece such as Shirley Hazzard’sThe Transit of Venus
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/transit-of-venus-2.html> made the pleasures 
ofCaptain Corelli’s Mandolin seem fairly redundant. Meanwhile, my attention was 
fully employed by shoebox-sized nonfiction classics such as Richard Rhodes’sThe 
Making of the Atomic Bomb 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/making-of-the-atomic-bomb.html>, Robert 
Caro’s life of Robert Moses,The Power Broker 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306716/s/the-power-broker/>
, or Taylor Branch’s trilogy about “America in the King Years”:Parting the 
Waters 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Parting-Waters-America-Years-1954-63/dp/0671687425>, 
Pillar of Fire 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Pillar-Fire-America-Years-1963-65/dp/0684848090/ref=pd_sim_14_1?ie=UTF8&dpID=519vbk%2BaeNL&dpSrc=sims&preST=_AC_UL160_SR106%2C160_&refRID=0ZFK8GYC25T6BXBQSYW7>
,At Canaan’s Edge 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/At-Canaans-Edge-America-1965-68/dp/068485712X/ref=pd_sim_14_2?ie=UTF8&dpID=51Pz%2BBtMMpL&dpSrc=sims&preST=_AC_UL160_SR110%2C160_&refRID=0ENDZ22PN2AV9R6E4J3D>
. I learned so much from books like these – while I was reading them. The 
downside was that I retained so little. Which was an incentive to read more.

I look forward to the day I join that gruffly contented portion of the male 
population that reads only military history

While it’s important not to convert prejudices into manifesto pledges, my 
experience is in keeping with actuarial norms: middle-aged now, I look forward 
to the days when I join that gruffly contented portion of the male population 
that reads only military history. More broadly, my changing tastes were shaped 
by a general cultural shift occasioned by the internet, the increased number of 
sports channels and the abundance of made-for-TV drama. Not, as is sometimes 
claimed, because they’re making us more stupid, rendering us incapable of 
concentrating on late-period Henry James (which I’d never been capable of 
concentrating on anyway), but because our hunger for distraction and diversion 
is now thoroughly sated by all the football, porn and viral videos out there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe190d54cfde62dff8e3c1df7163ccd6e060b5d45%2F481_922_2874_4129%2F2874.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe190d54cfde62dff8e3c1df7163ccd6e060b5d45%2F481_922_2874_4129%2F2874.jpg>
 David Hare: ‘The two most depressing words in the English language are 
“literary fiction”’ Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
As a consequence, the one thing I don’t go to fiction for, these days, is 
entertainment. Obviously, I still want to have a good time. I share Jonathan 
Franzen’s reaction to the joyless slog represented (for him) byWilliam Gaddis’s 
JR <http://www.amazon.co.uk/JR-William-Gaddis/dp/1843541653> but I don’t want 
the kind of good time that ends up feeling like a waste of time. Chaired by 
Stella Rimington,the Booker year of 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize-2011> was in some ways the 
belated last gasp of quality fiction as entertainment – or “readability”, as 
she called it. It was belated because David Hare had provided the epitaph a 
year earlier when he wrote that “the two most depressing words in the English 
language are ‘literary fiction’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/20/ten-rules-for-writing-fiction-part-one?INTCMP=SRCH>
” (which sometimes feels like the aspirational, if commercially challenged, 
cousin of genre fiction).

Within the sprawl of nonfiction there is as much genre- and 
convention-dependency as in fiction. Nicholson Baker has argued persuasively 
that a recipe for successful nonfiction is an argument or thesis that can be 
summed up by reviewers and debated by the public without the tedious obligation 
of reading the whole book. In exceptional cases the title alone is enough.
Malcolm Gladwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell> is the 
unquestioned master in this regard.Blink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/feb/06/scienceandnature.society>. Ah, 
got it. Some nonfiction books give the impression of being the dutiful 
fulfilment of contracts agreed on the basis of skilfully managed proposals. The 
finished books are like heavily expanded versions of those proposals – which 
then get boiled back down again with the sale of serial rights. Baker’s study 
of John Updike,U and I 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/U-I-Story-Nicholson-Baker/dp/184708351X/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1448555186&sr=1-1&keywords=u+and+i>
, on the other hand, is irreducible in that there is no thesis or argument and 
very little story. The only way to experience the book is to read it. Which is 
exactly what one would say of any worthwhile piece of fiction.

The appeal of Touching the Void is dependent absolutely on Joe Simpson being 
roped to the rock face of what happened

Don’t let me be misunderstood. The novel is not dead or dying. But at any 
given time, particular cultural forms come into their own. (No sane person 
would claim that, in the 1990s, advances were made in the composition of string 
quartets to rival those being made in electronic music.) Sometimes, advances 
are made at the expense of already established forms; other times, the 
established forms are themselves challenged and reinvigorated by the resulting 
blowback. At this moment, it’s the shifting sands between fiction and 
nonfiction that compel attention.

The difference between fiction and nonfiction is quite reasonably assumed to 
depend on whether stuff is invented or factually reliable. Now, in some kinds 
of writing – history, reportage and some species of memoir or true adventure – 
there is zero room for manoeuvre. Everything must be rigorously fact-checked. 
The appeal of a book such asTouching the Void  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/touching-the-void-7.html>is dependent 
absolutely on Joe Simpson being roped to the rock face of what happened. In 
military history, as Beevor commands, no liberties may be taken. As the author 
of many nonfiction books which are full of invention, I second this 
wholeheartedly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcddb4ffae1874915040162c05501d8ce511fe511%2F0_0_2362_1887%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcddb4ffae1874915040162c05501d8ce511fe511%2F0_0_2362_1887%2F2362.jpg>
 Walker Evans: Sharecropper’s Family, Hale County, Alabama 1936. Evans insited 
on calling his work ‘documentary style’. Photograph: Library of Congress/Walker 
Evans 
The manipulations and inventions manufactured by Werner Herzog in the higher 
service of what he calls “ecstatic truth 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/rogers-journal/herzogs-minnesota-declaration-defining-ecstatic-truth>
” leave the defences of documentary at large dangerously lowered. Inmy defence 
I would argue that the contrivances in my nonfiction are so factually trivial 
that their inclusion takes no skin off even the most inquisitorial nose.The 
Missing of the Somme 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Missing-Somme-Geoff-Dyer/dp/0857862723/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1448555474&sr=1-1&keywords=The+Missing+of+the+Somme>
 begins with mention of a visit to the Natural History Museum with my 
grandfather – who never set foot in a museum in his life.Yoga for People Who 
Can’t Be Bothered to Do It 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Yoga-People-Who-Cant-Bothered/dp/0857864068/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1448555542&sr=1-1&keywords=Yoga+For+People+Who+Can%E2%80%99t+Be+Bothered+To+Do+It>
was categorised as nonfiction because that’s what the publishers deemed most 
likely to succeed – ie, least likely to sink without trace. One of these 
“travel essays” – as the book was packaged in America – involved a psychedelic 
misadventure in Amsterdam, climaxing with a peculiar occurrence in a cafe 
toilet. Most of the story – which had originally appeared in an anthology of 
fiction – is a faithful transcript of stuff that really happened, but that 
incident was pinched from an anecdote someone told me about a portable toilet 
at Glastonbury. All that matters is that the reader can’t see the joins, that 
there is no textural change between reliable fabric and fabrication. In other 
words, the issue is one not of accuracy but aesthetics. That is why the 
photographerWalker Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/walker-evans>
 turned noun into adjective by insisting on the designation “documentary style” 
for his work. Exporting this across to literature, style itself can become a 
form of invention. As the did-it-really-happen? issue gives way to questions of 
style and form, so we are brought back to theexpectations engendered by certain 
forms: how we expect to read certain books, how we expect them to behave. The 
dizziness occasioned byWG Sebald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald> 
lay in the way that we really didn’t know quite what we were reading. To adapt 
a line of Clint Eastwood’s fromCoogan’s Bluff, we didn’t know what was 
happening – even as it was happening to us. That mesmeric uncertainty has 
diminished slightly since the Sebald software has, as it were, been made 
available for free download by numerous acolytes, but a similar categorical 
refusal informs Ben Lerner’s10.04 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/10-04-Ben-Lerner/dp/1847088937/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1448556290&sr=1-1&keywords=10.04+ben+lerner>
, “a work,” as his narrator puts it, “that, like a poem, is neither fiction nor 
nonfiction, but a flickering between them”. The flicker is sustained on an epic 
scale – in a thoroughly domestic sort of way – byKarl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>’s six-volume My Struggle 
series. A side-effect or aftershock of Knausgaard’s seismic shakeup was to make 
us realise how thoroughly bored we had become by plot. Rachel Cusk addressed 
and exploited this in her wonderfully plotless novelOutline 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/outline.html>, which was shortlisted for last 
year’s Goldsmiths prize.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210434f6bcdc5a15c8cebf756f77292532c77725%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210434f6bcdc5a15c8cebf756f77292532c77725%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Karl Ove Knausgaard sustains the ‘flicker’ between fiction and nonfiction ‘on 
an epic scale’. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer 
Seeking to reward innovation and experimentation, this prize is a good and 
timely thing – but it’s unfortunate that it’s limited to fiction. While last 
year’s Samuel Johnson prize went to Helen Macdonald for her beautifully novelH 
Is for Hawk <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/h-is-for-hawk.html>, much 
so-called experimental fiction comes in the tried-and-tested form of the 
sub-species of historical novel known as modernist. Had they been LPs rather 
than books, several contenders for last year’s Goldsmiths prize could have 
joinedWill Self’s Shark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/28/shark-will-self-review> in that 
oxymoronic section ofRay’s Jazz Shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/19/ray-smith-obituary>: “secondhand 
avant garde”.

Twenty-four years ago, I was surprised to see But Beautiful 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/but-beautiful.html> – a 
neither-one-thing-nor-the-other book about jazz – in the bestsellers section of 
Books Etc on London’s Charing Cross Road. “Is that true?” I asked the manager. 
“No, no,” he replied consolingly. “We just didn’t know where else to put it.” 
Nowadays, there’s an increasing need for a section devoted to books that 
previously lacked a suitable home, or that could have been scattered between 
four or five different ones, none of which quite fit.

It needs stressing that, as is often the case, a “new” situation turns out to 
have a long and distinguished prehistory

The danger, as genre-defying or creative nonfiction becomes a genre in its own 
right – with mix-and-match poised to become a matter of rote – is that no man’s 
land could become predictably congested. It also needs stressing that, as is 
often the case, a “new” situation turns out to have a long and distinguished 
prehistory. Where to stock Rebecca West’sBlack Lamb and Grey Falcon 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-lamb-and-grey-falcon.html> (1941)? 
History? Travel (within the subsection of the Balkans or Yugoslavia)? Or 
perhaps, as she suggested, in a category devoted to works “in a form insane 
from any ordinary artistic or commercial point of view”. Maggie Nelson must 
have been very happy when proof copies of her latest book,The Argonauts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/23/the-argonauts-maggie-nelson-review-harry-dodge-transgender>
, advertised it as a work of “autotheory” – happy because Roland Barthes had 
been saving a place for her in this hip new category. And so, as our proposed 
new section expands to make room for the diverse likes of Elizabeth Hardwick’s
Sleepless Nights 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sleepless-Nights-Classics-Elizabeth-Hardwick/dp/0940322722/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1448558134&sr=8-1&keywords=Sleepless+Nights>
, Bruce Chatwin’sThe Songlines <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/songlines.html>
, Simon Schama’sDead Certainties 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Dead-Certainties-Speculations-Simon-Schama/dp/1847087329/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1448558244&sr=8-1&keywords=Dead+Certainties>
, Roberto Calasso’sThe Marriage of Cadmus and Harmony 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Marriage-Cadmus-And-Harmony/dp/0099308010> or Ivan 
Vladislavic’sPortrait With Keys 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Portrait-Keys-City-Johannesburg-Unlocked/dp/184627060X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1448558367&sr=8-1&keywords=Portrait+with+Keys>
, the most viable label might well turn out to be an old one: “literature”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ed5fe30104e4d4ec7a4e5264817cb695af7c70%2F0_0_4300_3304%2F4300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ed5fe30104e4d4ec7a4e5264817cb695af7c70%2F0_0_4300_3304%2F4300.jpg>
 In Cold Blood: on the set of the film version of Capote’s nonfiction novel, 
which changed the literary landscape. Photograph: Images/REX Shutterstock 
The nonfiction novels of Norman Mailer (The Executioner’s Song) or Truman 
Capote (In Cold Blood) changed the literary landscape, but the scope for 
further innovation was quickly noticed by the young Annie Dillard. “We’ve had 
the nonfiction novel,” she confided to her journal; “it’s time for the 
novelised book of nonfiction.” The book she was working on,Pilgrim at Tinker 
Creek <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pilgrim-at-tinker-creek.html>, is a 
classic instance of the nonfiction work of art. Having won a Pulitzer prize for 
nonfiction in 1975, it went on to become the source of some controversy when it 
was revealed that the famous opening paragraph – in which the author awakens in 
bed to find herself covered in paw prints of blood, after her cat, a fighting 
tom, has returned from his nocturnal adventures – was a fiction. It’s not that 
she’d made this story up; she’d adapted it, with permission, from something 
written by a postgrad student. This was a shower in a teacup compared with the 
various storms that have swirled aroundRyszard Kapuscinski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ryszard-kapuscinski>. It’s a problem partly 
of his own making, since he repeatedly insisted that he was a reporter, that he 
had to “experience everything for [him]self”, that he didn’t have the freedoms 
of the imaginative writer, that while he “could embellish” the details of his 
stories, he decided against doing so on the grounds that it “would not be true”.

Gradually it emerged that this was part of the rhetoric of fiction, that he 
could not possibly have seen first-hand some of the things he claimed to have 
witnessed. For some readers this was a thoroughly disillusioning experience; 
for others it seemed that his exuberance and imaginative abundance were not 
always compatible with the obligations and diligence of the reporter. He 
remains a great writer – just not the kind of great writer he was supposed to 
be. (The potential for confusion was there from the outset; when Jonathan 
Miller was turning Kapuscinski’s book about Haile Selassie and Ethiopia,The 
Emperor <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/17445>, into 
an opera, the author reminded him that it was really a book about Poland.) 
Kapuscinski did not simply borrow the techniques and freedom of the novel; 
books such asThe Soccer War <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/soccer-war.html> 
orAnother Day of Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/another-day-of-life.html> generated the 
moulds from which they were formed – moulds which then dissolved,Mission 
Impossible-style, at the moment of the books’ completion. The essential thing – 
and this was something I discovered when writingBut Beautiful as a series of 
improvisations – is to arrive at a form singularly appropriate to a particular 
subject, and to that subject alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c5f150fb9e9996da8cd1b3f2ea0db49968ba87%2F0_0_3504_2346%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c5f150fb9e9996da8cd1b3f2ea0db49968ba87%2F0_0_3504_2346%2F3504.jpg>
 John Berger, whose stories of French peasant life combine documentary, poetry, 
fiction and historical analysis. Photograph: Getty Images 
That book was dedicated to John Berger. Habitually identified as a “Marxist”, 
“art critic” or “polymath”, Berger has an extraordinary capacity for formal 
innovation which is easily overlooked. The documentary studies – of a country 
doctor inA Fortunate Man <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fortunate-man.html> 
(1967), of migrant labour inA Seventh Man 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/seventh-man.html> (1975) – he made with 
photographer Jean Mohr are unsurpassed in their marriage of image and text. The 
shift from the overt modernist complexities of the Booker prize-winningG 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/g.html> to the stories of French peasant life 
was perceived, in some quarters, as a retreat to more traditional forms. 
Nothing – to use a phrase that may not be appropriate in this context – could 
be further from the truth. In its combination of poetry, fiction, documentary 
essays and historical analysis,Pig Earth 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Pig-Earth-John-Berger/dp/0747543038/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1448559272&sr=8-1&keywords=Pig+Earth>
(1979) was, even by Berger’s standards, his most formally innovative book – 
until he surpassed it with the next one,And Our Faces, My Heart, Brief As Photos
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/And-Faces-Heart-Brief-Photos/dp/0747576912/ref=pd_cp_14_2?ie=UTF8&refRID=1B0R305456HFEV58BNMA>
. Berger was 89 on 5 November, bonfire night. He has been setting borders 
ablaze for almost 60 years, urging us towards the frontier of the possible.

Geoff Dyer received the 2015 Windham-Campbell prize 
<http://windhamcampbell.org/2015/winner/geoff-dyer> for nonfiction. His new 
book,White Sands 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/529831/white-sands-by-geoff-dyer/9781101870853/>
, will be published by Canongate in June

Aminatta Forna: ‘Fiction allows me to reach for a deeper, less literal kind of 
truth’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e1b57aa5f57e798766ab79d701a30dbc7cfb31%2F0_68_4050_2687%2F4050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e1b57aa5f57e798766ab79d701a30dbc7cfb31%2F0_68_4050_2687%2F4050.jpg>
 Aminatta Forna: ‘Break the contract and readers no longer know who to trust.’ 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Each time a writer begins a book they make a contract with the reader. If the 
book is a work of fiction the contract is pretty vague, essentially saying: 
“Commit your time and patience to me and I will tell you a story.” There may be 
a sub-clause about entertaining the reader, or some such. In the contract for 
my novels I promise to try to show my readers a way of seeing the world in a 
way I hope they have not seen before. A contract for a work of nonfiction is a 
more precise affair. The writer says, I am telling you, and to the best of my 
ability, what I believe to be true. This is a contract that should not be 
broken lightly and why I have disagreed with writers of memoir (in particular) 
who happily alter facts to suit their narrative purposes. Break the contract 
and readers no longer know who to trust.

I write both fiction and nonfiction – to me they serve different purposes. On 
my noticeboard I have pinned the lines: “Nonfiction reveals the lies, but only 
metaphor can reveal the truth.” I don’t know who said it, I’m afraid. My first 
full-length work was a memoir of war, the rise of a dictatorship and my own 
family’s consequent fate. In the 12 years since its publication I have 
continued to explore the themes of civil war, though almost exclusively in 
fiction.Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> allows me to reach 
for a deeper, less literal kind of truth.

However, when a writer comes to a story, whether fiction or nonfiction, they 
employ many of the same techniques, of narrative, plot, pace, mood and 
dialogue. This is one reason I think the distinction between fiction and 
nonfiction prizes is, well, a fiction. Writers such as Joan Didion, Mary Karr, 
Roger Deakin, and more recently Helen Macdonald, William Fiennes and Robert 
Macfarlane, are master craftsmen. These writers have broken the boundaries of 
nonfiction to reach for the kind of truth that fiction writers covet.

A few years back I judged an award for fiction in which the brief covered a 
writer’s entire output, but in a single genre. It made no sense. Gabriel García 
Márquez’sNews of a Kidnapping  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1997/jun/29/fiction.reviews>is a furtherance 
of the line of questioning that began withChronicle of a Death Foretold. 
Aleksandar Hemon <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aleksandar-hemon>’s essays 
are extensions of his novels and short stories, or vice versa.Marilynne Robinson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/marilynne-robinson>’s essays are part of 
the same inquiry into the meaning of religion asGilead or Home. There should be 
a prize quite simply for belles-lettres, as the French call it, for “fine 
writing” in any form.

Aminatta Forna’s most recent novel is The Hired Man, published by Bloomsbury, 
£8.99.Click here to order a copy for £7.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hired-man.html>

Antony Beevor: ‘We seem to be experiencing a need for authenticity, even in 
works of fiction’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1d8e1c2b639ac2440521cb0380eec6a8ef7e8f7%2F244_429_5372_3315%2F5372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1d8e1c2b639ac2440521cb0380eec6a8ef7e8f7%2F244_429_5372_3315%2F5372.jpg>
 Historian Antony Beevor: ‘In a fast-moving world we want to learn and be 
entertained at the same time.’ Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
We are entering a post-literate world, where the moving image is king. The 
tagline “based on a true story” now seems vital when marketing movies. 
“Faction-creep” has increased both in television and the cinema. And more 
novels than ever before are set in the past. This is largely because the 
essence of human drama is moral dilemma, an element that our nonjudgmental 
society today rather lacks.

A blend of historical fact and fiction has been used in various forms since 
narrative began with sagas and epic poems. But today’s hybrid of faction has a 
different genesis, and is influenced by different motives. There is a more 
market-driven attempt to satisfy the modern desire in a fast-moving world to 
learn and be entertained at the same time. In any case, we seem to be 
experiencing a need for authenticity, even in works of fiction.

I have always loved novels set in the past. I began as a boy with Hornblower 
and Conan Doyle’s Brigadier Gerard stories because they offered excitement as 
well as escape into that “other country”. And more recently I have been gripped 
byHilary Mantel’s trilogy about Thomas Cromwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/02/wolf-hall-hilary-mantel>. But 
however impressive her research and writing, I am left feeling deeply uneasy. 
Which parts were pure invention, which speculation and which were based on 
reliable sources?

Mantel writes: “For a novelist, this absence of intimate material is both a 
problem and an opportunity… Unlike the historian, the novelist doesn’t operate 
through hindsight. She lives inside the consciousness of her characters for 
whom the future is blank.” (In fact the historian should do both – first 
explain the world as it appeared to protagonists at the time, and then analyse 
with hindsight.) The problem arises precisely when the novelist imposes their 
consciousness on a real historical figure.Helen Dunmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/helen-dunmore> (see below) said that 
novelists stray into “dangerous territory” when they fictionalise real people. 
She said that she was “very wary” of putting words into the mouths of 
characters from history.

Restorers of paintings and pottery follow a code of conduct in their work to 
distinguish the genuine and original material from what they are adding later. 
Should writers do the same? Should not the reader be told what is fact and what 
is invented? But if novelists do not want to make this distinction (say by the 
use of italics or bold to distinguish the true from the false) then why not 
change the names slightly, as in a roman à clef, to emphasise that their 
version is at least one step away from reality? The novelist Linda Grant argued 
that this also gives the writer much greater freedom of invention. Keeping real 
names shackles the imaginative writer perhaps more than they realise. In 
Tolstoy’sWar and Peace, the most convincing and interesting characters are 
those he made up, not the historical figures. The most memorable characters of 
world fiction have always come from a great writer’s imagination.

Antony Beevor’ 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwi_nN3x4LrJAhXGtRQKHVH1A40QFgg2MAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fardennes-1944-hitlers-last-gamble-antony-beevor-review&usg=AFQjCNEFAythagL4JjSK-1SRfiVNRlskFA&sig2=sbgf-cpwbZ7HYFlmNSeb8w&bvm=bv.108194040,d.d24>
s latest book is Ardennes 1944: Hitler’s Last Gamble, published by Viking, £25.
Click here to order a copy for £18.75 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281684/s/ardennes-1944/>

Alan Johnson: ‘I stuck to a sequence of fiction followed by fact as if it were 
an unwritten commandment passed down to autodidacts like me’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6606fe3622484abab2d36bb71f3f5e53308e9a07%2F0_0_3984_2711%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6606fe3622484abab2d36bb71f3f5e53308e9a07%2F0_0_3984_2711%2F3984.jpg>
 Alan Johnson: ‘I’m still drawn more towards novels.’ Photograph: Geoff Pugh/Rex
As a general rule I’ve always read fiction because I wanted to and nonfiction 
because I felt I had to. For a time I even stuck to a pedantic sequence of 
fiction followed by fact as if it were an unwritten commandment passed down to 
autodidacts like me.

There was also a certain amount of piety involved. Reading should be about 
learning. Pleasure should be a secondary consideration. I still recall the very 
first nonfiction book I ever read:The Blue Nile by Alan Moorehead. Since then 
I’ve loved many histories, memoirs, biographies and travel books. However, when 
choosing the next book to read (and what a wonderful moment that is) I’m still 
drawn more towards novels than the worthy tomes that I know will be more 
instructive.

I’ve known a few people who never read fiction but nobody yet who’s never read 
anything but. Even the most devoted film fan must appreciate the occasional 
documentary.

For the nonfiction obsessive I’d place True Grit by Charles Portis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/15/reading-group-true-grit-narrator>
 in their Christmas stocking in an attempt to convert them. As for my own 
favourite nonfiction book, it would have to beAn Immaculate Mistake, an 
exquisite memoir of childhood byPaul Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-bailey>. I often tell book festival 
audiences that I want to write fiction myself, to which the cynics in the 
audience suggest I write the next manifesto.

Alan Johnson’s second volume of memoirs, Please, Mister Postman, is published 
by Corgi, £8.99.Click here to order a copy for £7.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293913/s/please-mister-postman/>

Matt Haig: ‘The moment we trust too much in one fixed idea of reality is the 
moment we lose it’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc440e8917355e4f6201e7ca73077fd90406d223%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc440e8917355e4f6201e7ca73077fd90406d223%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Matt Haig: ‘The aim of any writer is the pursuit of truth.’ Photograph: Gary 
Calton for the Observer 
I like to think myself as anti-genre-labelling. There is nothing more likely 
to stunt your creativity than to think of walls between genres. I understand 
that booksellers, and even readers, need to know if a book is a crime novel or 
literary or commercial or romantic but for a writer, thinking in those terms is 
limiting.

Also, at the risk of sounding like a pretentious sixth-former, the divide 
between fiction and nonfiction is inherently false according to the multiverse 
theory, in that all fiction is true in one universe or other, so when you write 
a novel you are writing reality that belongs to somewhere else. But there is 
another reason the divide is false, or at least why it creates false ideas. And 
that is because things categorised as nonfiction can be inauthentic while 
fiction can contain more truth. The aim of any writer, even a fantasy writer, 
is the pursuit of truth.

I have written nonfiction and fiction. I wrote a science fiction novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/15/the-humans-matt-haig-review> 
that was very autobiographical about my experience of depression, and then I 
wrote anonfiction book about depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/22/men-do-cry-depression-matt-haig-reasons-to-stay-alive>
. They were both about the same truth, but from different angles, and I 
wouldn’t have been able to write the nonfiction without the fiction first. We 
need both genres, sometimes at the same time, because the moment we trust too 
much in one fixed idea of reality is the moment we lose it.

But as a reader, I must admit I read more nonfiction than fiction at the 
moment, because there is so much good stuff around and because I am writing 
fiction and my mind likes the counterbalance.

Matt Haig’s most recent book for adults is Reasons to Stay Alive, published by 
Canongate, £9.99.Click here to order a copy for £7.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/reasons-to-stay-alive.html>

Helen Dunmore: ‘Fiction gets under the guard. It creates empathy, changes 
fixed opinions and contributes to reform’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2add14a24aa67d42d4e616b6576594ccb626b5%2F0_1344_3744_2159%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb2add14a24aa67d42d4e616b6576594ccb626b5%2F0_1344_3744_2159%2F3744.jpg>
 Helen Dunmore: ‘Certain novels transform the reader’s internal landscape.’
 Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
It might seem logical that nonfiction, with its rigorous foundation in fact, 
would be a more persuasive instrument of social change than fiction; but I 
believe this is not the case. When Harriet Beecher Stowe publishedUncle Tom’s 
Cabinin 1852 it became an immediate bestseller in the US and Britain and helped 
to shatter white people’s complacency about slavery. There are important 
criticisms ofUncle Tom’s Cabin but, like Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/24/100-best-novels-huckleberry-finn-twain>
, the novel demolishes slavery’s belief system, denying that the enslaved are a 
different order of beings and may justifiably be exploited. More recently,Toni 
Morrison’sBeloved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/fiction.tonimorrison> exposes 
the cost of slavery with searing brilliance, while Chinua Achebe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/22/chinua-achebe-dead-nigeria> 
dramatises the crude irruption of western missionaries and colonists into 
highly complex, sophisticated Igbo culture. Such novels not only add to a 
reader’s knowledge: they transform that reader’s internal landscape.

We are feeling creatures, and often it is only our refusal or inability to 
empathise that allows us to pursue our cruelties. Fiction gets under the guard. 
It creates empathy, changes fixed opinions and morality, and contributes to 
reform of law and social practice. When Victorians read Dickens or Elizabeth 
Gaskell they came to love the characters of Mary Barton, Ruth, Oliver Twist or 
Little Nell, and through them to know with full imaginative force the cost of 
industrialisation, the brutality of the workhouse, or the desperation of a 
“fallen” woman.

The sweatshop is still with us and so are slavery, the denial of rights to 
women and the sufferings of those swept aside. Read Sunjeev Sahota’s The Year 
of the Runaways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/19/the-year-of-the-runaways-sunjeev-sahota-review-political-novel>
 and enter the world of immigrants without papers. Read Emma Healey’sElizabeth 
Is Missing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/08/elizabeth-is-missing-review-emma-healey-impressive-debut-dementia>
, and live inside a dissolving mind. You will not emerge from these books 
unchanged.

Helen Dunmore’s new novel, Exposure, will be published by Hutchinson in 
January, £16.99.Click here to order a copy for £13.59 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360914/>

Adam Sisman: ‘Being nosy, I enjoy investigating the lives of others… that they 
are real people is essential’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26217bb650bd1fb82ce69419c6eb28c179321ba4%2F0_778_2381_1709%2F2381.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26217bb650bd1fb82ce69419c6eb28c179321ba4%2F0_778_2381_1709%2F2381.jpg>
 Adam Sisman: ‘Biography teaches us about life itself, just as fiction does.’ 
Photograph: Geraint Lewis/Rex Shutterstock 
It is, I think, generally true that most writers write either fiction or 
nonfiction, to the exclusion of the other, most of the time; though it is easy 
to think of exceptions to this rule. Nicholas Shakespeare, for example, is a 
much-admired novelist, but he has also written anexcellent biography  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/09/stephaniemerritt>of Bruce 
Chatwin. Before concentrating on thrillers,Robert Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-harris> wrote several works of 
nonfiction, includingSelling Hitler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/selling-hitler.html>, a brilliant account of 
the“Hitler diaries” story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2008/apr/24/25yearsagotodaythesunday>
. And so on.

As a writer, I specialise in biography, which seems to suit my interests and 
aptitudes. Being nosy, I enjoy investigating the lives of others, like a 
detective, or perhaps a spy. I relish reading other people’s letters and 
diaries, and poring over their manuscripts. That these others are real people 
is an essential part of the process. I can imagine a biography of a fictional 
character, but it would not be the kind of biography that I should want to 
write.

Though I write nonfiction, this does not mean that I do not read fiction: on 
the contrary, I consume more novels than any other type of book.My last 
biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/25/john-le-carre-biography-adam-sisman-review>
 was of the novelist John le Carré; if I had not gained so much pleasure from 
reading his work, I doubt if I would have enjoyed writing his life.

I notice that dedicated readers of fiction tend towards new books. I am 
probably unusual, in that I am as likely to read a novel written 100 years ago 
as one of those shortlisted for this year’s Booker. I am only slightly 
embarrassed to admit that the novel I am reading at the moment is by Marcel 
Proust.

In any case I feel that those readers who restrict themselves to fiction may 
be denying themselves pleasure as well as instruction. I would argue that 
biography can be as enriching and as entertaining as fiction. To those who 
doubt the truth of this, I recommend anything byMichael Holroyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-holroyd> or Richard Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richard-holmes>, or Selina Hastings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/23/red-earl-huntingdon-selina-hastings-review>
.

At its best, biography teaches us about life itself, just as fiction does. “I 
esteem biography, as giving us what comes near to ourselves, what we can turn 
to use,” Johnson told Boswell during their tour of the Hebrides. The great man 
had written almost every type of book, including works of both fiction and 
biography, so he knew a thing or two.

John le Carré: the Biography  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/335092/s/john-le-carre/>
by Adam Sisman is published by Bloomsbury, £25.Click here to order a copy for 
£17.50 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/335092/s/john-le-carre/>

Jane Smiley: ‘Readers want to know not only what happened, but also how it 
looked, sounded, smelled, felt, what it meant then, and what it means now’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9cdaf5f6af3211f4226a8dc701cc53593e7535c%2F0_154_5175_3302%2F5175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9cdaf5f6af3211f4226a8dc701cc53593e7535c%2F0_154_5175_3302%2F5175.jpg>
 Jane Smiley: ‘If the author doesn’t provide the logic, the reader will.’ 
Photograph: David Hartley/Rex Shutterstock 
The goal of every author of every piece of writing is to get the reader 
willingly to suspend disbelief. Every piece of writing puts forth some logical 
argument and some theory of cause and effect for the simple reason that words, 
especially prose words, are sequential. The author and the reader both know 
that if the author doesn’t provide the logic, the reader will. But the logic of 
events and people as they exist in the world isn’t self-evident, and narrators 
of fiction and narrators of nonfiction have different ways of putting together 
their logical systems.

Nonfiction, history, is about what is known to be, or generally accepted to 
be, accurate. Facts are like archeological finds – they must strike us as 
tangible and real, therefore likely, plausible, attested, but also new and 
revelatory. The promise of nonfiction is that it is accurate, and therefore, 
like an archeological site, incomplete – here are the stone walls, here is part 
of a mosaic, here are two goblets. My theory concerns what these objects might 
mean, how they might be connected to an earthquake for which there is evidence, 
but I cannot go too far toward completeness or the reader, who might otherwise 
enjoy my narrative, will cease to be willing to suspend disbelief in its 
accuracy. It is certain that after I die, more tangible evidence will surface, 
some plates, some clay tablets, a skull with a spike pounded into the cranium, 
and so theories will change, and I will be praised for having stuck to the 
facts as they were then understood.

But the history of literature shows that listeners and readers want to know 
not only what happened, but also how it looked, sounded, smelled, felt, and 
also what it meant then and what it means now. They want to know but also to 
experience, and therefore they seek completeness, and so they willingly suspend 
disbelief in fiction (The Odyssey, the Book of Genesis, Waverley, Flashman). 
What they get from these sources is not only pleasure, but emotional education, 
the exercise of the imagination, an enlargement of the inner life. A writer of 
fiction also has a theory, a theory about what happened, and also about whether 
the past and the present are similar, whether people change or remain the same. 
As with the archaeologist, my theory, if I am a fiction writer, will be found 
wanting after I die, but pleasure in my stories may linger (War and Peace) or 
surge (The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/30/private-memoirs-confessions-justified-sinner>
). Chances are that in order to construct my narrative, I did plenty of 
research, but just as with historians, I know that as yet undiscovered sources 
will turn up. The test for my theory will not be whether my narrative is 
factually accurate. It will be whether my idea of human nature retains 
immediacy.

As a reader, I love both history and historical novels. What I get from 
Geoffrey Parker’sGlobal Crisis is insight into what did go wrong for humans of 
the 17th century and what could go wrong very soon in our world. What I get from
Eleanor Catton’sThe Luminaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/11/luminaries-eleanor-catton-review>
 is a tight, suspenseful formal puzzle combined with the feeling that I know 
how men in New Zealand in the 1860s are experiencing their world. Both are 
fascinating and valuable. Why should I forgo either?

Golden Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/21/golden-age-jane-smiley-review-final-volume-the-last-hundred-years-trilogy>
, the final volume in Jane Smiley’s Hundred Years trilogy, is published by 
Mantle, £18.99.Click here to order a copy for £14.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337527/?utm_source=editoriallink%20%20&utm_medium=>

David Kynaston: ‘After four decades of writing history books, I continue to 
feel a sense of inferiority to those who practise out-and-out literature’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F499067f23c3c4957096938763b9f9c7fa5c9914c%2F0_0_3952_2621%2F3952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F499067f23c3c4957096938763b9f9c7fa5c9914c%2F0_0_3952_2621%2F3952.jpg>
 David Kynaston: ‘When the chips are down, nothing quite beats the right 
novel.’ Photograph: REX Shutterstock 
Fiction or nonfiction? I can only answer subjectively and autobiographically. 
From the start, reading modern history at Oxford in the early 1970s, I knew 
somehow that I was in the second-class carriage. Those doing English were more 
interesting, more glamorous, altogether more “it”. Years later, Martin Amis 
gave some comfort by retrospectively wishing he’d done it the other way round, 
but deep down, after four decades of writing history books, I continue to feel 
a sense of inferiority to those who practise out-and-out literature.

Why is fiction (leaving aside poetry and drama) superior? Not just because it 
reflects an intrinsically more creative process, but because at its best it is 
capable of getting inside the heads of people with a richness, complexity and 
profundity that no other genre (written or otherwise) can. I’ve read plenty of 
history and biography in my time, but never come across anyone who has meant 
quite as much to me asPierre or Prince Andrei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/01/war-and-peace-stories-lives-leo-tolstoy-james-wood>
,Levin or Anna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/rereading-anna-karenina-james-meek>
.

Of course, Tolstoy is on a pedestal – assuredly the greatest novelist. Dickens 
falls short, unable or unwilling to drill down into those heads; Flaubert is 
too contemptuous of his characters; Joyce takes that fateful wrong turn after
Dubliners. But plenty of others do do it – Austen, Eliot, Fontane, Forster, 
Proust, Grossman, even in my time Pym and Powell – and, not to avoid the 
unavoidable cliche, enrich immeasurably our awareness of being human, even 
teach us how to live.

But there is something to be said, by me anyway, on the other side. Those 
might be my desert island authors – no question – yet it has been nonfiction 
that has at least as decisively shaped my view of the world, certainly once I 
was a young adult.George Orwell’s The Lion and the Unicorn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>gave me a compelling sense of 
20th-century Britain;CLR James’s Beyond a Boundary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/02/beyond-a-boundary-broke-cricket-barriers>
, the greatest ever cricket book, enlarged the possibilities of history; the 
devastating memoirs of Nadezhda Mandelstam, widow of the poet Osip, belatedly 
made me realise that liberty ultimately trumps equality;EP Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/06/ep-thompson-unconventional-historian>
’sThe Poverty of Theory, his brutal but painstaking attack on the French 
philosopher Louis Althusser, taught me the virtues of empiricism. Now in my 
mid-60s, I am as happy (like many men my age) to turn to a biography or 
autobiography – at the moment Adam Mars-Jones’sKid Gloves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/30/kid-gloves-voyage-round-father-review-adam-mars-jones>
 – as I try to understand the epoch I have passed through.

Even so, when the chips are down, nothing quite beats the right novel. Three 
years ago, I happened to be re-readingAnthony Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope>’s The Warden when I was 
diagnosed with cancer. During the anxious days and especially nights that 
followed, it did the job – and I was, and remain, grateful.

Modernity Britain by David Kynaston is published by Bloomsbury, £14.99.  Click 
here to order a copy for £11.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275363/>

Caroline Sanderson: ‘Nonfiction can do anything fiction can do; and often does 
it better’

 Caroline Sanderson 
“So you’re a published writer,” says the person at the party. “What novels 
have you written?”

Why do we so often think of fiction as the outstanding form? As nonfiction 
previewer for theBookseller, and the author of five nonfiction books of my own, 
I am often moved to question why fiction dominates our conversations about 
books.

The numbers certainly don’t support fiction’s pre-eminence. Novels are not 
what the majority of people buy, nor are they where most money is made. 
According to BookScan, in a printed book market worth £1.24bn between January 
and October this year, almost 40% of sales came from general (ie, non-academic) 
nonfiction, compared with 27% from adult fiction. And sales of hardback 
nonfiction are booming too: up 8.3% on 2014.

The problem is that the very term “nonfiction” is supremely unhelpful; a big, 
baggy anti-moniker that conceals a multitude of possibilities. It masks the 
fact that nonfiction can do anything fiction can do; and often does it better. 
Tell an exuberant, unruly true story of ordinary, conflicted people like
Alexandra Fuller’sLeaving Before the Rains Come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/04/leaving-before-the-rains-come-alexandra-fuller-review>
. Evoke faraway worlds which barely seem of the 21st century, like Colin 
Thubron’sTo a Mountain in Tibet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/20/mountain-in-tibet-colin-thubron>
. Help us feel the thick presence of a time when our ancestors lived and 
breathed, as Yuval Noah Harari does inSapiens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/21/sapiens-brief-history-mankind-review-yuval-noah-harari>
.

The best nonfiction trumps fiction by combining the allure of a true story 
with the recounting of realities we are better off for knowing. By comparison, 
fiction is only made-up stuff.

Caroline Sanderson’s Someone Like Adele is published by Omnibus, £12.95

Kerry Hudson: ‘Yes, this is “made up” but this is also the most truthful thing 
I have to give you’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d986034ef308ba68dba691bf099bd03e8ab43d0%2F0_0_5592_3418%2F5592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Based%20on%20a%20true%20story%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20fine%20line%20between%20fact%20and%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbased-on-a-true-story--geoff-dyer-fine-line-between-fact-and-fiction-nonfiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d986034ef308ba68dba691bf099bd03e8ab43d0%2F0_0_5592_3418%2F5592.jpg>
 Kerry Hudson: ‘I still need an absolute truth.’ Photograph: Richard Saker for 
the Observer 
As a teen I left small town libraries all over the UK with novels stacked up 
to my chest and under my chin. I’d go home, lie in bed with the books scattered 
around me and luxuriate in the possibility of disappearing into different 
worlds, spending time with characters who mostly behaved as I wanted and 
expected them to and even if they didn’t, the pages could be closed, the book 
abandoned. Beyond that bed was the council estate, caravan or B&B we were 
living in, usually in a rough area with all the grim certainties of life on the 
margins. Fiction was my fantasy island and I avoided nonfiction – reality was 
something I had plenty of, thank you very much.

But reality bites and holds on tight and, as a writer, though it felt natural 
I would write fiction I still need an absolute truth, something ‘real’ to begin 
from. I will stretch and twist that reality, filter it through various 
fictional smoke and mirrors, expand and compress its meaning but at the centre 
of each book there is that grain of “this really happened”. Everything is built 
around that and I hope my readers feel that honesty. Yes, this is “made up” but 
this is also the most truthful thing I have to give you.

I finally discovered nonfiction when I was in my 20s and far from the life I’d 
had. I read [the slave memoir]The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah 
Equiano, Primo Levi’s If This Is a Man and Janice Galloway’s This Is Not About 
Meand realised it was time to leave my island and start exploring new worlds. I 
finally understood at the heart of most narratives, fiction or fact, there is 
human complexity and us readers trying to understand our own stories through 
the telling of others’. And then I wrote my own.

Kerry’s Hudson’s latest novel, Thirst, is published by Vintage, £8.99. Click 
here to order a copy for £6.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306037/s/thirst/> 
 