
Pranksters changed the name of Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>’s lower house of Congress to the 
“Chamber of Rats” on Google Maps on Tuesday in the latest dig at the political 
class during a testing start to the year for the country’s government.

The lower house, also known as the Chamber of Deputies, became the “Chamber of 
Rats”, using the Spanish word “rata”, which is also slang for thief in Mexico. 
“Our teams are working fast to resolve this incident,” GoogleMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> said in a statement, explaining that 
place names on the online mapping service came from third parties, public 
sources and contributions from users.

Related: Mexico protests: how gas prices lit the flame under a quietly 
smoldering rage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/mexico-gasoline-price-protest-gasolinazo>

 It was the second such attack in the space of a few days.

 Mexican media reported at the weekend that the presidential residence 
appeared as the “Official Residence of Corruption” on Google Maps before Google 
Mexico removed it from the map and apologized for “inappropriate content” 
created by a user.

 Mexico’s government has faced protests, road blocks and looting of shops 
since the start of 2017, when the cost of fuel jumped sharply on the back of a 
finance ministry decision to liberalize the market and end state-set gasoline 
prices.

 Allegations of corruption swirl constantly around the political class in 
Mexico. A 2013 Transparency International study showed that 91% of respondents 
felt political parties were corrupt or extremely corrupt, while 83% took the 
same view of the legislature.

 The credibility of President Enrique Pena Nieto was damaged by a 
conflict-of-interest row earlier in his six-year term when it emerged that he, 
his wife, and his then-finance minister had allacquired homes from government 
contractors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/10/mexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain>
.

 A government-ordered investigation cleared all of any wrongdoing. 

 