
‘Yes, I’m often naked,” says Bryan Cranston. In this case, he’s speaking of 
a particularly vulnerable moment in his new movie, Trumbo. The film tells the 
story of the screenwriter Dalton Trumbo, perhaps the best known of theHollywood 
10 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hollywood_blacklist#The_Hollywood_Ten>, who 
in 1947 werejailed and blacklisted for alleged communist sympathies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/16/dalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston>
. When Trumbo reports to jail, he submits to a humiliating strip-search – it’s 
the moment when the power of the state is brought metaphorically to bear upon 
one helpless man.

Trumbo review – return to red-faced Hollywood's shame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/04/trumbo-review-return-to-red-faced-hollywoods-shame>
“When [the director] Jay Roach and I were talking about that, he said: ‘Do you 
want to be in underwear, do you want me to just shoot you above the waist or 
what?’ And I went: ‘No, I should be fully nude, because we need to see this man 
who was stripped of everything, stripped of his dignity, stripped of his 
freedom, not of his clothes.’ He becomes like any man exposed to ridicule, 
exposed to shame and ostracisation – totally vulnerable. It wasn’t difficult to 
come to that decision. And then it was like, ‘Here we go, pants off! Drop 
trou!’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454602053700%2FKP_1708788_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trumbo%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trumbo%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454602053700%2FKP_1708788_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Trumbo - video review 
If a script calls for nudity, Cranston is not a man to stint. Devotees of his 
work will recall his nude “fugue-state” moment in a deserted supermarket in 
season two ofBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, the series that made 
him an international star. Even further back was the episode of Malcolm in the 
Middle that he spent totally naked – except for a generous coating of filth or 
sewage.

That sitcom got him a trio of Emmy nominations; Breaking Bad bagged him three 
wins.Trumbo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/trumbo>, meanwhile, has earned 
Cranston his first Academy Award nomination for best actor. It’s none too 
shabby a career progression for someone who thought he had it pretty good when 
he was a jobbing actor, appearing in Airwolf, Deep Space 9 and Seinfeld.

The first thing that strikes you about Cranston is that he has hair of his 
own. We became so accustomed to his shaven head and sleazy goatee while he was 
playing feral meth-lordWalter White on Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/23/bryan-cranston-i-scare-people-breaking-bad-walter-white>
 that it’s something of a shock to see his neatly combed, reddish-tinged 
coiffure sitting happily atop his handsome head, even if, like me, you were a 
fan of his (more hirsute) work years before Walt showed up.

In Trumbo, Cranston plays the member of the Hollywood 10 whose story probably 
had the happiest ending. An unashamed communist who had served honorably in the 
second world war and played an active role in movie politics afterwards, he was 
one of themost successful <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0874308/> screenwriters 
in Hollywood. When the witch-hunts came to town in the late 40s, he and his 
friends were snubbed and insulted, denied work and finally jailed for contempt 
of Congress, after refusing to cooperate with the House Un-American Activities 
Committee.

After their release they were blacklisted for a full decade. The only work 
Trumbo could find was with the “poverty row” studio of the King brothers 
(played in the film by John Goodman and Stephen Root) who “need scripts like an 
army needs toilet paper”. He knocked out about 18 scripts in two years for an 
average (and derisory) sum of $1,270 each. But he and his friends had their 
names occluded by the “fronts”, whose names appeared in the credits. One of the 
movie’s most touching scenes has Trumbo and his family watching the Oscars on 
TV as his script for Roman Holiday wins best screenplay; the statuette is 
picked up by his front. In the end, the blacklist was irreparably broken in 
1960, when Kirk Douglas and Otto Preminger insisted that Trumbo becredited as 
the writer of both Spartacus and Exodus 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/08/07/trumbo_family_kirk_douglas_overstates_blacklist_role/>
, two of the biggest hits of that year. Trumbo thereafter remained busy, and no 
less impassioned and vocal, until his death in 1976.

Hollywood blacklisted my father Dalton Trumbo: now I’m proud they’ve put him 
on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/16/dalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston>
The film does a good job of recalling the vileness of those years, and name 
names when it comes to the villains. Foremost among these are the envenomed 
antisemite and gossip columnist Hedda Hopper (Helen Mirren, spitting the word 
“kike” at an outraged but terrified Louis B Mayer), and members of the 
rightwing Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals such 
as director Sam Wood (John Getz) and actor John Wayne (David James Elliott).

The makers of Trumbo, says Cranston, didn’t consciously set out to evoke our 
own politically turbulent times – theMcCarthy-like Ted Cruz 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/is-senator-ted-cruz-our-new-mccarthy>
, the slurs, innuendos and, yes, commie-bashing antics of Donald Trump – but 
the parallels are hard to avoid.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftrumbo-bryan-cranston-hollywood-mccarthyism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bryan%20Cranston%20and%20John%20Goodman%20on%20Hollywood%20and%20McCarthyism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftrumbo-bryan-cranston-hollywood-mccarthyism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bryan%20Cranston%20and%20John%20Goodman%20on%20Hollywood%20and%20McCarthyism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Ftrumbo-bryan-cranston-hollywood-mccarthyism-video&media=>
“I think the strength of the script and the story alone gave it its legs,” he 
argues. “But we were very fortunate to come across this story that does very 
much resonate now: these fearmongers who ply their trade on the citizens of any 
enlightened country. And who keep repeating certain stories, certain versions, 
or distortions, of a story so that people become fearful of the lie, instead of 
the demagogues spreading it.”

I wonder if this isn’t an ineradicable strain in the American body politic – 
or even in the American character? From Salem, The Crucible and McCarthy to 
Cruz and Trump?

“That may be a little too glib, too easy,” he replies. “I would venture to 
suggest that any country has its fearmongers. The kind of people who notice a 
certain truth – because there has to be the germ of a truth to a rumour – and 
then blow it up to make it seem vastly more than what it is. It’s shameful 
behaviour, then and now.”

There were some very sad stories among the 10, I suggest. “And beyond the 
Hollywood 10, as well as beyond Hollywood itself,” he says. “Carl Foreman, 
Walter Bernstein, people were driven out of the country to find work. There’s a 
tremendous amount of tragic material. And Hollywood gets the focus of that 
because of its higher visibility, and the nature of what film-makers and 
Hollywood people do. But the McCarthyites were just as fervent in their attacks 
outside Hollywood, on people who worked for the military, for the government, 
teachers and scholars, unions and so on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44db19d1dc1e680ae55246eb59177f4523895238%2F0_0_3600_2158%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44db19d1dc1e680ae55246eb59177f4523895238%2F0_0_3600_2158%2F3600.jpg>
 With Aaron Paul in Breaking Bad. Photograph: Frank Ockenfels/AP 
Having achieved financial stability around age 40 with his regular role on 
Malcolm in the Middle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/apr/01/features.review47> 
(2000-06), and household-name status at the relatively venerable age of 50, 
Cranston had had enough hard times and setbacks, but also enough 
self-assurance, to keephis head when we were all losing ours over Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/23/bryan-cranston-i-scare-people-breaking-bad-walter-white>
. He’s a character actor’s character actor, promoted from the mass of his 
constantly auditioning peers into a complicated kind of stardom at a time when 
he was able to handle it.

“You need to protect yourself from it,” he says. “You could fall into a media 
maelstrom and never come out of it. Especially if you start taking it at all 
seriously. I need to protect myself, so when I’m not working, I just shut down, 
I hide away. I like privacy and solitude. I like slowing down my pace, because 
my work life has a very fast pace. But my personal life is calm and slow.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97133946764e68c1acda495d1aec7917d9b18ece%2F0_0_1968_2048%2F1968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97133946764e68c1acda495d1aec7917d9b18ece%2F0_0_1968_2048%2F1968.jpg>
 With the cast of Malcolm in the Middle. Photograph: 20th C Fox/Everett/Rex 
His early life was lived on untrustworthy and ever-shifting ground, in 
middle-class Canoga Park in the San Fernando Valley, Los Angeles. His parents 
were occasional actors who never got enough work to sustain family life – he 
has called them “broken people, incapacitated as far as parenting went” – and 
when Bryan was 12, they lost their home. It was a harsh early lesson that has 
stuck with him.

“For the first nine years, my life was solid, and then it started to erode,” 
he says. There was a fracture in my home life. That’s when I learned, at 12, 
that when someone says you own a home, you really don’t own a home, the bank 
does. So that was an education. And my brother and I were shipped off to live 
with our maternal grandparents, not wanting to join this old German couple on 
some farm in Yucaipa [60 miles east of LA], and do chores and not watch TV. But 
by the time the year was up and we were ready to move back with our mother, we 
didn’t want to come back at all. We had acclimated to a simpler life, to 
a disciplined life. Everything was more regimented, and that’s where I learned 
a work ethic that I use to this day.”
 As LBJ in HBO’s All the Way. Photograph: HBO 
Cranston has certainly seized the opportunities available to him since 
Breaking Bad. A sort of twin work to Trumbo is the forthcoming HBO filmAll the 
Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/03/bryan-cranston-lyndon-johnson-hbo-tv-biopic>
, an adaptation of the Broadway play, in which he revives his Tony-winning 
performance as Lyndon B Johnson. LBJ, I suggest, is the most Shakespearean of 
American presidents, a figure worthy of Lear and Falstaff, Caesar and Macbeth.

“Oh, he was very, very Shakespearean – huge in every sense, and vastly 
complex. He was a man whose ambition would burst out of his body, tremendous 
ambition and political acumen – and he knew how to use it. When the Kennedy 
assassination happened, he realised he had a window of opportunity to pass 
legislation that could change this country. And it was legendary – Civil Rights 
Act, Voting Rights Act, Fair Housing Act, Head Start, Medicare, Medicaid, the 
Public Broadcasting System – a tremendous amount of domestic achievement in 
just four years. And yet, for most people, he’ll be for ever known for Vietnam. 
But just as his political acumen allowed him to pass legislation at home, it 
was his political hubris that brought his downfall internationally. He didn’t 
want to be known as the first American president to lose a war, so he was going 
to win it if he could. But he couldn’t. Think of the fun you can have with a 
role like that!”

Trumbo: mark the film's release with our Austin Reed competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/feb/04/trumbo-mark-the-films-release-with-our-austin-reed-competition>
Cranston’s LBJ is one of his explosive performances, compared with his 
fiercely concentrated work as Walter White, but he does share a lot with Dalton 
Trumbo. “There’s a lot of parallels: both extremely good at what they did, 
aggressive, very ambitious, can be irascible, can be irritating, can be great 
raconteurs. If you did a Venn diagram of their overlap, there’s a lot more 
within the crossing circles than there is outside them.”

Including Bryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston>, obviously.

• Trumbo is out in the UK on 5 February. To enter our Trumbo competition, go to
theguardian.com/members <http://theguardian.com/members>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c43b658d726ece5f06f4e96617530d0c23c8d0c%2F369_0_4801_2880%2F4801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Every%20country%20has%20its%20fearmongers%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Bryan%20Cranston%20on%20Trumbo%20and%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20blacklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fevery-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c43b658d726ece5f06f4e96617530d0c23c8d0c%2F369_0_4801_2880%2F4801.jpg>
 With Helen Mirren as Hedda Hopper in Trumbo.  