
Forensic investigators are scouring the charred remains of a fireworks market 
outside Mexico City aftera powerful chain-reaction explosion ripped through its 
stalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/mexico-fireworks-market-explosion>
, killing at least 31 people and leaving dozens more badly burned.

Mexico fireworks market explosion leaves at least 31 dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/mexico-fireworks-market-explosion>
The third such blast to ravage the market on the northern outskirts of 
Mexico’s capital since 2005 sent up a towering plume of smoke that was lit up 
by a staccato of bangs and flashes of light. Once the smoke cleared, the 
open-air bazaar was reduced to a stark expanse of ash, rubble and the charred 
metal of fireworks stands, casting a pall over the country’s Christmas season.

Authorities have not yet said what may have caused the explosions which took 
place inMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> state, which rings 
the capital.

Mexico state health officials said about 60 people were hospitalized for 
injuries from Tuesday’s explosion, including for severe burns, in some cases 
over 90% of their bodies. On Wednesday, 47 people remained hospitalized, among 
them 10 children.

Mexico state chief prosecutor Alejandro Gómez said on Wednesday that the death 
toll had risen to 31, after several people died at local hospitals, and 70 
people were injured.

Gómez said some of the dead were so badly burned that neither their ages nor 
their genders could be immediately determined. He said the toll could rise 
because 12 people were listed as missing and some body parts were found at the 
scene.

Investigators were studying burnt human remains at the site, but were not sure 
if they belonged to individuals already confirmed dead, Gómez said.

A list of the nine bodies identified so far showed the dead included a 
three-month-old baby boy and a 12-year-old girl. Gómez said a total of seven 
male minors were among the dead.


Survivor Crescencia Francisco Garcia said she was in the middle of the grid of 
stalls when the thunderous explosions began. She froze, reflexively looked up 
at the sky and then took off running through the smoke once she realized 
everyone was doing so. As she ran she saw people with burns and cuts, and lots 
of blood.

“Everything was catching fire. Everything was exploding,” Francisco said. “The 
stones were flying, pieces of brick, everything was flying.”

Mexico state governor Eruviel Avila vowed: “We are going to identify who is 
responsible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmexico-firework-market-explosion-death-toll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb023426ce8041b8e2f5eee1e5949725615b978dd%2F0_12_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Everything%20was%20destroyed'%3A%20Mexico%20reels%20after%20fireworks%20market%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmexico-firework-market-explosion-death-toll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Everything%20was%20destroyed%27%3A%20Mexico%20reels%20after%20fireworks%20market%20explosion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmexico-firework-market-explosion-death-toll%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb023426ce8041b8e2f5eee1e5949725615b978dd%2F0_12_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 A huge explosion guts Mexico’s biggest fireworks market. Photograph: Jose Luis 
Tolentino/AFP/Getty Images 
Sirens wailed and a heavy scent of gunpowder lingered in the air well after 
the thunderous explosions at the market, which were widely seen in a dramatic 
video. The smoking, burned out shells of vehicles ringed the perimeter, and 
first responders and local residents wearing blue masks over their mouths 
combed through the ash and debris. Firefighters hosed down still-smoldering 
hotspots.

“Everything was destroyed. It was very ugly and many bodies were thrown all 
over the place, including a lot of children. It’s the worst thing I’ve ever 
seen in my life,” said Angelica Avila, 24, tears running down her face. Avila 
spoke outside a nearby hospital as she waited for an update on the health of 
her brother, a fireworks salesman, who she said was burned and also suffered a 
heart attack.

Tultepec mayor Armando Portuguez Fuentes said the market was especially well 
stocked because demand for noisy firecrackers and rockets soared this time of 
year.

“We are obviously in the high season,” Portuguez said. “There was more product 
than usual because we are a few days away from Christmas, a few days away from 
New Year’s, and those are the days when the products made here are consumed the 
most.”

Cesar Ornelas of Atizapan de Zaragoza was only 10 minutes into shopping with 
his son and his father when he heard the first explosions. He tried to run, but 
something knocked him to the ground from behind. He tried several times to get 
up, unsuccessfully, and ultimately his 15-year-old son Francisco had to drag 
him out.

“We didn’t look back,” said Ornelas, who suffered light burns and a large 
bruise over his left kidney. His white tank top had a fist-size burn on the 
chest. “We heard how the explosion was kind of going off bit by bit.”

Nearly four hours later, he and Francisco limped gingerly out of the market 
area. Francisco said paramedics told him his leg was probably fractured by 
flying debris. Ornelas said his 67-year-old father, Ernesto, had run in a 
different direction and sought refuge in a nearby home. All the father’s 
clothing was burned, and his face and arm were bloodied. An ambulance had 
spirited him to a hospital, but Ornelas wasn’t sure where it was or how serious 
his injuries were.

A similar fire engulfed the San Pablito market in 2005, touching off a chain 
of explosions that levelled hundreds of stalls just before Mexico’s 
Independence Day. A year later, a similar accident at the same market also 
destroyed hundreds of stands.

Mexicans to burn Donald Trump effigy to celebrate Easter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/mexicans-donald-trump-effigy-easter-judas>
In an editorial Wednesday, the newspaper El Universal called it “the 
traditional tragedy”, noting: “Our country’s fascination with fireworks has 
caused, among other things, a long series of accidents with terrible results.”

Portuguez, the Tultepec mayor, said the manufacture and sale of fireworks was 
a key part of the local economy. He added that it was regulated by law and 
under the “constant supervision” of the defense department, which oversees 
firearms and explosives.

“This is part of the activity of our town. It is what gives us identity,” 
Portuguez said. “We know it is high-risk – we regret this greatly, but 
unfortunately many people’s livelihoods depend on this activity.”

 * The Associated Press and Reuters contributed reporting  