
As a longtime champion of girls’ rights, I’ve spoken many times about the 
importance of giving more girls around the world the education they deserve.

And one of the first questions I almost always hear is some variation of “What 
about the boys?” How, they ask, do we ensure boys’ needs aren’t ignored or 
diminished when we make special efforts to educate girls? In order to bring 
about better outcomes for girls, don’t we need to change the minds of boys and 
men first?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444383494876%2Fb143ebca-77be-4176-be89-f329dbfbed85-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Girls'%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Girls%27%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444383494876%2Fb143ebca-77be-4176-be89-f329dbfbed85-680x1020.jpeg>
 Chernor Bah argues that during adolescence, the world of girls typically 
shrinks, while that of the boys expands. 
I now have a standard answer. I’ve just spent a lot of time detailing the 
structural and systematic exclusion of a largely marginalised and often 
vulnerable population. So why are you still only interested in the empowered 
group?

I’ll admit that my response is a bit flippant, designed for effect and for 
shifting the challenge of their question back on them. Further, it doesn’t 
fully address all the very real and difficult issues bound up in the question 
“What about the boys?”


During adolescence, the world of girls typically shrinks

But my ultimate answer is that girls’ empowerment initiatives must keep their 
eyes, first and foremost, on girls. In many societies, the obstacles keeping 
girls out of school or from realising their full potential are far greater than 
those faced by boys, and they require a higher level of effort and investment.

Direct economic, social and health investment in girls doesn’t just help girls 
and women; the evidence is overwhelming and conclusive that, as the wellbeing 
of girls and women improves, boys and men are better off, too.

During adolescence, the world of girls typically shrinks, while that of the 
boys expands. In order to engage girls socially and prepare them economically 
requires a higher level of effort and investment that prepares them to face the 
social, health and violence risks, as well as the economic challenges, that 
they uniquely face.


As boys and men see more educated girls in their midst, I believe they will be 
more likely to abandon their archaic perceptions of women as inferior and mere 
sexual objects with no meaningful role to play outside the home. Only as we 
create, so to speak, “facts on the ground” – that is to say, real and tangible 
change – will we have any chance of moving attitudes and perceptions in a 
positive direction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554156668%2F825a8130-21f1-4f1d-a5fd-6e096b0d035b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Girls'%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Girls%27%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554156668%2F825a8130-21f1-4f1d-a5fd-6e096b0d035b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 School girls play with coloured powder outside a school in Allahabad on March 
25, 2013. Photograph: SANJAY KANOJIA/AFP/Getty Images 
That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t make any effort to give boys a quality 
education and all the other building blocks of personal development. Indeed, 
approximately 27 million (or 47%) of the 58 million primary school-aged 
children out of school today around the globe are boys.

The obstacles keeping them out of school are: conflict and fragility, poverty, 
geography, disability, ethnic or religious discrimination and, quite simply, 
lack of local capacity to educate them. The international community has to 
continue to address those challenges if we are to achieve the goal of education 
for all.

But, in a world of finite resources, we have to spend more on educating girls 
and building their skills, especially in adolescence, when girls are faced with 
far greater social, health and economic risks. We have to account first for 
that imbalance. When we focus resources directly on girls’ empowerment, 
beginning with the poorest girls, boys and the rest of society benefit. Whereas 
“trickle down” doesn’t work, “trickle up and out” often does.

We have to prioritise which girls we should focus on most. Knowing, even among 
girls, there are distinct and critical differences based on economic status, 
health and disability, ethnicity, religion and geography, girls’ education 
efforts must focus on the most marginalised, not just the middle and upper 
classes.


Many girls I knew in my community were subjected to FGM and were forced into 
early marriages

We have to be conscious and supportive of the girls who need the most and who 
often are invisible within their communities and to the managers of empowerment 
programmes. For all these reasons, they require a much more targeted approach.


First-hand experience: my sisters faced challenges I never did



How did I, a young male, born and raised in a fairly conservative country, get 
so interested and passionate about girls’ empowerment? That’s another common 
question I am often asked, directly or otherwise. In short, it grew out of two 
sources: my own personal story and the story of my country.

I was raised in Sierra Leone by a single mother, alongside two sisters in what 
is one of the worst places in the world to be a girl. My mother separated from 
my father when I was young and has since then worked as a primary school 
teacher. She is educated. But the pay for a teacher like her was paltry. Aware 
of the circumstances for women inSierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone>, she had to work hard and use 
all her energy and ingenuity to make ends meet. To supplement her low pay, she 
sold everything – bread, cake, palm oil, whatever she could create with her own 
hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554597043%2F96d1daa5-6966-4fcd-a7d1-180e999b02ad-1020x818.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Girls'%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Girls%27%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554597043%2F96d1daa5-6966-4fcd-a7d1-180e999b02ad-1020x818.jpeg>
 Access to education has always been the frontline of the civil rights battle 
in the US. In a famous image from 1942, 15 year old Dorothy Counts is taunted 
as she walks towards the previously all-white Harding High School in Charlotte, 
North Carolina. Photograph: Bettmann/CORBIS 
She was a teacher with a little bit of education herself, and despite many 
challenges, including at one point, fleeing the country for our lives, as 
refugees, she understood the power of learning. That makes me one of the lucky 
ones. Without my mother’s understanding of the value of education, I would not 
have received the education I did and would not be where I am today. It’s one 
small example of how educating a woman has multiple ripple effects for her 
family and the community around her.

But I was lucky not just to have an enlightened mother. I was fortunate also 
to be a boy. My two sisters faced challenges I never did: threats of sexual 
violence, men coming into contact with them and, even when the girls were 
fairly young, asking them to marry them. As we got older, there were signals 
from many directions suggesting that their lives seemed to matter less, even 
though I was always convinced they were smarter than me. In retrospect, I can 
now see what happened: society spent so much time telling them, and girls like 
them, that there were higher expectations for me only because I was a boy.

Our society not only treats girls badly, it blames them for their plight

In Sierra Leone, about 90% of girls are subjected to female genital mutilation 
<http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/83/11/news21105/en/> (or FGM), one of the 
highest rates in the world. Only 36% of women in Sierra Leone are literate, 
compared with 52% of men. Furthermore,18% of girls are married by the age of 15 
<http://www.forwarduk.org.uk/what-we-do/africa-programmes/sierra-leone-maternal-mortality/>
, and 44% by the age of 18. It’s illegal but, with little enforcement of those 
laws, widespread.

Two out of 10 women aged 20 to 49 report having their first sexual intercourse 
before they are 15 years old, rising to seven out of 10 by 18. Over their 
lifetime, if present patterns continue, 75 % of all adolescent girls in Sierra 
Leone will be a single mother at some point and that figure in Liberia is over 
90%. Much of the single motherhood arises from having babies before marriage, 
unstable marriages, and the absence of male social and economic support.

We have to be supportive of the girls who need the most and who often are 
invisible within their communities

Fitting into that pattern, many girls I knew in my community who dropped out 
of school were subjected to FGM and were forced into early marriages. As these 
girls reached puberty, their social space narrowed as boys’ expanded. It didn’t 
matter that so many of the girls were smart and showed lots of potential, more 
than a lot of the boys. It also didn’t seem to matter that the children of 
uneducated or poorly educated women were most likely to be caught in a 
continuous downward spiral of poverty, ill health and other challenges.

The more I saw this pattern, the more I sensed something was not right. Our 
society not only treated girls badly, it then blamed them for their plight, 
saying they weren’t smart or hard-working enough to learn. And when they were 
sexually abused, it was somehow their fault. That, at least, was how many men, 
and the boys these men influenced, saw it.

In my mid-teens, I befriended a small group of other boys who talked about 
education, and who all knew that improving the odds for girls to get schooling 
was important – not only to those girls but to us, too.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554700108%2F2634a5a6-ebfc-43a0-b32c-f15d705454eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Girls'%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Girls%27%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F11%2F1444554700108%2F2634a5a6-ebfc-43a0-b32c-f15d705454eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Oprah Winfrey with some of the students at her Leadership Academy for Girls at 
Henley-On-Klip in South Africa. Photograph: Denis Farrell/AP 
When we were between 15 and 18, we started a campaign, through the Children’s 
Forum Network 
<https://www.facebook.com/Childrens-Forum-Network-Of-Sierra-Leone-9034827086/timeline/>
, that helped change the laws to deal with child marriage, codify sexual 
violence laws in the country and ensure compulsory primary education for girls. 
I was the first child to testify about this to the national Truth Commission, 
and I collected similar testimonies from others. One of our recommendations was 
to pass the Child Rights Act, which was finally enacted in 2007.

We were motivated by justice and human rights. We were raising our voices and 
created a platform to talk about girls’ rights. We still took a lot of flak 
from friends and some relatives, who didn’t understand what we were doing and 
accused us of being too influenced by the west or of lacking a grasp of reality.

I wish I could say that, over the last decade since we fought for girls’ 
rights in Sierra Leone, we dramatically transformed how men there view 
educating and empowering girls. The truth is that, while there has been some 
change, it has been much less than we would have hoped. It’s still a work in 
progress.

And that is not limited to Sierra Leone. There are far too many places around 
the world where it is difficult to be a girl. My own personal story is 
emblematic of what is happening elsewhere. Approximately15 million girls 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/about-child-marriage/> worldwide are forced into 
marriage every year and in 27 countries there are large districts where at 
least 15% of girls are married before age 15.

According to the International Center for Research on Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, one-third of girls in the 
developing world are married before the age of 18, and one in nine are married 
before the age of 15. Unesco data shows that “nearly 1% of the world’s adult 
population is still not literate; two-thirds of them are women”. Those 
empirical numbers confirm what I’ve seen anecdotally from my experiences across 
the continent and what I’ve read about.

Engaging boys: ending poverty helps us all

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444396479497%2F833ea82f-4b4b-4b51-8583-96170e8dfee3-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Girls'%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Girls%27%20education%20is%20the%20global%20civil%20rights%20issue%20of%20our%20time%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fgirls-education-global-civil-rights-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444396479497%2F833ea82f-4b4b-4b51-8583-96170e8dfee3-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Boys discuss child marriage during children’s parliament session at school. 
Photograph: Plan International 
I have personally designed and implemented programmes in several African 
nations aimed at encouraging boys to understand the value of girls’ education, 
so I’m certainly not against spending some of the valuable girls’ education 
resources on boys.

In Ethiopia, I helped to lead an innovative initiative, supported by Girl Hub, 
called Yegna (which means “ours” in Amharic) aimed at inspiring girls to 
believe in themselves and to change boys’ and society’s minds about the value 
of girls in society.


We created clubs, radio dramas, talk shows and a documentary on the topic. 
Those are useful and can work when paired with a more targeted, girl-centric 
programmatic approach. We worked with local groups and, in some cases, 
religious institutions to get their help spreading the gospel, if you will, of 
girls’ education.

The medium of engagement matters. I worked with a group of boys in Ethiopia 
who told me they cared about equality issues but would feel emasculated if they 
were seen as promoting girls’ issues. Creating the right platforms and the 
right messages reinforces incentives for all and aims to make it cool to be 
part of male gender clubs. In Liberia, we came up with the idea of being 
G-Positive (a play on gangsta, but standing really for gender).


In Ethiopia, we created clubs for boys and girls with T-shirts that identified 
them publicly and proudly as part of a growing group dedicated to promoting 
girls. Delivering messages through mass media alone doesn’t work. They must be 
reinforced with small social groups, which make it easier for boys, who 
essentially become positive deviants, to have their behaviour approved by their 
peers.

These approaches also have to answer the question: what’s in it for the boys? 
They have to show that ending poverty benefits us all and eases the burden men 
may feel they have to provide solely for their families. As Plan International 
has pointed out, educating girls has enormous economic, health and social 
benefits across a society, which shows up in decreased under-five mortality, 
greater agricultural productivity, improved nutrition, increases in per-capita 
income and GDP growth, lower fertility rates, and much more.

There are civil society benefits to educating girls, as well. Investing in 
girls can diminish the pipeline of boys who might end up in groups such as Boko 
Haram, the Taliban or al-Shabaab. In response to these groups’ efforts to, in 
part, keep girls out of school by terrorising them, many people call for 
focusing primarily on boys, the recruits for these extremist movements.

What transformation in aid and development really looks like
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/07/what-transformation-in-aid-and-development-really-looks-like-ethiopia>
But the answer to this difficult challenge is to double down on efforts to 
keep girls in school, to defy them, asMalala Yousafzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malala-yousafzai> and other courageous girls 
have done. We know that when the parents – especially mothers – of young boys 
who are vulnerable to recruitment are educated, they will be much less likely 
to allow their sons to go to Boko Haram or the Taliban. That’s why valiant 
efforts today to keep schools safe from violence are so critical to the future.

I believe girls’ education is the global civil rights issue of our time. 
Girls’ education and empowerment initiatives must also appeal to boys’ and 
men’s sense of justice, because even as those boys and men have bought into and 
perpetuate cultures that devalue girls and women, they do care about injustice. 
We need to show them that it’s more fashionable and even masculine to join the 
fight against injustice and do something about it. We need to show them that 
it’s about our sisters, mothers and daughters. We have to make it personal.

Child brides in Bangladesh: 'The dreams I had as a young girl are impossible 
now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/15/bangladesh-child-brides>
The best way to level the playing field is not to use finite resources meant 
for gender equality on boys and men, but to empower girls and women directly. 
For everyone’s good, we need to get them in school, learning, growing and, 
ultimately, transforming their communities.

 * This piece is part of child rights organisation Plan International’s 2015 
State of the World’s Girls ReportUnfinished Business of Girls’ Rights 
<https://plan-international.org/unfinished-business-girls-rights>. The 
organisation has been publishing the annual series since 2007 with the 
objective of marking progress and analysing the barriers that still stand in 
the way of gender equality. The reports are part of Plan International’sBecause 
I am a Girl <https://plan-international.org/what-we-do/because-i-am-girl> 
global campaign dedicated to girls’ rights. 
An advocate for global education, a girl champion and former refugee from 
Sierra Leone, Chernor Bah is an associate at thePopulation Council 
<http://www.popcouncil.org/>, leading a collaborative initiative to provide 
solutions to young women affected by the Ebola outbreak.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 