
Dean Peacock, executive director, Sonke Gender Justice 
<http://www.genderjustice.org.za/>, Cape Town, South Africa, @sonketogether 
<https://twitter.com/SonkeTogether>

Challenge misogyny in public: Some of our most powerful work has been when 
we've held senior male politicians and public figures accountable for 
misogynistic statements or abusive behaviour. The documentary filmCan't Just 
Fold Your Arms <http://vimeo.com/46332577> shows our case against Julius 
Malema, then the most prominent political figure besides the president. Our 
case against him in the Equality Court generated a much-needed national 
conversation about the roles and responsibilities of male politicians.

Rujuta Teredesai, co-founder and executive director, Equal Community Foundation
 <http://ecf.org.in/>, Pune, India, @RujutaTH <https://twitter.com/RujutaTH>

Recognise we are all responsible for raising men: We need to see how are we 
'raising' men around us. It could be as a parent, as sibling, as a friend, as a 
boyfriend, as a husband… what expectations are we putting on them? We must 
recognise our role in raising men.

Yemurai Nyoni, director, DotYouth <http://bulawayoyouth.weebly.com/#/>, 
Bulawayo, Zimbabwe,@YNyoni <https://twitter.com/YNyoni>

Get power behind the movement: The key for us in Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> has been to use the current power 
dynamics. We have worked with traditional leaders and used their power to 
influence change for women and girls. The truth is, men have the power in the 
current set up; they have resources and sit in most decision-making positions. 
We will make little progress now if we're excessively confrontational.

Kristen Woolf, girl-centred practice and strategy director, The Girl Hub 
<http://www.girleffect.org/>, London, UK, @girleffect 
<https://twitter.com/girleffect>

Don't lose focus on girls: Very clearly men and boys have got to be a central 
component of the solution, but we need to tread carefully here not to lose the 
focus on equality and empowerment for girls and women.

Scarce funding is being diverted away from girls to programmes that leave them 
out and directly benefit boys and men (all under the name of gender equality). 
We must be very intentional in the design of gender-equality programmes to not 
lose sight of the primary goal: levelling the playing field.

Caroline Enye, team leader, Voices 4 Change 
<http://www.grminternational.com/projects/voices_for_change_empowering_adolescent_girls_and_women_in_nigeria_v4c>
, Abuja, Nigeria,@CarolineEnye <https://twitter.com/CarolineEnye>

Make gender equality cool: Within the Nigerian context, men are rewarded for 
upholding patriarchy and adhering to the expected codes. Any man who deviates 
from that is sanctioned by his male constituency. So in this context, a man isl 
not likely to get recognition for supporting gender equality. This is why 
Voices 4 Change has adopted a social-norms-marketing approach where we market 
the 'coolness' of supporting women's empowerment.

Daniel Molina, regional gender equality and masculinities programme 
coordinator,Plan International <http://plan-international.org/>, Tegucigalpa, 
Honduras

Reach boys through their hobbies: Methodologies on engaging boys must reach 
their interests. In Central America we are engaging boys and men through music, 
arts and sports.

Faiza Jama Mohamed, Nairobi director, Equality Now 
<http://www.equalitynow.org/>, Nairobi, Kenya, @equalitynow 
<https://twitter.com/equalitynow>

Give boys positive role models: Currently what boys see is violence and 
discrimination against women committed by men. So, they grow into the same type 
of men. This paradigm needs to change.

Significant change is possible when the men take collective responsibility for 
shifting the violent norms that exist. In Narok,Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>, young men took a collective decision 
to protect their sisters in the community from undergoing female genital 
mutilation (FGM) by taking a stand against and warning their fathers not to 
subject their sisters to the cut. This happened after the young men were 
sensitised and shown the dangers of FGM.

Rema Nanda, founder, Jagriti Youth <http://www.jagritiyouth.org/>, Bangalore, 
India,@JagritiYouth <https://twitter.com/JagritiYouth>

Laws and government are key to changing beliefs: Behaviour and norm change at 
scale is an expensive and hugely challenging proposition. From anti-smoking to 
safe-driving the evidence is stunning. It takes long time to change. That's why 
laws and good governance are critical.

Sheepa Hafiza, director of the gender justice and diversity and migration 
programme,Brac <http://www.brac.net/>, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Focusing just on girls suggests they are the problem: Over emphasis on girls 
implies that they are the only problem. Both girls and boys need to bring their 
own perspectives and solutions to the table.

Trevor Davies, director, Africa Fatherhood Initiative 
<http://www.africafatherhood.co.za/>, Johannesburg, South Africa, @FathersAfrica
 <https://twitter.com/FathersAfrica>

Start with the dads: Fatherhood is an important area of work as it is 
intergenerational. It speaks to a key area of masculinity for men. It is a life 
milestone when many men can look inward and want to change or do better.

Interest in fatherhood is increasing dramatically because of the rates of 
fatherlessness in countries such asSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> and the startling range of 
social issues that accompany such rates including gender-based violence, 
academic achievement of boys and girls, HIV transmission to infants and 
maternal and newborn mortality in general.

Ntenga Moses, executive director, Joy for Children – Uganda 
<http://www.joyforchildren.org/>, Kampala, Uganda, @nbkmoses 
<https://twitter.com/MosesNtenga>

Look at the bigger picture: Poverty, ignorance and lack of options remain the 
greatest barriers – at least inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>
 – to ending harmful practices such as FGM and child marriage. Education must 
be accessible in terms of cost and distance to all children as an alternative 
to child marriage.

Joya Taft-Dick, communications and youth advocacy officer, Together for Girls 
<http://www.togetherforgirls.org>, Washington DC, United States, @together4girls
 <https://twitter.com/together4girls>

Boys are vulnerable too: One in seven boys in Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Kenya and 
Haiti experience sexual violence prior to the age of 18 and they are much less 
likely than girls to tell someone about the abuse. So, involving men in the 
fight to end gender inequality should include this nuance: the recognition of 
how gender norms affect masculine experiences of violence, especially sexual 
violence.

This article was first published on 29 April 2014. Read the full live Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/14/boys-men-gender-equality?commentpage=4>
.

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 