
Among the unfunny cliches aimed at the middle-aged on reaching milestone 
birthdays – references to old wine, elasticated waistbands, 60-is-the-new-40 
etc – lies the happy fact that, for the midlife runner, age and wisdom bring 
rewards. As a V50 parkrunner, for example, you can be well placed in your age 
group despite finishing near the back of the pack. For some veteran runners, 
every milestone birthday earns them more bling at the finish line, as these 
three women champs in the V50, V60 and V70 categories have proved with some 
panache.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4325fc445da9de7c584a19b6cbbcab13a816988c%2F0_80_2359_2948%2F2359.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day'%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day%27%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4325fc445da9de7c584a19b6cbbcab13a816988c%2F0_80_2359_2948%2F2359.jpg>
 Clare Elms: ‘I eat piles of fruit every day’ Photograph: Handout 
Clare Elms, 52

Elms holds the world age group record for running a mile very quickly indeed 
(5:07.32). Officialdom (or lack of it) stands in the way of her claiming a 
sub-five: “I did actually run much faster outdoors, breaking five minutes and 
the world W50 outdoor record, but it wasn’t validated because of lack of 
officials present.”

Elms was also first woman in her age group in the Virgin Money London marathon 
<https://www.virginmoneylondonmarathon.com/en-gb/> last year (2:53.52). She is 
proud of being the first finisher in all 116 of her parkruns to date and of 
scooping her first W50 in the World Sprint Triathlon in 2013.

When you talk to her, though, it’s clear that her family is her biggest source 
of pride. She is the mother of 16-year-old triplets, and lives with them, her 
husband, and her parents in a busy south London household. Her 84-year-old 
father is her biggest fan. He used to mind the babies so she could run, and is 
still cheering her on at every parkrun: “When my triplets were babies, running 
became an important part of my life, my father and good friend, Clare, would 
look after them so that I could run around the block to clear my head. It 
became part of my daily routine, most days I would somehow find the time to 
run.”

It was off the back of this unstructured, head-clearing training that she ran 
a 10k race, to raise money forRett UK <http://www.rettuk.org/> (her niece had 
been born with Rett syndrome, a serious neurological disorder) and finished in 
42 minutes. That’s when she was advised to train seriously with a club.

When her children were seven, she won each of them a gold medal (for the 
1,500m, 5,000m and the 800m) at the British Masters championships, but her 
proudest running moment came with a milestone birthday attached: “I won my age 
group at the Masters international in Nottingham 2014 [for 6km] after many 
attempts. My mum and dad had surprised me and arrived in Nottingham just before 
the race started, and I won it in the last 100m ... the fact that I didn’t give 
up, I was so proud and delighted.”

It’s still a struggle to fit in structured training with a household like 
hers, but she runs most days – having a dog that needs a run helps, as does 
cycling everywhere and scheduling Wattbike sessions as crosstraining. She 
advises setting in stone three essential runs a week: “I have never run a lot 
of miles, especially during the track season. I have now done three marathons 
where I have increased my miles, but the crucial sessions remain Tuesday track, 
Thursday hard tempo and the long runs with marathon pace included in them. I 
have always raced a lot but many of the races, including for example the 
parkruns are more tempo runs than flat-out efforts.”

Without being too precious about it, Elms’s lifestyle and diet is typical of 
your average athlete: nothing faddy, but fruit and veg loom large, including “… 
an avocado with every meal … I am addicted to them. I eat piles of fruit every 
day. Mango, grapes, raspberries, blueberries, strawberries, figs and also dried 
fruit like apricots. I love honey and my treat is manuka honey, I have a big 
spoon in my porridge every morning. I also have malt loaf for energy most days, 
also with honey!”

Combine this with eight hours sleep a night, a dark-chocolate habit, a general 
avoidance of alcohol apart from the odd glass of prosecco, iron and glucosamine 
supplements and brief flirtations with nitrate-rich beetroot, and Clare ticks 
most of the healthy-lifestyle boxes that those NHS post-50 checks would have us 
live by. The fact that she leaves all other women runners, whatever their age, 
trailing in her wake can only be that she was born to run, and, as she 
approached her 53rd birthday, is still looking for personal bests. “Deep down I 
feel if I am consistent and wise with my training I can definitely PB at 
certain distances. I am keen to try new sessions maybe changing the recovery 
and to introduce more miles, I think I can still improve!”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa834eebadec9747a8afc4d17f740998ee029b901%2F0_346_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day'%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day%27%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa834eebadec9747a8afc4d17f740998ee029b901%2F0_346_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Angela Copson 
Angela Copson, 69

If Elms was a late arrival to the running party, Angela Copson’s debut jog at 
59 was positively maverick. When I contacted her she was excited about her 
selection for the W65 team in the British & Irish Cross Country championships 
in Glasgow, next month, but was happy to elaborate on what drove her to run her 
first marathon, back in 2007, following her husband Harry’s life-saving heart 
surgery: “I was so impressed with John Radcliffe hospital, I wanted to give 
something back. Harry left hospital with [instructions to] get plenty of 
exercise; he took up cycling, so I jogged with him to make sure he was OK.”

The jogging led to a charity place in the London Marathon, throwing herself 
into raising money for Heart Research UK rather than running the miles in 
training. So she was as surprised as anyone else when she completed her debut 
marathon, aged 60, in 3 hours and 57 minutes, with “lots of chatting on the way 
…”

It was suggested that proper training might be a good idea, so Copson joined 
Rugby & Northampton athletic club and went on to smash practically every 
distance in her age category, going on to run a marathon PB of 3:14.51. This 
put her in the elite/championship start of the race, although the word elite 
does not sit comfortably with her. “I am not elite, I don’t get paid for 
racing, so I don’t have to be strict with myself, or deny myself anything I 
like, such as cakes, or a glass of wine. My family come first; I have three 
grandchildren and when I spend time with them it’s not a problem if I don’t run.

“I do love healthy food: fish, chicken green veg, salads, pasta, brown rice 
and all fruits. I don’t take supplements and I am lucky not to be on any 
medication as this has to be declared at World & European Masters races. I have 
tried different gels for marathons, but I find a bowl of porridge with honey is 
more beneficial. I am 5ft 1in and weight seven-and-a-half stone. My ideal 
running weight could be a few pounds lighter but then I start to look gaunt. I 
try to get eight hours in bed, I don’t always sleep but it makes me rest and 
it’s good for reading.”

Kate Williamson, 70
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97c8c2c733d99717de5560eada12b5942d18b298%2F0_20_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day'%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20eat%20an%20avocado%20every%20day%27%3A%20veteran%20women%20runners%20share%20their%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fi-eat-an-avocado-every-day-veteran-women-runners-share-their-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97c8c2c733d99717de5560eada12b5942d18b298%2F0_20_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Kate in action 
Next year’s Virgin Money London Marathon will be Angela’s first in the W70 
category, a fact which I was very excited to discuss with 70-year-old Kate 
Williamson, who currently holds the British record for that race, having run 
London last April in 3:42.42… so can we look forward to the Kate and Angi W70 
smackdown? Sadly, Williamson can’t be doing with all that training this season: 
“Not a hope. I’m not intending to go for another marathon … I’m getting slower, 
my marathon PB was 3:33 in 2008.”

Williamson loves to run, it lifts her mood, so she goes out to train four or 
five times a week, but now she’s running for sheer enjoyment. She went for her 
first run at 35: “[I was] challenged by my son, who was fed up with doing the 
Jane Fonda exercise tapes in the garden … A few years later I joined Eynsham 
Road Runners, there is no way I would have achieved any records without their 
endless support and encouragement.

 “I only trained very hard for the London marathon this time (even bought a 
runner’s watch!) as I had been second in my age group three times previously 
and I really wanted to be first this. I enlisted the help of coach Tony Lock, 
who wrote me a schedule.”

And what would Williamson advise for the midlife newbie building a long 
training programme for a first marathon? “Obviously for longer races the long 
runs are important but I think speed work, including hills, is essential. I 
also think stretching is important. I also love to cycle, walk and work in the 
garden.”

As far as nutrition goes, Williamson isn’t in the market for self-denial. She 
doesn’t take supplements, drinks moderately and “loves food, especially bread, 
hot cross and chelsea buns, and fruit”.

Which will no doubt fuel her onward and upward to the next age category 
milestone, V75 and counting.
 