
At Freddie’s 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/at-freddie-s.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byPenelope Fitzgerald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/penelope-fitzgerald>

Chosen by David Nicholls <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-nicholls>

So many of my early reading memories involve hysterical laughter. There was 
Adrian Mole, of course, andDouglas Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/douglasadams>’s The Hitchhiker’s Guide to 
the Galaxy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hitchhiker-s-guide-to-the-galaxy-the-trilogy-of-four.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, the Monty Python books,Woody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>’s Without Feathers, Geoffrey 
Willans’sHow to Be Topp, Evelyn Waugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh>’s Decline and Fall 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/decline-and-fall.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
. Books were prized for being shocking or funny or, even better, both, and the 
promise that a book would make the reader “laugh out loud” seemed entirely 
plausible. Why not? It happened all the time.

Less so now perhaps, but a book that consistently makes me laugh is Penelope 
Fitzgerald’sAt Freddie’s, a comic masterpiece from 1982 that really should be 
better known. It’s set in the early 60s, in a shabby, crumbling stage school in 
Covent Garden, full of terrifyingly precocious child actors and inept, 
downtrodden teachers, all presided over by the infamous Frieda “Freddie” 
Wentworth. Manipulative, enigmatic, sharp-tongued, opinionated, she’s an 
extraordinary comic creation; imagine Miss Jean Brodie played by Alastair Sim.


Frieda “Freddie” Wentworth is an extraordinary comic creation; imagine Miss 
Jean Brodie played by Alastair Sim
David Nicholls 
But if Freddie dominates both school and novel, there’s also a wonderful 
supporting cast, and I particularly like Pierce Carroll, the inept tutor, well 
intentioned but entirely incapable of controlling his class. There’s Boney 
Lewis, a charming, drunken actor famed for his Napoleon, an off-stage cameo 
from Noël Coward and a great comic set piece involving a hysterically 
pretentious production ofKing John, full of mad acting and mime.

If the idea of a stage school comedy sounds worryingly winsome, Fitzgerald 
dodges sentimentality and predictability. She’s clear-eyed about the prospects 
of the underdog and brilliant at capturing the desperation that lurks behind 
the smiles and bravado of those on the lower rungs – has anyone written about 
failure so well? There’s a bracing bitterness to the humour (“No emotion can be 
as pure as the hatred you feel for a child,” says Boney), and melancholy too, a 
sense that disaster is never far away; in this respect, the final page is quite 
unforgettable. Fitzgerald is rightly celebrated for the great, late historical 
novels such asThe Blue Flower 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blue-flower.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, but she is also a first-class, underrated comedian, even when the comedy is 
played against a backbeat of sadness.


 * David Nicholls’s <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-nicholls> Us 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/us.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Hodder.

The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-diary-of-adrian-mole-aged-13-3-4-2.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 bySue Townsend
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sue-townsend>

Chosen by Nina Stibbe

When I wrote in a letter to my sister in 1983 “We’re ALL reading this Diary”, 
I was referring toThe Secret Diary of Adrian Mole Aged 13¾ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/15/adrian-mole-townsend-classic-review>
 by Sue Townsend, and for once I wasn’t exaggerating. Everybody was reading it 
and declaring it hilarious, satirical and miraculous. For me, it was joy and 
relief. Suddenly, here was this ordinary boy from Leicester writing about his 
hopes and dreams and his dysfunctional family. What thrilled me was that he 
made it seem normal – and funny – to worry. I’d just turned 20 and felt as if 
I’d done nothing but worry my entire life. “Saturday January 10th: ‘I think I’m 
turning into an intellectual. It must be all the worry.’” I’d had that exact 
thought many times, starting when I was about 10, and had felt myself 
ridiculous. Now it seemed quite endearing.

Adrian’s main concerns were similar to my own. He might be put into a 
children’s home because his mother is too busy readingGermaine Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/germainegreer>, having sex with a neighbour 
and being an alcoholic to serve up decent meals. Laughing with him, I felt my 
past was OK, and we could all be forgiven.

Also, Adrian’s sensitivity regarding Mrs Braithwaite’s defection from Labour 
to the SDP (“It’s a sad day when families are split by politics”) encouraged me 
to express my own political ideas, for example regarding Michael Foot’s 
self-esteem (“How must it feel to be called a scruffy old tramp all the 
time?”). And, if he hadn’t reported that Pandora Braithwaite’s horse (whose 
previous owners had lived in Zimbabwe) was called Ian Smith, would I have 
noticed that an acquaintance of mine was fostering a greyhound called Ted 
Hughes? I don’t know. I only know that this glorious book made me laugh the 
most, and the best.

 * Nina Stibbe’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/24/my-life-before-writing-nina-stibbe>
Love, Nina 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-nina.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
is published by Penguin.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/24/my-life-before-writing-nina-stibbe>
Agatha Runcible makes an appearance at the breakfast table in 10 Downing 
Street attired in Hawaiian fancy dress
David Lodge 
Vile Bodies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/vile-bodies.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byEvelyn Waugh
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh>

Chosen by David Lodge

Choosing the author is no problem: Evelyn Waugh is the supreme master of 
comedy in modern English literature. But which novel:Decline and Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/mar/20/declaringwaugh>? Vile 
Bodies? Black Mischief? Scoop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/10/100-best-novels-scoop-evelyn-waugh-robert-mccrum>
? It’s a tough call, but I have a special fondness forVile Bodies, his novel 
about the Bright Young Things of the 1920s. Although it was written partly out 
of the pain of discovering his first wife’s adultery and ends on “the biggest 
battlefield in the history of the world”, it is continuously amusing and often 
laugh-out-loud funny. Many scenes and episodes, especially those that involve 
Colonel Blount, the eccentric father of the hero’s on-off fiancee, still make 
me laugh every time I reread the book. Just remembering them can provoke a 
smile: for instance, Agatha Runcible’s appearance at the breakfast table in 10 
Downing Street attired in Hawaiian fancy dress. That scene, like so many in 
Waugh’s comic fiction, works because of careful preparation and timing: 
Agatha’s ludicrous entrance is both unexpected and yet entirely consistent with 
the preceding narrative, from which certain details have been deftly omitted. 
And the sequence still works every time I revisit the novel because the 
language in which it is communicated, including the dialogue, is perfectly yet 
economically expressive. Comedy is generated from invented situations and 
verbal style, and Waugh was a master of both.

 * David Lodge’s <https://www.theguardian.com/books/davidlodge> The Man Who 
Wouldn’t Get Up and Other Stories 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/untitled-482842.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Vintage.

The Just William 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/just-william.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 books byRichmal Crompton
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/27/my-hero-richmal-crompton-louise-rennison>

Chosen by Deborah Moggach

There’s a snobbishness in our literary world that equates laughter with 
shallowness. How untrue that is. There’s nothing shallow about my favourite 
comic writers –Nora Ephron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron>, 
Nancy Mitford <https://www.theguardian.com/books/nancy-mitford>, Beryl 
Bainbridge <https://www.theguardian.com/books/berylbainbridge> (her description 
of undignified middle-aged sex inInjury Time strangely lingers). But for me, 
and I suspect many others, the funniest books of all time are theJust William 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/22/just-william-richmal-crompton>
 books.

I suppose they’re for children, and I got hooked on them when I was William’s 
age, 11, but I still turn to them when I need a rush of joy. It’s a comfort 
just knowing they’re sitting on my shelves, shabby in their disintegrating 
jackets, waiting to welcome me back into the world of William, his fellow 
Outlaws and his suburban family of anxious mother, remote father and mad 
spinster aunts.

'Great comedy isn’t heartless – far from it. When we laugh at its 
protagonists, we also laugh at ourselves'
Deborah Moggach 
Richmal Crompton was a peerless writer who understood that the basis for 
comedy is the disconnect between how we see ourselves and how others see us. 
William’s older brother Robert considers himself to be a suave man about town 
but what we see is a hapless and humourless young chap, struggling to maintain 
his dignity, whose efforts to engage with the opposite sex are constantly 
sabotaged by his infuriating little sibling. Ditto Ethel, the vain and 
beautiful older sister, who also comes a cropper through William’s often 
well-meaning efforts to help her or, more often, get himself out of a scrape.

And the most important thing is that we mind about them. Great comedy isn’t 
heartless – far from it. When we laugh at its protagonists, we also laugh at 
ourselves. I’m 68, but there’s still a part of me who’s an 11-year-old crashing 
around the countryside, unwittingly causing mayhem from often the best 
intentions.

 * Deborah Moggach’s Something to Hide 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/something-to-hide-483419.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Vintage.

Three Men in a Boat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/three-men-in-a-boat-13.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Jerome K Jerome


Chosen by John O’Farrell

Comedy in all its forms seems to date much more quickly than other genres, so 
it is something of a miracle that an unambitious travelogue published in 1889 
should still feel so fresh and funny today. Like the Thames navigation itself, 
Jerome K Jerome’sThree Men in a Boat (To Say Nothing of the Dog) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/10/100-best-novels-three-men-boat-jerome>
 is unchallenging, charming and meandering; the narrator disappears up 
anecdotal backwaters and lingers at riverside inns to spin another irrelevant 
yarn. You can smell the river on every page.

There is also a great humanity to the narrator: if he is critical of others, 
he is equally critical of himself. His exasperation with his friend Harris 
performing a comedy song is hilarious. Harris can never remember the words, and 
the description of the assembled party guests, so eager to laugh uproariously 
at the end of each verse but then denied the moment because the singer keeps 
stopping, is a window into the determination of Victorian England to remain 
jolly no matter what.

I regularly cycle past the house in Chelsea Bridge Road, where Jerome wrote 
this classic, and seeing the blue plaque always brings a smile to my face as I 
picture him staring out of the window of the top-floor flat, the Thames just 
about visible. And I imagine him writing about pleasure-boating today, and all 
the posh married couples swearing at each other in their huge fibre-glass cabin 
cruisers as they struggle to moor up beside the Harvester Inn, Cookham.

 * John O’Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johnofarrell>’s There’s 
Only Two David Beckhams 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/there-s-only-two-david-beckhams.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Black Swan.
 ‘The worse the world gets, the more we need to laugh’ … Marina Lewycka. 
Illustration: Leon Edler 
Extinction by Thomas Bernhard
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/02/prose-translation-thomas-bernhard-austrian-writer>

Chosen by Geoff Dyer <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/geoff-dyer>

I am not exaggerating when I say that Thomas Bernhard is the funniest writer 
ever and thatExtinction, his last novel, is his funniest. The narrator is in 
Rome when he learns that his parents and brother have been killed in a car 
crash back in Austria. The story, in so far as there is one, unfolds in a 
two-paragraph torrent over 300 pages from a narrator who claims to have 
“cultivated the art of exaggeration to such a pitch that I can call myself the 
greatest exponent of the art that I know of”.

Geoff Dyer <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/geoff-dyer>’s White Sands: 
Experiences from the Outside World 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/white-sands.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Canongate.

Lint by Steve Aylett
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/30/complete-accomplice-steve-aylett-review>

Chosen by Bridget Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bridget-christie>

This satirical biography of the fictional cult writer Jeff Lint is still the 
funniest book I’ve ever read. It’s exhausting: every sentence is so funny and 
has so many ideas in it that I had to read it really slowly to take it all in. 
If you find the idea of a baffled chef funny, or titles such as “Jelly Result”, 
“The Stupid Conversation”, “I Eat Fog”, “The Nose Furnace”, “I Blame Ferns” or 
“The Man Who Gave Birth to His Arse”, then you’ll love it. Inventive, absurd 
and audacious, it’s a comic gem.

 * Bridget Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bridget-christie>’s A 
Book for Her 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-for-her.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
is published by Arrow.

The Jeeves 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thank-you-jeeves.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 series byPG Wodehouse
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>

Chosen by Sebastian Faulks

The only book that’s ever literally made me fall out of bed laughing is 
Towards the End of the Morning 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/towards-the-end-of-the-morning-350796.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byMichael Frayn <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-frayn>. I read it 
when I was about 26 and working on an old Fleet Street newspaper very like the 
one described in the novel. The passage that inflicted lifelong lumbar spine 
damage was old Eddie Moulton’s swansong, in which he remembers the great 
journalists of the past. One day, I really must get round to suing the author 
for all my osteopath bills.

Before that, The Rachel Papers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rachel-papers-2.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byMartin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> made me snort, 
shudder and chortle with embarrassed glee. It took the narcissistic young man’s 
comic novel to such new heights that it essentially killed off the genre – for 
which, many thanks. Also for “I … waved, with sinister, beckoning motions” and 
all that.

Terry Wogan read the Gussie Fink-Nottle prize-giving speech at Cheltenham - 
you could hear the laughter in Birmingham
Sebastian Fauks 
And earliest of all were PG Wodehouse’s Jeeves stories. I have never been able 
to tune in toLord Emsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/12/blandings-pg-wodehouse-tv>, but 
the Jeeves-Wooster relationship has a tensely comic energy. A few years ago, I 
heard Terry Wogan read the famous Gussie Fink-Nottle prize-giving speech to a 
large audience at the Cheltenham festival. They say you could hear the laughter 
in Birmingham.

 * Sebastian Faulks <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sebastian-faulks>’s 
Where My Heart Used to Beat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/where-my-heart-used-to-beat-482474.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Vintage.

I Want My Hat Back 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-want-my-hat-back.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byJon Klassen
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jon-klassen>

Chosen by Jenny Colgan

I first came across Je Veux Mon Chapeau by Jon Klassen while living in France, 
and assumed it was French. Its graphic style and dark undertow seemed far more 
European than most anglophone books. It is Canadian, though, and for my money 
the funniest book ever written, and here is why: it isalways funny, every 
single time you read it. And if you know any children at all, you will be 
reading it a lot.

It is funny in whatever language you read it (22 and counting) and to almost 
every child in the world. And like many parents and carers, I suspect, I hoard 
my children’s laughter like miser’s gold: one day, when I am old and drowsy, I 
want the memory of it ringing out to be all I hear.

 * Jenny Colgan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jennycolgan>’s Christmas 
at Little Beach Street Bakery 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-at-the-little-beach-street-bakery.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Sphere.

Augustus Carp, Esq by Henry Howarth Bashford

Chosen by Philip Ardagh

Although I’m a huge fan of PG Wodehouse in general and his Blandings stories 
in particular, and although Clive James’s series of unreliable memoirs has 
caused me to snort out loud in public, and after having weighed up Max 
Beerbohm’sSeven Men and Two Others, I’ve gone for Augustus Carp Esq, by Himself.

Subtitled “Being the Autobiography of a Really Good Man”, and first published 
in 1924, it begins: “It is customary, I have noticed, in publishing an 
autobiography to preface it with some sort of apology. But there are times, and 
surely the present is one of them, when to do so is manifestly unnecessary.” 
Though written by Dr Henry Howarth Bashford – later Sir Henry, physician to 
George VI – his name did not appear in the book in his lifetime.

Carp’s nearest relative must be Pooter from Diary of a Nobody 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-nobody.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 but, for me, Carp, the character and the book, surpasses Pooter and the better 
known classic. Here is a Sunday school superintendent, churchwarden and 
self-appointed president of a piety league, who religiously highlights the 
faults in others while constantly trying to pursue his own advancement through 
“good deeds”. (When falling out with those at the church of St James the 
Lesser, he joins the congregation of St James the Lesser Still.)

When tricked into believing that port is “a species of fruit squash imported 
from Portugal and known as Portugalade” he gets terrible “port-poisoning”. It 
all ends in tears, one of which lands on his employer, causing him to apologise 
–not to his employer “but to the moisture”. Why? “Because by apologising to the 
moisture, I was conveying to Mr Chrysostom, in the most trenchant way possible, 
my own opinion of his character.” Carp is, quite simply, a very British comic 
masterpiece.

 * Philip Ardagh <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philip-ardagh>’s The 
Grunts on the Run 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/grunts-on-the-run-393509.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Nosy Crow.

What a Carve Up! 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/what-a-carve-up-3.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byJonathan Coe
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathan-coe>

Chosen by Marina Lewycka <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marinalewycka>

The worse the world gets, the more we need to laugh. Recently I’ve enjoyed 
Obstacles to Young Love by the late David Nobbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/10/david-nobbs> (of Reginald 
Perrin fame) published in 2010; like the best comic fiction, it’s funny, sad, 
dark and poignant all at the same time. But my all-time favourite isWhat a 
Carve Up! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/02/jonathan-coe-carve-up-book-club> 
by Jonathan Coe, which focuses on a single venal, privileged family who between 
them have fingers in the pies of agriculture, banking, healthcare, the media, 
the arms trade and the arts, which they ruthlessly exploit for their own ends. 
Cockup collides with conspiracy, while our hero, an unsuccessful novelist hired 
to write the family’s history, consoles himself by watching reruns ofCarry On 
films, and by befriending the girl next door. The Radio 4 adaptation of the 
book was written by none other than David Nobbs. Coe’sNumber 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/11/number-11-jonathan-coe-review-what-a-carve-up>
, a sequel toWhat a Carve Up!, was published in November 2015. It’s also funny, 
dark and very bleak, but I think the original has the edge.

 * Marina Lewycka <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marinalewycka>’s The 
Lubetkin Legacy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lubetkin-legacy.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Fig Tree.

It should be enjoyed in private where you can laugh, scream and dribble at 
your pleasure, without fear of being arrested
Shazia Mirza 
Me Talk Pretty One Day 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/me-talk-pretty-one-day.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byDavid Sedaris
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-sedaris>

Chosen by Shazia Mirza

This is not a book to be read in public. It should be enjoyed in private, 
where you can laugh, scream and dribble at your pleasure, without fear of being 
arrested.Me Talk Pretty One Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/feb/04/biography.davidvincent> is in 
two parts, one about Sedaris’s childhood and family, and the second is about 
his experience in France as a foreigner.

It is funny and touching, and his accounts of trying to learn French will 
leave you spitting up the windows. His characters and situations are vivid and 
beautiful, and will remain with you long after you’ve finished the book and 
been given filthy looks by your fellow commuters. This is a book so funny it 
will make you feel alive.

 * Shazia Mirza <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaziamirza>’s 2017 
comedy tour starts in Bath on 19 January.

The Plague and I by Betty MacDonald

Chosen by Lissa Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/13/crooked-heart-lissa-evans-review>

“I had braced myself for a year-long stay; these casual mentions by other 
patients of staying two, three or even five years, made me feel as though I had 
just finished a hearty dinner and then been informed by my laughing hostess 
that she had canned those funny-tasting oysters herself.”

In 1937, Betty MacDonald, a divorcee living in Seattle, contracted 
tuberculosis. In 1948, after the enormous success of her first book,The Egg and 
I – about living on a chicken farm – she wrote a second, entitled The Plague 
and I, about her experiences in a sanatorium. Thomas Mann it ain’t, but while 
I’ve readThe Magic Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/14/winter-reads-thomas-mann-magic-mountain>
 once,The Plague and I has been a constant companion since I discovered it as a 
teenager.

It’s like a conversation between someone who is forgetting to breathe and 
another who keeps asking “what happened next?”
Lissa Evans 
Separated from her large, loud, loving family, placed on a regime of total 
bed-rest, perpetually cold (part of the “cure” was having all of the windows 
open, all of the time), hovering between loneliness, terror and utter boredom, 
MacDonald writes about her seclusion in a way that is painfully, barkingly 
funny. “I lay there, remembering the year we had sat at the Thanksgiving dinner 
table for four hours listening to a deservedly lonely man from Mary’s office 
recall every bridge hand he had held since 1908 …”

Her style is completely her own, the sprawling sentences packed with anecdote, 
incident, bang-on simile and throwaway wit – it’s like overhearing a 
conversation between someone who keeps forgetting to breathe and another who 
keeps asking “and what happened next?”

So, my panacea for 40 years has been a funny book about chronic illness. 
Fingers crossed it keeps working …

 * Lissa Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/13/crooked-heart-lissa-evans-review>
’sCrooked Heart 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crooked-heart-283737.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
is published by Black Swan.

The Best of Myles by Brian O’Nolan

Chosen by Ian Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ian-martin>

Which Brian O’Nolan was funnier – novelist “Flann O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/flannobrien>” or columnist “Myles na 
gCopaleen”? Both were madly futuristic.At Swim-Two-Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/08/100-best-novels-at-swim-two-birds-flann-o-brien-obrien-dermot-trellis>
, his masterpiece, has characters conspiring against their author, erupting 
into the baffled real world as if in some weird Charlie Kaufman movie.The Third 
Policeman, with its proposition that people and their bicycles are exchanging 
molecules, one slowly becoming the other, now feels like something the 
mainstream media might be hiding from conspiracy theorists. However,The Best of 
Myles, an anthology of satirical columns he wrote for the Irish Times, has been 
a lighthouse for me since the early 70s, and remains the funniest book I’ve 
ever read. With swaggering confidence, O’Nolan invents a parallel-reality 
Dublin in 1940 and then riffs for 26 years, until he dies. It’s a 
four-dimensional tour de force. There are “regulars”: The Brother, a monstrous 
chancer; Keats and Chapman, literary dandies with a weakness for puns; and the 
Plain People of Ireland, a sort of unreliable chorus. It’s a world both banal 
and absurd, where rogue ventriloquist theatre escorts – and intoxicating 
ice-cream – cause mayhem. One bloke spends all day cracking a fiendish 
newspaper crossword just to stroll into a bar in the evening and help an 
astonished acquaintance “solve” it. This book is a masterclass in how to defy a 
boring world with mischief.


 * Ian Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ian-martin>’s Epic Space 
<https://unbound.com/books/epic-space>, an anthology of his satirical 
architectural columns, will be published in March by Unbound.

The Code of the Woosters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/20/the-code-of-woosters-pg-wodehouse-comfort-reading>
 byPG Wodehouse  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>

Chosen by Charlotte Mendelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/charlottemendelson>

Novels rarely make me laugh. Practically everything else does, so clearly I’m 
not picky. Strangers giggling give me the giggles. Show me a wobbly film of an 
adult falling off a swing and I’m hysterical; if it’s a toddler I may need 
oxygen. Yet almost all contemporary fiction leaves me straight-faced.

There have been highlights: Cold Comfort Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/20/100-best-novels-cold-comfort-farm-stella-gibbons>
 (“what do you do when you’re not ... eating people?”); Flann O’Brien; Douglas 
Adams;Catch-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/10/catch-22-50-years-joseph-heller>
. But nothing comes close to the salvation of my teenage years, the epitome of 
Englishness: PG Wodehouse. It shouldn’t work. Cricket, sentimental villagey 
poshness, chorus girls, spats: this is not my world. But Wodehouse’s sleight of 
hand – the apparent casualness of his observations, the Chandleresque daring of 
his similes – makes every description a joy: “Unseen in the background, Fate 
was quietly slipping lead into the boxing-glove”; “I marmaladed a slice of 
toast”; “the uproar of the butterflies in the adjoining meadows”. But if you 
want proof of Wodehouse’s gloriousness, turn toThe Code of the Woosters 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/code-of-the-woosters-315074.html> for the 
greatest line ever written about aunts, or anything else: “You cowered before 
her like a wet sock.”
 