
‘A small act of kindness to a troubled young man’ 

I adored Alan Rickman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> from an 
early age for his bigger, more widely known roles and became more interested in 
his more off the beaten track work, such as the incredible Snow Cake film he 
did with Sigourney Weaver in 2006. As a depressed teenager, often in and out of 
hospital with frequent, fraught experiences with social services, I wrote him a 
short letter telling him how his films brought some joy and escapism to my 
life. With a remarkably quick turnaround came a very encouraging, kind letter 
back and a signed photo. Thankfully, nearly ten years later, my life has turned 
around. I will remember this man and his kindness, creativity and compassion 
fondly for the rest of my life. I only hope he realised the comfort his 
humility brought to people like me all around the world.

George
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d91cfbf98bc5061c8fe87d4587668bbcf1b6706%2F0_0_4992_2996%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity'%20-%20readers'%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity%27%20-%20readers%27%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d91cfbf98bc5061c8fe87d4587668bbcf1b6706%2F0_0_4992_2996%2F4992.jpg>
 Director Marc Evans; Sigourney Weaver and Alan Rickman at the premiere of Snow 
Cake The Edinburgh International Film Festival 2006. Scotland, United Kingdom 
15th August 2006 Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
‘Alas for Alan’ 

I directed a 13-year-old Alan Rickman at Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith. 
He played the town mouse in a musical version of Aesop’s fables. We won our 
section of the Hammersmith Drama Competition. I had just got into Cambridge and 
was working as a part-time teacher. Alan was quiet but very clever and 
inventive. 22 years later he played the James Stewart part in The Philadelphia 
Story for me at Oxford. As boy and man he was a talented, funny and gentle 
person.

Gordon McDougall
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc29ff2eb0cd1a8339376db4a7dcef892755a62a%2F0_0_2088_1422%2F2088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity'%20-%20readers'%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity%27%20-%20readers%27%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc29ff2eb0cd1a8339376db4a7dcef892755a62a%2F0_0_2088_1422%2F2088.jpg>
 Alan Rickman as ’Elyot’ and Lindsay Duncan as ‘Amanda’ in Howard Davies’s 
production of Noel Coward’s “Private Lives” at the Albery Theatre in London. 
Photograph: Peter Jordan/PA 
‘The patience of a saint’

I had the pleasure of seeing Alan Rickman on stage on a few occasions, the 
first time being in “Private Lives.” After seeing his captivating performance 
as Snape in the first Harry Potter film, and watching every single movie with 
him that was available, I also met him at theBerlinale  
<https://www.berlinale.de/en/HomePage.html>in 2006 where he was promoting the 
movie Snow Cake. Me and handful of other admirers met him at the cinema of the 
Sony Centre in Berlin. Despite it being a cold February evening Alan greeted 
all of us cheerfully. He was particularly taken aback by two very young german 
girls and their mother. They were over the moon once Alan showed up and he 
scolded them with a lot of humor, telling them they shouldn’t be up at this 
hour. Alan was incredibly sweet and patient with them. Eventually they asked 
for an autograph and Alan bowed down, looked each of them in the eye, while 
asking, with a very gentle voice: “Wie heißen Sie?” He took his time with every 
single person present since he knew we had waited in the bone-chilling cold. I 
shall never forget what a patient and gentle soul he was.

Birte, voice actress, Germany

‘ Beautiful handwriting’

I wrote a letter to Alan Rickman in the early 90s asking for an autograph, 
with a rather cheeky supplementary section asking his advice about a drastic 
career change I was thinking about. I’d just finished university and was 
contemplating a career in economics and politics, or going off abroad to teach 
English. Little did I realize that within a couple of days I’d receive the 
autograph in the form of a three page letter, where Alan gave advice about my 
possible career change based on his own experience. So I eventually plumped for 
the English teaching and have never had any cause to regret it. I’ve lived in 
some lovely countries and met some wonderful people. It was such a remarkably 
generous and thoughtful act from a busy, talented person. He will be much 
missed.

Brent Quigley

‘Alan the mentor’

When Alan Rickman first saw me, I was wearing black tights and six inch red 
heels and was swinging around on a rope. I was playing Captain Hook in a 
devised production of Peter Pan in my final year as a student at the Royal 
Academy of Dramatic Art. Later that year I had to suddenly apply for an 
Exceptional Talent visa just to stay in the UK and be able to work there as an 
actor. I wrote to Alan asking if he would write me a letter of recommendation 
to support my application. Not only did he respond very quickly, he wrote an 
initial draft in the first couple of days, trying to fulfil all the criteria 
that the UK Border Agency had put forward, and reassured me that he would help 
me in any way possible. He was incredibly kind and supportive through the whole 
process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7253226199ff3b671a0f73ab43c0a47af69c7b4a%2F0_0_625_417%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity'%20-%20readers'%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity%27%20-%20readers%27%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7253226199ff3b671a0f73ab43c0a47af69c7b4a%2F0_0_625_417%2F625.jpg>
 Extracts of the recommendation letters written by Alan Rickman to Tanmay 
Photograph: Tanmay Dhanania 
Eventually, despite our best efforts, I was unsuccessful in securing the visa. 
I wrote to Alan thanking him for all his help and had nearly decided that this 
was the end of my career, when he wrote me a most beautiful email, saying that 
sadly, these were the times we lived in, but to not give up hope, and that 
things can change and that I must keep on doing what I have to. I had no idea 
he was already unwell at this stage, but his enthusiasm and his optimism were 
infectious. I have since had roles in both television and film, portraying 
Naseem Ali Khan in Channel 4’s Indian Summers series, and starring in the film 
Brahman Naman premiering at the Sundance film festival this year. Many actors 
credit Alan’s performances as the reason why they took up acting. I had the 
incredible good fortune to be able to credit his words to me as one of the 
reasons why I remained an actor and am working today. All my love to him.

Tanmay Dhanania, actor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5832d09a1db584bf213dd37d51d013b8a515d61%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity'%20-%20readers'%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ll%20remember%20his%20kindness%20and%20creativity%27%20-%20readers%27%20tributes%20to%20Alan%20Rickman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fill-remember-his-kindness-and-creativity-readers-tributes-to-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5832d09a1db584bf213dd37d51d013b8a515d61%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Alan Rickman as Hans Gruber in 1988 film Die Hard Photograph: Allstar/20TH 
CENTURY FOX 
‘Just who is that guy?’

It’s 1988. My 10 year old son wants to see Die Hard. He needs an accompanying 
adult in order to get into the theater. That’s me. We walk into the Rivoli 
Theater, Wisconsin. Buy a big tub of popcorn and two cokes then settle into our 
seats. Two hours and 12 minutes later the lights in the theater come up as the 
credits roll. I don’t move until I find out who exactly is the actor that 
played Hans Gruber. Ah, Alan Rickman. Good. I vow to see every film he’s in, 
and I do until my MS renders me housebound. Movies just aren’t the same on DVD.

slovenia46

You can see all the Alan Rickman tributes and add your own on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5697acb3e4b054dd75ed0386>
 