
Elderly revolutionaries joined young doctors, famous musicians, government 
workers and former guerrilla fighters in Havana’s Plaza de la Revolución as 
thousands lined up to pay their last respects toFidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>.

Some carried flags. A few had flowers. All came with memories of the guerrilla 
leader who overthrew a dictatorship, resisted a US-led invasion, faced down a 
nuclear superpower and dominated the island’s political life for half a century.


'Today, we don’t talk about baseball': Cubans react to Castro's death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/today-we-dont-talk-about-baseball-cubans-react-to-castros-death>
At the start of the official commemorations, Orlando Gómez had come with his 
wife to bid farewell to his old comrade in arms. Waiting in the hot sun to sign 
the condolence book, he recalled the first time he had gone into combat with 
Castro in March 1958.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cubans%20mourn%20Fidel%20Castro%20in%20Havana%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cubans%20mourn%20Fidel%20Castro%20in%20Havana%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video&media=>
Cubans mourn Fidel Castro in Havana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/28/cubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video>
A few weeks earlier, Gómez – then an idealistic 18-year-old – had left his 
home in Havana to join the small rebel army in the Sierra Maestra mountains. He 
had been put in charge of a mortar unit for the attack on an army garrison at 
the San Ramón sugar mill. The battle lasted from midnight to 4am. Four 
guerrillas were killed, but they destroyed the mill and the barracks before 
returning to their base in the mountains.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8326afc45fb73de6e520a9483222f46aa1cfae29%2F0_169_5077_3047%2F5077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20here%20because%20of%20Fidel'%3A%20Cubans%20gather%20to%20pay%20last%20respects%20to%20Castro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20here%20because%20of%20Fidel%27%3A%20Cubans%20gather%20to%20pay%20last%20respects%20to%20Castro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8326afc45fb73de6e520a9483222f46aa1cfae29%2F0_169_5077_3047%2F5077.jpg>
 Ernesto Barbon, a veteran of the Angola war of the 80s, waits in line to enter 
the Plaza de la Revolución, to render homage to Fidel Castro on Monday. 
Photograph: Ricardo Mazalan/AP 
“Fidel led by example. He was always in the frontline. He walked faster than 
everyone. He never stopped moving, but he was very approachable. You could 
always talk to him,” he recalled. “I want to say goodbye to this extraordinary 
man. He was a great guerrilla leader and tactician.”


Others remember Castro as a leader who stood firm during the Bay of Pigs 
invasion of 1961 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/17/cuba-love-obama-bay-of-pigs-anniversary>
 and the Cuban missile crisis, when the world was taken to the brink of nuclear 
war over the Soviet Union’s efforts to build a missile base on the island.


“He was very open with the people about the threat we faced and how we must 
pull together to protect our liberty,” said Jorge Jorge, a university teacher 
who had arrived two hours earlier with a group of friends. “We have come here 
to share our grief and to show our determination to hold on to Fidel’s ideals. 
He taught us how to share.”


Like many in the crowd, he had often come to the square to hear Castro deliver 
his marathon orations, some of which lasted more than six hours. They were 
often at times of hardship – of which there were many: the death of Che 
Guevara, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the exodus of migrants escaping 
economic crisis or political crackdowns.

There is widespread recognition of Castro’s failures, and many – particularly 
among the young – balk at his dictatorial rule. But this was not the time or 
the place or the crowd to dwell on the negatives.

“I was born in a poor black family. Thanks to the revolution, I had 
opportunities that did not exist before,” said Tony Ávila, one of the island’s 
most famous musicians, who said he had been called up the previous night by the 
culture ministry and told to attend. He appeared more than happy to do so. “I’m 
here because of Fidel. He was everything to me.”


It was not just Cubans paying homage. Many foreigners were present – out of 
curiosity or shared political beliefs. Chilean Alberto Reyes arrived with a 
handmade flag and a photograph of the dead revolutionary who had inspired him 
as a youth to join theManuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manuel_Rodr%C3%ADguez_Patriotic_Front> – one of 
several dozen groups across Latin America that were committed to armed struggle 
against the rightwing dictatorships that held power across most of the region 
in the 1970s and 1980s.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fc1bbcefa0a172e5e2d5b61cc4a8dd33f52ef08%2F0_209_4516_2710%2F4516.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20here%20because%20of%20Fidel'%3A%20Cubans%20gather%20to%20pay%20last%20respects%20to%20Castro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20here%20because%20of%20Fidel%27%3A%20Cubans%20gather%20to%20pay%20last%20respects%20to%20Castro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffidel-castro-cubans-last-respects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fc1bbcefa0a172e5e2d5b61cc4a8dd33f52ef08%2F0_209_4516_2710%2F4516.jpg>
 People react to a tribute to Cuba’s late President Fidel Castro inside the 
Jose Martí Memorial in the Plaza de la Revolución on Monday. Photograph: Edgard 
Garrido/Reuters 
“He was the light in the lighthouse. More than any other leader, he unified 
Latin America,” said Reyes, who has lived in Havana since the 1990s.


Many turned up in groups, bearing flags or wearing the uniforms of customs 
officers or doctors. “I’m here because he gave me the chance to enter 
medicine,” said Beatriz de la Cruz Quila, a 21-year-old medical student at the 
Institute of Gastrointestinal Medicine – one of several dozen institutions 
created after Castro took power in 1959.


The commemoration will continue in Havana until a ceremony on Tuesday night. 

Fidel Castro: mass rallies set for Havana and Santiago as ashes journey across 
Cuba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castros-ashes-to-be-buried-after-week-long-journey-across-cuba>
Then on Wednesday, Castro’s ashes will begin a three-day procession east 
across the island, going back along the route the victorious rebel army took 
from the Sierra Maestra to the capital to topple Fulgencio Batista in 1959.


Castro’s remains will be interred on Sunday morning in Santa Ifigenia cemetery 
in Santiago, which is also the resting place of José Martí, the hero of the 
19th-century war of independence against Spain.


That will mark the end of nine days of mourning. Since Fidel’s death on Friday 
night, the media have run blanket coverage of tributes, interviews, historical 
documentaries and footage of diplomatic trips and speeches by Castro. Musical 
performances have been cancelled and bars have been prohibited from selling 
alcohol.


“There’s a genuine feeling of mourning, that’s not a formality, that’s not 
showy, that’s not outward-focused, but rather completely intimate,” the former 
national assembly president Ricardo Alarcón said on state television on Sunday.


Not everyone is grief-stricken. Democracy activists have cheered the demise of 
a leader who repressed political opponents, denied freedom of speech and 
restricted travel and religious worship.


One woman at the Plaza de la Revolución, who only gave her first name Milena, 
said she was sad but determined to take something positive from the moment. “He 
should be remembered as a revolutionary who believed in social justice and 
fought for free public health and education. We need to maintain this. His 
ideas should live forever”
 