
I have been writing every day of my life, seven days a week, for almost 50 
years. Even Christmas Day. But I still enjoy it. I have lived in the same house 
for the last 30 years and I have written in the same room ever since. When 
I first came to London, I went on a canal boat ride in Little Venice and 
I remember going past the street where I live now, thinking: “This must be a 
nice place to live.” I never dreamed that I would one day live here.

My writing room is a cosy, book-lined room, with a dark wooden desk and a 
window overlooking the garden. There is a little Paddington bear watching over 
my desk. I am happy here, although on some days, there is rather a lot of 
traffic on the road and the river and it can be quite noisy.

But I like looking out of the window while I write, watching all the activity. 
I am a city person and I get my inspiration from watching people. If I go for a 
short walk, I come back brimming with ideas. I think my mind has adapted to my 
work as a writer – I am constantly listening for little snatches of 
conversation. I’ve got ideas that made their way into books while on holiday, 
while shopping, while observing my grandson.Paddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/01/michael-bond-my-family-values>
 has a lot of my father in him; he was a very polite man and never left the 
house without a hat, so he could raise it when he met a lady. When he took me 
to the seaside as a child, he even kept his hat on while he was in the water.

I am always at my desk by 9am. I use a laptop, which is usually buried under 
papers, and I have a typewriter, too. I like typewriters; you can type with 
real flourish. One of the problems about working from home is it is so easy to 
do, so you end up working a lot. This is not a grumble, though, it is a fact of 
life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fmichael-bond-writing-day-paddington-bear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a780e69feeadf057e22299d789b40361c54fd1%2F0_31_2035_2542%2F2035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20at%20my%20desk%20by%209am.%20I%20even%20write%20on%20Christmas%20Day%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fmichael-bond-writing-day-paddington-bear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20at%20my%20desk%20by%209am.%20I%20even%20write%20on%20Christmas%20Day%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fmichael-bond-writing-day-paddington-bear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a780e69feeadf057e22299d789b40361c54fd1%2F0_31_2035_2542%2F2035.jpg>
 Michael Bond at the wold premiere ofPaddington. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/PA 
Paper is my problem. I have finished and unfinished stories all over the 
place. When I really want something – a particular page or a reference book – I 
can’t find it, so it doesn’t work incredibly well. I am running out of flat 
surfaces. It is ridiculous, really. And I am running out of space on my 
bookshelves – I have a lot of fat reference books everywhere and no space for 
anything new. I was brought up in a home where books were considered part of 
the furniture and I love reference books. But I tend to collect them – wine 
books, food books, books for my Monsieur Pamplemousse series – and only read 
them once. I have 95% of all I should ever want to know in my writing room.

I went through a long, lovely period 30 years ago where I would go to a flat 
in Paris to do my writing. It was lovely because no one wrote to me. There were 
no disturbances and you could get a lovely meal in the evening. I’d get up 
early, switch on the machine and spend all the morning writing. While I 
wouldn’t want to write anywhere else than my home now, it’s not ideal because 
so many other things intrude.

How long does it take me to write a book – how long is a piece of string? I 
am a quick writer, but in practical terms, I never continue to the next page 
until I am happy with the one I am writing. Goodness knows how many times I go 
over it. I don’t mind that though, it is a case of getting it right.

I love working with illustrators. My current illustrator for the Paddington 
books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/03/michael-bond-l0-things-paddington-bear>
 lives in America and I like him terribly – any time I am not happy with 
something, I give him a call and he changes it immediately. You can have a 
funny relationship with illustrators because publishers don’t like you talking 
without them – it feels as if you’re going behind their back.

I don’t think I’ve got faster at writing over the years. I think I am more 
skilled, though. Writing Paddington still comes very easily to me. I didn’t set 
out to write another, I was just exercising my mind and writing some ideas, 
until my agent said “You’ve got a book on your hands.” I am very pleased with 
it.

Paddington’s Finest Hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/25/new-paddington-bear-book-to-be-published-in-2017-paddingtons-finest-hour-michael-bond>
 will be published in April by HarperCollins.
 