
The world of film academia can often seem remote – as divorced from mainstream 
film culture as the magical forest kingdom of Terabithia is from human society 
in the classic 1977 children’s book Bridge To Terabithia, and its two film 
adaptations. And yet Terabithia, as distant as it may seem, is in fact readily 
accessible to those willing to leave the safety of earthly civilisation behind 
and rope-swing across a creek to the magical treehouse beyond which it lies.

As it turns out, film academia is just as easy to access, only its rope swing 
is the blossoming medium of the video essay and its treehouse is[in]Transition 
<http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/intransition/>, the world’s first 
peer-reviewed academic journal of “videographic film and moving image studies”. 
Don’t let the big words put you off: behind the scholarly jargon, 
[in]Transition is a treasure trove of engaging short-form videos that make film 
theory accessible to anyone with a decent Wi-Fi connection and a willingness to 
overlook some slightly wanky prefatory quotations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWPUzTtNlMKs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWPUzTtNlMKs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWPUzTtNlMKs&media=>
In common with mainstream video essay channels such as Every Frame A Painting, 
the academic clips on [in]Transition explore a broad range of pop cultural 
phenomena through an intellectual lens – and use montage, juxtaposition and the 
hallowed art of the supercut to do so. Recent videos have included an 
examination of two fleeting moments in Charlie Kaufman’s Adaptation and a 
treatise on fembots and colour theory inspired by a narrative arc from 
Battlestar Galactica. Both pieces could probably have found a wider audience 
elsewhere, but here they’re subject to the rigorous academic process of peer 
review, which undoubtedly has a purifying effect on their arguments.

Despite such clinical trappings, [in]Transition demonstrates a rare openness 
to conflicting opinions and contrasting styles. Where many of YouTube’s most 
popular video essays are prone to preachy hyperbole – their guiding principle 
being “thou shalt not take David Fincher’s name in vain” – most of the videos 
on [in]Transition seem content simply to ask questions and probe received 
wisdoms. Tonally, they run the gamut from objective historical assessment to 
outlandish truther-style conspiracy (the aforementioned video on Adaptation 
centres its argument on the precise number of car alarm beeps heard across the 
course of the film). Who knows, a future issue might even make room for a 
tortured analogy about Bridge To Terabithia.
 