
Minutes after collecting 53 points, 17 assists and 16 rebounds in his second 
straight triple-double, Houston’s James Harden was asked what it has been like 
to play in new coach Mike D’Antoni’s system.

“It’s been a dream so far,” Harden said.

It looked more like a nightmare to the short-handed New York Knicks 
after Harden powered the Rockets to a 129-122 win on Saturday night. “It was 
likeNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> 2K numbers,” New York’s Brandon 
Jennings said, comparing Harden’s performance to the video game. “I just told 
him afterward to just go and get the MVP and keep balling and doing what he’s 
doing.”
NBA (@NBA) 
James Harden puts up 24 points, 10 assists & 9 rebounds in the first half! 
#Rockets50 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Rockets50?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/KOoiE9UHRF <https://t.co/KOoiE9UHRF>
 <https://twitter.com/NBA/status/815407684346224640> January 1, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/NBA/status/815407684346224640> 
Harden became the first player in NBA history to have at least 50 points, 15 
assists and 15 rebounds in a single game, according to information provided by 
the Rockets from the Elias Sport Bureau. He also tied Wilt Chamberlain for most 
points in a triple-double, set career highs for points and three-pointers with 
nine, and matched his career best for assists.

He passed his previous career best of 51 points on a three with 1:16 left, 
leading to a standing ovation. “It looked very effortless,” team-mate Ryan 
Anderson said. “But it just goes to show how great of a player he is.”

Basketball in 2016: 10 memorable moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/30/basketball-in-2016-10-memorable-moments>
Harden has thrived as the point guard in D’Antoni’s fast-paced system. He is 
averaging 28.5 points and an NBA-best 12 assists per game. “He’s an 
unbelievable player,” D’Antoni said.

The Knicks got within three several times in the fourth quarter, with the last 
time coming on a layup by Joakim Noah with about four minutes left. Harden 
responded to Noah’s basket with three free throws before dishing to Anderson 
for a three-pointer that made it 119-111. Another three by Anderson with less 
than two minutes left extended the lead to 124-113.

Harden, who had 30 points, 13 rebounds and 10 assists in Friday night’s 
140-116 victory against the Clippers, completed his eighth triple-double this 
season when he grabbed his 10th rebound with about 10 minutes left in the third 
quarter. It was his 17th career triple-double and his fourth career 50-point 
game.

The Knicks played without starters Kristaps Porzingis (sore achilles tendon) 
and Courtney Lee (sore right wrist) due to injuries. They lost another one at 
half-time when Carmelo Anthony was sidelined by a sore left knee. He had seven 
points in the first half. “I just decided at the last minute to just go out 
there and play and try to get going and the more I played the [more sore] it 
got ... I don’t think it’s that serious,” Anthony said.

Anderson added 25 points for the Rockets, who have won four in a row. Jennings 
had a season-high 32 points for New York, who have dropped four straight.
 