
The letter in which TS Eliot rejects George Orwell’s allegory Animal Farm 
because “we have no conviction … that this is the right point of view from 
which to criticise the political situation” has beenpublished online for the 
first time by the British Library <https://www.bl.uk/20th-century-literature>, 
alongside a wealth of other material from 20th-century writers.

Addressing the author as “Dear Orwell”, Eliot, then a director at publishing 
firm Faber & Faber,writes on 13 July 1944 
<https://www.bl.uk/collection-items/letter-from-t-s-eliot-faber-to-george-orwell-rejecting-animal-farm-13-july-1944>
 that the publisher will not be acquiring Animal Farm for publication. Eliot 
described its strengths: “We agree that it is a distinguished piece of writing; 
that the fable is very skilfully handled, and that the narrative keeps one’s 
interest on its own plane – and that is something very few authors have 
achieved since Gulliver.”

Animal Farm, a beast fable that satirised Stalinism and depicted Stalin as a 
traitor, was rejected by at least four publishers, with many, like Eliot, 
feeling it was too controversial at a time when Britain was allied with the 
Soviet Union against Germany.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aed182c9ed4504c6046ed00c322ea3492c93798%2F0_0_5106_3760%2F5106.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20needs%20more%20public-spirited%20pigs'%3A%20TS%20Eliot's%20rejection%20of%20Orwell's%20Animal%20Farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20needs%20more%20public-spirited%20pigs%27%3A%20TS%20Eliot%27s%20rejection%20of%20Orwell%27s%20Animal%20Farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aed182c9ed4504c6046ed00c322ea3492c93798%2F0_0_5106_3760%2F5106.jpg>
 ‘In this country intellectual cowardice is the worst enemy a writer or 
journalist has to face’ … George Orwell. Photograph: Mondadori via Getty Images 
“I think my own dissatisfaction with this apologue is that the effect is 
simply one of negation. It ought to excite some sympathy with what the author 
wants, as well as sympathy with his objections to something: and the positive 
point of view, which I take to be generally Trotskyite, is not convincing,” 
wrote Eliot to Orwell. “And after all, your pigs are far more intelligent than 
the other animals, and therefore the best qualified to run the farm – in fact, 
there couldn’t have been an Animal Farm at all without them: so that what was 
needed (someone might argue), was not more communism but more public-spirited 
pigs.”

Animal Farm went on to be published by Secker & Warburg in August 1945. In a 
preface by Orwell, not printed until 1972, the author says that when he wrote 
the book, in 1943: “It was obvious that there would be great difficulty in 
getting it published.”

“If publishers and editors exert themselves to keep certain topics out of 
print, it is not because they are frightened of prosecution, but because they 
are frightened of public opinion. In this country intellectual cowardice is the 
worst enemy a writer or journalist has to face, and that fact does not seem to 
me to have had the discussion it deserves,” wrote Orwell.

Thanks but no thanks: famous authors' rejection letters
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/nov/30/1> 
“At this moment what is demanded by the prevailing orthodoxy is an uncritical 
admiration of Soviet Russia. Everyone knows this, nearly everyone acts on it. 
Any serious criticism of the Soviet regime, any disclosure of facts which the 
Soviet government would prefer to keep hidden, is next door to unprintable.”

Eliot’s letter is one of more than 300 items which have been digitised by the 
British Library, a mixture of drafts, diaries, letters and notebooks by authors 
ranging from Virginia Woolf to Angela Carter and Ted Hughes. The literary 
archive reveals that Orwell was not the only major writer to suffer a series of 
rejections: the British Library has also digitised a host of rejections for 
James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, showing how his patron 
Harriet Shaw Weaver attempted to find a printer for the novel she had published 
in serialised form in The Egoist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40b0b09085669ba8a6c37d6d9f25a1a15e0f660d%2F0_115_2542_1524%2F2542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20needs%20more%20public-spirited%20pigs'%3A%20TS%20Eliot's%20rejection%20of%20Orwell's%20Animal%20Farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20needs%20more%20public-spirited%20pigs%27%3A%20TS%20Eliot%27s%20rejection%20of%20Orwell%27s%20Animal%20Farm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fts-eliot-rejection-george-orwell-animal-farm-british-library-online%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40b0b09085669ba8a6c37d6d9f25a1a15e0f660d%2F0_115_2542_1524%2F2542.jpg>
 Virginia Woolf’s letter rejecting James Joyce’s Ulysses has been put online by 
the British Library. Photograph: Central Press/Getty Images 
Weaver was told by one printer that “we would not knowingly undertake any work 
of a doubtful character even though it may be a classic”, while another asks 
Weaver, addressed as “Dear Sir”, to “exclude some of the paragraphs which 
others have taken exception to” if they are to print it. British law meant that 
a printer rather than a publisher would be held responsible if a book was found 
objectionable, but US publisher BW Huebsch eventually agreed to print Joyce’s 
Portrait.

The archive also contains a 1918 letter from Woolf, declining to print 
Ulysses. Woolf tells Weaver that “the length is an insuperable difficulty to 
us”, because “we can get no one to help us, and at our rate of progress a book 
of 300 pages would take at least two years to produce – which is, of course, 
out of the question for you or Mr Joyce”.

“Until now these treasures could only be viewed in the British Library reading 
rooms or on display in exhibitions – nowDiscovering Literature: 20th Century 
<https://www.bl.uk/20th-century-literature> will bring these items to anyone in 
the world with an internet connection,” said Anna Lobbenberg, digital 
programmes manager at the British Library.
 