
John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> is 
demanding thatPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> finds more than £1bn from 
within the government’s emergency budget plan to rescue Britain’s ailing social 
care system.

The shadow chancellor says the money could come from the “fiscal headroom” 
left by the chancellor in the autumn budget. The money has been put aside in 
case of a financial emergency caused by Brexit,reports have claimed 
<https://www.ft.com/content/fd27be6a-a04c-11e6-86d5-4e36b35c3550>. 

The demands are meant to increase pressure on Theresa May’s government to step 
in with emergency funding to protect elderly and vulnerable people.

In a letter sent to Hammond on Sunday, seen by the Guardian, the shadow 
chancellor wrote: “Independent estimates by health care charities put the 
minimum cost of resolving the immediate crisis over this year at £1.9bn. The 
funding announced by your government covers only a quarter of this.

“As you are aware, the necessary funding could be provided to social care and 
you would remain well inside your own target for deficit reduction, set at 2% 
of GDP in 2020-21.

“With political will, the crisis can be resolved.”

On Thursday, the government announced that council tax would be allowed to 
rise faster than expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 – by about £46 a year for an average home – to bail out struggling social care 
services for the elderly and vulnerable in England.


It follows concerns that residential care homes are closing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/elderly-and-disabled-people-put-at-risk-by-care-homes-closures>
 at an unprecedented rate, while hospitals arelogjammed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/25/huge-rise-in-hospital-beds-in-england-taken-up-by-people-with-malnutrition>
 with elderly patients with nowhere to go.

 Local authority cuts have left more than a million people in need of 
assistance in their homes, charities have claimed.

May’s government has been accused of failing to respond adequately to a 
growing crisis in the sector, which has suffered huge cuts at a time of rising 
demand.


 According to the shadow chancellor’s officials, the new fiscal deficit 
outlined by the chancellor in theautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2016> gives more “fiscal 
headroom” to raise spending in case of a downturn.

The Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> (OBR) 
estimates this fiscal rule gives the government scope for nearly 2.5% of GDP, 
or £56 billion, more structural borrowing in 2020-2021. Sources close to 
McDonnell said it leaves scope for borrowing of 1.2% of GDP, or around £26bn.

It has been reported that this “fiscal headroom” had been left by Hammond in 
case the negative impact of Brexit was worse than OBR estimates.

McDonnell’s letter follows a request from Jeremy Corbyn on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/17/social-care-crisis-jeremy-corbyn-seeks-urgent-meeting-with-pm>
 for urgent cross-party talks on how the government might avert the deepening 
crisis in social care this Christmas.


A government spokesperson said: “On Thursday, the government announced almost 
£900m of additional funding over the next two years to tackle these growing 
pressures.

“However we know that money alone is not the solution. There is a diversity of 
provision across councils, with many already providing high-quality social care 
services within existing budgets.”
 