
The combined impact of welfare cuts will leave struggling working families - 
the “just about managing” householdsTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has vowed to help – worse off 
by more than £2,500 a year by 2020, according to research published days before 
her government’s first autumn statement.

A study of 187,000 households across the UK found that policies including cuts 
to universal credit and the four-year benefit rate freeze, coupled with rising 
rents and higher inflation, would see low-income working families typically 
lose £48.90 a week by the end of the decade.


Will Theresa May’s ‘just about managing families’ fall for the rhetoric? | 
Sonia Sodha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-jams-rhetoric-just-managing-families-autumn-statement>
The findings have alarmed councils and charities worried that the growing 
financial burden on low-income families will raise poverty and homelessness 
levels.

The research will increase the pressure on the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to 
offer some relief to the “just about managing” families – or “Jams” – in 
Wednesday’s autumn statement. He warned on Sunday thatthe government is facing 
a “sharp challenge” in the face of the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/philip-hammond-autumn-statement-dashes-hopes-of-big-windfalls-struggling-families>
, but indicated that there would be some limited relief for those who are 
struggling.

The prime minister will also announce tax breaks and an annual £2bn investment 
fund for research and development to big businesses on Monday – an offer likely 
to be criticised for failing to address welfare cuts. She will further woo big 
business by slashing corporation tax to the lowest level out of the world’s top 
20 economies, according to reports.

On becoming prime minister in July, she promised to help “ordinary working 
class families 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
” in a bold attempt to distance her from her predecessor’s austerity approach. 
She has confirmed there will be no fresh cuts to social security budgets in 
this parliament.

But the study, by the consultancy Policy in Practice 
<http://policyinpractice.co.uk/>, suggests that even after promising no more 
cuts the cumulative impact of the £12bn of welfare changes either already in 
place or due to come into force will be far harsher than that experienced by 
low-income households under the first wave of austerity-driven welfare cuts 
during David Cameron’s leadership.

The study is based on the financial circumstances of 187,475 households in 17 
district, council and metropolitan borough councils in England, Scotland and 
Wales under a mix of political control.


The analysis, which uses housing benefit and council tax data supplied by the 
local authorities, gauges the cumulative impact of various welfare reforms, 
including thebenefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
, housing benefit freezes, bedroom tax and universal credit changes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fa6623882fab4b4b5b6c071bbc6730dd1955561%2F0_384_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Just%20about%20managing'%20families%20to%20be%20%C2%A32%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20by%202020%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Just%20about%20managing%27%20families%20to%20be%20%C2%A32%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20by%202020%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fa6623882fab4b4b5b6c071bbc6730dd1955561%2F0_384_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Philip Hammond and the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, on the BBC’s Andrew 
Marr Show on Sunday. Photograph: Reuters 
Official estimates of inflation and projected increases in private rent levels 
are factored in, as well as gains through the government’s “national living 
wage” and personal tax allowances.

When the impact of welfare cuts on out-of-work households is included, the 
average weekly loss drops to £41.45, or £2,155 a year – though that masks the 
extreme effect of reforms on some families, such as those hit by thelower 
benefit cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/brutal-reality-lower-benefit-cap-hits-home-struggling-families>
, who will lose hundreds of pounds a week. By contrast, the equivalent weekly 
household loss for both in-work and out-of-work families between 2013 and 2016 
was £13.72.

Asked if he would reverse the universal credit cuts, Hammond told BBC1’s 
Andrew Marr Show that forecasts were “pointing to a slowing of economic growth 
next year and a sharp challenge for the public finances”.

“There are a range of reasons for that and we’ve got to make sure that what we 
do is responsible, that everything we do is compatible with building resilience 
in our economy as we go into a period where there will be some uncertainty 
around the negotiation over our exit from the EU and focus on making sure that 
our economy is match-fit,” he said.

The former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith resigned from the 
cabinet in March over the cuts to universal credit, complaining of then 
chancellor George Osborne’s “salami slicing” of the welfare budget.

A Department for Work and Pensions spokesman said: “Our welfare reforms are 
incentivising work and restoring fairness to the system, because we know that 
work is the best route out of poverty.

“Our employment rate is at a record high, wages are rising and unemployment is 
at an 11-year low. We continue to spend around £90bn a year supporting 
families, people with disabilities, people on low incomes and jobseekers. And 
by the end of this parliament we will have given local authorities £1bn in 
discretionary housing payments for their residents who may need extra help.”

Hammond has already disclosed that he will announce £1.3bn of improvements to 
Britain’s roads, which will include £1.1bn to reduce congestion and upgrade 
local roads and transport networks and £220m to tackle “pinch points” on 
England’s motorways and major A-roads.

Treasury sources have confirmed that he could also crack down on staff perks 
such as gym memberships and mobile phone contracts, which are offered to 
workers willing to forgo part of their salaries in return.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a260cacf045870bb9edd139a7a19881a29acc18%2F0_102_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Just%20about%20managing'%20families%20to%20be%20%C2%A32%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20by%202020%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Just%20about%20managing%27%20families%20to%20be%20%C2%A32%2C500%20a%20year%20worse%20off%20by%202020%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fjust-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a260cacf045870bb9edd139a7a19881a29acc18%2F0_102_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Theresa May promised to help ordinary working families in her first speech as 
prime minister. Photograph: Jack Taylor/PA 
The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said Hammond should reverse the welfare 
cuts alongside reductions in disability benefits that will leave some claimants 
£30 a week worse off.

He also revealed Labour would support an increase in the 40p tax threshold 
from £43,000 next year to £50,000, a move promised in 2014 by Cameron to take 
millions of middle-income earners off the higher tax rate.

Jam tomorrow: all Philip Hammond is likely to offer struggling Britons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/jam-tomorrow-all-philip-hammond-is-likely-to-offer-struggling-britons>
“It looks as though the threshold will be increased on Wednesday by the 
government and we would support that,” he said. “It’s to people who need a tax 
giveaway at the moment, because the mismanagement of the economy by the 
Conservatives is hitting them hard.

“What we need is a long-term strategy. This autumn statement, we’re going back 
to giveaways and gimmicks again,” he added.

Campaigners and MPs – including some Tory backbenchers 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/11/heidi-allen-its-time-to-let-universal-credit-do-what-it-was-created-to-do-boost-the-incomes-of-poorer-working-people.html>
 – have been lobbying ministers to mitigate the impact of the welfare cuts by 
restoring the work allowance in universal credit, and toreconsider the planned 
£30-a-week cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/17/ministers-told-dropping-plan-to-curb-power-of-lords-is-big-mistake-politics-live?CMP=share_btn_tw&page=with:block-582dd95ee4b06ac41294eaf7#block-582dd95ee4b06ac41294eaf7>
 in employment and support allowance benefits due in 2017.

Alison Garnham, chief executive of Child Poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> Action Group, said: “The huge 
cuts hitting, or about to hit, families under previously announced policies 
will be devastating to these families, communities and local authorities, as 
child poverty rises and huge amounts of money gets sucked out of local shops 
and businesses. Until the government acts, councils are resigned to being in 
the ‘damage limitation’ business.

“The big choice facing the government now is does it live up to the prime 
minister’s words – for example, by reversing the cuts targeting working 
families under universal credit – or does it give austerity a rebrand by making 
soothing noises but largely pressing ahead with policies that will tip the just 
about managing into hardship and more children into poverty.”


Office for Budget Responsibility to tear up forecasts for UK growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/office-of-budget-responsibility-to-tear-up-forecasts-for-uk-growth>
The term “Jams” is used to refer to a loose group of about 6 million 
low-income working families, defined by theResolution Foundation 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/> thinktank as having a net income of 
between £12,000 and £34,000 a year, although in practice many in this group 
switch regularly between employment and unemployment in an insecure job market. 
Their incomes have remained largely flat for a decade.

 In her first speech to the CBI’s annual conference, the prime minister will 
announce increases in government investment in research and development worth 
£2bn a year by 2020 and an “industrial strategy challenge fund” to back 
priority technologies.

She will also announce a review of current research and development tax 
incentives to ensure the global competitiveness of the UK as a home for 
scientists, innovators and tech investors.
 