
This month actor Louise Linton caused a social media storm when an extract of 
herAfrican gap year memoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/zambians-hit-back-at-white-saviour-gap-yah-memoir>
 was published by the Telegraph and was widely panned online for being a tick 
list of cliches and stereotypes in the way the west has always liked to portray 
the continent. On Twitter,#LintonLies 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/LintonLies?src=hash>, set up by Zambian writer 
Lydia Ngoma, was trending as people started to pour scorn on Linton’s version 
of certain events and her take on life there. Think: “close encounters with 
lions”, “brutal tales of rape and murder,” and 12-inch long spiders, which 
would be terrifying, though theyonly exist in Laos 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_huntsman_spider>.

But the problem is broader, deeper and goes back much further than Linton’s 
book. The dominant narratives aboutAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in western writing and media still 
carry echoes of colonialism, commonly portraying the western visitor as 
benevolent saviour and denying those who actually live there any agency in the 
process.

This inevitably feeds into the way travellers perceive the continent and the 
kinds of trips people choose to go on. Travel to African countries still 
focuses on luxury safaris, where tourists can play the wealthy explorer, or 
voluntourism-style “gap yahs” of the kind Linton enjoyed, something parodied 
well by theBarbie Saviour instagram account 
<https://www.instagram.com/barbiesavior/?hl=en>, which pokes fun at the 
uncomfortable trend of young people broadcasting their lightweight 
philanthropic efforts on social media.

To explore the subject further, we asked three writers and editors to describe 
what changes they’d like to see in the way travellers and writers approach 
Africa.

Lydia Ngoma: ‘I would like to see more stories on progress … African 
wonder-kids making it in mainstream media’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6db719d0cab20ab101d579b20b85535bef7ba%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let's%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%27s%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6db719d0cab20ab101d579b20b85535bef7ba%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 ‘If one is going to document Malawi, let it be about Malawi and not about 
“Africa”’ … studying at the library of Gumbi. Photograph: Axel Fossio for the 
Guardian 
Many books, travel guides and shows about Africa are predominantly created by 
white, western travellers, and while this is not a bad thing in itself, there 
are some tropes that we as Africans are tired of seeing.

What we usually see is the country of Africa (!) set against a beautiful 
backdrop of enchanting natural landscapes, exotic animals and its happy people 
dying of hunger, disease and/or war. We are shown one side of a rusty, old 
colonial coin where helpless Africans need saving from themselves in their dark 
paradise. This is a stereotype, an incomplete story, and the narrative needs 
changing.

Africa is a continent made up of 54 different countries which all have 
different, unique people and cultures which need to be individually 
appreciated, not slapped together as one. If one is going to document Malawi, 
let it be about Malawi and not about “Africa”, because Malawi alone cannot 
describe, let alone define the whole continent.

While some travellers positively document African countries’ massive steps in 
development, there is still a large number that have held onto the 
Africa-is-dying-only-we-can-save-them trope. Yes, there are still thousands 
that struggle on a daily basis, but that is not exclusive to Africa, so why are 
we the only ones portrayed by the trademark kid with the flies around his 
mouth? I would like to see more stories on progress – breakthroughs in health 
and education, state-of-the-art infrastructure, African wonder-kids making it 
in mainstream media. LikeSiyanda Mohutsiwa 
<https://twitter.com/SiyandaWrites?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a young writer from Botswana who started the trending twitter hashtag 
#ifafricawasabar. It opened up a discussion on important things that affect us 
such as politics, corruption, prejudices and the like, earning her a spot on a
TED Talk <https://www.ted.com/speakers/siyanda_mohutsiwa>. As for travel 
resources, sites I follow includezurukenya.com <http://zurukenya.com/>, which 
gives travel advice on Kenya, andakinmade.com <http://akinmade.com/> which 
features the works of Lola Akinmade, a Nigerian writer and photographer. Great 
travel writers include Zambian journalist Humphrey Nkonde, and Pelu Awofeso 
from Nigeria.

In the same way we made Africa synonymous with death, war and hunger, let us 
change the narrative and make it more associative with progress and development.

Lastly – and this lies on my fellow Africans – let us get more African-written 
travel pieces on Africa. Instead of waiting for the western blogger to come and 
pose with the hunger stricken child, let us write our own stories and show the 
world the side of Africa which is less seen.

• Lydia is a writer from Lusaka, Zambia who started #LintonLies 
<https://twitter.com/search?f=tweets&vertical=news&q=%23LintonLies&src=typd>. 
She blogs ateyewoke.wordpress.com <https://eyewoke.wordpress.com/> and you can 
follow her on Twitter@lydiangoma <https://twitter.com/lydiangoma>

Samira Sawlani: ‘Writing continues to present a particular experience as the 
only experience’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa8f11215f3ead31bc07eb7e29dc13cf1075b4f3%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let's%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%27s%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa8f11215f3ead31bc07eb7e29dc13cf1075b4f3%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Another side of Lagos … Nigeria’s music scene is booming. Here, singer Temi 
Dollface works in her studio. Photograph: Joe Penney/Reuters 
There is a running theme among the “I hugged a child during my gap yah in 
Africa and it transformed me/I taught in a village with only an American accent 
as a qualification/I fought rebels in the jungle and made it home in time to 
cook for all the starving African children/Africa and its people gave my life 
meaning, they’re so happy with so little” memoirs which crop up in mainstream 
western media from time to time – which is that they are all written by white 
writers.

While there is no shortage of travel writers from diverse backgrounds, their 
experiences are rarely seen in the mainstream media. Such stories would provide 
a more authentic and badly needed alternative to the cliched, often patronising 
tales by “white saviours” , with their echoes of Kipling and Conrad.

Like Louise Linton’s memoir, such writing reinforces negative stereotypes and 
continues to present a particular experience as the only experience; that of 
the white writer from the west.

Yet there is an abundance of travel writing, blogs and travelogues by writers 
on and from Africa, in the African diaspora and a range of racial backgrounds, 
just waiting to be discovered. This includes blogs like theKenyan Camper 
<https://thekenyancamper.com/>, Mzansi Girl <http://www.mzansigirl.com/> and 
work by Nigerian travel writerPelu Awofeso <https://wakaabout.online/>.

One great example is Looking for Transwonderland: Travels in Nigeria, by Noo 
Saro-Wiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/29/looking-transwonderland-saro-wiwa-review>
, who having grown up in the UK, returned to the place of her birth and wrote a 
fascinating, funny and poignant book about the five months she spent travelling 
across the country, an insight into the vibrancy, chaos, cultures, landscape 
and beauty of Nigeria.

When it comes to the west’s view of Africa, not only is there a need for more 
diverse voices, it’s time we had more decolonised ones too.

• Samira is a journalist and community manager for Media Diversified 
<https://mediadiversified.org/category/samira-sawlani/>. Follow her on Twitter 
@samirasawlani <https://twitter.com/samirasawlani>

Elliot Ross: ‘When writers recycle familiar colonial fantasies they’re 
refusing to engage with what’s actually in front of them’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c886d063b6980fa1c5ec98a9f15df9f40fb0b57%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let's%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%27s%20get%20more%20travel%20stories%20on%20Africa%20by%20Africans%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fafrica-travel-writing-beyond-cliches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c886d063b6980fa1c5ec98a9f15df9f40fb0b57%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Beyond the cliches … Tomoca, Addis Ababa’s oldest and most venerated coffee 
house. Photograph: Alamy 
There are numerous examples of non-African writers and reporters currently 
doing strong work in Africa for European and American media. From the 
Anglophone press, the likes ofJames Copnall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/james-copnall>, Joe Penney 
<http://passblue.com/author/joe-penney/>, Jina Moore <http://www.jinamoore.com/>
,Glenna Gordon <http://www.glennagordon.com/>, Howard French 
<https://twitter.com/hofrench?lang=en-gb>, Hannah McNeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hannah-mcneish> and many others produce 
good, thoughtful journalism about all kinds of things. As I see it, such 
journalists tend to share a few basic commitments. Firstly, they speak with 
large numbers of local people at all levels of society. Secondly, they don’t 
make themselves the story. Thirdly, they attempt to engage seriously with the 
historical, political and economic contexts for whatever they’re reporting on – 
be that an election campaign, a social movement, a civil war, or the rise of a 
new musical genre.


I think the best travel writing usually sticks by those commitments too. One 
of the reasons it’s frustrating when writers recycle familiar colonial 
fantasies is that they’re refusing to engage with what’s actually in front of 
them, or else can only think about what they find in Africa today by comparison 
with spurious Eurocentric cliches about the continent. Whether a writer is 
going clubbing in a heaving mega-city or traversing some faraway mountain 
paradise, they’ll write best by respecting the place and the people in it.

• Elliot is a writer and worked as senior editor at Africa is a Country 
<http://africasacountry.com/> for four years. Follow him on Twitter 
@FutbolsaCountry <https://twitter.com/FutbolsaCountry>
 