
With the news that the state pension age could rise to 75 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/05/pension-age-state-75-65-work-careers-retirement>
 we wondered whether you would still be able to do your current job at that age.

Most of you who work mainly physically strenuous jobs said there’s no way 
you’d make it to 75.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4579600> oreilly62  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4579600> 05 March 2016 9:08am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69946388> 
I'm only in my mid 50's and my body is knackered through hard manual labour, 
working in an office until your 75 would be hard enough, but to compete with 
youngsters doing physical graft isn't possible.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4613102> stevebb  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4613102> 05 March 2016 10:02am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69948877> 
I worked as a night truck driver until I was 66. First leg was a 125 mile 
unbroken journey to London, 45min compulsory break, load two decks of a 45' 
trailer, 165 mile unbroken drive to Cardiff, tip the two decks, another 
compulsory break watching the clock tick every minute. 40 mile return to depot, 
split the unit fuel up. Do two 20 mile round trips delivering vehicles to the 
garage. Drive the 25 mile journey home, arrive at 7-ish in the morning, leave 
again at just before 5pm for work. All legal, but bloody knackering. I've so 
enjoyed the last two years of retirement - I've earned it.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3821611> bouledesuif  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3821611> 05 March 2016 11:01am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69951353> 
As far as I can make out from the above interviews, only the railway worker 
seems to have done a predominantly physical job, and there is no detail about 
the precise nature of his tasks.

My plumber is only 50 and his knees are gone, after some failed keyhole 
fiddling, his doctors told him to go and have physio because he is "too young" 
for knee replacement. He went for physio and the physio told him there was 
nothing he could do for him, and he has now gone to a sports injury specialist.

Nothing like this will get him working properly again, and being 
self-employed, when he has gone through all the criteria required by the NHS, 
even then the recovery period from knee replacement will make it hard to get by 
financially.

There are many people like him, who are not academically suited, and it is 
quite ridiculous to say that they should be working after 65. Most electricians 
I know have arthritis in their wrists, plasterers are finished after 40, site 
carpenters and joiners get tinnitus, lung complaints and arthritis and not many 
can keep going after 60.

Britain has a growing skills crisis: who can advise a young person to take up 
a trade when the stage comes that your body is worn out, you are left high and 
dry for years before you get a small pension?

The skills crisis comes from bad government, and their apprenticeship flagship 
efforts don't bear close scrutiny either, because MPs have mostly never done 
anything useful in their lives.

Some of the reasons you gave included exhaustion and long hours.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3786343> packc47  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3786343> 05 March 2016 10:19am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69949651> 
Those of us who work in public sector office jobs, which people see as 'easy', 
burn out because of the amount of abuse we receive as we are at the front end 
of government policies. 40 plus years of remaining calm whilst worried or 
aggressive people shout at you takes its toll. I started work in HMRC at age 
17, that was hard enough as many people don't want to pay tax, but working in 
the NHS was worse in some respects. Sometimes if you were able to help people 
it felt rewarding, but having aggressive drug users or just worried ill people 
getting angry because you couldn't give them what they needed at that 
particular time makes you very weary after a few years. I'm 68 and I'm glad to 
be out of it now.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1534676> Motdoc  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1534676> 05 March 2016 9:08am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69946396> 
I'm a doctor and wouldn't mind doing some work into old age. Not sure you'd 
want me in the middle of the night though, in A and E or seeing people in GP in 
ten minutes, not safe.

My wife is a teacher. Looking after 30 five year olds when you are 67? 
Impossible. I recon.

Guess it just depends on the individual and the job.

But for dodiedoh it’s not just about whether you can do your job or not, but 
making way for someone else who may need it.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4370810> dodiedoh  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4370810> 05 March 2016 11:14am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69951903> 
I am 62 and retired from teaching last year largely because I was finding it 
increasingly difficult to keep up with the constant changes to the curriculum 
etc. Despite being fit and healthy, I hadn't had a day off sick in more than 
thirty years, I simply did not have the energy any more.
I only have a small pension and savings to keep me going until I get the state 
pension at 65 but every time I think about getting a part time job to 
supplement this I remember that I would be depriving someone who needs the work 
to support his or her family.

You might feel like you can work but some employers might disagree with you.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12279273> Nogbadthebadshat  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12279273> 05 March 2016 9:14am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69946637> 
Its not just about whether they feel able to work.

As an employer, having people working into their 70's presents a minefield of 
problems that the government seems to be planning on passing on to me. Slips 
and trips have considerably higher chances of resulting in injury - and time 
off- as we age and our bodies become more brittle, that has consequences for 
insurance premiums for me if we have a significant number of 70 year olds. That 
is just on example.

And that could be possible, we have a great team, I can't just get rid of 
people because they are getting older, that's discrimination, but what if their 
work deteriorates to a significant extent? As some in the article mention, 
health problems can maean that is a reality, then who is the bastard? Its not 
osborne, its me for sacking someone at 70 and leaving them to the mercy of the 
welfare system.

Whoever is thinking up these ideas has absolutely no clue about actual working 
life in small businesses.

If you’re like OlaNorskman retiring is not really an option that appeals to 
you.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14072999> OlaNorskman  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14072999> 05 March 2016 1:26pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69956990> 
I don't know about 75 for being put out to grass... I'm 72 and I hate 
"retirement"...and I think one should be able to work as long as one wants. For 
men, our work is what we do and who we are... who wants to become a bloody 
non-person.

I also think retiring people too early is a total waste of human resources and 
experience to a nation... for example what I don't know about product 
development isn't worth knowing about, the accumulated knowledge and 
experienced potentially just "rusting" away...

But of course it's not "rusting" away in my case, I'm still working, maybe not 
the 10 or 12 hours day I used to do, now I just do a 5 to 8 hour day. But then 
I enjoy what I do and it keeps me interested in the world for all it's mess.

However I can very well understand if one has had to do hard manual labour 
most of one's life and one's physical condition reflects hard toil then 60 
should be the cut off point for grinding the body down. Life should be more 
than drudgery and for such folk retirement could be a welcome relief and reward.

But if you’ve been as lucky as thedirtydingo working at 75 is no great shakes.
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4422824> thedirtydingo  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4422824> 05 March 2016 8:56am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69945871> 
Left school at 15 yrs and worked until 76yrs but I have been lucky with my 
health. Its not the same for everyone. However I still feel that 65 is a fair 
enough age for anyone to retire if so inclined.

Could you still do your job at 75? Let us know in the comments below.

 