
The NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> commissioner, Adam Silver, has 
said that if any championship team expressed doubt about visiting Donald 
Trump’s White House in the next few years, he would still advise them to go.

LeBron James will not stay at Trump-branded hotel in New York
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/05/lebron-james-will-not-stay-at-trump-branded-hotel-in-new-york>
Since John F Kennedy welcomed the Boston Celtics in 1963, it has been a 
tradition for teams that win the NBA championship to visit the president, 
exploring the grounds and listening to a speech. Outgoing Barack Obama is a 
huge basketball fan but the idea of Trump cracking jokes to a league that is 
represented by over 70% black players is worrisome to say the least.

In London ahead of the Global Games match between the Denver Nuggets and 
Indiana Pacers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/28/denver-nuggets-indiana-pacers-nba-london-o2-arena>
 on Thursday, Silver was asked by the Guardian what the dialogue might be if a 
side was unsure of going.

“If a team came to me in the current situation and asked for my view on 
whether they should go, I would say go whether it’s President Obama or now 
President-elect Trump”, Silver said.

Following Trump’s election victory, LeBron James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/lebron-james-endorses-hillary-clinton-in-emotionally-charged-declaration>
 – the league’s biggest star whose voice carries great weight within the sport 
– and multiple head coaches have expressed the difficulties involved with 
making this decision, putting into doubt the idea of a team laughing and joking 
while Trump welcomes them to the White House.

The president-elect and Silver are both from New York and the commissioner 
touched on a limited relationship while defending Trump’s future relations with 
the NBA.

“Donald Trump, the private citizen, I don’t know well, but I have known him 
for many years as a fellow New Yorker. He has been to many Knicks games over 
the years and I’ve been to several games with his daughter Ivanka and her 
husband Jared Kushner. I have no reason to believe he won’t continue to be 
supportive of the NBA.”

By accepting racial protest, the NBA draws a blueprint for other sports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/22/nba-black-players-protests-adam-silver-lebron-james>
Yet the reality is that Trump’s ongoing racial and derogatory comments are 
alienating much of the demographic of the league, a quarter of which comes from 
outside the United States.

During the Cleveland Cavaliers’ visit to the White House in 2016, small 
forward Richard Jefferson posted to his Snapchat account that they would be the 
last team to visit, while former player Jalen Rose has said teams simply will 
not make the trip.

“Our players are citizens in their own right and are entitled to their own 
opinions”, Silver added.

“I don’t plan on forcing them to do anything that will be viewed as political 
in nature. But I think as we have done historically, we encourage players to 
have those conversations with each other, with us, and become informed on the 
issues.

“We are a boundaryless business in many ways, this notion we have that 
wherever you grow up, whether it’s here or Beijing or Paris; if you are the 
very best basketball player you will come together and play in this one league. 
We will pay a lot of attention to things that potentially affect borders.”

Silver also said it was important that people involved in the NBA continue to 
feel like they have a voice that will be heard.

“I talk to NBA coaches all the time and I would like to believe that they 
believe that the NBA is a safe place to speak, where their political views will 
be honoured.

“I believe our fans are sophisticated and understand that even if they don’t 
necessarily agree with a coach’s or player’s political view, they can be proud 
that they felt comfortable saying it. That’s part of political discourse.”

Silver, who has been praised for his swift action regarding the relocation of 
the All Star game from Charlotte to New Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/21/nba-moves-all-star-game-charlotte-hb2-law>
 in February – because of North Carolina’s HB2 law that limited protections for 
LGBT people – andthe life ban of former LA Clippers owner Donald Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nba-la-clippers-donald-sterling-lifetime-ban-racist-comments>
, hopes a diverse and forward-thinking league will make a smooth transition to 
the Trump era.

“The institution is bigger than any one man and it is symbolic for an NBA 
championship team to go to the White House.,” he said.
 