
There was no Reddit or Twitter back in 1996. So when a young DC fan from 
Missouri named Geoff wanted to present his fan theory about the new Superboy to 
the world, he simply wrote to the comic’s letters page.

“I’d love to see a meeting between Superboy and Supergirl. It’s been a while,” 
wrote the 15-year-old fanboy after waxing lyrical on the “surprise, action and 
intrigue” featured in the latest instalment of the young Kal-El’s colourful 
adventures. “Also chalk up another vote for the Robin/Superboy crossover.

“Last thought … I think I know who Superboy is a clone of. How about Lex 
Luthor? All the pieces fit, and it would have some great ramifications.”

The editor of Superboy #26, volume three, wrote back somewhat snidely: 
“Superboy and Supergirl – check! Robin/Superboy – check! Lex Luthor as DNA 
donor – BZZZZ! I’m sorry. Two out of three ain’t bad though (right, Meatloaf?)”

The above exchange would most likely have been forgotten by all but the 
teenager himselfhad Geoff’s surname not been Johns 
<http://ifanboy.com/articles/geoff-johns-was-a-letter-writing-fanboy/>. Seven 
years later and now in the employ of DC, the young man would write his clone 
Luthor storyline into the 2003 relaunch of Teen Titans. Another seven years on 
and Johns became the president and chief creative officer of DC Comics; in May 
he was put in joint charge of the new DC Expanded Universe, including upcoming 
superhero epics Justice League, Wonder Woman and Aquaman.

Star Wars: Episode VIII 'leaked script' reveals rumoured plot twists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/rumoured-leaked-script-reveals-star-wars-episode-viii-plot-rey-force>
Few would argue that Johns had the last laugh at the editor who pooh-poohed 
his clone Luther Superboy pitch. But I’m using the story to illustrate how the 
gap between a strong fan theory and a Hollywood screenplay might not be as wide 
as some might think. If you reckon the Johns story is a one-off,how about a 
young Steven Moffat posting a Doctor Who concept in an internet chatroom in 1995
 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-11-05/this-fan-theory-steven-moffat-posted-in-a-chatroom-in-1995-became-a-real-doctor-who-episode>
 that he would later go on to use in the show himself?

Then there are the fan theories that came true, like Jon Snow’s resurrection 
in Game of Thrones, or thewriting into canon of the theory behind the Klingons’ 
sudden development of raised cranial ridges 
<http://www.cracked.com/article_20793_6-fan-ideas-so-good-they-were-adopted-by-creators.html>
 between the end of Star Trek: The Original Series and their next appearance in 
1979’s Star Trek: The Motion Picture. We can also includeJK Rowling’s decision 
to back the popular fan theory that Dumbledore from the Harry Potter books and 
movies is death himself <http://www.slashfilm.com/dumbledore-as-death-theory/> 
(advance warning, link-clickers, this one’s rather a long story), not to mention
JJ Abrams’ embarrassment 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/J-J-Abrams-Admits-They-Screwed-Up-Khan-Reveal-Star-Trek-Darkness-40522.html>
 when fans worked out that Benedict Cumberbatch really was playing Khan six 
months ahead of the release of 2013’s Star Trek Into Darkness.

For Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> film-makers such as 
Rian Johnson, writer and director of the upcoming Episode VIII, the existence 
of fan theories must represent a minefield. We’re still well over a year from 
the release of the second instalment of the new trilogy and there are already 
dozens of new ones hitting the internet every week.

More than any other film series, Star Wars lends itself to online guessing 
games, because the original trilogy was responsible for quite possibly the most 
mind-blowing twist in movie history, the revelation in 1980’s The Empire 
Strikes Back of Darth Vader’s true identity as Anakin Skywalker, father of 
Luke. With Episode VIII, like Empire, being the middle instalment in the new 
triptych, fans have already convinced themselves that another 
cerebellum-twisting revelation is on the way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstar-wars-fan-theories-rian-johnson-episode-viii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccccc807f704551768ff5d215a552b9535c1f27%2F0_275_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%2C%20Rey%2C%20you%20are%20my%20father!'%3A%20just%20how%20far-out%20are%20Star%20Wars%20fan%20theories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstar-wars-fan-theories-rian-johnson-episode-viii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%2C%20Rey%2C%20you%20are%20my%20father%21%27%3A%20just%20how%20far-out%20are%20Star%20Wars%20fan%20theories%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fstar-wars-fan-theories-rian-johnson-episode-viii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccccc807f704551768ff5d215a552b9535c1f27%2F0_275_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Double agent? … Adam Driver’s Kylo Ren in Star Wars: The Force Awakens. 
Photograph: Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
I’ve read theories along the lines that Daisy Ridley’s Rey is the 
reincarnation of Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker 
<http://moviepilot.com/posts/3745276>, presumably thereby allowing for the 
immortal Mark Hamill line: “No, Rey, you are my father!” in the new instalment. 
I’ve read thatAdam Driver’s Kylo Ren is in fact a double agent 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/ryanhatesthis/seriously-dont-click-this-if-you-havent-seen-tfa-yet?utm_term=.amW1JK2Pq#.conOyGvEm>
, who has been working for Luke all along in a plan to infiltrate the First 
Order’s power base and kill Supreme Leader Snoke. Then there’s the one that the 
team of Rebel grunts led by Felicity Jones’ Jyn Erso in the upcomingRogue One: 
A Star Wars Story <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story>
,are somehow going to morph into the evil Knights of Ren 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/starwarsspeculation/comments/3ztg01/the_rogue_one_squadron_are_the_knights_of_ren/>
 by the time Episode VIII rolls around. And these are just some of the less 
far-out concepts.

The problem for Johnson and Lucasfilm is that the fan theory brigade are not 
just monkeys with typewriters, glacially working their way towards the 
inevitable truth with all the pace and urgency of the Sarlacc’s digestion 
system. With the way Reddit, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and a thousand fan 
forums are throwing up, filtering and pushing new ideas into the public 
consciousness, they are effectively acting like some kind of giant, 
super-powered fanboy hive mind (a much more Star Trek-y concept, I know) – and 
someone is bound to hit on the truth about Episode VIII sooner or later. The 
only way for the film-makers to avoid being second-guessed is to avoid any 
mirroring of the narrative arc of the original trilogy whatsoever this time 
out. And that goes against everything Abrams set up in The Force Awakens, which 
found success by restoring themes from earlier episodes – giant weapons of mass 
space destruction, Force-sensitive ingenues, wise, enigmatic aliens and shock 
character deaths – and heavily hinting that part two would resolve all its 
millions of irritatingly lost threads in thrillingly Star Wars-y fashion.

I hope I’m wrong here, and Johnson has a curveball up his sleeve that will 
shock fans to their very cores by combining laser-honed symmetry and prodigious 
originality. In the meantime, I’ll be keeping one eye on the crazier corners of 
the internet – just in case one of those monkeys happens to deliver Episode 
VIII’s complete, unabridged script.

 