
With a life intertwined with Australian football it seems appropriate that 
Ange Postecoglou is the man to leadAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> to a new landmark for the 
local game, one which takes the Socceroos to a fresh status in the local 
sporting landscape.


For Postecoglou, who by his own admission grew up as an outsider due to his 
ethnicity and passion for a foreign sport, the Asian Cup victory is more than 
just a trophy. The achievement provides credibility for the Socceroos and 
further helps push the game – his game – into the hearts and minds of 21st 
century Australians.

The coach sees every triumph as a win for Australian football and, leaving 
aside World Cup qualification, there has been none bigger than this. Apart from 
four Oceania crowns, the Socceroos’ trophy cabinet had remained bare. But no 
longer can detractors point to a lack of success.

Postecoglou said the aim was a broader context than simply collecting 
silverware. “The main motivation at the start of the month was to give the game 
a kick along in this country and we have done that,” he said. “It is great for 
our country.

Asian Cup final: Australia v South Korea – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jan/31/asian-cup-final-action-from-the-socceroos-v-south-korea-in-pictures>
“I really believe it is important we shed ourselves of any inferiority 
complex. We have done this [achievement] with Australian coaches, staff and 
players.”

Until 10 years ago Australian football seemed dogged by road-blocks and 
ill-fortune at every turn. Australia’s great football missionaryJohnny Warren 
referred to a curse 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2005/11/17/curses-what-win> to help explain 
the inexplicable. And when Son Heung-min drew South Korea level a minute into 
three minutes of injury time it seemed the bad old days had perhaps returned. 
But this is a different era and a different mentality.

“It was a game worthy of bringing out a champion,” Postecoglou said. “It was a 
case of two teams giving everything they have got and not taking a backwards 
step, because they know everything is on the line.

“Copping a goal in injury time would kill most teams, but we picked ourselves 
up, and we knew we had it in us [to recover].

“To be become champions you have to show an array of qualities. This was about 
courage and conviction and our players had that in abundance. With my history 
in grand finals, I knew there was still to be a twist in the tail somewhere.”

If the Socceroos are the team for modern Australia, so too Massimo Luongo is 
symbolic via his Italian and Indonesian parentage with, appropriately, a link 
to Asia.

Luongo, who Postecoglou said “played much more than I expected at the start of 
the month”, was an inspiration with his tireless running throughout all 120 
minutes. Postecoglou was duly rewarded and Luongo was named the Asian Cup’s 
most valuable player with the midfielder providing more combined assists and 
goals than any player.

Australia's Massimo Luongo named Asian Cup's most valuable player
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/31/asian-cup-mvp-australia-luongo>
“We set out on this journey with the boss saying together we can make history 
and we have,” said Luongo. “Today was something that no words can describe. 
Everyone from the goalkeeper to the strikers did their job. This Asian Cup 
could be a massive stepping stone for us as a team with our performances.”

Few will be surprised that Postecoglou is aiming for further growth, with his 
team now assured of participation at the 2017 Fifa Confederations Cup in Russia.

“I’m not setting any limits on things,” he said when asked about future 
prospects for this team. “This is not the end of things for us but the 
beginning. We want to qualify for the next World Cup and make a mark.”
 