
Archaeopteryx, supposedly the oldest and most primitive bird on Earth, might 
not have been a bird after all, scientists say.

The controversial claim, if confirmed, is something of a bombshell for 
researchers who have viewed the evolution of birds and feathered flight through 
the lens of the species since it was discovered 150 years ago.

The finding leaves palaeontologists in the awkward position of having to 
identify another creature as the oldest and original avian on which to base the 
story of birdlife.

Archaeopteryx was discovered in 1861, two years after Charles Darwin published 
On the Origin of Species. The spectacular fossils of an animal with the 
feathered wings of a bird, but the teeth and tail of a dinosaur, caused an 
immediate sensation in Victorian England where society was wrestling with the 
consequences of evolution through natural selection.

Though descriptions of Archaeopteryx as a "missing link" are widely frowned 
upon by scientists, the creature became renowned as the most primitive bird on 
the planet.

That view has now been challenged by researchers in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, who have tried to knock the 
feathered fossil off its perch in a reassessment of the bird-dinosaur family 
tree.

Xing Xu at Linyi University <http://en.lytu.edu.cn/> and colleagues ran the 
fresh analysis after studying a newArchaeopteryx-like fossil bought from a 
dealer bythe Shandong Tianyu Museum of Nature, the world's largest dinosaur 
museum <http://www.china.org.cn/china/shandong/2010-08/19/content_20747599.htm>
. The fossil was probably excavated from the 155 million-year-old Tiaojishan 
Formation in eastern China. The chicken-sized creature, namedXiaotingia zhengi 
in honour of the scientist who established the museum as a repository for 
vertebrate fossils, shared several features withArchaeopteryx, including long, 
sturdy forelimbs that presumably allowed it to fly.

But when Xu's team reconstructed family trees to include Xiaotingia, they 
found the creature belonged not in the lineage of birds, but to a group of 
dinosaurs called deinonychosaurs. More strikingly,Archaeopteryx appeared in the 
same group,according to the study in Nature 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature10288>. Deinonychosaurs, such as the 
velociraptor, walked on two legs, ate meat and had vicious retractable claws. 
The finding is tentative, but builds on doubts that have emerged over the 
special status of archaeopteryx following the discovery of other bird-like 
dinosaurs and dinosaur-like birds over the past decade or so.

In an accompanying article, Lawrence Witmer at Ohio University 
<http://www.oucom.ohiou.edu/dbms-witmer/> wrote: "There has been growing unease 
about the avian status ofArchaeopteryx as, one by one, its 'avian' attributes 
(feathers, wishbone, three-fingered hand) started showing up in non-avian 
dinosaurs. Perhaps the time has come to finally accept that archaeopteryx was 
just another small, feathered, bird-like theropod fluttering around in the 
Jurassic."

If Archaeopteryx was a dinosaur, this means flight evolved at least four times 
in vertebrates: in reptiles, birds, dinosaurs, and most recently in bats.

Witmer adds that with Archaeopteryx dethroned, more recently discovered 
fossils, includingEpidexipteryx <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epidexipteryx>, 
Jeholornis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeholornis> and Sapeornis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sapeornis>, become candidates for the world's 
oldest bird. On a cautionary note, he adds that the next feathered fossil 
unearthed in China could easily restore the premier status ofArchaeopteryx.

Paul Barrett, a dinosaur researcher at the Natural History Museum in London 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/research-curation/staff-directory/palaeontology/p-barrett/index.html>
, said: "The overall picture of birds being descended from meat-eating 
dinosaurs is now very firmly established. This is an argument over a relatively 
small rearrangement of some of the twigs on the evolutionary tree close to the 
origin of birds. It doesn't affect much of our big picture view of how birds 
came from dinosaurs, but some of the minutiae: the small changes that are 
important to the biology of the animals.

"This part of the evolutionary tree is very sensitive to small changes in how 
we interpret the anatomy and the combination of anatomical features we see in 
these animals as they are discovered. As a result, the structure of that 
evolutionary tree is very unstable and can flip around. MaybeArchaeopteryx 
wasn't on the direct ancestral line to birds, but was part of an early 
experimentation in how to build a bird-like body."
 