
The past year witnessed the launch of a slightly desperate PR campaign by the 
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to show the world that it is 
totally not racist after last year’s vanilla nominations.

Oscar nominations 2016: The Revenant leads field, Mad Max in second place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-2016-the-revenant-leads-field-mad-max-in-second-place>
With the addition of a more diverse set of Academy members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/26/ava-duvernay-joins-most-diverse-oscars-board-election-race>
, including snubbed Selma director Ava DuVernay, and the hiring of Chris Rock 
for next month’s Oscars ceremony, it’s been the equivalent of someone saying 
something a bit offensive, but following it with, “But look, I have black 
friends,” for 12 months straight. Going into today’s nominations, it looked as 
if the notorious hashtag#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/oscarssowhite?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^hashtag>
 would be a thing of the past.

Idris Elba was a shoo-in for best supporting actor for his terrifying turn as 
a warlord inBeasts of No Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/04/netflix-beast-of-no-nation-boycotted-idris-elba>
. The box office smashStraight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/31/straight-outta-compton-review-an-energetic-a-side-let-down-by-a-bloated-b-side>
 was seen as a likely best picture inclusion.Benicio del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/11/benicio-del-toro-interview-sicario>
 was a strong contender for Sicario. Will Smith and Michael B Jordan were 
outsiders for best actor while Samuel L Jackson could also have sneaked in for 
best supporting.

But after the announcements, read by an expectedly diverse bunch of names (the 
Academy: “how can we be racist if Ang Lee is our friend?”), we’re in an even 
worse place than last year. Even Selma had a best picture nomination then.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440693836888%2FKP_405317_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Straight%20Outta%20Compton%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Straight%20Outta%20Compton%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fstraight-outta-compton-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440693836888%2FKP_405317_crop_640x360.jpg>
This year, not one actor of colour has been recognised. Elba, who has been 
nominated forthree Screen Actors Guild awards 
<http://www.sagaftra.org/nominations-announced-22nd-annual-screen-actors-guild-awards>
 and was up for two Golden Globes, was surely snubbed by the Academy. A chance 
to have some diversity was missed with Straight Outta Compton’s sole nomination 
handed to the film’s white screenwriters. Similarly, Creed, Ryan Coogler’s 
vibrant millennial reboot of the Rocky franchise, was nominated for only one 
Oscar: best supporting actor for the film’s one white star, Sylvester Stallone.

Oscars 2016: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-2016-full-list-of-nominations-awards-movies>
Other notable snubs related to 50s-set lesbian romance Carol. While the film 
managed six nominations, gay directorTodd Haynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/todd-haynes> was left out – a surprising 
absence, given his Directors Guild of America, Bafta and Golden Globe 
nominations. The best director race is populated by straight white men, yet 
again. The last time a black director was in the race? 2013. The last time a 
gay director and a female director were in the race? 2009.

Hotly tipped comedy Tangerine, with its trans cast, was also absent. Politely 
told trans drama The Danish Girl managed four nominations, but it’s a film 
that’s beenlargely rubbished by the LGBT community 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/bent/regressive-reductive-and-harmful-a-trans-womans-take-on-tom-hoopers-the-danish-girl-20151203>
 for its straight viewpoint and inauthenticity.

Best picture snubs for Carol and Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/straight-outta-compton> mean that the entire 
category is populated by films about straight white people. OK, so The Martian 
has a slightly diverse cast, but it’s Matt Damon’s show.

The news has gone down predictably badly on Twitter.
Cee-Jay (@TheGoldTalent) 
#OscarsSoWhite <https://twitter.com/hashtag/OscarsSoWhite?src=hash> the only 
time black people get nominated or awards is when they act as Slaves or 
Criminals
 <https://twitter.com/TheGoldTalent/status/687645170637103104> January 14, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/TheGoldTalent/status/687645170637103104> Kyle Buchanan 
(@kylebuchanan) 
Dear Academy, #OscarsSoWhite 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OscarsSoWhite?src=hash>? Again? In a year with 
CREED, STRAIGHT OUTTA COMPTON, and BEASTS OF NO NATION? What more did you need?
 <https://twitter.com/kylebuchanan/status/687632285382873088> January 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kylebuchanan/status/687632285382873088> Morgan Jerkins 
(@MorganJerkins) 
The Oscars are gonna be so white that Chris Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/chris-rock> is gonna have to walk through 
the back door of the venue, like the olden days.
 <https://twitter.com/MorganJerkins/status/687642314504859648> January 14, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/MorganJerkins/status/687642314504859648> 
Civil rights activist Al Sharpton 
<https://twitter.com/TheRevAl/status/687655798105870336> has labelled Hollywood 
“fradulent” for their choices whileRicky Gervais 
<https://twitter.com/rickygervais/status/687665159058358272> jokingly asked why 
the Academy read out “all the white nominees first”.Washington Post writer Drew 
Harvell <https://twitter.com/drewharwell/status/687633867944148992> also made a 
valid point on Twitter: “Minorities are 37% of the US, bought 46% of movie 
tickets – and got 0 Oscar-acting noms.” Some of the year’s biggest US hits have 
reflected the country’s racial diversity more than ever, notably with Furious 
7’s refreshingly mixed group of actors. But even that film, which Vin Diesel 
wildly predicted would sweep the board at the Oscars, was snubbed in one key 
category: best original song. See You Again, Wiz Khalifa’s ode to Paul Walker, 
was seen as a lock for the category, one of the few that often rewards black 
talent.

Given the ceremony’s choice of host, the outspoken Chris Rock, it’ll be a 
nervous night for Academy bigwigs. If Neil Patrick Harris was brave enough to 
make jokes about the overwhelmingly pale skin of the nominees, Rock will 
undoubtedly and enthusiastically skewer the old white men who have made it 
another uniform contest.

The race is now on for the Academy to PR its way out of this one. We’re 
predicting a diverse set of presenters, the overuse of clips fromCreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/creed> and Compton in any marketing montages 
and 12 further months of black/gay/trans industry friends being pushed to the 
forefront. #OscarsSoTired.

Oscar nominations and Alan Rickman – the Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-and-alan-rickman-the-dailies-film-podcast> 