
For nearly a decade, the National Rifle Association has spurred its members 
with apocalyptic warnings that the Democratic president wanted to confiscate 
Americans’ guns.

Now, the NRA has won. The candidate the NRA backed with an unprecedented $30m 
in ad buys 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2016/11/the-nra-placed-big-bets-on-the-2016-election-and-won-almost-all-of-them/>
is heading to the White House. Republicans will control both houses of 
Congress. Donald Trump has pledged to nominate a supreme court justice who 
supports gun rights.

“This is our historic moment to go on offense,” NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre told 
membersin a post-election video address 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChGXaHYk0Ng>. 

Local gun-carrying restrictions may be wiped out under Trump, advocates say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/gun-control-donald-trump-congress-concealed-carry-law>
Compared with European countries, most of America’s laws are already extremely 
friendly to gun owners, and many states have continued to roll back gun 
restrictions to make it easier to carry guns in public – including on 
university campuses.

“Part of the problem for the NRA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra> is 
that they’ve been so successful already that there’s not a lot for them to 
accomplish,” said Adam Winkler, a University of California Los Angeles law 
professor and gun politics expert.

LaPierre pledged to go after the “tyrannical erosion of gun rights” in the 
relatively small number of states with very strict gun control laws, such as 
New York and California. He assailed their “deceitful web of gun bans, ammo 
bans, magazine bans, exorbitant fees, and taxes and registration schemes”.

The NRA’s priority is a federal law that would make gun-carrying permits 
issued in one state valid across the country, which would make carrying a 
concealed firearm across the country as easy as driving your car across state 
lines.

This federal national reciprocity law, which Trump has already endorsed, would 
essentially gut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/gun-control-donald-trump-congress-concealed-carry-law>
 existing local restrictions on carrying guns in public, and would mean that 
tourists from other states could soon carry their guns around New York City. 
Gun control advocates have called the potential reciprocity law “dangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/gun-control-donald-trump-congress-concealed-carry-law>
”. LaPierre called on Trump and Congress to pass this national reciprocity 
legislation “as quickly as it can be written and signed”.

Winkler said he believed that if reciprocity passed, “the NRA is going to 
organize gun owners to descend en masse in places like New York City”.

“I wouldn’t be surprised to see a lot more very bold, aggressive, in-your-face 
political actions by gun rights activists,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Ftrump-nra-endorsement-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20promises%20to%20serve%20the%20NRA%20well%20following%20endorsement%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Ftrump-nra-endorsement-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20promises%20to%20serve%20the%20NRA%20well%20following%20endorsement%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Ftrump-nra-endorsement-video&media=>
Trump promises to serve the NRA well following endorsement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/20/trump-nra-endorsement-video>
Another high priority for the NRA is to end “the absolute fallacy of gun-free 
zones”, LaPierre said in his address. “Not one more American serviceman or 
woman should be murdered on a military base because the government denied their 
right to defend themselves with a firearm.”

Barack Obama’s defense department released a new directive  
<http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/521056_dodd_2016.pdf>on 18 
November that clarifies the process of how commanders can give service members 
approval to carry their own personal weapons for self-defense on military 
bases. Bearing Arms, a gun rights news site,hailed the move 
<http://bearingarms.com/bob-o/2016/11/22/the-trump-effect-ends-gun-free-zones/>
: “The Trump Effect Ends Gun Free Zones Before He Even Takes Office.”

A defense department spokesman said the new directive had been in process for 
more than a year, as part of a broader set of new security measures prompted by 
mass shooting attacks on service members, including at the Fort Hood military 
base in 2009 and at twomilitary facilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/chattanooga-shooting-fbi-killing-four-us-marines>
 in Tennessee in 2015. “Yes, it occurred after an election, but this has been 
in the works for a while,” US army Maj Jamie Davis said.

'I had to pull over and take half a Xanax': the toll of documenting US gun 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/28/gun-violence-documentaries-91-percent-newtown-under-the-gun>
It’s not clear whether Trump will also move to end gun-free zones in schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/08/donald-trump-end-gun-free-zones-schools-video>
, a talking point earlier in his campaign, which is not included on his official
second amendment policy platform 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/> and 
which LaPierre did not mention. The mother of one of the 20 children killed in 
a mass shooting at Sandy Hook elementary school in 2012 told the Guardian that 
Trump would facebroad opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/sandy-hook-families-gun-control-state-and-local-action>
 if he tried to bring more guns inside schools.

Trump also promised to roll back Obama’s January executive actions on gun 
control, which were announced by the White House with great fanfare. In early 
2016,Trump said 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-vows-to-unsign-obama-gun-measures/>: 
“I will veto that. I will unsign that so fast.”


It’s not clear how much impact, if any, a rollback of the January executive 
actions might have. Though Obama’s actions were hailed by gun control groups 
and slammed by the NRA, they were in factmostly symbolic 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/how-much-could-obamas-gun-moves-affect-gun-violence-nobody-knows>
. Obama’s attempt to tighten background check regulations by executive action 
amounted to little more thanpublicizing a new handout 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/how-much-could-obamas-gun-moves-affect-gun-violence-nobody-knows>
 from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms explaining how citizens 
should comply with the current law.

With Republicans controlling both Congress and the White House, gun rights 
advocates have also focused on the possibility of loosening restrictions on 
some weapons, including removing gun silencers from the legal category of 
especially dangerous weapons. “As they become more popular and people realize 
they’re environmentally friendly, no noise, no damage or hearing loss, they’re 
being used by tens of thousands of Americans,” said Paul Valone, the president 
of Grassroots North Carolina, a state gun rights group. 


As for universal background checks, for which Democrats pushed in vain in 
Congress this year – including holding ahighly publicized sit-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/23/house-democrats-gun-control-sit-in-civil-disobedience>
 just trying to get a vote on a bill – “I would hope that will be dead on 
arrival for the duration of the Trump presidency,” Valone said.

Gun violence prevention groups, which won three important victories on 
state-level ballot measures to advance gun control, pledged to play strong 
defense and to keep pushing for gun control legislation.

 “It’s more important than ever that gun safety groups like ours to continue 
to grow, to protect the progress we’ve made, and to fight for responsible 
change,” said Peter Ambler, the executive director of Americans for Responsible 
Solutions, a gun control group founded by the former congresswoman Gabby 
Giffords, who survived being shot during a public meeting with her constituents 
in Tucson, Arizona, in 2011.

Republicans will have at least 51 senators, a narrow majority, in the next 
Congress. But Ambler said that legislation in the Senate would still need 60 
votes to get approval, and that securing that 60th vote in support of, for 
instance, national concealed carry reciprocity legislation could be hard to 
come by.

Gun sales spiked under Obama’s presidency, and the NRA had warned members that 
Obama was the most anti-gun president in history. But the president’s big push 
for stricter gun control laws after the Sandy Hook shooting failed to get those 
60 Senate votes necessary, after strong opposition from the NRA and other gun 
rights groups. Despite a series of increasingly lethal mass shootings, and 
Obama’s emotional speeches about gun control, restrictions have been blocked at 
the federal level. Instead, the threat of potential gun control has served as 
an ironic boost to gun sales.

The day after the election, shares of the US’s two largest gun companies fell 
more than 10% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/gun-stocks-dive-trump-victory>
, a seeming reaction to Trump’s victory, and to the potential end to the 
spiking gun sales driven by a fear of looming gun bans. With their candidate in 
the White House, the NRA may face a similar challenge: less engagement by its 
members, and perhaps fewer donations, if gun rights appear on safer ground.

“Their membership tends to stagnate, and contributions tend to fall, when the 
government is more sympathetic,” said Robert Spitzer, a gun politics expert at 
the State University of New York (SUNY) Cortland.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20changing%20portrait%20of%20gun%20ownership%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20changing%20portrait%20of%20gun%20ownership%20in%20America%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgun-ownership-survey-gender-video&media=>
The changing portrait of gun ownership in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/gun-ownership-survey-gender-video>
“When they’ve had friendly presidents in the White House, most notably George 
W Bush, they would try to find some other person to demonize to keep their 
membership interested,” Spitzer said. “Who the demons will be now, in the next 
couple years, I’m not sure. Maybe Chuck Schumer or a new Democratic leader. 
It’s hard to know. But they’ll find demons, they will, because that’s what they 
do.”

While LaPierre celebrated sending Clinton “on permanent political vacation”, 
her loss and the end of Obama’s presidency leaves the NRA without its chief 
opponents.

In his address, LaPierre put the spotlight on what he called two elitist 
anti-gun billionaires, George Soros, a major liberal philanthropist, and 
Michael Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor who has invested millions in 
supporting new gun control groups and backing candidates who support stricter 
gun control laws.

He also criticized the federal judges Obama had appointed over his presidency. 
“More than 300 Obama-appointed anti-gun judges present an infection for which 
there is no cure, other than time and vigilance,” he said.

But Trump’s victory seems likely to restore the supreme court’s pro-gun 
majority, which narrowly supported a sweeping interpretation of Americans’ gun 
rights in a 5-4 ruling in the 2008 Heller case.

“The most important issue for us this cycle was the Scotus [supreme court] 
nominee and protecting Heller. Trump will appoint a new justice soon after he 
enters office, so our top priority will become a reality,” Jennifer Baker, an 
NRA spokeswoman, wrote in an e-mail.

For Dick Heller, the gun rights advocate whose lawsuit against the District of 
Columbia’s handgun ban resulted in the historic 2008 decision defining 
Americans’ constitutional right to own a gun in their homes for 
self-protection, Trump’s victory came as a relief. He no longer had to fear 
that Clinton would attempt to overturn his victory.

“Now I think at least for half a generation, I think we’re OK. Maybe a full 
generation. Maybe two,” he said.

The benefits the NRA is poised to reap from a Trump administration were not 
easily earned. In backing Trump, the NRA made a big bet on a candidate who had 
onceendorsed a ban on assault weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-endorses-donald-trump-convention>
 and who had no record as a champion of gun rights.


The NRA went on to spend more to boost Trump than any other outside group, 
including the most prominent Trump Super Pac, according toan analysis 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2016/11/the-nra-placed-big-bets-on-the-2016-election-and-won-almost-all-of-them/>
 by the Center for Responsive Politics andthe Trace <https://www.thetrace.org/>
, a not-for-profit news outlet that covers gun violence.

Gun rights group: US should appoint special 'second amendment' prosecutor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/gun-rights-trump-administration-second-amendment-prosecutor>
 In supporting Trump, the group more than doubled the $12.5m it spent 
supporting Mitt Romney and attacking Barack Obama in 2012. The group also spent 
$20m across six Senate races and saw five of its six candidates win, and the 
Republicans maintain control of the Senate.

Chris Cox, the NRA’s chief lobbyist, repeatedly championed Trump and pushed 
back on or smoothed over his more outrageous remarks, including Trump’s initial 
suggestion that the Pulse nightclub shooting in Orlando would have been less 
deadly if more people had been carrying guns while drinking at a bar.


When Trump made a sly reference to what “the second amendment people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/09/trump-gun-owners-clinton-judges-second-amendment>
” might be able to do to stop Clinton’s agenda if she got to appoint supreme 
court justices, a remark widely interpreted as a reference to insurrection or 
assassination, the NRA staunchly argued that Trump had only been talking about 
gun rights advocates turning out to the polls to defeat Clinton.

Since he won, the NRA has not been shy in claiming credit for Trump’s victory. 

“While many in the establishment shunned Trump, NRA stood with the candidate 
during ups and downs, highs and lows, and finally victory over Clinton,” the 
editor of America’s 1st Freedom, an NRA publication,wrote on 10 November 
<https://www.americas1stfreedom.org/articles/2016/11/10/voters-reject-gun-control-and-embrace-freedom/>
.

In his address, LaPierre praised “the everyday Americans who stormed the polls 
in an act of ultimate defiance agains the elites” and called NRA members “the 
special forces that swung this election and sentDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Mike Pence to the White 
House”.

“Just as the narrative was becoming that the NRA was vulnerable, they’re now 
entering a period of renewed strength,” Winkler said.

Even if the NRA membership was less active under a Trump administration, that 
would not matter much, he said.

“It’s a good problem to have if the problem is you’ve won too much,” he said. 
GLOCK Inc. (@GLOCKInc) 
Cooked to perfection. 
Photo credit: Lindsay Eisbrenner pic.twitter.com/qVrD0G9aut 
<https://t.co/qVrD0G9aut>
 <https://twitter.com/GLOCKInc/status/798903478877847553> November 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GLOCKInc/status/798903478877847553>  