
Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> is a better investment 
for retirement than a pension, according to the Bank of England’s chief 
economist, Andy Haldane.

Haldane owns two homes – one in Surrey and a holiday home on the Kent coast. 
His basic salary at the Bank is £182,000 and he is in line for a pension of 
more than £80,000 a year when he retires.

In an interview with the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/property-is-a-better-bet-than-pensions-says-gold-plated-bank-guru-lfgqx9rwc>
, Haldane said he did not consider himself wealthy. “I see myself as not having 
to worry about money, but plainly not wealthy. I never have [felt wealthy] , 
and never expect to in this job.”

He does not have a credit card – “I’ve never seen the need for it,” he told 
the paper. “My spending is all on debit cards.”

Haldane believes that property is a better bet for retirement planning than a 
pension. “It ought to be pension but it’s almost certainly property,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fproperty-is-better-bet-than-a-pension-says-bank-of-england-economist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0de0e98169891e3a26481863887e5d3d43877c35%2F0_252_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Property%20is%20better%20bet'%20than%20a%20pension%20says%20Bank%20of%20England%20economist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fproperty-is-better-bet-than-a-pension-says-bank-of-england-economist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Property%20is%20better%20bet%27%20than%20a%20pension%20says%20Bank%20of%20England%20economist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fproperty-is-better-bet-than-a-pension-says-bank-of-england-economist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0de0e98169891e3a26481863887e5d3d43877c35%2F0_252_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of England. Photograph: ANL/REX 
Shutterstock 
“As long as we continue not to build anything like as many houses in this 
country as we need to ... we will see what we’ve had for the better part of a 
generation, which is house prices relentlessly heading north.”

Ros Altmann, the former pensions minister, said his comments were “divorced 
from reality” and it was “irresponsible” to suggest people should rely on 
property rather than pensions.

This is not the first time Haldane has raised eyebrows with his comments on 
pensions. In a speech in May,he admitted that he was unable to understand 
pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/19/bank-of-englands-chief-economist-calls-for-more-simple-pension-system>
 becausethe system was so complicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/19/uk-pensions-complicated-rule-changes>
.

ONS data shows UK wealth wedded to property
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/ons-data-shows-uk-wealth-wedded-to-property>
“I consider myself moderately financially literate – yet I confess to not 
being able to make the remotest sense of pensions,” he said. “Conversations 
with countless experts and independent financial advisers have confirmed for me 
only one thing – that they have no clue either.”

He said ordinary workers had no chance of making informed decisions for their 
retirement funds and called for the system to be simplified.
 