
Dame Zaha Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>, the 
world-renowned architect, whose designs include the London Olympic aquatic 
centre, has died aged 65. The British designer, who was born in Iraq, had a 
heart attack on Thursday while in hospital in Miami, where she was being 
treated for bronchitis.

Hadid’s buildings have been commissioned around the world and she was the 
first woman to receive the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) gold 
medal.

Zaha Hadid's 10 best buildings in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-10-best-buildings-in-pictures>
A lengthy statement released by her company said: “It is with great sadness 
that Zaha Hadid Architects have confirmed that Dame Zaha Hadid DBE died 
suddenly in Miami in the early hours of this morning.

“She had contracted bronchitis earlier this week and suffered a sudden heart 
attack while being treated in hospital. Zaha Hadid was widely regarded to be 
the greatest female architect in the world today.”

Speaking from Mexico, Richard Rogers, whose buildings include the Pompidou 
Centre and the Millennium Dome, told the Guardian that the news of Hadid’s 
death was “really, really terrible”.

“She was a great architect, a wonderful woman and wonderful person,” Lord 
Rogers said. “Among architects emerging in the last few decades, no one had any 
more impact than she did. She fought her way through as a woman. She was the 
first woman to win the Pritzker prize.

“I got involved with her first in Cardiff when the government threw her off 
the project in the most disgraceful way. She has had to fight every inch of the 
way. It is a great loss.”

Jane Duncan, RIBA’s president, said: “Dame Zaha Hadid was an inspirational 
woman, and the kind of architect one can only dream of being. Visionary and 
highly experimental, her legacy, despite her young age, is formidable.

“She leaves behind a body of work from buildings to furniture, footwear and 
cars, that delight and astound people all around the world. The world of 
architecture has lost a star today.”

The architect Daniel Libeskind <http://www.dezeen.com/tag/daniel-libeskind/> 
said he was devastated by her death. “Her spirit will live on in her work and 
studio. Our hearts go out,” he said.

Zaha Hadid: queen of the curve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/08/zaha-hadid-serpentine-sackler-profile>
Stirling prize winner Amanda Levete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/24/amanda-levete-on-my-radar-richard-linklater-ben-mcintyre>
 said:“She was an inspiration. Her global impact was profound and her legacy 
will be felt for many years to come because she shifted the culture of 
architecture and the way that we experience buildings. When my son was very 
young, Zaha showed him how to write his name in Arabic. It was the moment I 
realised the genesis of her remarkable architectural language.

“She was an extraordinary role model for women. She was fearless and a 
trailblazer – her work was brave and radical. Despite sometimes feeling 
misunderstood, she was widely celebrated and rightly so.”

Architect Graham Morrison said: “She was so distinct that there isn’t anybody 
like her. She didn’t fit in and I don’t mean that meanly. She was in a world of 
her own and she was extraordinary.”

The British culture minister, Ed Vaizey, posted on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/edvaizey/status/715563221302845440>, saying he was stunned 
at the news and praising her “huge contribution to contemporary architecture”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e9d7cadd28dab1a7aa29fb0406557cc24530e5b%2F0_0_3500_2098%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Queen%20of%20the%20curve'%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Queen%20of%20the%20curve%27%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e9d7cadd28dab1a7aa29fb0406557cc24530e5b%2F0_0_3500_2098%2F3500.jpg>
 The London aquatics centre built for the 2012 Olympic Games. Photograph: John 
Walton/PA 
The London mayor, Boris Johnson, tweeted: “So sad to hear of death of Zaha 
Hadid, she was an inspiration and her legacy lives on in wonderful buildings in 
Stratford and around the world.”

Hadid, born in Baghdad in 1950, became a revolutionary force in British 
architecture even though she struggled to win commissions in the UK for many 
years. The Iraqi government described her death as “an irreplaceable loss to 
Iraq and the global community”.

She studied mathematics at the American University of Beirut before launching 
her architectural career in London at the Architectural Association.

By 1979, she had established her own practice in London – Zaha Hadid 
Architects – and gained a reputation across the world for groundbreaking 
theoretical works including the Peak in Hong Kong (1983), Kurfürstendamm 70 in 
Berlin (1986) and the Cardiff Bay opera house in Wales (1994).

The first major build commission that earned her international recognition was 
the Vitra fire station in Weil am Rhein, Germany (1993), but her scheme to 
build the Cardiff opera house was scrapped in the 1990s and she did not produce 
a major building in the UK until the Riverside museum of transport in Glasgow 
was completed in 2011.

Other notable projects included the Maxxi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/nov/16/zaha-hadid-maxxi-rome>: 
Italian National Museum of 21st Century Arts in Rome (2009), the London 
aquatics centre for the 2012 Olympic Games (2011), the Heydar Aliyev centre in 
Baku (2013) and a stadium for the 2022 football World Cup in Qatar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d93c822f795887b17a695be4ac63c4eda0d31d%2F0_0_4950_2969%2F4950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Queen%20of%20the%20curve'%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Queen%20of%20the%20curve%27%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d93c822f795887b17a695be4ac63c4eda0d31d%2F0_0_4950_2969%2F4950.jpg>
 One of Hadid’s notable projects, the Heydar Aliyev cultural centre in Baku, 
Azerbaijan. Photograph: View Pictures/Rex 
Buildings such as the Rosenthal Centre of Contemporary Art in Cincinnati 
(2003) and the Guangzhou opera house in China (2010) were also hailed as 
architecture that transformed ideas of the future. Other designs include the 
Serpentine Sackler Gallery in Kensington Gardens, west London, and the BMW 
factory in Leipzig, one of her first designs to be built.

She became the first female recipient of the Pritzker architecture prize in 
2004 and twice won the UK’s most prestigious architecture award, the RIBA 
Stirling prize. Other awards included the Republic of France’s Commandeur de 
l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres and Japan’s Praemium Imperiale.

Hadid won acclaim in Scotland for designing the popular Riverside Museum in 
Glasgow, known for its distinctive roof structure. Muriel Gray, chair of the 
board of governors at the Glasgow School of Art, tweeted a picture of the 
Riverside museum with the message: 
<https://twitter.com/ArtyBagger/status/715557113389559810> “Horrible shocking 
news that Zaha Hadid, incredible architectural trailblazer has just died. Huge 
loss to design.”

Hadid was recently awarded the RIBA’s 2016 royal gold medal, the first woman 
to be awarded the honour in her own right.

Architect Sir Peter Cook wrote in his citation at the time: “In our current 
culture of ticking every box, surely Zaha Hadid succeeds, since, to quote the 
royal gold medal criteria, she is someone who ‘has made a significant 
contribution to the theory or practice of architecture … for a substantial body 
of work rather than for work which is currently fashionable’.


“For three decades now she has ventured where few would dare … Such self 
confidence is easily accepted in film-makers and football managers, but causes 
some architects to feel uncomfortable. Maybe they’re secretly jealous of her 
unquestionable talent. Let’s face it, we might have awarded the medal to a 
worthy comfortable character. We didn’t. We awarded it to Zaha: larger than 
life, bold as brass and certainly on the case.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740d4b4a41156373830378ec6311dc68c54e1073%2F0_211_4000_2394%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Queen%20of%20the%20curve'%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Queen%20of%20the%20curve%27%20Zaha%20Hadid%20dies%20aged%2065%20from%20heart%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fstar-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740d4b4a41156373830378ec6311dc68c54e1073%2F0_211_4000_2394%2F4000.jpg>
 A computer-generated image of the stadium to be built in al-Wakrah for the 
2022 World Cup in Qatar. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Speaking in February on BBC Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, Hadid said: “I 
don’t really feel I’m part of the establishment. I’m not outside, I’m on the 
kind of edge, I’m dangling there. I quite like it … I’m not against the 
establishment per se. I just do what I do and that’s it.”

Levete, who co-designed the spaceship-like media centre at Lord’s cricket 
ground, described her as “a true and loyal friend … a confidante and someone I 
could turn to for advice”.

She said: “She was an absolute inspiration to many and her global impact was 
really profound.”


Kelly Hoppen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/feb/19/kelly-hoppen-take-risks-trust-intuition-entrepreneur>
, the interior designer who appeared in BBC2’s show Dragons’ Den, tweeted:
“Deeply saddened by the news of Zaha Hadid’s death. She was an iconic architect 
who pushed the boundaries to another level xx ZahaHadid” 
<https://twitter.com/kellyhoppen/status/715560956714213376>


Angela Brady, a former president of RIBA, described Hadid as “one of our 
greatest architects of our time”.

She added: “She was a tough architect, which is needed as a woman at the top 
of her profession and at the height of her career. She will be sadly missed as 
an iconic leader in architecture and as a role model for women in architecture.”

A spokeswoman for BMW said: “She was an icon in the world of architecture, 
groundbreaking in her way to create with a very distinctive style. On the 10th 
anniversary of our Leipzig plant’s central building which she was the architect 
for , Zaha said that she felt it gave testament to the plant’s vision. We are 
glad she felt this way, too.”

Author Kathy Lette tweeted Hadid’s “beautiful, undulating feminine designs 
proved that u didn’t need a phallic edifice complex 2 be a brilliant architect 
<https://twitter.com/KathyLette/status/715561960323026948>”.


Tamara Rojo, English National Ballet director and dancer, tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/TamaraRojo1/status/715569459159764993> “Devastated by the 
passing of the great Zaha Hadid” with a picture of “her stunning Opera House in 
Guangzhou where we performed last year”.
 