
We expect love to be the source of our greatest joys. But, in practice, it is 
one of the most reliable routes to misery. Few forms of suffering are ever as 
intense as those we experience in relationships. An estimated 42% of marriages 
in Britain end in divorce; 30% of people in couples describe themselves as 
“actively unhappy but unable to leave”.

The new year can be gloomy – one in five divorces are filed in January. But we 
can at least try to understand our sorrows. This does not magically remove 
problems, but it sets them in context, reduces our sense of isolation and helps 
us to accept that certain problems are normal.

Related: ‘Tis the season for divorce – but perhaps we should think twice | 
Daisy Buchanan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/its-the-week-for-divorce-but-perhaps-we-should-think-twice>

The problems begin because, despite all the statistics, we are inveterate 
optimists about how love should go. No amount of information seems able to 
shake us from our faith in love. A thousand divorces pass our doors; none seem 
relevant to us. We continue to think of love as an enthusiasm, rather than a 
skill that might be learned.


One of our gravest errors around relationships is to imagine that they aren’t 
things we can get wiser or better at. We might do well this new year to develop 
an emotional skill one could term “romantic realism”, defined as an awareness 
of what can legitimately be expected of love and the reasons why we will, for 
large stretches of our lives, be very disappointed by it for no especially 
sinister reasons. In fact, as in all areas, we can improve how good we are at 
loving another person. We are ready for a relationship when:

1 We accept perfection is unrealistic

We should accept from the outset that anyone we could be with will be very far 
from perfect. We should also grasp the specifics of their imperfections: how 
they will be irritating, difficult, sometimes irrational and often unable to 
sympathise or understand us. However, we are a flawed species. Whomever one got 
together with would be radically imperfect in a host of deeply serious ways. 
One must conclusively kill the idea that things would be ideal with any other 
creature in this galaxy. There can only ever be a “good enough” relationship.


For this realisation to sink in, it helps to have had a number of 
relationships, not in order to have the chance to locate “the right person”, 
but so that one can have ample opportunity to discover at first hand, in many 
different contexts, the truth that everyone (even the most initially exciting 
prospect) really is a bit wrong close up.

2 We learn to blame love, not our lover 

When difficulties strike in relationships, we often fall prey to the idea that 
we are going out with a particularly cretinous human. The sadness must be 
someone’s fault: and, naturally enough, we conclude that the blame has to lie 
with the partner. We avoid the far truer, darker, yet gentler conclusion: that 
we are trying to do something very difficult at which almost no one succeeds 
completely. At an extreme, we exit the relationship far too early. Rather than 
adjust our ideas of what relationships in general are like, we shift our hopes 
to new people who – we ardently trust – won’t suffer any of the problems we 
experienced with the last partner. We blame our lover in order not to blame 
love itself, the truer but more elusive target.

3 We realise that love makes irrational demands of our partners 

The romantic ideal states that we will be nicer to our partner than to anyone 
else in the world. We selected them because we liked them so much and will 
therefore bring our kindest and most gentle sides forward in the relationship. 
We will be a lot nicer with them than, for example, with any of our friends. We 
like the latter; we love the former.


But the reality is intriguingly and soberingly different. We tend to become, 
if things go to plan, something akin to monsters in love. We’re likely to be 
significantly less kind to our partner than towards almost any other human on 
the planet. What explains our bad behaviour? Firstly, there is so much at 
stake. Our whole life is on the line. Friends are with us for the evening; our 
mutual challenges may go no further than the need to locate a half-decent 
restaurant. But the person we love becomes, if things go well, involved in some 
of the grandest and most complex matters we ever undertake: we ask them to be 
our lover, our best friend, our confidant, our nurse, our financial adviser, 
our chauffeur, our co-educator, our social partner and our sex mate. Together 
with them, we may set up a house, raise a child, run the family finances, nurse 
elderly parents, manage our careers, go on holiday and explore our sexuality. 
The job description is so long and so demanding, that no one in the standard 
employment market could conceivably deliver perfectly on even a fraction of the 
demands. Asking someone to be with us turns out to be an impossibly demanding 
and therefore pretty mean thing to suggest to anyone we would really want the 
best for.

Love also lends us the safety to show a partner who we really are – a 
privilege we would, in truth, be wiser and kinder never fully to share with 
anyone. We are – naturally – appallingly difficult to live with; it’s just that 
no one ever cared enough about us to tell us. Our friends couldn’t be bothered, 
our exes wanted to be rid of us without hassle, our parents were blind to our 
faults. That realisation should breed extreme modesty.

4 We are ready to love rather than be loved

We start out knowing only about being loved. It comes to seem – very wrongly – 
like the norm. To the child, it feels as if the parent is spontaneously on hand 
to comfort, guide, entertain, feed and clear up, while remaining almost always 
warm and cheerful. Plenty of parents don’t reveal how often they have bitten 
their tongue, fought back the tears and been too tired to take off their 
clothes after a day of childcare. We should renounce the desire to be loved and 
instead strive to love.

5 We accept that relationships require administration

The romantic person instinctively sees relationships in terms of emotions. But 
what a couple get up to together over a lifetime has much more in common with 
the workings of a small business. They must draw up work rosters, clean, cook, 
fix, throw away, mind, hire, fire, reconcile and budget.

None of these activities have any glamour whatsoever within the current 
arrangement of society. Those obliged to do them are therefore highly likely to 
resent them and feel that something has gone wrong with their lives for having 
to involve themselves so closely with them. And yet these tasks are what is 
truly “romantic” in the sense of “conducive and sustaining of love” and should 
be interpreted as the bedrock of a successful relationship.

6 We understand that sex and love do, and don’t, belong together

The general view expects that love and sex will be aligned. But in truth, they 
won’t stay so beyond a few months or, at best, one or two years. This is not 
anyone’s fault. Because relationships in the long term have other key concerns 
(companionship, administration, another generation), sex will likely suffer. We 
are ready to get into a long-term relationship when we accept a large degree of 
sexual resignation and the task of sublimation.

7 We realise we’re not that compatible

The right person is expected to be someone who shares our tastes, interests 
and general attitudes to life. This might be true in the short term. But, over 
an extended period of time, the relevance of this fades dramatically; 
differences inevitably emerge. The person who is truly best suited to us is not 
the person who shares our tastes, but the person who can negotiate differences 
in taste intelligently and wisely. It is the capacity to tolerate difference 
that is the true marker of the right person. Compatibility is an achievement of 
love; it shouldn’t be its precondition.

We often complain, at tricky points in our relationships, that love has turned 
out to be too hard. Perhaps we are repeatedly arguing over small domestic 
details, perhaps it’s been a long while since there was some uninhibited fun 
and delight. The difficulties not only distress us in and of themselves, they 
can also feel illegitimate, contrary to the rules of love – and a sign that the 
relationship itself must be an error. This is a legacy of Romanticism, an 
ideology that lulls us into the unhelpful belief that love is not something to 
be worked at, because it is a feeling and not a skill. We need only surrender 
to our emotions, and our relationships will thrive. In fact, the contrary is 
true. We must study love the way we study anything else that matters. We should 
modestly accept the need to enrol at the school of love.

 Alain de Botton’s The Course of Love is published by Penguin on 26 January 
2017, priced (£8.99).
 