
The shadow of the Parsonage <https://www.Bront%C3%AB.org.uk/>, the Brontë 
family’s Yorkshire home, falls close to Sowerby Bridge where writerSally 
Wainwright <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sally-wainwright> grew up. 
She visited often, and even at the age of six, the small rooms in which the 
siblings wrote their novels and verses acted on her imagination. Her television 
dramas – includingHappy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley> and Last Tango in Halifa
x 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/20/last-tango-in-halifax-tv-review>
 – explore half-submerged family dynamics. No wonder, with a massive Brontë 
library at home, she felt the BBC’s invitation to make a two-hour drama about 
their lives was something she “had always wanted”. To Walk Invisible is an 
exploration of the sisters’ imaginations and the intense atmosphere in which 
they flared, fuelled in part by their brother Branwell’s drug and alcohol 
addictions, and his routine eruptions.

A similar interest led Tracy Chevalier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/17/tracy-chevalier-my-writing-day> 
away from her day job as a novelist of historical fiction to curate Charlotte 
Brontë’s bicentenary exhibition at the Parsonage. But neither Chevalier nor 
Wainwright talk about the Brontës as if they are objects of professional 
interest. They call them by their first names, quibble over their merits and 
speculate about how their lives might have gone if they had lived longer. At a 
talk in Edinburgh this summer, Wainwright described them as the ultimate 
“dysfunctional sitcom family”, although when she and Chevalier meet she says 
she thinks “sitcom” is wrong. Then she decides “dysfunctional” is wrong, too. 
“They had issues,” Chevalier helps, before advancing a theory of her own about 
the sisters – that every fan has their favourite – which makes the Brontës 
sound a bit like the Spice Girls. She tests it out on Wainwright.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b1a28ad5f9c942e712219d0f8cce8c4a5c83f8%2F488_1001_4138_2483%2F4138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20had%20issues'%3A%20Sally%20Wainwright%20and%20Tracy%20Chevalier%20discuss%20the%20Bront%C3%ABs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20had%20issues%27%3A%20Sally%20Wainwright%20and%20Tracy%20Chevalier%20discuss%20the%20Bront%C3%ABs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b1a28ad5f9c942e712219d0f8cce8c4a5c83f8%2F488_1001_4138_2483%2F4138.jpg>
 Personal passions … Sally Wainwright, left, and Tracy Chevalier. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Tracy Chevalier: I was going to ask, are you a Charlotte or an Emily?

Sally Wainwright: [Laughing] Emily and Anne, really.

TC: One of the things I found out when I started spending time at the 
Parsonage is that Brontë fans tend to be a Charlotte or an Emily. And now 
coming up on the inside is Anne.

SW: I think she gets kicked out by the bigger personalities. I get the 
impression, reading between the many lines of Charlotte’s letters, that Emily 
and Charlotte have had quite a difficult relationship, that Charlotte wanted to 
be Emily’s best mate and Emily wasn’t having any of it. So I’ve dramatised them 
as being quite tricky with each other, and Anne being the glue that makes it 
work.

TC: She was the mediator.

SW: She was a bit more grown up actually. She’s the one who held down a job 
the longest, the one who dealt with real life more effectively than either 
Charlotte or Emily and certainly Branwell. I wanted to put Anne on the map so 
she is not just “the other one”. The reason I have a problem with Charlotte 
sometimes is the way she tried to apologise for Anne and Emily after they were 
dead, for not quite knowing what they were doing when they wrote their books. 
Of course they knew what they were doing.

TC: I see Charlotte from very much a writer’s point of view and I just find 
Jane Eyre a more solid piece of work. Wuthering Heights makes me want to throw 
it across the room.

SW: Really?

TC: Because it’s got this very strange structure …

SW: It’s a brilliant structure.

TC: It’s incredibly violent.

SW: It’s complex. People are complex. People are dark.

TC: But Jane Eyre is complex, too, in a way that lets the reader in more. I 
feel that Emily herself never made friends with people. She was uncompromising. 
And Wuthering Heights is also an uncompromising book and I found that a little 
exhausting. I think people who are Emilys – not necessarily you – are really 
into the incredibly passionate liaison between Heathcliff and Cathy whereas 
actually he’s an awful man.

SW: No, it’s a novel about domestic abuse. It’s weird it’s become this 
romantic novel: it isn’t. It’s a weird bond. I think that’s why I like Emily – 
she had such an unusual mind. I suppose I admire her, I aspire … You know, I 
could never be that clever. She was extraordinarily intelligent. I find the 
fact that she was so reclusive intriguing and compelling, and I’m attracted to 
this woman who was her own person. She wasn’t particularly feminine, and really 
ploughed her own furrow. This is where I part company with Charlotte. She had 
the makings of a great feminist, and then she let herself down.

TC: How?

SW: Well, giving up work when she got married.

TC: I think she was just enjoying being married and having a new role. I would 
love to have seen what happened if she had lived. I think she would have gone 
back to writing.

SW: What is exciting about Charlotte is that she was writing about female 
experience, and she was one of the first women to really do that, with Jane 
Eyre. She was writing about things women felt and thought that had never been 
written before.

TC: Is everybody brought up in Yorkshire steeped in this whole Brontë thing, 
or was it special to you?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34fb8344f198eceb9369c70b57cb40af5d4c34ba%2F0_186_2547_1528%2F2547.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20had%20issues'%3A%20Sally%20Wainwright%20and%20Tracy%20Chevalier%20discuss%20the%20Bront%C3%ABs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20had%20issues%27%3A%20Sally%20Wainwright%20and%20Tracy%20Chevalier%20discuss%20the%20Bront%C3%ABs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthey-had-issues-sally-wainwright-and-tracy-chevalier-in-conversation-about-the-brontes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34fb8344f198eceb9369c70b57cb40af5d4c34ba%2F0_186_2547_1528%2F2547.jpg>
 Branwell Brontë’s portrait of his sisters. Photograph: Granger Historical 
Picture Archi/Alamy Stock 
SW: I don’t know that everybody’s steeped in it – but I was. It was the kind 
of thing my parents would do of a Sunday – take us somewhere like the 
Parsonage. I remember being really overwhelmed by the place. My mum saying, 
“That’s the settee that Emily died on”, and my sister saying, “Come on, we’re 
leaving”. But I was drawn to it. It had quite an oppressive feel to a child.

TC: To an adult, too! When you look out the front windows and you just see 
those graves ... Brrrr. When the BBC asked if you wanted to do a biopic, how 
did you decide what parts of their lives to dramatise?

SW: The last three years of their lives were so intense I didn’t have to 
invent a story, it was all there. I wanted to place Branwell centre, not to 
make him cool – what interested me was how he would have affected that 
household as an alcoholic. When we think of the Brontë sisters, we tend to 
think of him as this annoying little brother in the background. But in terms of 
their personal everyday lives he wasn’t in the background: he was an 
ever-present problem they had to deal with and live with.

TC: Every time I’d visit [the Parsonage], I’d go to the top of Penistone Hill 
and watch the set being slowly built. It was fascinating.

The last three years of the Brontës’ lives were so intense I didn’t have 
to invent a story

SW: It looked fabulous, but we had a few problems. It was a great place to 
build it because of the landscape, but then it was a really daft place because 
of the weather. It was just so windy up there and we should have known that. 
And then we had to use so much CGI we could have built it in Manchester. It’s a 
shame. At one point the council was going to buy it and use it as a tourist 
exhibit but by the time we finished filming it was actually falling down, due 
to the weather.

TC: Had you written anything historical about real people before?

SW: No, it was a first.

TC: Did you feel there were constraints?

SW: Writing dialogue in period! I was really nervous about getting it right. 
It took me ages to dare to start because I didn’t want it to feel like a period 
drama. I wanted it to feel alive. It was the first time I’d not written 
anything contemporary. I found that quite a challenge. Choosing which words I 
could get away with and still allow it to feel authentic. We had a long 
conversation about using the word “fuck”.

TC: Do they use that? Does Emily?

SW: Branwell does. I was sitting in the library at the Parsonage with Siv 
Jansson, who was my literary adviser. Ann Dinsdale [principal curator] was down 
the far end, and I whispered to Siv, “Do you think Branwell would have said 
‘fuck’?” And Ann said, “Course he would!” I thought, “All right, I can use it 
then.” It’s about trying to get that balance between it feeling very vibrant 
and using language …

TC: ... respectful of the period? Welcome to my world! I try to solve it by 
paring it back and being as spare as I can. It is really hard to get that kind 
of purity that makes it feel timeless and yet somehow you sense the period in 
it. I love writing dialogue. I don’t like writing description very much. A 
screenplay is kind of all dialogue isn’t it?

SW: I put a lot of stage directions in. Kay Mellor once told me, “If you 
haven’t put it in the stage directions and it isn’t there, it’s your fault!” 
And I quite like writing stage directions. I’d quite like to have a crack at 
writing a novel at some point. I’ve thought about it a lot, but I don’t know if 
I’ve got the right … I’ve tried to write a novel several times and it always 
gets to page 30 and just stops.

TC: Well I’ve thought of writing a screenplay. I’ve even thought of stories, 
and then I’m kind of terrified. It feels so alien. What I was amazed by over 
the two years [working at the Parsonage] and what I cannot wait to see in To 
Walk Invisible are not the individuals but the relationship between them. Three 
sisters sat round a table and, within the space of two years, they wrote three 
bestsellers that are still in print today and still studied. Can you imagine 
anybody thinking of their siblings that they would all be successful and do the 
same thing? I think it must be to do with the atmosphere of the house, the sort 
of relationships they had.

SW: Of all the literary figures you can think of, even more than Shakespeare 
or Dickens, I think people are interested in the Brontës’ personal lives. They 
lived in obscurity but now they are megastars.

 * To Walk Invisible is on BBC1 at 9pm on 29 December. Reader, I Married Him, 
an anthology of short stories inspired by Jane Eyre and edited by Tracy 
Chevalier, is published by Borough Press.
 