
The streets of Miami, Florida, were full last weekend as crowds gathered to 
celebrate the death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/the-old-man-is-dead-fidel-castros-death-sparks-celebrations-on-streets-of-miami>
 of Cuban revolutionary and former leaderFidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-dead-revolutionary-history>
. He died on Friday aged 90.

Many Cuban Americans fled there to escape Castro’s communist rule. But many do 
not share the delight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-dies-cuba-revolutionary-icon>
, and hail his many achievements, especially with his work around improving 
health and education.

We asked Cuban Americans to tell us how they felt. Are there mixed feelings? 
How did Castro’s rule affect them? What does the future hold? Here is a 
selection of opinions.

Jacob Wilson, 26, from Detroit: My family had to flee when it became clear 
that Batista’s hold on power was waning

The death of Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> has 
brought some relief. He and his brother represent a hammer and sickle lodged 
into the gears of social and economic progress. As long as they live, reforms 
will be a metre wide and an inch deep. Even with the death of Fidel, his 
brother and the ageing communist elites will continue to stop the country 
opening up. They know their only means of survival will be to improve 
conditions before the veil comes off.

'The old man is dead': Fidel Castro's death sparks celebrations on streets of 
Miami
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/the-old-man-is-dead-fidel-castros-death-sparks-celebrations-on-streets-of-miami>
The Fernandez side of my family were from Artemisa, Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>. We can trace our roots to the 
construction of the railroad in the 1800s. My great-great-grandfather came over 
from Spain to assist in its construction and stayed.


My great uncle was detained and questioned in the time leading up to the 
overthrow of Fulgencio Batista Zaldívar, Cuba’s dictator from 1952 to 1959. My 
family had to flee when it became clear that Batista’s hold on power was 
waning. The decision was a sound one – other land owners and dissidents were 
among the first victims of Fidel Castro.


In America my grandfather’s siblings went back to school. They wanted to 
re-enter the workforce as engineers and chemists. My grandfather was the 
youngest and became a chef, working for members of the Detroit Club and other 
private groups.


The accolades that western leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/world-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video>
 and pseudo-intellectuals are heaping on this despot are sickening. If your 
political system can’t exist without the destruction of civil liberties then it 
should not be legitimised. The presidents of the US,Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 and the European commission seem to be ofanother opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-world-leaders-react-vladimir-putin-narendra-modi>
. They see Castro as a “singular figure”, a “remarkable leader” and “a hero for 
many”.
 These men share many of the goals and aspirations of Castro’s revolution, if 
not his methods. This should give us all pause for thought, as the goals and 
the methods are linked.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e47ad5180f86960901d521cacf45759eda4d15%2F0_71_1950_1169%2F1950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20dark%20era%20is%20over.%20I%20can%20see%20the%20light'%3A%20Cuban%20Americans%20on%20Fidel%20Castro's%20death%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20dark%20era%20is%20over.%20I%20can%20see%20the%20light%27%3A%20Cuban%20Americans%20on%20Fidel%20Castro%27s%20death%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e47ad5180f86960901d521cacf45759eda4d15%2F0_71_1950_1169%2F1950.jpg>
 Cuba’s leader Fidel Castro gives his cap to Argentinian soccer star Diego 
Maradona in1987. Photograph: Prensa Latina/Reuters 
I am not sure what the future holds for Cuba. It’s taken out the heart of a 
monster on life support. The brother and his team of kleptocrats will work 
their hands to the bone to keep the Cuban people from the rest of the world.

Nicholas, 21, from Florida: I am saddened at the loss of a man who has come to 
symbolise Cuba

I have felt a range of emotions in the days following Fidel Castro’s
 death. I am saddened at the loss of a man who has come to symbolise Cuba and 
its valiant resistance to foreign oppression. Further, he supported the 
struggle against exploitation across the developing world, and his loss will be 
felt by many of those who fought against their own oppressors and were inspired 
bythe Cuban revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-personality-cult-propaganda-power>
.

I know many of Castro’s changes benefited the country’s poorest and most 
marginalised. This is especially true in areas of health and education. But I 
also recognise that there has been great suffering under his excessively 
authoritarian regime. For those who experienced this pain, I hope that his 
death provides some closure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc43e5c993a26d0a8828b00528f883e128a4e0f3%2F0_24_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20dark%20era%20is%20over.%20I%20can%20see%20the%20light'%3A%20Cuban%20Americans%20on%20Fidel%20Castro's%20death%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20dark%20era%20is%20over.%20I%20can%20see%20the%20light%27%3A%20Cuban%20Americans%20on%20Fidel%20Castro%27s%20death%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-death-cuban-americans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc43e5c993a26d0a8828b00528f883e128a4e0f3%2F0_24_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Cuban president Fidel Castro expressing his joy in meeting former South 
African president Nelson Mandela at Mandela’s office in Johannesburg. 
Photograph: Yoav Lemmer/AFP/Getty Images 
I would say that of the exiled branch of my family, I am the most
 sympathetic to Castro’s politics and legacy. This poses some
 difficulty for me and many other young Cuban Americans in similar
 positions. I feel more able to come to terms with Cuba’s past,
 present and future. But I still have family in Cuba, some of whom are ardent 
supporters of the revolution, and this wound has never fully healed for those 
who chose to leave.

Forget Fidel Castro’s policies. What matters is that he was a dictator | Zoe 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-policies-dictator>

In this respect, there is a tremendous problem in the Cuban American community 
as a whole. There is a widespread inability to talk about Castro and the 
revolution in a level-headed way. For many, painful memories inhibit an 
objective discussion about Cuba and the achievements (and failures) of the 
revolution. I hope that one day, this will change. To work towards a brighter 
future, we must first be able to talk about the past.

I have found myself able to look past and make peace with the struggles my 
family faced leaving Cuba many years ago. I have visited the island, and will 
continue to do so as it is a place that I feel an intense affinity towards. 
History will be the ultimate judge of Castro’s legacy, but I expect that – as 
the man himself predicted – it will absolve him.

At this point, I do not expect any major changes in the immediate
 future of Cuba. Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro> 
has shown an inclination towards reform, and this will certainly continue until 
he stands down as president in 2018. The death of Fidel represents the gradual 
passing of an older generation of revolutionaries in the country. Soon it will 
be the young who must carry forward and adapt the revolution to make it a 
success for all Cubans. These are people who never experienced the past 
struggles faced in Cuba. They have been shaped by the revolution. It is up to 
them to learn from the mistakes of the past to make a better future.

Alba Herrera, 54, from Pennsylvania: The dark era of Cuba is coming to an end 
and we can start seeing the light

Raúl Castro: where will Fidel's brother and successor take Cuba next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/raul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next>
I’m glad he is dead. But I’m sad that he died without facing judgment for all 
the crimes he committed against the Cuban people. The world has believed this 
myth about Castro. I was born there after he took office. My parents were not 
wealthy before Castro. In fact, we belonged to the proletarian class. But after 
Castro, we were miserable, worse than poor. And after my family requested 
permission for an exit visa we were calledgusanos (worms). 


My family had to leave our country and learn a new language and adapt. I am 
glad the US took us in and I’m proud to be an American by choice. But this man 
took away the right for me to live in my own country. His politics defined me 
making me a true liberal in its real definition. I’m for freedom of speech, 
movement, religion, right to bear arms, sexual rights, political freedom, etc. 
I’ve seen first hand what happens when these rights are removed by despots such 
as the Castro brothers and their henchmen.

There is hope for the future. Raúl is still in power. But he too is old, and 
one can only hope that he too soon joins his brother. The dark era of Cuba is 
coming to an end and we can start seeing the light at the end of the tunnel.

Joaquin Tomas, 39, from New York: There was repression, but Castro’s policies 
also had a positive impact

It’s complicated. I grew up in the US, so I wasn’t directly affected by Castro 
and his oppression. My family were. They supported him at first, my uncle died 
fighting for the revolution. But then when he seized control it got worse and 
my family turned against him. My mother ended up in a work camp and I grew up 
hearing these tales of Castro being almost like the boogie man. He was the 
stuff of childhood nightmares.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cubans%20mourn%20Fidel%20Castro%20in%20Havana%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cubans%20mourn%20Fidel%20Castro%20in%20Havana%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fcubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video&media=>
Cubans mourn Fidel Castro in Havana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/28/cubans-mourn-fidel-castro-in-havana-video>
But then later when I grew up I got a more nuanced view. Unlike lots of Cuban 
Americans I went to Cuba. I visited a clinic and saw how good their healthcare 
system is. My cousin goes to college and medical school for free. Although 
there was repression, Castro’s policies also had a positive impact.


I found the celebrating of his death distasteful. I get why some would feel 
happy, but he has been out of power for nearly a debate and it’s not like the 
system has changed. The government has not been toppled. His brother is still 
in power. There have been reforms but it’s still the same. I felt like people 
were celebrating out of a sense of vengeance. They were celebrating an old 
man’s death. For however bad or good he is, Castro is still a human being. He 
was sick and I found it distasteful to celebrate his death.
 