
Murder. Shootouts. Betrayal. Morals twisting until they snap. We’ve seen it 
all before: Breaking Bad, The Sopranos, The Wire,Boardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/boardwalk-empire>, Peaky Blinders, 
Sons Of Anarchy. For the past decade or so TV has been inundated with moody 
crime sagas. When Narcos debuted on Netflix last year, it could easily have 
been dismissed as just another one. But Narcos always had an ace up its sleeve. 
There are criminals. And then there is Pablo Escobar.

If fictional, Escobar’s story would seem absurd. At his peak, the Colombian 
drug lord is said to have been worthin the region of $30bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/22/tv-series-film-colombia-drugs-kingpin-pablo-escobar>
 – around the same as Warren Buffett, adjusted for inflation. He was so richhe 
offered to pay off Colombia’s national debt 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk%3APablo_Escobar#Issue_of_National_debt_payment>
. Escobar’s Medellín drug cartel was responsible for 80% of the global cocaine 
trade, raking in such colossal quantities of money that it spent $2,500 a month 
just on rubber bands to bunch banknotes together. Making money faster than he 
could launder it, Escobar allegedly buried it in barrels. Rumours of immense 
stashes persist to this day.

Full-immersion TV – is Narcos too intense to binge-watch?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/15/full-immersion-tv-is-narcos-too-intense-to-binge-watch-netflix>
Losses of $2.1bn a year, due to water damage or rats eating the bank notes, 
were written off as acceptable 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/pablo-escobar-and-rubber-bands-2015-9>, because 
such numbers were a mere drop in the ocean. Wild hippos still lurk near 
Hacienda Nápoles, Escobar’s ranch situated between his home town of Medellín 
and the country’s capital Bogotá, after they escaped from his personal zoo. No 
other famous lawbreakers – Al Capone, John Gotti, Bonnie and Clyde – come close 
to Escobar in sheer repute. He’s almost certainly the most famous criminal who 
ever lived.

Narcos tells his story in swaggering fashion; a striking, violent drama of 
guns, handlebar moustaches and awful 80s shirts. Beginning with Escobar’s 
comparatively humble beginnings in racketeering, the series charts his meteoric 
rise all the way up to becoming the Colonel Sanders of blow. At the same time 
it tells the also-true story of the Drug Enforcement Agency’s increasingly 
desperate and morally murky operation against him. Its first series was hugely 
popular and praised by critics; last year Netflix’s chief content officerTed 
Sarandos even said it was more popular than Game Of Thrones. 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/netflix-ted-sarandos-says-show-more-popular-than-hbos-game-of-thrones-2015-12>
 Now it’s back, and the hunt for Escobar is closing in.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7q6tIlb82w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7q6tIlb82w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE7q6tIlb82w&media=>
Filmed in the streets, buildings and rainforests of Colombia, with dialogue in 
English and Spanish, Narcos feels sleekly authentic: action scenes are captured 
vérité-style, expansive wide shots making full use of the grandeur of the 
country. The Guide has been invited to poke around a few of its sets, and the 
devil seems to be in the detail: rather than using a soundstage, a cocaine lab 
in season two has been built into a disused factory in Bogotá’s centre: bricks 
of “cocaine” stacked against every wall, heaps of the white stuff on tables – 
it’s usually milk powder, if you’re interested – and equipment bubbling away 
into labyrinthine webs of pipes and flasks. (“Could we actually make cocaine 
here?” says a production designer. “Sure!”) For a US show it feels 
international, hurling viewers onto the very same streets where many of the 
things you see in the show actually happened.

It was important not seeing him as ‘bad’ or ‘good’, because we all have that 
shit in ourselves
Wagner Moura 
All this authenticity would be for nothing, though, without the right man 
playing Escobar. For Narcos, Brazilian actor Wagner Moura has been handed the 
task of portraying “El Patrón”. Moura was a gamble. Butdirector José Padilha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/24/i-shot-pablo-escobar-narcos-jose-padilha-on-his-new-tv-series>
 offered him the role after the two worked together onBrazilian cop drama Elite 
Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/10/worldcinema.thriller>. The 
problem was, Moura didn’t speak Spanish. When playing Escobar in a show in 
which half the dialogue is Spanish, this was a concern. So Moura spent months 
away from his family in Medellín on a Spanish-language course. Worried that he 
didn’t look like the pot-bellied Pablo, he piled on 40lbs (“You just eat 
delicious things. So I did that professionally”).

He read everything about the drug lord he could find. Gradually, he sculpted 
his own version of Escobar, as a cool, collected leader prone to bursts of 
terrifyingly pragmatic violence. “I didn’t try to imitate Pablo or be like him. 
I just tried to learn as much as I could,” says the actor. Despite hisBrazilian 
accent causing mockery among some Colombians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/narcos-netflix-colombian-accents>
, Moura created a compellingly complex villain – one whose actions were made 
all the more shocking by their proximity to historical fact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F380670ec100a8f759faf95d741ab5460661a2bd6%2F0_361_2811_1687%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals'%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals%27%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F380670ec100a8f759faf95d741ab5460661a2bd6%2F0_361_2811_1687%2F2811.jpg>
 Narc web... Escobar briefs his henchmen. Photograph: Juan Pablo 
Gutierrez/Netflix 
Because, for all his “man of the people” posturing, Escobar was no Robin Hood. 
In 1989, he masterminded the bombing ofAvianca flight 203 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/12/20/nyregion/drug-trafficker-convicted-of-blowing-up-jetliner.html>
 – killing all 107 people on board – just to assassinate one presidential 
candidate, whom he later discovered didn’t even get on the plane. Escobar is 
said to be responsible for around 7,000 deaths. For years, there was war on the 
streets of Colombia. To some Escobar was a saint. To most he will always be a 
monster. This is the quandary Moura and Narcos wrestle with.

Pablo Escobar's brother asks to 'review' season two of Narcos for accuracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/pablo-escobar-brother-narcos-netflix-colombia>
Moura is at pains to avoid portraying Escobar as the shark-eyed bogeyman he 
could be in a lazier series. “It was important not seeing him as ‘bad’ or 
‘good’, because we all have that shit in ourselves. We just don’t allow that 
part to go further.” You never agree with Pablo’s actions, but they never seem 
like a jarring and abrupt moral volte-face, either. Moura’s Escobar is a family 
man, a friend, many of his worst actions driven by worry and weakness. His wife 
Tata (Paulina Gaitán) is a huge and perennial influence. “Even Osama bin Laden 
was a human being, you know?” says Moura. “He had people who liked him. He had 
family. In the neighbourhood Pablo built, he’s still loved. And how could you 
blame those people? When your government doesn’t give you anything and some guy 
says, ‘Hey, I’m gonna give you a house,’ how can you not like him?”

This blurred line between good and evil extends to the desperate pursuit of 
Escobar by DEA agents Steve Murphy (American actor Boyd Holbrook) and Javier 
Peña (Pedro Pascal, best known for meeting agrisly end thanks to some thumbs as 
Prince Oberyn in Game Of Thrones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QS2IYyywZMs>
). Narcos shows their fascinating, Zero Dark Thirty-esque mission, not to 
arrest Escobar, but to kill him. Idealistic and wanting to single-handedly 
solve the Colombian drug crisis, Murphy (who also acts as the series’ narrator) 
moves to Colombia, unprepared for the extent to which rules are routinely bent, 
while his reluctant new partner Peña, more experienced in the ways of this 
world, has little problem with the dirtying of hands. By season one’s end, 
neither can claim innocence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe750168d47be7cf9f7940027ca9728dd22e6464%2F1694_307_6187_3713%2F6187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals'%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals%27%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe750168d47be7cf9f7940027ca9728dd22e6464%2F1694_307_6187_3713%2F6187.jpg>
 Boyd Holbrook and Pedro Pascal. Photograph: Juan Pablo Gutierrez/Netflix 
As with Escobar, Murphy and Peña are real people. Both Holbrook and Pascal 
have become close with their real-life counterparts, meeting them for research 
and attending Quantico with them for DEA training. Neither are under any 
illusions that this is a tale of the White Knight of USA riding in to save the 
day. The DEA has no problem killing, exemplified by the first episode’s brutal 
slaying of Escobar henchman Poison in a restaurant shootout. There were 
reprehensible actions on both sides. “Steve’s a good friend of mine,” says 
Holbrook. “Funny, goofy, got a lot of balls. But is he a hero? No.”

Even Osama bin Laden was a human being, you know? He had people who liked him
Wagner Moura 
These moralistic greys are what makes the saga of Escobar so compelling – and 
why it’s been told so many times. As a result, understandably, some Colombians 
are fed up with their country’s vestigial association with crime and are upset 
this nerve is being prodded once again. “There is controversy,” says Moura. “We 
are a big series made by Americans with a Brazilian playing Pablo Escobar. 
Colombians are sick of narcos shows anyway, even the ones produced by 
themselves.”

Despite the country’s transformation over the past two decades into a tourist 
hotspot, the cocaine and Escobar era remains a stubborn stain. “They suffer so 
much prejudice,” Moura continues. “Showing their passports and people saying, 
‘Oh, you’re Colombian. So you have cocaine.’ So you can understand how they’re 
sick of it.” Holbrook agrees, saying the Colombians they’ve met find it 
“embarrassing that we’re not talking about a hero, we’re talking about a 
criminal. But,” he concedes, “it is the Michael Jordan of criminals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafcf80abbadb18e5c0315e0658f2e8699cd91ea2%2F473_442_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals'%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20Michael%20Jordan%20of%20criminals%27%3A%20how%20Narcos%20found%20a%20true%20villain%20in%20Pablo%20Escobar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fnarcos-netflix-pablo-escobar-wagner-moura%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafcf80abbadb18e5c0315e0658f2e8699cd91ea2%2F473_442_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
 Escobar and his wife Tata (Paulina Gaitán). Photograph: Juan Pablo 
Gutierrez/Netflix 
It’s an apt comparison, and Narcos’ first season would have been remiss not to 
show some of the pizazz that comes with being one of the richest men in the 
world. Escobar had girls, cars, planes, houses and status. But, far from 
glamorising it, we see the grimy depths he had to plunder to get them, and how 
easily they’re lost. No one could ever say this is a tale preaching a moral 
that crime pays. Season two deals with Escobar on the run: paranoid, cornered, 
hunted. Any residual glamour is gone. For obvious reasons, there will not be a 
third season, at least not in the current guise. Most people know exactly how 
Escobar’s story ends, and Narcos finishes in the very same way, right down to 
using the same building where it happened.

Myth and fact mix in summer of Escobar as narco king’s life hits the screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/22/tv-series-film-colombia-drugs-kingpin-pablo-escobar>
The Escobar of Narcos is every bit as antiheroic as Walter White or Tony 
Soprano, and making you invested in him in a similar way to those layered 
creations is probably the show’s biggest achievement. There remains something 
endlessly fascinating about organised crime, and still no criminal is as 
fascinating as Pablo Escobar. That’s why he still consumes us, and why Narcos 
will almost certainly not be the last telling of his tale. But it feels like 
the definitive one.

Escobar also consumes Moura, who seems relieved, at least in part, that Narcos 
is winding down. Playing Pablo comes with certain emotional compromises, the 
transformation more than the simple application of a gaudy shirt. “I gave 
myself so much for this project, for this character,” he says. “It’s a very 
important part of my life.” The weight of that responsibility will soon be 
lifted; the literal weight of Pablo, too, can be shed. “I’m excited about 
getting rid of Pablo,” he beams. “I just want to get thin again!”

Series two of Narcos is available on Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> from Friday 
 