
I can remember the precise moment when I threw away the babycare manuals. My 
first-born was four-and-a-half months old and, according to Penelope Leach's 
Your Baby and Child, by now probably on four feeds a day. In reality, she was 
down to around 29. I then understood why they were called mother-and-baby 
books: they are mother, and you become baby. Virtually all of them infantilise 
mothers. Anyway, from that point on, my baby wrote her own manual. (To be fair 
to Leach - well, someone has to - she did also say listen to your child.)

But now something miraculous has happened. The best book on parenting you have 
never heard of has been published. It took six years to find a publisher and, 
when it eventually came out last year, was greeted in the national media by a 
resounding silence.

I think I know why Naomi Stadlen's What Mothers Do - Especially When it Looks 
Like Nothing didn't get double-page tabloid spreads or prominent placement by 
the Tesco checkout. Stadlen doesn't offer the definitive recipe to getting a 
six-month-old to sleep through the night, or a nannyish regime for taming 
troublesome tots. In fact, she sees the growth of such books as itself 
problematic - and not just because most of them, in one way or another, are 
confidence-undermining.

No, the how-to books, Stadlen suggests, reduce mothering to a series of tasks 
rather than a developing relationship. They encourage mothers to attend more to 
rules than to their babies. It's hardly surprising, then, that women who follow 
them complain that motherhood is boring, because they are missing out on the 
exciting bit - getting to know their own particular baby. Certainly, I mother 
worst when I make decisions based on the murmured precepts of some invisible 
third party rather than instinct and the needs of my children, myself and 
partner.

In this gentle but revolutionary book, Stadlen goes further and argues that 
feeling disoriented, confused and uncertain is exactly the right state of mind 
needed by a new mother or the teach-yourself process that lies ahead. If a 
woman considered herself an expert, or had set beliefs, she would find it hard 
to adapt to her individual baby.

Stadlen is a psychotherapist but (you shouldn't still need to write "a 
psychotherapist but" in a national newspaper in 2005, yet you do) also 
fabulously experienced at listening to mothers through the weekly discussion 
group, Mothers Talking, that she has run at the Active Birth Centre in London 
for the past 12 years. In her book she tries to create a language to describe 
the nameless feats of caring that most mothers (and other caretakers of small 
children) do every day.

Is this necessary? Should mothers join the legion of self-promoters? Must 
selflessness hire Max Clifford? A part of me, I'll admit, doesn't want 
mothering to need a job description, yet Stadlen is absolutely right to argue 
that mothers often feel lonely, invisible and unimportant, as evidenced by the 
number who say, "I get nothing done all day," when in fact they have been 
interacting all-consumingly with a newborn. Practical tasks we can describe, 
but not the act of a woman who has just started something - lunch, tidying up, 
a shower - when her baby wakes up and calls for her. Becoming instantly 
interruptible, she must put aside the threads of her personal existence and 
attend to it.

So little has been written about learning to comfort a baby, remarks Stadlen: 
compared with a mother who trains her baby, one who comforts seems to be "doing 
nothing". I wept when I read her exquisitely sensitive descriptions of it. 
"People ask mothers: 'Is he sleeping through the night yet?' 'Have you started 
him on solids yet?' 'Has he got any teeth?' No one seems to ask: 'Have you 
discovered what comforts him?' Yet the ability to sleep through the night, or 
to digest solid food or to grow teeth, has little to do with mothering. Babies 
reach those milestones when they are mature enough, whereas being able to 
comfort depends on a mother's ability."

But if we lack the words to describe what mothers do right, we have developed 
an extensive language to describe what mothers do wrong - a misappropriated 
Freudian vocabulary ("neurotic", "paranoid" or "a worrier") often used 
self-deprecatingly by mothers themselves. Stadlen wants a much more 
appreciative word "to honour intelligent motherly concern", and the vivid 
quotes from mothers help her supply it. Other mothers confess, on Amazon and 
Stadlen's own website, that this book made them weep too, certain that it will 
become a classic.

Here I come clean: I have a tiny personal connection to the author. Fifteen 
years ago, when I was struggling with breastfeeding, a friend (thank you, 
Sarah) suggested I call the helpline of the La Leche League, the group giving 
information and support to women who want to breastfeed. It was Stadlen who 
answered and the advice she gave me then enabled me to breastfeed first one and 
later a second child for longer than it would be decent to mention on these 
pages. (In the absence of publicity, her book is being passed from mother to 
mother like contraband - that's how I came to hear of it.)

Yet Stadlen isn't in the advice business. On the contrary, she suggests that 
the joint enemy of all mothers - be they full-time, in paid work, breastfeeding 
or bottle-feeding - is "anyone who claims that there is only one right way to 
bring up a child". So anxious is she that her descriptions should not become 
prescriptions that she invites readers to write to her if they detect her 
trespassing into giving "rules".

What I love most about her book is that, although it is so warm and affirming 
that it made me feel that I wasn't as lousy a mother as I often believe, it 
doesn't sentimentalise motherhood either. Stadlen is not Polyanna or Pangloss. 
She is brilliantly insightful, for instance, on why mothers can become 
defensive and competitive, or how those with high expectations of themselves 
can also demand more of their babies than they can deliver. She also 
appreciates how difficult a baby's utter dependency can feel to women who have 
prized independence in their professional lives, and how - in a culture in 
thrall to busyness - what an enormous change is required to refrain from 
busying oneself with a long list of tasks in order to match the baby's pace.

Personally, I think she is a bit hard on the ideas about maternal ambivalence 
expressed by the psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott and the new breed of motherhood 
authors including Kate Figes and Rachel Cusk. Winnicott's 1958 paper, with its 
playful list of 18 reasons why a mother hates her baby ("I suggest that the 
mother hates the baby before the baby hates the mother"), reassured me when I 
was at my most unloving, and provided an important early breach in the wall of 
idealisation surrounding motherhood. But Stadlen thinks Winnicott helped 
introduce the idea that maternal ha tred is the norm, and perhaps even 
beneficial to mothers and children.

She is even sterner with Figes et al. For these writer-mothers, Stadlen 
suggests, moments of hate arise primarily when their baby won't fall asleep at 
those times that their mother is desperate to get on with their book, poem, or 
article. Just when it seems, disappointingly, that Stadlen is about to join the 
backlash club, excoriating these women for being too self-centred to mother 
properly, she comes in with a much tenderer explanation - that they find the 
degree of closeness with their babies unbearable because they don't feel 
sufficiently separate from them. They suffer from what Mel Brooks in The 
Producers calls "the urge to merge", and Stadlen is superb on how such mothers 
can feel accused by their babies' crying because they don't have a steady sense 
of themselves.

This is an author who believes that "rarely is it necessary to tell a mother 
what to do. It may demoralise her further, and certainly does not help her to 
learn". Her profoundly moving account of how, slowly and with difficulty, 
mothers can come to trust their children and themselves, should be given 
(instead of those free packs of horribly scented wipes that make all babies 
smell the same) to every new mother - and quite a few old ones too.

Â· What Mothers Do - Especially When it Looks Like Nothing, by Naomi Stadlen, 
is published by Piatkus Books at ?9.99. To order a copy for ?9.99 with free UK 
p&p, call the Guardian Book Service on 0870 836 0875 or go to
www.theguardian.com/bookshop <https://www.theguardian.com/bookshop>.
 