
Deadly toddlers who are running rampant across the country, killing people at 
an alarming rate, need to be locked up, a video released on Tuesday claimed.

The video – titled Guns Don’t Kill People, Toddlers Do, – features toddlers 
playing with guns at home or in their backyards, while the narrator calls for 
them to be deported.

“We need to lock them up,” the narrator says. “Not the guns – that’s just 
un-American. Round them up. Deport them. Get them out of our country. And keep 
them away from guns.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjlxXAy1_eE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjlxXAy1_eE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjlxXAy1_eE&media=>
 Video by Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence on toddlers using guns 
The video is a satirical take by the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence 
and the McCann Executive Advertising Company on the conversation surrounding 
gun violence. It’s part of acampaign <http://toddlerskill.org/#toddler-map> 
named Toddlers Kill that also aims to highlight a genuine issue of accidental 
shootings involving minors.

“We were hoping it would speak to the absurdity that we see as the gun debate 
in America,” said Brendan Kelly, press secretary for the Brady Campaign to 
Prevent Gun Violence.

Kelly said the video has been a success, as it is being widely discussed. He 
attributes that to the fact that what is said in the video is true.

An investigation 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2016/10/14/ap-usa-today-gun-accidents-children/91906700/>
 by USA Today and the Associated Press that was published last week examined 
instances of gun violence involving minors between January 2014 and June 2016. 
The report found that since the start of 2014, more than 80 children younger 
than four fatally shot themselves. It also found that three-year-olds were the 
most common shooters and victims among young children, as nearly 90 of them 
were killed or injured in the same period.

Researchers at the publications used the nonpartisan research group Gun 
Violence Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/23/kentucky-gun-owner-gun-violence-archive-mark-bryant>
, news reports and public sources to gather the information. The statistics 
also raised questions about the official US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention tally of deaths by minors. In 2014, the publications found that 113 
minors had died from accidental discharge while the CDC reported 74.

According to the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, 27 states have enacted 
<http://smartgunlaws.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/consumer-child-safety/child-access-prevention/>
 child access prevention laws that aim to protect children from accessing guns 
in their homes, with the strongest imposing criminal liability on parents who 
negligently stored firearms while others simply prohibit gun owners from 
providing firearms to minors.

Gun violence: who's accountable when a child is charged with manslaughter?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/17/detroit-boy-manslaughter-charge-accountable>
However, keeping firearms away from children is difficult, as a Harvard study 
found <http://www.usatoday.com/videos/news/nation/2016/06/07/85555458/> that 
seven in 10 children who live in a home with a firearm know where that firearm 
is.

Gun rights supporters ridiculed the video online for the use of toddlers in 
pushing this message.
Stephen Gutowski (@StephenGutowski) 
This is a real image that the Brady Campaign just tweeted out. I did not 
change this is any way. I am not joking.pic.twitter.com/xHbDbGzCyY 
<https://t.co/xHbDbGzCyY>
 <https://twitter.com/StephenGutowski/status/788399045295439872> October 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/StephenGutowski/status/788399045295439872> 
The National Shooting Sports Foundation, the trade association of the firearms 
industry, took issue with the USA Today-Associated Press investigation.


“The non-academic study cited (Chronicle of Agony) increases the number of 
incidents by including youth up to age 17 and ignores that an accident 
involving a six-year-old is a far cry from a gang-related ‘accident’ among 
older teenagers,” NSSF’s CEO, Stephen L Sanetti, said in a statement about the 
investigation.

Project ChildSafe is the firearms industry’s program that distributes gun 
locks to prevent accidents. The program was awarded $2.4m from the Department 
of Justice last year.

According to USA Today and the Associated Press, the National Rifle 
Association has said that there is now a one in a million chance of a child 
dying from a firearm accident.

President Barack Obama has called for smart guns 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/30/us/politics/obama-puts-his-weight-behind-smart-gun-technology.html>
, which use fingerprint technology to lock guns, as a way to reduce child 
deaths. The NRA has no formal opposition to smart-gun technology, though they 
do oppose laws mandatingthe adoption of smart guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/01/obama-smart-guns-police-law-enforcement>
.

Kelly said the aim of the video was to encourage voters to consider candidates 
who support gun control measures.

“We are also trying to push people to get out to the ballot box, and keep in 
mind this November where candidates stand on solutions to gun violence,” he 
said.
 