
We are not yet halfway through 2016, but creative, digital and advertising 
agencies are already learning new things that are informing and changing the 
way they operate.


I spoke to five US agencies (large and small) to get their insights.

Brands must be authentic

Authenticity is a key word for Joe Cecere in 2016. The president and CEO at 
Minneapolis-based agencyLittle <http://www.littleco.com/> says that 
organisations are becoming more eager to connect with customers by telling what 
he calls their “true story” – one that defines their purpose.


“Consumers are getting more savvy and knowledgeable about what brands stand 
for – and brands are understanding that consumers will react really fast if 
they sense any kind of insincerity or that their purpose isn’t defined,” he 
says.

Marketing experts on how to achieve more creative and ambitious work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/may/10/marketing-experts-achieve-creative-ambitious-work>
But people have always appreciated honesty, so why now? The level of 
competition in most industries has reached the point where there are few 
differentiators left, suggests Cecere. That throws the authenticity of company 
messaging into sharp focus.

Millennials (broadly defined as the generation born from the early 1980s to 
the mid-90s) are also driving this move to transparency. “They’ve been raised 
to understand the background of things. They’re going to dig more,” he says.

So what does this mean in practical terms? “The story has to be consistent,” 
Cecere says. “The brand has to show up the same way, whatever the touchpoint.”

View the past through a contemporary lens

A clear, powerful message can be difficult for brands to find in a world with 
so many different voices and icons, warns Alain Sylvain, founder and chief 
executive of New York-based brand strategy consulting firm,Sylvain Labs 
<http://sylvainlabs.com/>. “Brands today are struggling because there’s no pop 
culture. Everything is so fragmented by technology. They don’t know how to pull 
out a contemporary voice.”

Sylvain sees more opportunity in the past. If you grew up in the 1980s and 
90s, mixing and matching your own shows at your own time or just watching 
YouTube wasn’t an option. Traditional network TV was king.

Now, the icons of that era are disappearing, he says. “That means the power of 
celebrity is so much greater than it would have been 50 years ago.”

Predictive behaviour is where we need to sharpen our capabilities
Jennifer Friese, Razorfish 
There’s a reason that we took the passing of David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
,Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-dead-music-superstar-57> 
and others so hard – they’re cultural linchpins in a way that celebs spawned in 
the post-TV era aren’t, says Sylvain. “If I was a brand, I would be nostalgic. 
I would look to harness some of that powerful energy that TV created in the 80s 
and 90s and make it relevant today.”

He sees huge latent value in those assets if they’re used in new and 
innovative ways (rather than just airing old Michael Jackson videos). It means 
examining our short-term cultural history in fresh ways. There’s a reason that
Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/30/straight-outta-compton-review-pulsating-account>
, the biodrama about hip-hop group NWA, did so well, he says.

“There’s a real fear to acknowledge history. A lot of brands say: we need to 
keep it contemporary for Gen Z,” concludes Sylvain. “But that generation is 
really interested in looking at this history through a contemporary lens.”

Consider the quality of your message

He may not follow 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2015/08/17/20-times-donald-trump-has-changed-his-mind-since-june/>
 Cecere’s consistency rule, but Donald Trump is a good example of how content 
is still king. No one really cares what channel he’s on; he pops up everywhere 
and always makes a splash. Love him or hate him, he’s doing an excellent job of 
keeping people interested, says Laura Davis, managing director for 
Sausalito-based agency,Division of Labor <http://divisionoflabor.com/>.

“You need to make a statement that’s big and amazing and impactful,” she says. 
Basically, drop a bombshell.

It doesn’t necessarily matter which channel you choose to say it on so much as 
what you say, Davis asserts. She has seen so many technology innovations and 
new distribution channels come and go, but one thing is constant: the quality 
of the messaging.

“No one is really going to remember that you [were] the first to do video on 
Instagram, or that you had the first broadcast on Periscope,” she says. 
“They’re going to remember what you put there. What was compelling and 
interesting.”

Agencies must be smarter with ads

Advertising may be a key part of the equation, but it too is changing, warns 
Susan Noonan, executive director of media and analytics atButler, Shine, Stern 
& Partners <https://bssp.com>, which bills itself as one of the largest 
independent agencies on the west coast. The loud debate over adblocking is a 
sign that consumers are sick of unimaginative approaches to advertising online.

“We had this great opportunity as an industry to create more personalised ads 
and be more conscious of consumer experience by personalising it – and we took 
advantage of it. We abused it,” she says.

Consequently, advertisements became more intrusive, Noonan believes. 
Advertisers began taking over pages and exchanging data with tens of different 
partners while readers are struggling to load web pages. She argues that 
advertisers must be more welcoming with their ads.

“We need to be more conscious of that to ensure we’re more seamlessly 
integrated into the content, whether that’s through things like native 
advertising or being more conscious of the size of the ads that we’re putting 
on these sites, and the number of data calls that we’re making.”

Companies must also be more sensitive about how they personalise ads for 
customers, she concludes: “There’s a dichotomy between consumers wanting ads 
that are more personalised and relevant to them, and consumers not wanting to 
feel spied on and creeped out.”

Agencies must up their data game

For companies to be smarter with their advertising and targeting, they must be 
smarter with their data, says Jennifer Friese, western regional president at
Razorfish <http://www.razorfish.com/>. “Brands are having to become smarter as 
their consumers become more digitally focused,” she says. “They’re asking 
agencies and consultancies questions that you can’t answer without data.”

Friese says that the rise of consulting firms in the agency space has made 
agencies think differently about the industry. PwC, Deloitte and IBM are 
relatively recent entrants with huge market shares.

“It has made traditional and even digital agencies sharpen their skills and 
hone their expertise around data, because that’s driving a lot of what clients 
are looking for,” mused Friese.

The other thing driving an enhanced focus on data is the millennial 
generation, which was the first to grow up with computers and web access in its 
homes. To serve a constantly-connected demographic focused on instant 
gratification, brands must use data intelligently, she asserts. “Brands have an 
opportunity to create integration as you’re walking down the street, or 
listening to music.”

But it’s no longer enough to serve their needs in the moment. “Instead, brands 
need to forecast what their customers might need before they need it. 
Predictive behaviour is where we need to sharpen our capabilities.”

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media and Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media and Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 