
Protectionism is not a concept we would commonly employ in the world of media, 
marketing and communications. But it’s an increasingly resonant theme in the 
broader world of politics and economics. So, I wonder, where would 
protectionism take us?

Good government seeks to manage the tension between enabling and protecting: 
enabling individual, collective and commercial freedoms: protecting the 
vulnerable, the disadvantaged and the things we hold dear.

 For the world of business, in the era of globalisation, enabling has been the 
order of the day. There’s been a centrist consensus around the social and 
economic benefits of free trade, free movement and free markets. But, across the
political spectrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/27/trade-policy-uk-eu-referendum-us-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-ttip-globalisation>
, people have been asking questions about globalisation: from Donald Trump and 
Bernie Sanders, to Jeremy Corbyn and French economistThomas Piketty 
<http://www.theeuropean-magazine.com/thomas-piketty--2/9351-thomas-piketty-on-globalizations-ills>
, to assorted protest movements around the world.

'Creative disruption' wrecks industries, communities and careers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/oct/16/creative-disruption-wrecks-industries-communities-careers>
 What about the increasing inequality, the personal and corporate tax 
avoidance, the imbalanced housing market, the warped financial sector? What 
about the exported jobs, the failed industries, the mass migration and 
environmental damage? Are these not in some part the unintended consequences of 
globalisation? There’s a renewed interest in protectionism in its broadest 
sense: protecting local hospitals, housing and high streets; jobs, services and 
small businesses; libraries, pubs and the planet.

 Now it would be easy to dismiss all this as economic naivety, parochial 
radicalism or the inevitable response to the challenges of austerity. But I 
think the interesting thing about protectionism is that it forces us to ask 
some simple questions: what do we want to protect? Which communities, 
activities and institutions are so precious to us that they merit particular 
support? Maybe protectionism also prompts us to reorder our priorities. Let’s 
start by indentifying the things we hold dear and then build an economic policy 
around them.

 So what could protectionism mean for the media, marketing and communications 
industries? What are the things we would fight to preserve?

 I’d imagine many of us would begin by saying we believe in protecting the 
value of ideas and creativity, and in protecting the individuals and 
institutions that generate them.

 And yet creative businesses haven’t got a great record of defending the value 
of creativity. We’ve been powerless to prevent thedevaluation of the music 
industry and the erosion of the publishing sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/14/robert-levine-digital-free-ride>
. We’ve looked on as writing has been commoditised; as photographers’ fees have 
fallen; as creativity has been re-categorised as ‘content’.

We’ve aligned ourselves with the themes of the new economy: empowerment, 
freedom and sharing, but failed properly to address the challenges these themes 
pose for our own industries. Sometimes consumer empowerment has come 
hand-in-hand with the disempowerment of creative professions and individuals; 
sometimes customer freedom has entailed giving creativity away for free; 
sometimes the sharing economy has compromised intellectual property.

We should do everything we can to protect the value of our creativity.

 A more confident creative industry would be more bullish about the value of 
its output; and more assertive about realising that value. A more confident 
industry would be looking to secure a fair value exchange. Consumers should be 
expected to pay for great music, literature, entertainment, opinion and 
knowledge. Or they should at least be prepared to receive the advertising that 
subsidises those services.

 So I guess I’m a protectionist where these things are concerned. We should do 
everything we can to protect the value of our creativity and to protect our 
journalists, writers, art directors, photographers, filmmakers and musicians. 
We should support paywalls, memberships and micro payments; tariffs, taxes and 
trademarks. And we should block the adblockers.

 And what if our new protectionism didn’t stop there? What if we were more 
assertive in using our creative and communication talents to protect the things 
that matter to us in the broader community? What role should media and 
marketing play in protecting our health, our privacy, our children, our 
environment?

In the age of purpose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/21/unilever-keith-weed-brands-sustainable-business>
, all brands have been exploring how they will leave the world a better place. 
In defining purpose the modern brand manager should more specifically ask: what 
are we going to protect?

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 