
Donald Trump refused to answer a question from a CNN reporter during his press 
conference at Trump Tower in New York on Wednesday, as retribution for the CNN 
story that said he and Barack Obama had beenpresented with claims that Russia 
had compromising financial and personal information 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2017/01/10/politics/donald-trump-intelligence-report-russia/index.html?mc_cid=50b8ef8c5c&mc_eid=b29fd3f47d&iid=EL>
 about the president-elect.

“Not you. Your organization is terrible,” said Trump, when CNN’s senior White 
House correspondent, Jim Acosta, tried to ask a question.

“Since you’re attacking us, can you give us a question? Mr President-elect, 
since you’re attacking our news organization, can you give us a chance?” asked 
Acosta.

“I’m not going to give you a question. You are fake news,” said the 
president-elect.

Trump was furious after BuzzFeed published an unverified and salacious 35-page 
report yesterday claiming to show connections between Trump and Russia, using
CNN’s earlier story 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2017/01/10/politics/donald-trump-intelligence-report-russia/index.html?mc_cid=50b8ef8c5c&mc_eid=b29fd3f47d&iid=EL>
 (which mentions the report without revealing its full contents or publishing 
it) as justification for publishing. BuzzFeed’s decisiontriggered a storm over 
media ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
.


John McCain passes dossier alleging secret Trump-Russia contacts to FBI
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
Trump repeatedly criticized CNN and BuzzFeed throughout his press conference 
at Trump Tower in New York on Wednesday, calling BuzzFeed a “leftwing blog” and 
a “failing pile of garbage” for publishing the unverified report. CNNlater said 
<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/11/politics/cnn-statement-trump-buzzfeed/index.html?sr=fbCNN011117cnn-statement-trump-buzzfeed0605PMStoryLink&linkId=33282660>
 that its decision to publish “carefully sourced reporting” on unverified 
intelligence documents concerning Donald Trump was “vastly different than 
BuzzFeed’s decision to publish unsubstantiated memos”.


His attack on CNN <https://www.theguardian.com/media/cnn> can be viewed as 
somewhat ironic.

Jeff Zucker, president of CNN Worldwide, was the head of NBC Entertainment 
when it launched The Apprentice, and the success of that and the subsequent 
spin-off The Celebrity Apprentice helped Zucker become head of NBC. Then, with 
Zucker as president, CNN gave Trump millions in free publicity thanks to its 
round-the-clock coverage 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/jeff-zuckers-singular-role-in-promoting-donald-trumps-rise/2016/10/02/7c3d4366-865b-11e6-a3ef-f35afb41797f_story.html?utm_term=.60dc0dd7ff30>
 of his presidential campaign.

Shortly after dodging the CNN question on Wednesday, a BBC reporter asked if 
Trump would reconsider his position as president if intelligence agencies found 
any truth in the report’s allegations.

“BBC, that’s another beauty,” said Trump, before adding: “There’s nothing they 
could come back with” and quickly moving along.

Trump’s treatment of reporters during the press conference drew criticism from 
free-speech activists.

“President-elect Trump’s attempt to punish a major US media outlet for what he 
considers unfavorable coverage and his denigration of members of the press is 
the kind of thuggish behavior exhibited by authoritarian regimes,” said Suzanne 
Nossel, executive director of PEN America, a group that pushes for the freedom 
to write.

In Wednesday’s press conference, Trump also slammed intelligence agencies for 
supposedly leaking the report to news agencies.


“I think it was disgraceful that the intelligence agencies allowed any 
information that turned out to be so false and fake” to get out, said Trump.

“As far as BuzzFeed <https://www.theguardian.com/media/buzzfeed>, which is a 
failing pile of garbage writing it, I think they’re going to suffer the 
consequences, and they already are,” Trump said.

Many news outlets, including the Guardian, published articles based on the 
report without publishing it in full or giving its full details because they 
are unverified.

The Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 that the FBI applied for a warrant from the foreign intelligence surveillance 
(Fisa) court last summer so that it could monitor four members of Trump’s team 
suspected of contact with Russian officials, but the Fisa court rejected the 
application.


BuzzFeed co-founder Jonah Peretti said in a statement: “We stand with Ben on 
his decision to publish this newsworthy document, which was reported on by 
multiple news outlets and seen by high level government officials including the 
president and president-elect.

“As a result of this decision, we were criticized by the incoming 
administration. We are not going to respond to these divisive comments.”

In response to CNN’s statement criticizing BuzzFeed’s report, BuzzFeed 
editor-in-chief Ben Smithtold the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/donald-trump-fake-news_us_58765d29e4b05b7a465cd876>
: “We’re not going to participate in an attempt to divide the media against 
each other. We stand by the decision to publish a newsworthy document.”

 * This article was amended on 12 January 2017 to show the tweet on BuzzFeed’s 
decision to publish was from Ben Smith, not Jonah Peretti.  