
For a reminder of superheroes’ roots in the hard-boiled pulp fiction of the 
1920s and 30s, you only need to watch one ofNetflix’s shows about “street 
level” heroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/27/luke-cage-jessica-jones-superwoman-marvel-dc>
 such as Luke Cage, Jessica Jones or Daredevil. Costumes are often dispensed 
with, central characters sometimes struggle to pay the rent, and powers are 
downgraded to a level where they’re suitable only for protecting the streets of 
Manhattan – rather than taking on alien invaders and all-powerful AI 
supervillains.

From Luke Cage to Supergirl: why superhero TV is better than the movies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/27/luke-cage-jessica-jones-superwoman-marvel-dc>
But on the big screen, with the honourable exception of upcoming Marvel movie 
Spider-Man: Homecoming, the genre is becoming ever more outlandish and 
fantastical as studios battle to hit ever-more grandiose levels of epic 
spectacle in a sort of superhero arms race. Not so long ago, Guardians of the 
Galaxy opened up the Marvel universe to a radical shift into outrageous space 
opera, while current offeringDoctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>
 introduces us to an entirely new world of magical and mystical entities across 
multiple head-spinning dimensions. Meanwhile, the DC expanded universe seems to 
have hit peak crazy with far-out villains such asSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/03/super-stylewatch-harley-quinn-enchantress-and-wonder-woman>
’s Enchantress, a gyrating ancient sorceress bent on taking over the world, and
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>’s Doomsday, a monstrous 
zombie alien creature formed from the dead body of General Zod lovingly infused 
with Lex Luthor’s DNA.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449121923489%2FKP_646761_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Zack%20Snyder%E2%80%99s%20superhero%20smackdown%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Zack%20Snyder%E2%80%99s%20superhero%20smackdown%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449121923489%2FKP_646761_crop_640x480.jpg>
Batman v Superman: watch the trailer for Zack Snyder’s superhero smackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/03/batman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video>
Is it all, perhaps, getting just a little bit out of control? Legendary Batman 
comic book writer (and sometime film-maker)Frank Miller hinted at his feelings 
on the current comic book movie zeitgeist this weekend 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/festivals/lucca-comics-frank-miller-on-where-he-would-take-the-batman-movie-franchise-1201904240/>
 when he told Variety he would make the dark knight “smaller” if he were ever 
handed the keys to the franchise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbatman-real-world-superhero-villain-casey-affleck-ben-affleck-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de6896e038bad19398a6f0a74d66fee05158812%2F0_0_3690_5062%2F3690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Batman%20for%20the%20real%20world%3A%20is%20Casey%20Affleck's%20Villain%20the%20superhero%20we%20deserve%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbatman-real-world-superhero-villain-casey-affleck-ben-affleck-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Batman%20for%20the%20real%20world%3A%20is%20Casey%20Affleck%27s%20Villain%20the%20superhero%20we%20deserve%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fbatman-real-world-superhero-villain-casey-affleck-ben-affleck-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de6896e038bad19398a6f0a74d66fee05158812%2F0_0_3690_5062%2F3690.jpg>
 Ben Affleck as Batman. Photograph: Supplied by LMK 
“My dream would be to … lose the toys and to focus more on the mission, and to 
use the city a great deal more,” said Miller, who wrote the seminalBatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> graphic novels The Dark Knight 
Returns and Batman: Year One. “Because he’s got a loving relationship with the 
city he’s protecting. And unlike Superman his connection to crime is intimate; 
it has been ever since his parents were murdered. And he defeats criminals with 
his hands. So it would be a different take. But it will never be in my hands, 
because it would not be a good place to make toys from. There wouldn’t be a 
line of toys.”

Miller’s strategy for reinventing the caped crusader sounds a lot closer to 
Christopher Nolan’s relatively minimalistDark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/25/actionandadventure1> trilogy than 
Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
, which threw itself into an epic, outsized storyline and found itself 
faltering in the details – with a dark knight who seemed strangely disconnected 
from his traditional moral centre.

With luck, we might get to see a Batman closer to his pulpy detective-story 
roots inBen Affleck’s upcoming solo outing, The Batman 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/ben-affleck-reveals-title-of-new-batman-film-the-batman-1201877858/>
. But if the demands of the DC universe make a minimalistic caped crusader an 
unlikely prospect any time soon, Affleck’s brother Casey might have just the 
tonic.Variety reports that the younger sibling is pitching a new thriller 
titled Villain 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/casey-affleck-villain-vigilante-thriller-1201903512/>
, which will focus on a Batman-style vigilante who gains superpowers after 
being shot in the head during a brutal burglary. Intriguingly, this new 
“real-world” superhero sounds a lot like Affleck’s raging, murderous dark 
knight in Dawn of Justice. Is the younger Affleck satirising his own brother’s 
work? To quote the trade bible:

The movie is set in a city overrun with crime. Affleck’s character loses 
everything of meaning in his life when a brutal home invasion leaves his family 
dead and two bullets lodged in his head. He develops a unique power in the wake 
of his trauma — an ability to see into people’s pasts, presents, and futures — 
and goes on a mission of revenge to find the men who killed his family, and in 
the process clean up his city long overdue for justice.

But as his vigilante acts become more frequent and violent in nature, his 
arrival as the city’s hero may instead be the announcement of its most prolific 
villain.

As the superhero genre continues to gain in popularity, it was perhaps 
inevitable that we would see comic book tropes beginning to seep into other 
genres. What are the heroes and villains of Josh Trank’sChronicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/02/chronicle-film-review>, Neil 
Burger’sLimitless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/27/limitless-bradley-cooper-review> 
or Luc Besson’sLucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/lucy-scarlett-johansson-luc-besson-review>
 experiencing, after all, if not a form of superpower? In fact, as Miller 
suggests, the only reason studios need to keep their heroes wearing 
recognisable costumes is to make sure they sell plenty of toys.

Deathstroke: the perfect Batman villain for DC's vision of violence?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/deathstroke-batman-villain-dc-vision-of-violence>
Comic-book films remain in their relative infancy – the oft-compared western 
genre took more than three decades to hit its peak – and it seems unlikely that 
audiences will tire of superheroes with silly names, outlandish outfits and 
extravagant powers any time soon. But there is surely room for more 
introspective and cerebral material that plays on our fascination with 
superhuman abilities – especially with the meta-fuelledKick-Ass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/31/kick-ass-review-film> saga having 
most likely given us our last big screen instalment.

Which Affleck superhero flick would you rather see? Ben’s epic tale of 
gun-toting Batman’s battle with Deathstroke on the streets of Gotham? Or 
Casey’s intriguing examination of the corrupting nature of superpowers? I’m a 
huge Batman fan, but I’m going with the younger Affleck on this one.
 