
If the British summer would just play ball, the DVD release of A Bigger Splash 
(Studiocanal, 15) would be perfectly timed. Luca Guadagnino’s slinky, shimmery 
indulgence is the cinematic equivalent of a beach read: it slips by in a 
pleasurable daze, our concentration divided between the words and the sunlight 
on the screen. TheDavid Hockney allusion 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-a-bigger-splash-t03254> in the 
title is no accident. The setting of this lackadaisical daylight noir may be 
the Sicilian island of Pantelleria rather than Beverly Hills, but this is a 
sparkling lifestyle study, fascinated with the surface luxuries – the pools, 
the meals, the linen kaftans – of the rich and famous.

As the lazily decadent summer plans of Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>’s mute rock star and her 
surrounding party curdle in the heat, Guadagnino’s gaze isn’t critical, 
exactly, but it’s almost savagely languid: sparked into irritable life by the 
braying intrusions ofRalph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes>’s vividly horrible record 
producer, these characters slowly tear one another apart as the camera looks 
lustfully on. The final reels, however, bring Europe’s refugee crisis into this 
elite-class soap: callously exploitative or slyly excoriating of the main 
characters’ privilege? I’m not sure.

With last week’s EU referendum having resulted in the Leave camp’s victory, the
often toxic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/project-fear-how-hope-got-sidelined-in-eu-vote>
 conversation their campaign has fuelled about immigration and refugee 
accommodation shows no sign of ending. With canny timing, then, Netflix 
recently added Chris Temple and Zach Ingrasci’s new documentary,Salam Neighbor 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80096976>, to its library. The film follows 
the American film-makers as they spend a month living in Jordan’sZaatari 
refugee camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/14/life-refugee-camp-syrian-family-jordan-escape>
, recording the testimonies of a range of displaced Syrians. It may sound like 
a human interest stunt, and the film-making can be more earnest than it is 
artful, but this is still an attention-grabbing, eye-level view of a crisis 
that many of us have spent more time discussing than imagining.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDI4-BSovs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDI4-BSovs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRrDI4-BSovs&media=>
Watch the trailer for How to Be Single. <https://youtu.be/RrDI4-BSovs> 
Back to outright escapism, as Burr Steers’s turgidly japey adaptation of Pride 
and Prejudice and Zombies (Lionsgate, 15) shows up the limited shelf life of 
the novelty bestseller that spawned it – the joke’s all in the title. Steers 
and a reasonably cheerful cast attempt to bolster the undead premise, but as 
Jane Austen interpretations go, it’s not a fraction as funny (or even as 
modishly ironic) asWhit Stillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/15/whit-stillman-the-cosmopolitans>
’s zombie-freeLove and Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-and-friendship>, currently in cinemas. I 
laughed more duringHow to Be Single (Warner, 15), a brightly air-freshened but 
rather endearing romantic comedy that seesDakota Johnson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dakota-johnson> as winningly gawky here as 
she is snakily erotic inA Bigger Splash, following gobby Rebel Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/28/rebel-wilson-australia-comedy-actor-guys-dolls>
’s lead into the tumultuous New York singles scene. Written and played with a 
measure of wry compassion, it represents a fair compromise between studio-movie 
optimism and the scuzzy lo-fi confessionals ofLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>.

Feelgood formula of the arthouse persuasion, meanwhile, is on offer in the 
straight-to-DVD Brazilian crowd-pleaserThe Violin Teacher (Studiocanal, 15), in 
which spiky favela kids blossom under the tutelage of a refined São Paulo 
violinist. It barely has more edge than the 1999 Meryl Streep cornfestMusic of 
the Heart, but Lázaro Ramos’s performance in the title role gives it grace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbigger-splash-salam-neighbor-pride-prejudice-zombies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f52b072450fd7d52feb7ee90a99d2ddd4f3ffe9%2F0_44_2590_1554%2F2590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3B%20Salam%20Neighbor%3B%20Pride%20and%20Prejudice%20and%20Zombies%3B%20How%20to%20Be%20Single%3B%20The%20Violin%20Teacher%3B%20Triple%209%3B%20Ivan%E2%80%99s%20Childhood%3B%20Gilda%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbigger-splash-salam-neighbor-pride-prejudice-zombies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3B%20Salam%20Neighbor%3B%20Pride%20and%20Prejudice%20and%20Zombies%3B%20How%20to%20Be%20Single%3B%20The%20Violin%20Teacher%3B%20Triple%209%3B%20Ivan%E2%80%99s%20Childhood%3B%20Gilda%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbigger-splash-salam-neighbor-pride-prejudice-zombies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f52b072450fd7d52feb7ee90a99d2ddd4f3ffe9%2F0_44_2590_1554%2F2590.jpg>
 Nikolai Burlyayev in the ‘heart-clutching’ Ivan’s Childhood.
 Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/The Criterion Collection 
A resplendently Eurotrash Kate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> doesn’t exactly bring grace to 
the table inTriple 9 (eOne, 15); still, cast raucously against type as a 
Russian mafia Medusa, she serves up the most enduring lines of this 
cool-blooded heist thriller from genre-travelling Australian John Hillcoat. If 
only the film had quite as much fun with itself. Despite an A-grade, up-for-it 
ensemble and a crooked cop plot that double-crosses itself into next week, the 
energy level is oddly low throughout; Hillcoat has studied the strut ofMichael 
Mann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/16/michael-mann-blackhat-chris-hemsworth>
, but the degree of homework shows.

Finally, no new release this week can really be a match for the lucid, 
heart-clutching emotional immediacy ofIvan’s Childhood (Curzon Artificial Eye, 
PG), happily reissued on Blu-ray following a stint in cinemas. Andrei 
Tarkovsky’s stark, pristine 1962 debut, bringing Soviet-Wehrmacht to juddering 
life through the eyes and sense memories of a 12-year-old boy, remains one of 
the most startling and least sentimental of all second world war odysseys on 
screen. If you’re in the mood for a smokier, more sinuous trip to the 1940s, 
however, the Criterion Collection offers the velvety vamping ofGilda (Sony, 
12), a winding melodrama in which postwar politics bleed into the paperback 
danger of Glenn Ford andRita Hayworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/13/1>’s Argentine underworld 
romance. Seventy years old this year, it still handily out-sexesA Bigger Splash 
in a head-to-head battle.
 