
Margaret Atwood can sleep easily: the shortlist for the 2013 Arthur C Clarke 
award 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/apr/04/arthur-c-clarke-award-shortlist-all-male>
 is strikingly devoid of what she called "talking squids in outer space". It 
might even please the self-appointed Dr Johnson of genre fiction, Christopher 
Priest, whofulminated so fulsomely 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/29/arthur-c-clarke-award-christopher-priest>
 about last year's shortlist. It seems telling that the dystopic is so much in 
evidence. Nod features a world where most of the population suddenly cannot 
sleep, giving a new twist to the zombie novel. Dark Eden rewrites Genesis from 
a scientifically grounded perspective, with a human population on a distant, 
sunless world suffering from the results of in-breeding and conservative 
indoctrination. Earth, in 2312, is an overheated trash-pile whose neo-neo-con 
rulers manage to exert political influence over the rest of the solar system. 
The Dog Stars is billed on Amazon as "The Road – with hope" which must surely 
be the least effective marketing strap-line ever. In Intrusion MacLeod presents 
a frighteningly possible "democratic dystopia", where the government gives you 
the choice you would have made had you all the facts that they have. Harkaway, 
here, is the wild card, with a giddy homage to the unlikely combination of Ian 
Fleming and John Ruskin.

The Clarke awards have always sought to include the so-called literary within 
genre (Atwood is a previous winner, as is Kazuo Ishiguro, while David Mitchell, 
Sarah Hall and Lydia Millet have all been shortlisted). Harkaway is, I suppose, 
the "literary" turn here, although all the titles deploy techniques from 
literary fiction: Kim Stanley Robinson, for example, uses bricolage to good 
effect; Adrian Barnes investigates how texts become holy and Dark Eden has both 
inventive neologism and wonderful stories-within-stories. The false dichotomy 
between "literary" and "genre" has never seemed so slight.

As a Man Booker judge, I'm slightly envious of the shortlist here, though not 
perhaps of making the final decision. But were it me, I'd be pushing for Ken 
MacLeod. Five times a shortlisted author, MacLeod has moved from space opera to 
insightful and ingenious near-future fictions. Intrusion comes after the 
fearfully prescientThe Execution Channel 
<http://www.strangehorizons.com/reviews/2007/06/the_execution_c.shtml>, the 
wonderful take on the Scottish covenanter novelThe Night Sessions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/aug/09/sciencefictionfantasyandhorror.roundupreviews1>
, and the simulations-within-simulations Soviet fantasy ofThe Restoration Game 
<http://www.socialistreview.org.uk/article.php?articlenumber=11381>. Intrusion 
is both horrific and comic and deals movingly with the consequences of genetic 
fixes. The ending – resilient, broken, hopeful and disillusioned – is a 
triumph. And it will probably be true by a week on Thursday, given his track 
record.
 