
The opening lines of Viceroy’s House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/gurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition>
, British director Gurinder Chadha’s epic new film, are barked out in Hindi by 
a tough colonial Scot at the head of a vast team of flunkies who, only 70 years 
ago, were ensuring the smooth running of the 340-room palace in New Delhi that 
was headquarters for British rule of an entire subcontinent. The scene then 
shifts to two Indian staff overheard irreverently discussing an alabaster bust 
of Queen Victoria, the empress who “never even set foot in India”.

It is a world familiar from popular films and television dramas set during the 
Raj. But something is different. The traces are being kicked over after 200 
years of subservience. The British are about to relinquish their hold on the 
“jewel in the crown” of empire.

Related: The most exciting period and historical films of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/27/most-exciting-period-and-historical-films-of-2017>

When Chadha, best known for her 2002 film Bend It Like Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Observer_review/0,,683987,00.html>
, set out to tell her story of “the people’s partition” of India, she wanted to 
focus on the lives of those affected, rather than linger on the terrible 
violence that marked the creation of India and Pakistan in 1947.

“‘The people’s partition’ was actually my working title seven years ago when I 
began,” she told theObserver. “I wanted to show the emotional impact, not the 
fighting. My maternal grandmother came to live with us in the 1970s and she was 
still totally traumatised. When she sat with us to watch telly she would be 
disturbed by conflict of any kind. We laughed at her, but she would say, ‘You 
don’t know what happened to us!’”

What the director could not guess was that her personal film, which premieres 
at the Berlin film festival in February, would also challenge accepted history. 
Studying the archives, Chadha came across confidential government documents 
that support a revisionist view of the lead-up to Indian independence, which 
was finally declared at the stroke of midnight on 15 August 1947. The British 
decision to draw a line through the whole of south Asia, creating two 
religiously defined new nations, was not entirely forced on them by the warring 
communities. It was, in fact, an idea hatched by Churchill during the war to 
protect British strategic interests.
 Gurinder Chadha: ‘I was absolutely furious when Downton Abbey came out first, 
but now I am so grateful. The genre has become global in a very big way.’ 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
“My big headline message is still that partition was a blunder. But the more I 
read, I found that secret British moves to retain influence over the port of 
Karachi gave me a new plot twist,” said Chadha. “History is always written by 
the victors, as we say at the outset of the film, and I was told at school that 
partition was ‘our’ fault because the Muslims, Sikhs and Hindus had fought with 
each other. But a document in the British Library marked ‘Top secret: only for 
circulation among chiefs of staff’ makes it clear the British felt they could 
not just hand all India back just after the war. The solution was for a 
Pakistani regime, friendly to Britain, to control Karachi, on the borders of 
Afghanistan, and notIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.”

Chadha’s film stars Hugh Bonneville as the last viceroy, Louis Mountbatten, and
Gillian Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gillian-anderson> as his 
influential wife, Edwina. WhenViceroy’s House comes to British cinemas in 
March, it will be the first film to be released in two languages: English and 
Hindi.

“Bend It Like Beckham was the first film to be number one at the box office in 
both Britain and India, and this is just as proud a moment for me,” said 
Chadha. Her screenplay, co-written with her husband, Paul Mayeda Berges, and 
Moira Buffini, was inspired by her own family story. Chadha’s grandparents had 
been forced from their house in what is nowPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> to travel as refugees to a new, 
Hindu-dominated India.

All the same, Chadha wanted to take a balanced view. “I have had to jump into 
so many camps to make this film. I wanted to be able to sit and watch it in 
London, in Delhi and in Lahore,” she said. A fair portrayal of Muhammad Ali 
Jinnah, leader of the Muslim League and the first governor general of Pakistan, 
was particularly important. “I told Denzil Smith, who plays Jinnah, that I 
wanted him to smile in this film. He is usually made such a villain.”

Early in Chadha’s research she met Prince Charles at a charity event and told 
him she planned a film about Mountbatten’s handling of Indian independence and 
partition. Intrigued, the prince suggested some further reading. The prince 
will probably be pleased that Mountbatten, a favourite great-uncle, is largely 
let off the hook by Chadha. Charming, respectful and diplomatic, Bonneville’s 
earl has no clue he is being used as a benign front for divisive British plans.

“One has to understand that throughout India Mountbatten is vilified,” said 
Chadha. “But when Narendra Singh Sarila, who wroteThe Shadow of the Great Game, 
was working on another book with an assistant in the British Library in 1997, 
he found documents that prove that early plans for the shape of a future 
Pakistan were kept hidden,” said Chadha.

“I can see it was the right thing for the British government to do, from their 
perspective. They wanted a base to help control Russia. That was ‘the great 
game’ then and it continues.”

Mountbatten’s wife emerges from the film as a strong and modernising force. 
“The story is partly about a marriage. Edwina was very political and pushy, I 
think, although Mountbatten had been chosen to go out to India precisely 
because he wasn’t a politician,” said Chadha.
 Lord and Lady Mountbatten and Mahatma Gandhi in New Delhi in March 1947, 
shortly before partition. Photograph: AP 
An affair between Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru and Lady Mountbatten is 
alluded to in a couple of shots, but Chadha judged it was not central to her 
tale. “It is widely known there was an immense closeness there, but, from what 
I gathered, the relationship was consummated after this period.”

Anderson’s Edwina battles prejudice inside Viceroy’s House and later helps 
refugees. These scenes were based on archive footage and on conversations with 
Lady Pamela Hicks, the couple’s daughter, now 87. “Pamela told us her mother 
sent back a Miss Hudson to the home counties when it was ‘discovered she was 
racially prejudiced’, so we put it in the film,” said Chadha.

While some historians blame Mountbatten and the British for religious violence 
that saw hundreds of thousands killed, others criticise Gandhi for aligning his 
politics with spiritualism and, later, with Hinduism. Chadha acknowledges this 
fault, but traces the fatal divisions back to a former viceroy, Lord Curzon.

A key wedding scene in the film shows Indians of all religions happily 
recognising each other’s faiths. “For centuries they had got on with the common 
principle that if you had a faith, it was OK. It was a binding thing,” she 
said. “There was conflict within that, of course. In 1857 the unrest known in 
Britain as the Indian Mutiny broke out. The Brits panicked and so Lord Curzon 
introduced the colonial concept of ‘divide and rule’.”

In 2006 Chadha was the subject of the BBC’s long-running history show, Who Do 
You Think You Are?, and found the experience “an emotional rollercoaster”. 
Visiting her grandfather’s home for the first time, she found Pakistani people 
living there who, like her family, had been forced to leave their former homes.

In 1941 the population of Karachi had been almost half Hindu, while a third of 
the inhabitants of Delhi were Muslim. A decade later there were almost no 
Hindus in Karachi and 200,000 Muslims had left Delhi.

The refugee journeys scarred even surviving families. Chadha’s other 
grandmother lost her grip on sanity for ever when her baby, Chadha’s aunt 
Tripat, died from starvation.

“Someone came and placed a rock on the baby’s chest. They wrapped her in a 
cloth and she was taken to the river. You can’t talk to my aunts about it even 
now. My story is just one of many,” said Chadha.

The Viceroy’s House is the centre of this tale of division. Chadha had planned 
an “Upstairs, Downstairs” approach, looking at life in the state rooms and in 
the servants’ quarters and was annoyed whenDownton Abbey reached television 
screens first. “I was absolutely furious,” she said, “but now I am so grateful. 
The genre has become global in a very big way.” The hit ITV drama series also 
gave her a viceroy in Bonneville.

The Viceroy’s House, designed by British architect Edwin Lutyens, is now the 
state home of the Indian president. A visit from Chadha confirmed its “great 
presence. Impressive architecture was considered a necessary part of colonial 
rule. It was only completed in the early 1930s and I don’t think Lutyens would 
have expected it to be turned over to Indian hands just 20 years later.”

Chadha hoped to make a film like the British Raj films she loves: A Passage to 
India and Gandhi. “But it is my personal view. What makes this film British, 
with a Punjabi beating heart, is its sense of fairness. People will have 
quibbles, but Pakistanis seem to feel it shows they survived and Indians see 
all the British skulduggery.

“In Britain we can feel some guilt, but also now see what the politicians were 
trying to secure.”

ROAD TO DIVISION

1857 The Indian Mutiny, a rebellion against the British East India Company, 
known in India as the first war of independence.

1905 Lord Curzon, the British viceroy, formulates the “divide and rule” policy 
and partitions Bengal on 16 October into two new provinces: Bengal, and Eastern 
Bengal and Assam.

1945 PM Winston Churchill, leaving office, bequeaths the government a secret 
wartime plan to retain influence of the key strategic port of Karachi after 
Indian independence.

1946 First of a series of religious massacres in Calcutta.

March 1947 A new viceroy, Lord Louis Mountbatten, arrives with his wife, 
Edwina, and daughter, Pamela. Rioting and killing continues. Negotiations with 
Nehru, Jinnah and Gandhi fail.

15 August Independence is declared at midnight and two days later partition 
creates the Dominion of Pakistan (which included the future Bangladesh). The 
largest mass migration in human history follows, displacing 14 million Hindus, 
Sikhs and Muslims.
 