
Wednesday marks 10 years since David Beckham confirmed he would leave Madrid 
and head to California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/jan/11/newsstory.europeanfootball> 
to sign with the Los Angeles Galaxy. Then football’s most recognisable star, he 
arrived in Major League Soccer with the goal of improving the American game.
Beckham promised to “make a difference” Stateside 
<http://www.espn.com/espn/wire?section=soccer&id=2728604>, but where did he 
fail and where did he succeed?

Successes

1) He raised the profile of MLS

Like it or not, MLS’s profile improved with Beckham in the league. At the 
time, the midfielder was a global superstar, a status that drew eyes to a 
league that had, until then, had a low profile internationally.

His arrival and positive rhetoric regarding the league has also heavily 
influenced other professionals in considering North America as a place to play 
their football. Whether it was Frank Lampard or Sebastian Giovinco, Beckham’s 
decision to go to the US amid interest from other high-ranking European teams 
gave the league a certain legitimacy. It constructed the notion that there was 
something to be built in the US, and that players could earn more than just a 
hefty salary, something Beckham touched on when he arrived.

“With me, it’s about football,” he said. “I’m coming there to make a 
difference. I’m coming there to play football. I’m not saying me coming over to 
the States is going to make soccer the biggest sport in America. That would be 
difficult to achieve. Baseball, basketball, American football, they’ve been 
around. But I wouldn’t be doing this if I didn’t think I could make a 
difference.”

Whether he remained true to that is up for debate, what isn’t is that the 
league’s profile improved with his arrival.

2) He raised his own profile
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faafd0a09d162648e4294a00ed61412dcc0ed101c%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20decade%20on%2C%20did%20David%20Beckham's%20move%20to%20MLS%20make%20a%20difference%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20decade%20on%2C%20did%20David%20Beckham%27s%20move%20to%20MLS%20make%20a%20difference%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faafd0a09d162648e4294a00ed61412dcc0ed101c%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 David Beckham and Tom Cruise greet each other at an NBA game in 2011. 
Photograph: Andrew D Bernstein/NBAE/Getty Images 
It was a moment that left Robbie Keane a tad red-faced. The Republic of 
Ireland internationalwas captioned as an ‘unidentified fan’ 
<https://www.joe.ie/uncategorized/pic-possibly-the-cruellest-robbie-keane-photo-caption-youll-ever-see/41061>
 while posing for a snap alongside Galaxy team-mate Beckham, and Russell Brand 
at an LA Lakers game.

It was a moment that raised a smile among football fans, but the same 
awkwardness would never befall Beckham.Whether he was court-side 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/othersports/article-2622136/NBA-Play-offs-LeBron-James-fires-Miami-Heat-victory-Brooklyn-Nets.html>
, oron David Letterman’s talk show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jgVh66v-G1s>
 Beckham was unmistakable.

It’s a testament to his legacy – or maybe just his army of PR staff – that 
Beckham is still active on the US talk show circuit. It can be tough for an 
athlete to stay relevant after retirement, but Beckham’s blend of talent, good 
looks, and charm has made him a well-known figure in the United States with his 
move toMLS <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> catapulting him into the 
consciousness of the US audience.

“There’s only one player in the last 20 years that is iconic in the way that 
David Beckham is,”Grant Wahl told CNN in 2013 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/05/16/us/beckham-american-impact/>. “I think part of 
it is, he’s a tremendously good-looking guy who has embraced the positive and 
negative that comes with being a global celebrity. Women love the guy.”

Whether Beckham’s victory in promoting Beckham helped anyone other than his 
family is another question.

3) He delivered on the field, eventually

It’s fair to say Beckham was not an instant playing success in MLS. He 
reinvented himself as a central midfielder as his 30s wore on, and the former 
England international saw injury curtail his debut season, but he did 
eventually show his quality on the ball.

In terms of on-field performance, Beckham was only ever likely to be evaluated 
by the silverware he accrued while with the Galaxy. When he signed for the club 
in 2007 they had two MLS Cups, while DC United were the most successful team in 
the league with four.Fast forward to 2012 and the teams were tied 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MLS_Cup#Champions>, thanks to Beckham winning 
two of the three MLS Cup finals he contested.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtxXRD3ENwk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtxXRD3ENwk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtxXRD3ENwk&media=>
Beckham’s success wasn’t confined to show-piece occasions though. He produced 
many memorable moments on the field, including trademark free-kicks and one 
goal from inside his own half. Still a fierce competitor even as his playing 
career wound down, his best season was arguably 2011 in which he recovered from 
a mid-season spine fracture to record 15 assists.

The failures

1) His proposed franchise remains in a state of limbo

It speaks volumes of David Beckham’s MLS franchise that it still does not have 
a name, despite being announced almost three years ago.

Beckham’s franchise bid was confirmed in February 2014 at a lavish ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/05/david-beckham-confirms-mls-team-miami>
, but his goal of MLS dominancehas been hindered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/miami-david-beckham-mls-stadium>
 by an inability to secure a stadium in downtown Miami. An issue many sceptics 
highlighted at the time, there are also concerns about the general viability of 
a team in Miami. The city housed the Miami Fusion from 1997 until 2001 when 
financial problems forced the team to fold.

Why Miami made David Beckham work hard for his MLS stadium dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/miami-david-beckham-mls-stadium>
Seemingly undeterred, Beckham has maintained a positive outlook on things with 
a belief his persistence will produce rewards. Meanwhile, Don Garber – the 
league’s commissioner – has begun to lose patience, admitting in December that 
a conclusion was required soon.

“Everybody needs to understand, including David and his partners, that we’ve 
worked hard, and it’s time for us to reach a conclusion,”Garber told the Miami 
Herald 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/miami-dade/article121201883.html>
.

Beckham’s ownership group had acquired land in Overtown, Miami, but 
bureaucratic delays mean there has been little tangible progress in 2016. 
Garber did state that he was “more confident than a year ago” about the team’s 
prospects, but if the franchise fails to materialize it will be a failure for 
the usually successful Beckham.

2) His loan spells were disrespectful to Galaxy fans
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef42bbbad27d3ec84f922061f101a9b68c51db04%2F0_0_3000_2028%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20decade%20on%2C%20did%20David%20Beckham's%20move%20to%20MLS%20make%20a%20difference%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20decade%20on%2C%20did%20David%20Beckham%27s%20move%20to%20MLS%20make%20a%20difference%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-beckham-la-galaxy-mls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef42bbbad27d3ec84f922061f101a9b68c51db04%2F0_0_3000_2028%2F3000.jpg>
 David Beckham was subject to the ire of sections of the LA Galaxy’s fans. 
Photograph: Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
David Beckham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham> may have 
left with general goodwill when his MLS career ended in 2012, but there was a 
time when he was much maligned among his own supporters.

“Go home fraud”, read one banner. “Hey Becks, Here Before You, Here after You, 
Here Despite You,”said another 
<http://www.cnn.com/2009/SPORT/football/07/20/mls.beckham.fans.row/index.html>.

Beckham’s meek start to life in the league wasn’t helped by the fact he missed 
the start of the 2009 season so he could remain on loan at Italian giants 
Milan. Understandablymet with criticism from Galaxy supporters upon his return 
<http://www.cnn.com/2009/SPORT/football/07/20/mls.beckham.fans.row/index.html>, 
the midfielder cited a desire to prolong his England career as the reason 
behind the temporary stints in Serie A.

Landon Donovan – I was wrong to criticise David Beckham at LA Galaxy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/08/landon-donovan-david-beckham> 
When he returned to Milan again in 2010 he suffered a torn achilles tendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/15/david-beckham-world-cup-injury>
, which left him out for six months of the season. Beckham was far from the 
only MLS star to engage in a post-season loan – the likes of Thierry Henry and 
Robbie Keane both returned to the Premier League – but they came back in time 
to start their seasons in the US.

Beckham’s commitment to the league was subsequently questioned, and team-mate 
Landon Donovan also criticized him publicly for his lack of commitment (
although the US international later apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/08/landon-donovan-david-beckham>
). On the plus side, the aforementioned banners may now be worth something if 
not a unique piece of American soccer memorabilia.

3) It was more about his celebrity than football

When the Beckhams moved to Los Angeles they rubbed shoulders with a host of 
celebrities. In fact, during David’s first game with the Galaxy, (a 1-0 loss to 
Chelsea) a host of stars came out to watch, including Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, 
Jennifer Love Hewitt, Eva Longoria and Arnold Schwarzenegger.

It’s fair to say the Beckhams embraced the celebrity culture. As David toured 
the chat shows, his wife Victoria landed her own reality show,Victoria Beckham: 
Coming to America 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victoria_Beckham:_Coming_to_America>. It lasted 
one episode.

In fairness to Beckham, the focus did seem to shift to his football towards 
the end of his time in Los Angeles, with the midfielder admitting in 2013 he 
had been hurt by criticism of his celebrity driven persona. “At the end of the 
day I’m a footballer who has played for some of the biggest clubs in the world, 
with some of the best players in the world, and under some of the biggest and 
best managers, and achieved almost everything in football,” he said. “I hope 
people will remember me as a hard-working footballer, someone who was 
passionate about the game and someone that gave everything that they have, 
because that’s how I feel.”
 