
This week Kirsan Ilyumzhinov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/sep/21/russia.chess>, an eccentric 
Russian provincial governor, was re-elected as president of the international 
chess federation (Fide) after abitter contest with the former world champion 
Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/sep/29/chess-karpov-kirsan-ilyumzhinov> 
that descended into allegations of bribery, corruption and the issuing of law 
suits.

Why does this election matter? Basically, this was a fight for the soul of 
chess. Ilyumzhinov's 15-year reign as president of Fide has been marked by 
quixotic and autocratic decision-making, allegations of corruption, and the 
lack of any serious sponsors.

Ilyumzhinov is a businessman and politician who acquired a vast fortune in the 
early 1990s in the free-for-all that followed the break-up of the Soviet Union. 
He became president of the impoverished autonomous Russian Republic of Kalmykia 
in 1993 after promising to raise the monthly income of every Kalmyk family to 
$100 a month. Since then, he has lavished vast funds on pet projects such as 
the building of opulent Buddhist temples and, connected with his presidency of 
Fide, the construction of aChess City <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chess_City> 
in Kalmykia that hosted the chess Olympics in 1998, but now stands as something 
of a folly. As president of Kalmykia, he has concentrated power in his own 
hands and suppressed political opposition. Media rights group Reporters Without 
Bordersdescribed the Kalmyk authorities 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/country_profiles/4580467.stm> as 
"among the most repressive towards the media in the entire Russian Federation".

In 1998, Larissa Yudina 
<http://www.ifex.org/russia/2008/06/13/journalists_call_for_new_investigation/>
, editor of the Republic's only opposition newspaper, was murdered and the 
Kalmykian authorities were suspected of involvement. Recently, Ilyumzhinov has 
attracted attention from the world's media as he claims that he has been
abducted by aliens <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8662822.stm>. In the Russian 
parliament, a representative asked (without obvious irony) whether this might 
have constituted a security risk as he could have given away state secrets.

Given all this, how come Ilyumzhinov was re-elected as Fide's president for 
another four years? In short, by having more money and more political savvy 
than his opponent,Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov>. Karpov was world champion 
from 1975 to 1985 and is hugely respected within the chess world, but could not 
match Ilyumzhinov's financial promises. He also made a huge mistake by bringing 
his former rivalGarry Kasparov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov> into his team. Since 
retiring from chess five years ago, Kasparov has thrown himself into Russian 
politics, becoming anoutspoken critic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/08/russia.lukeharding> of Putin and 
Medvedev. The Kremlin must have feared that Kasparov would use Fide as a 
platform to attack them and they therefore threw their support and influence 
behind Ilyumzhinov.

In England, where chess has little cultural significance, it is hard for us to 
imagine the central place of the game inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. At the 1925 Soviet party congress, 
it was decided that chess – scientific and logical chess – was to be promoted 
by the state as an ideological project to wean the people away from the 
superstitions of the Russian orthodox church. Within a decade, millions were 
playing in organised competitions and Soviet players came to dominate the chess 
world in the 20th century. Since those early Soviet days, chess and politics 
have been inextricably linked.

So, Ilyumzhinov had the backing of the Kremlin and, on a basic level, he 
(allegedly) offered financial inducements to delegates – paying air fares and 
promising funds for country federations. On a larger scale, this has been the 
financial model during Ilyumzhinov's incumbency. If a tournament sponsor pulled 
out, he used his political connections within the former Soviet Union to find a 
new venue or simply made up the financial shortfall from his own deep pockets. 
The great tournaments and matches in the chess world used to take place in New 
York, London, Paris and Moscow. Now they are played in obscure provincial 
Russian towns, like the current chess Olympics taking place in Siberia. Thus 
the chess world limps on.

The tragedy is that chess ought to be a dream for sponsors with its global 
appeal and intellectual cachet. A glance at advertising hoardings demonstrates 
how often the iconography and language of chess is used as, for example, we are 
urged "to make the right move" by financial institutions. Numerous studies have 
shown the educational benefits of playing chess: it improves concentration, 
promotes disciplined decision-making, and forces us to think ahead. The game is 
played in every single country in the world, it is a universal language, 
culturally diverse, with anancient history 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_chess> that touches literature, music, 
art and science. Chess is also ideally suited to the digital age, with vast 
amounts of information available online and games broadcast live over the net.

But given Ilyumzhinov's record and background, it's no surprise that during 
his reign as president no serious western sponsor has come forward to support 
the chess world. He is, by his own admission, on another planet. And that 
leaves the rest of us, in the real world, struggling to promote the game 
seriously.
 