
I’m a 71-year-old man with a husband who is 21 years younger. We’ve been 
together for eight years and married for two. The problem is that I got 
traumatised by fear of Aids in the late 80s and I’ve become inhibited in my 
sexual behaviour. I was brought up in a time when homosexuality was against the 
law, and I am still struggling to liberate myself.

Make two lists now – the first one of all the erotically exciting things you 
would like to do, regardless of any risk for HIV transmission. Make it a long 
list, and let your imagination take you wherever it will – from passionate 
embraces in a dark movie theatre or exciting touches while swimming at a 
private picnic, to full-on intercourse, oral sex or whatever might be arousing 
for you.


Then make another list of just those things you fancy that could expose you to 
a risk of HIV exposure. You will find that the second list is extremely short 
compared with the first. The point is, there are so many non-insertive forms of 
wonderfully erotic sex, you can stop worrying about disease and instead focus 
on pleasure. Put your sexual energy and imagination to summoning the positive 
aspects of love-making, then act on whatever is comfortable, not forgetting 
erotic conversation, mutual masturbation and sex toys. If your husband will 
cooperate by creating his own thrilling list, so much the better!

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/20/private.lives@theguardian.com>
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 