
Would it make all that much difference if Captain America were gay? A gay Iron 
Man, now, given Tony Stark’s penchant for making lewd comments in theMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> movies, would have made for a 
spikier shift in dynamics. A gay Hulk might have been read as homophobia, 
particularly if alter ego Bruce Banner remained straight. A gay Black Widow 
would have fed into stereotypes about physically adept women.

But a gay Captain America? Would anyone even notice? 

Jane Bond is just James in a frock. We need a new heroine | Catherine Shoard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/jane-bond-james-heroine-gillian-anderson>
Perhaps that’s why the Twitter user behind the #givecaptainamericaaboyfriend 
hashtag <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GiveCaptainAmericaABoyfriend> chose good 
old Steve Rogers to have their sexuality switched, the latest salvo in the 
ongoingGLAAD-backed 
<http://www.comicbookresources.com/article/glaad-addresses-givecaptainamericaaboyfriend-hashtag>
 battle to improveHollywood’s appalling record on diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/major-study-hollywood-endemic-diversity-crisis>
. Chris Evans’s patriotic hero is the guy you’d introduce your daughter (or 
son) to, rather than the Avengers member one might choose to go for a beer 
with. He’s the superhero equivalent of Alan Titchmarsh, an uncomplicated titan 
of conservatism in the tradition of that doyen of American innocence, Forrest 
Gump (though with a rather higher IQ). As Stark himself has pointed out, Rogers 
doesn’t even use curse words.

As such, Gay Cap would probably make no more of a fuss about his sexual 
proclivities than the current Straight Cap does. Which you have to assume is 
exactly the campaign’s point, even if the idea seems to have entered from way 
out in left field. After all, while therecent social-media drive to switch John 
Boyega and Oscar Isaac’s relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/20/gay-kiss-star-wars-episode-viii-john-boyega-oscar-isaac>
 from bromance to romance in the new Star Wars movies made a certain sort of 
sense, Rogers’s coming out would undercut both his previous passion for Hayley 
Attwell’s Peggy Carter and his burgeoning romance with her niece, Sharon, in 
current Marvel film Captain America: Civil War.

That doesn’t mean Marvel and its owner Disney are off the hook here: the 
studios certainly ought to be thinking about introducing a gay superhero into 
the Avengers continuum at the earliest opportunity. It’s just that there are 
better candidates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fgay-captain-america-female-bond-steve-rogers-marvel-civil-war-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c51193151ab66e6e6e1bc251f70e930b1e6fbe6%2F0_0_1893_1136%2F1893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20gay%20superhero%3F%20Yes%20please!%20Just%20not%20Captain%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fgay-captain-america-female-bond-steve-rogers-marvel-civil-war-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20gay%20superhero%3F%20Yes%20please%21%20Just%20not%20Captain%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fgay-captain-america-female-bond-steve-rogers-marvel-civil-war-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c51193151ab66e6e6e1bc251f70e930b1e6fbe6%2F0_0_1893_1136%2F1893.jpg>
 Huge impact … Chadwick Boseman as T’Challa/the Black Panther in Captain 
America: Civil War. Photograph: Allstar/Marvel Studios 
Would a gay relationship in Star Wars: Episode VIII be revolutionary?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/20/gay-kiss-star-wars-episode-viii-john-boyega-oscar-isaac>
In the same way that Chadwick Boseman’s debut as the Black Panther in the 
Marvel universe made a greater impact than Anthony Mackie’s Falcon, because of 
everything the Panther represents in terms of Afro-centrism and black power 
politics, the introduction of a traditionally gay superhero would remind us 
that Marvel hasn’t shied away from diversity in print. While gay X-Men 
characters such as Mystique and Northstar may be off-limits (Marvel Studios 
doesn’t own the screen rights to X-Men), it would be easy enough to introduce 
teenage lovers Hulkling and Wiccan into the Avengers.

Marvel’s decision to drop hints about the pair’s sexuality in the pages of 
Young Avengers more than a decade ago was accompanied by a battle in the 
letters pages between those who backed and opposed the idea of gay superheroes. 
This was a genuine shift in the zeitgeist, and one confirmed in 2010 when the 
two shared their first on-panel kiss a full five years before the US made gay 
marriage legal nationwide. Bringing these heroes of the revolution to the big 
screen would be a worthy way of showing that Marvel, and the under-fire Disney, 
have no problem with gay people.

On a similar note, I’m not sure there are too many people out there who would 
really want to seethe next James Bond played by a woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/24/jane-bond-gillian-anderson-next-007-twitter>
, however tantalising the prospect of a 007 essayed by Rosamund Pike or Olivia 
Colman might be.Marvel might have made the new Thor female in the comics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shortcuts/2014/jul/16/female-thor-good-feminine-male-superhero-better>
, but Bond doesn’t necessarily need to switch genders just to prove the 
diversity point.


As I’ve argued before, there’s plenty of room for spin-offs and alternate 
versions in the Bond universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/23/james-bond-cinematic-universe-idris-elba-tom-hiddleston-tom-hardy>
. So let Jane Bond exist alongside her male counterpart.

At the same time, we need to accept the point these campaigns are making: that 
the vast majority of blockbusters are headlined by white, male stars, and this 
needs to change. Challenging the status quo, even in controversial ways, is the 
kind of message studios need to send if they are to be taken seriously on 
diversity.

Gay Cap and Jane Bond may seem like examples of tokenism. But if Hollywood has 
any hope of fending off accusations it is lagging several decades behind the 
societies it caters to, and ultimately aims to reflect, these might be just the 
kind of heroes it needs right now.
 