
What does it mean to say that a psychological or behavioural condition has a 
biological cause? Over the past week more battles have been raging over 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), after a paper published by a 
group of Cardiff researchers found evidence for a genetic association with the 
condition.Their study looked 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2810%2961109-9/fulltext>
 for chromosomal deletions and duplications known as copy number variants (CNV) 
and found that these were present in 16% of the children with ADHD.

What many reports did not tell you – including the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/sep/30/hyperactive-children-genetic-disorder-study>
 – is that this same pattern of CNV was also found in 8% of the children 
without ADHD. So that's not a massive difference.

More interesting were the moral and cultural interpretations heaped on to this 
finding, not least by the authors themselves. "Now we can say with confidence 
that ADHD is a genetic disease and that the brains of children with this 
condition develop differently to those of other children," saidProfessor Anita 
Thapar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/sep/30/hyperactive-children-genetic-disorder-study>
. "We hope that these findings will help overcome the stigma associated with 
ADHD."

Does the belief that such problems have a biological cause really help to 
reduce stigma?

In 2001, Read and Harre 
<http://informahealthcare.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09638230123129> explored 
attitudes among first-year undergraduate psychology students, with 
questionnaires designed to probe belief about the causes of mental health 
problems, and responses on six-point scales to statements such as: "I would be 
less likely to become romantically involved with someone if I knew they had 
spent time in a psychiatric hospital." People who believed more in a biological 
or genetic cause were more likely to believe that people with mental health 
problems were unpredictable and dangerous, more likely to fear them and more 
likely to avoid interacting with them. An earlier study in 1999 byRead and Law 
<http://isp.sagepub.com/content/45/3/216.full.pdf+html> had similar results.

In 2002 Walker and Read <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12530335> showed 
young adults a video portraying a man with psychotic symptoms, such as 
hallucinations and delusions, then gave them either biogenetic or psychosocial 
explanations. Yet again, the "medical model" approach significantly increased 
perceptions of dangerousness and unpredictability.

In 2004 Dietrich and colleagues 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1440-1614.2004.01363.x/abstract> 
conducted a series of structured interviews with three representative 
population samples in Germany, Russia and Mongolia. Endorsing biological 
factors as the root cause for schizophrenia was associated with a greater 
desire for social distance.

Lastly, more compelling than any individual study, a review of the literature 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2006.00824.x/full> to 
date in 2006 found that overall, biogenetic causal theories, and labelling 
something as an "illness", are both positively related to perceptions of 
dangerousness and unpredictability, and to fear and desire for social distance. 
They identified 19 studies addressing the question. Eighteen found that belief 
in a genetic or biological cause was associated with more negative attitudes to 
people with mental health problems. Just one found the opposite, that belief in 
a genetic or biological cause was associated with more positive attitudes.

These findings are at odds with everything that many people who campaign 
against stigma have assumed for many years, but they're not entirely 
nonsensical. Jo Phelan, in her paper"Genetic bases of mental illness – a cure 
for stigma?" 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6T0V-469PSG3-N&_user=10&_coverDate=08%2F01%2F2002&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=2282a90cae9851e8cafdd5cd68c5c8f0&searchtype=a>
, said that a story about genetic causes may lead to people being conceived of 
as "defective" or "physically distinct". It can create an associative stigma 
for the whole family, who in turn receive labels such as "at risk" or 
"carrier". This stigma may persist long after ADHD symptoms have receded in 
adulthood: perhaps a partner will wonder: "Do I really want to risk having a 
child with this person, given their genetic predisposition?"

Perhaps it will go further than that: your children, before they even begin to 
show any signs of inattentiveness or hyperactivity, will experience a kind of 
anticipatory stigma. Do they have this condition, just like their father? "It's 
genetic you know." Perhaps the threshold for attaining a diagnosis of ADHD will 
be lower for your children: it's a condition, like many others, with a notably 
flexible diagnostic boundary.

Blaming parents is vile. But before reading this research I think I also 
assumed, unthinkingly, like many people, that a "biological cause" story about 
mental health problems was inherently valuable for combating stigma. Now I'm 
not so sure. People who want to combat prejudice may need to challenge their 
own prejudices, too.

I'll be speaking at today's protest against science cuts, 2pm outside the 
Treasury. See scienceisvital.org.uk/
 