
A year ago on this blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/mar/21/non-linear-film-narrative-contraband>
, I speculated about whether the fragmented, non-linear narrative that 
re-emerged in the noughties as the best method of tossing a net over the 
globalised decade's intertwinings and complexities was gone for good. Some 
people had questioned, especially after Alejandro González Iñárritu'sBabel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112357/babel>, whether the form had 
anything deeper than "We're all connected" Benettonisms to offer – a criticism 
that resurfaced in reviews of the Wachowskis'Cloud Atlas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148731/cloud-atlas> (well, I enjoyed it!).

The New Disorder – as David Denby termed it in his essay for the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2007/03/05/070305crat_atlarge_denby>
 – has certainly lost some of its timezone-flyby thrill, as maybe globalisation 
itself did after the credit crunch. But the world hasn't got any less 
complicated. Its tangle of overlapping cultures, and the heightening pace of 
change, still throw particular challenges at storytellers. If non-linear 
jigsaws were too superficial, then old-school linear narrative – of the sort 
practised by Hollywood – is too lodged in a single, self-serving perspective. 
One sign of this is what I like to call "the Villain Problem": Hollywood used 
to be quite happy, viewing the world down the sight of an American gun, to 
label Russians or Arabs or whoever as its bad guys. But that's impossible these 
days without offending someone, possibly even a paying audience segment. 
Psychopaths, terrorists, genetically modified freaks, even all three at once 
(well done, the newStar Trek 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150829/star-trek-into-darkness>), are 
about all that is left in the cupboard.

A pair of new releases this week suggest that it might be possible for the 
global film to thread a way between oversimplifying and overelaboration.The 
Reluctant Fundamentalist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149954/reluctant-fundamentalist> and A 
Hijacking <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149953/hijacking> both take 
completely disparate elements of 21st-century life, in the way of the noughties 
global-hopping picture, and attempt to fuse them into a traditional, coherent 
story: Manhattan high finance and the madrassas of Lahore in the former; a 
Copenhagen boardroom and Somalian piracy in the other.

The Reluctant Fundamentalist is probably the more ambitious work, covering 
serious ground as it attempts to marry the ideologies that have driven the 
geopolitics of the last decade: global capitalism and Islamic militancy.Riz 
Ahmed <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/riz-ahmed> excels as Changez, a young 
Pakistani maverick who wows Wall Street but then has a Damascene conversion on 
the road away from 9/11.

Director Mira Nair aspires to see our world through both (equally distorting) 
sides of the prism – but The Reluctant Fundamentalist only flickers with 
insight into how the west and the rest view, and influence, each other. She has 
specialised in sitting between the two camps in her past work, but perhaps it's 
telling that the film runs, finally, on American lines: it's governed by a 
reductive (and lumpily executed) thriller dynamic that inhibits exploration of 
ambiguous issues. Instead there is the crude suggestion that extremes such as 
capitalism and religious fanaticism are mirror images – but The Reluctant 
Fundamentalist relies completely on those extremes to manufacture drama. Not 
quite the ruefulGraham Greene <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/grahamgreene>
-esque inhabitation of a grey area promised by the title.

In some ways A Hijacking (Kapringen), a Danish film by Tobias Lindholm, deals 
with the same subject matter: violence committed against affluent westerners by 
the excluded. But, limiting its action to a stricken Indian Ocean cargo ship 
and the Copenhagen offices of its owners, it's far more tautly dramatised.

As the negotiations over ransom money drag out into weeks and months, there's 
more room to pick out incongruities and subtleties on each side. In the 
boardroom, as ice-cool CEO Søren Malling strains to reduce the payout, there's 
the nagging sense that, behind the concern and the talk of not appeasing 
terrorists, the crew are part of a worldwide commodity chain, with a price. On 
the ship, culture clash comes into play to queasy effect: the cook, played by
Pilou Asbæk <http://pilouasbaek.dk/>, is forced to slaughter a goat in order to 
prepare a meal for his captors. They probably don't think twice about how 
abnormal doing this is for a European; but, containing all the implicit 
violence hovering above him and his shipmates, it's this act that finally 
breaks him.

Lindholm helped script Borgen <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/borgen>, 
so perhaps these levels of scrutiny and delicacy are to be expected. It shows 
how dampening the wanderlust of its noughties predecessors can compress and 
amplify the moral force of these global stories. To use the old chaos-theory 
metaphor of a butterfly causing a storm on the other side of the world, perhaps 
Babel and its ilk got too fixated on the grandeur of the storm, and there's 
more scope to put the wings under lucid magnification. And A Hijacking is still 
as formally elegant as Babel, alternating crisply between air-conditioned 
conference room and fly-plagued ship's dorm. Its successes, and The Reluctant 
Fundamentalist's failings, show how the severe juxtapositions of 21st-century 
life are still putting pressure on narrative to evolve. Or perhaps we should 
call that opportunity.

• Next week's After Hollywood looks at the rise of the Muslim blockbuster. 
Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let 
us know in the comments below.
 