
"Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal" - TS Eliot

Plagiarism - the attempt to pass off the ideas, research, theories or words of 
others as one's own - is a serious academic offence. A new study by the 
Qualifications and Curriculum Authority warns that exam boards appear to be 
failing to spot cheating, even though the number of cases of fraud is 
increasing. Last year, 3,600 teenagers were caught breaching the rules - a 9% 
rise on the previous year.

The word plagiarism derives from Latin roots: plagiarius, an abductor, and 
plagiare, to steal. An example of plagiarism would be copying this definition 
and pasting straight into a report. Plagiarism is a very ancient art. 
Shakespeare stole most of his historical plots directly from Holinshed. 
Laurence Sterne and Samuel Taylor Coleridge were both accused of plagiarism. 
The extent of Coleridge's plagiarism has been debated by scholars since Thomas 
de Quincey, himself an accomplished borrower, published an exposé in Tait's 
Magazine a couple of weeks after Coleridge's death. Oscar Wilde was repeatedly 
accused of plagiarism: hence the celebrated exchange with Whistler: "I wish I'd 
said that, James."

"Don't worry, Oscar, you will."

In modern times, plagiarism is not limited to lazy and dishonest students. 
Martin Luther King plagiarised part of a chapter of his doctoral thesis. George 
Harrison was successfully sued for plagiarising the Chiffons' He's So Fine for 
My Sweet Lord. Alex Haley copied large passages of his novel Roots from The 
African by Harold Courlander. Princess Michael was accused of plagiarism over 
her book on royal brides. Jayson Blair, then a reporter for the New York Times, 
plagiarised many articles and faked quotes.

In 1997, less than six months after winning the Booker prize, Graham Swift's 
Last Orders was at the centre of accusations that the author had crossed the 
line between inspiration and plagiarism by "directly imitating" an earlier 
work, the 1930 novel As I Lay Dying by William Faulkner. Confronted with the 
accusations, Swift said his book was an "echo" of Faulkner's.

Originality has mattered a great deal in the last 200 years, though the 
importance we attach to it may be declining. TS Eliot's The Waste Land was 
critical. To read The Waste Land is also to read Shakespeare, Chaucer, Webster 
and many others. According to one critic, Eliot practises a "verbal 
kleptomania". In that sense, then, all culture is plagiarism. "I can sum up my 
thoughts on this in two lines," said novelist Julian Barnes of the 
Swift-Faulkner affair. "When Brahms wrote his first symphony, he was accused of 
having used a big theme from Beethoven's Ninth. His reply was that any fool 
could see that."

· We apologise for the fact that three words of the above piece are the 
author's own.

Sources: www.collegeboard.com <http://www.collegeboard.com>; www.plagiarism.org
 <http://www.plagiarism.org>; www.hnn.us <http://www.hnn.us>; www.wikipedia.org 
<http://www.wikipedia.org>; The Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory and 
Criticism; The Columbia Encyclopaedia (sixth edition); essay by David Bouchier 
onwww.wshu.org <http://www.wshu.org>; essay by Anthony Julius in the Guardian 
November 30 1996; Guardian news reports, November 24 1986, March 10 1997, July 
11 1997, November 22 2005
 