
You are a number of my friends. You are a close relative. You are many people 
I see at the park or supermarket. You all love your young children, are utterly 
devoted parents, think deeply about how to raise your offspring in the best way 
possible, but unfortunately often get it wrong.

You want to be nice to your little ones all the time. You don’t know how to 
say no. If you ask your child to do something and they ignore you, you let it 
go. If they do something really inappropriate, for example hit another child, 
you seem to be incapable of reacting with the seriousness such behaviour 
warrants. I’m not advocating punishment, but you don’t seem able to even get 
them to sit down so you can talk about what just happened.

You think deeply about how to raise your offspring in the best way possible, 
but unfortunately often get it wrong

A number of you have children who speak in a whinge or a whine. You respond as 
if a five-year-old talking like a baby is fine. You seem to think that asking 
them to speak in a strong, loud voice will cause lifelong trauma. You don’t 
seem to realise that by ignoring the toddler-talk they’ll quickly get the 
message and speak properly.

The results of this permissive parenting are catastrophic. It seems to break 
down on gender lines: the boys tend to be out-of-control mini-thugs, and the 
girls demanding and prone to tantrums. Both seem immature in their appreciation 
of the needs of others. They are often hard to like, and you are often 
exhausted and miserable. At times you lose your temper, and shock your children 
by shouting or screaming at them.

I’m not blaming you. Those of you I know all seem, tragically, to have one 
thing in common. You had at least one parent (usually the father) who was 
harsh, over-controlling and often punitive. You’ve resolved never to be like 
that. So you’ve gone to the opposite extreme. In a desperate attempt to not be 
authoritarian, you’ve become permissive. You forget that the best way is to be 
authoritative: warm, loving, child-centred, but with an understanding that 
limits and boundaries are crucial to children’s healthy emotional development.

A couple of you have asked in desperation what to do, and I’ve given my 
opinion, which you’ve welcomed. You try to change how you manage behaviour, 
have some initial success, but seem to slip back into the permissive pattern. 
I’ve come to the conclusion that just trying to change your reactions doesn’t 
deal with your own underlying hurts, and that you probably need therapy to 
tackle your unresolved pain and your ambivalence about control.

Parenting has evolved in so many good ways in recent decades. Harsh physical 
punishment is no longer the norm (I suspect it’s not a coincidence that 
violence in society at large has decreased at the same time). Children’s 
emotional needs are given far more consideration than before. But young 
children need to know the world is a safe, containing place, and that there is 
someone there who can psychologically hold them, and control them if necessary, 
through the extremes of ego-centrism they experience.

Be gentle. Be kind. Be caring. Be empathetic and understanding. But be in 
charge. Because one day your wild, spoilt toddler will be an angry, 
unsocialised teenager, and by then it’ll be too late.

Anonymous

We’d love to hear your stories

We will pay £25 for every Letter to, Playlist, Snapshot or We Love to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/familylife> we publish. Write 
to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
 