

The terrorism attack on New York's World Trade Centre, September 11 2001. 
Photograph: Steven James Silva/Reuters

The health of contemporary fiction is a matter for perennial and impassioned 
debate. How effectively do today's novelists portray contemporary society? In a 
multimedia age, can the novel still act as a cultural barometer? The art of 
fiction requires much more than a gift for storytelling, because reading is not 
a passive experience. We need to know why a particular story is worth our time. 
As a bookseller it can be tricky to pinpoint the reading public's appetites, 
but coming up this this autumn are a number of books which many will find 
extremely resonant.

Just as Picasso's Guernica was an immediate and visceral response to the 
horrors of Operation Rügen in 1937, then, many novelists have taken it upon 
themselves to articulate the feelings of the West about the terrorist attacks 
of 9/11.

Of these, I'd particularly recommend The Emperor's Children 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Emperors-Children-Claire-Messud/dp/0330444484/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430140&sr=1-1>
 by Claire Messud, which identifies the fall of the twin towers as the defining 
moment for Generation Y, and Joseph O'Neill'sNetherland 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Netherland-Joseph-ONeill/dp/0007269064/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430065&sr=1-1>
, which portrays a New York whose immigrant community is no longer symbolic of 
America's cherished freedom of opportunity.

But the uncompromisingly unilateral response of the Bush administration and 
its allies now demands something new of our writers: to clarify the values we 
are defending and the moral authority with which we assert them.

Nadeem Aslam's The Wasted Vigil 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Wasted-Vigil-Nadeem-Aslam/dp/0571238777/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430245&sr=1-1>
 takes us to the front line. Set in contemporary Afghanistan, a staging ground 
for the war on terror just as it was for the cold war, its motley characters 
are united in suffering, yet still divided by ideology. Their fates are 
determined remotely, whether by American or Taliban authority, and Aslam's 
lyrical prose contrasts sharply with the senseless and brutal slaughter that 
results.

Meaningless death was at the heart of Chris Cleave's debut novel, Incendiary 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Incendiary-Chris-Cleave/dp/0099490544/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430371&sr=1-2>
, whose innovative account of an east end woman losing her family in the 
terrorist bombing of a football stadium suffered the unfortunate coincidence of 
being released the very day of the London tube bombings.

A different atrocity is the catalyst for Cleave's The Other Hand 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Other-Hand-Chris-Cleave/dp/0340963409/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430469&sr=1-3>
. On holiday in Nigeria in attempt to revitalise a marriage undermined by an 
affair, Sarah and Andrew venture out of the hotel compound, only to be 
confronted by the full horror of a nation divided by greed and fear, now that 
the West has realised there is oil to be had. They encounter Little Bee, who 
then turns up at the door of their cosy suburban home two years later, an 
asylum seeker with no paperwork.

The West's distaste at being confronted by the fallout from our way of life 
and our shucking of accountability is personified by Lawrence, a Home Office 
press officer. He cannot understand Sarah's feeling of duty towards Little Bee 
in the face of the threat she might pose to her way of life.

Little Bee proves a perceptive narrator: she recognises that Lawrence has 
cocooned himself in self-deception, just as her own endurance of the horrors 
she has witnessed is dependent on a degree of denial.

The relevance of Muriel Barbery's The Elegance of the Hedgehog 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Elegance-Hedgehog-Muriel-Barbery/dp/1906040168/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430617&sr=1-1>
 is a little more tangential. One of its twin narrators is a 12-year-old of 
intimidating precocity who finds the bourgeois values of her parents' 
generation irredeemably selfish, to the extent that she feels that her only 
option is suicide - something she intends to carry out by immolating herself in 
the luxury apartment block in which she lives and which represents all she 
loathes.

A huge hit in France and a number of other European countries, the book also 
challenges the assumption of those with money and influence that they have the 
right to decide the values of our society. This oppressive attitude is what 
makes Madame Michel, the building's concierge, conceal her intellectual 
pursuits in the belief that her humble origins sap all value from her opinions.

Paul Auster's latest is replete with his trademark tricksiness, but is no less 
germane. InMan in the Dark 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Man-Dark-Paul-Auster/dp/0571240763/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430830&sr=1-1>
, a widower fantasises an escape from the pain of his loss by imagining an 
America where 9/11 never happened. But the civil war he conjures up in its 
place teaches him to treasure the tender hope his equally bereaved 
granddaughter represents.

By contrast, this autumn's rawest engagement with this ethical morass comes 
from John le Carré. InA Most Wanted Man 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Most-Wanted-Man-John-Carre/dp/034097706X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1217430929&sr=1-1>
, a Chechen refugee, his idealistic lawyer and the banker who holds his 
father's questionably acquired assets are toyed with by competing intelligence 
services: each is motivated by threats and temptations expertly formulated to 
appeal to their respective instincts. Setting the book in Hamburg draws 
attention to continued perturbation of its residents that it is the city where 
Mohammed Atta and his al-Qaida cell formulated their plans.

Le Carré is quoted as saying that the conclusions the book draws "took me by 
surprise then scared me stiff", and it certainly left me with a chill of 
foreboding. Our more astute writers remind us that every decision we take as 
result of that defining day in history, or indeed all choices we make about how 
we live our lives, have unavoidable consequences.

· Jonathan Ruppin is promotions buyer at Foyles bookshop
 