
The Archivist by Martha Cooley 328pp, Abacus, Â£9.99 

 T S Eliot fell in love with Emily Hale in 1913. They corresponded, on and 
off, through the decades that followed. When Eliot's first wife, Vivienne, 
died, Emily expected a proposal of marriage. It didn't come. Instead, upon his 
marriage to Valerie (who survives him), he broke completely with her. The end 
was abrupt, and, one might think, heartless. Hale was devastated. Eliot 
destroyed her letters; she sent his to Princeton University Library, where they 
are sealed from view until 2019.

 One of Eliot's biographers, Lyndall Gordon, writes of 'the strangeness of 
attachment that was bound up for many years with the fate of [Eliot's] soul'. 
This is a little precious, and one might think that his break with Hale could 
be described more accurately in plainer, less reverential language. Gordon adds 
that to try to imagine the relationship 'is to risk a fiction'. With The 
Archivist, Martha Cooley has obliged.

 She takes as her narrator the archivist responsible for the cache of letters 
deposited by Hale. This fictional character, Matthias Lane, has a wife, who 
kills herself, and a graduate student, who is keen to read the letters. The 
student seems keen on Lane too, and at first we wonder whether this is genuine. 
In a different kind of novel, indeed, the plot would be propelled by precisely 
this question: is it Lane she wants, or the letters? But in this novel, she 
wants (or, at least, is drawn towards) both, and her refusal to choose between 
them parallels the novelist's own determination to engage equally with the 
real-life drama of Eliot's aborted courtship of Emily Hale, and the fictional 
drama of Lane's aborted courtship of the student, Roberta Spire.

 As if to make sure that readers do not miss the parallel, Cooley makes Lane's 
wife a failed poet who dies in a mental institution. But then, just to make 
sure that we do not read the parallel as a mere replication, Cooley makes the 
fictional wife Jewish.

 The novel is thus ever at risk of splitting into two quite distinct 
enquiries, the one into the history and contents of the correspondence, the 
other into Matthias Lane's own troubled history. Cooley poses unanswerable 
questions concerning the letters - what is in them, what do they tell us about 
Eliot? (Of course, Cooley has not read them and, in this respect, her novel is 
a little like Eco's The Name of the Rose, which is also about an inaccessible 
text - in that case, Aristotle's lost treatise on comedy). And Cooley poses 
unanswered questions concerning Lane - why did his wife kill herself, what will 
he do about Spire, how will he reconcile his regard for Spire with his duties 
as custodian of the letters? Cooley seeks to relate these two enquiries, which 
gives her a special kind of problem. One imagines the task she set herself: to 
write a novel in which the Eliot/Hale relationship is obliquely explored by 
means of a relationship between two fictional characters. The unavoidable 
effect of such an approach, however, would be to make this second relationship 
parasitic on the first. But Cooley wants to give it its own integrity, and this 
means trying to make it independent of the first. Cooley wants her characters' 
lives to be both a commentary on Eliot's (and Hale's) and to have their own 
interest. The novel is thus ever pushing and pulling against itself, at one 
moment the fictional mirroring the real, at the next, departing from it.

 The opening paragraph both defines the novel's ambition and identifies the 
way the novelist proposes to tackle her task: 'With a little effort, anything 
can be shown to connect with anything else: existence is infinitely 
cross-referenced. And everything has more than one definition. A cat is a 
mammal, a narcissist, a companion, a riddle.' Cooley 'cross-references' her 
characters with Eliot and Hale. Does it work? The Archivist is all about 
connections, some revelatory, but many forced. For example, Roberta's parents 
are Holocaust survivors who have chosen to convert and bring up their daughter 
as a Christian. Discovering this deception, she rejects them, and embraces her 
new Jewish identity. Likewise Judith, Lane's wife, protests to Lane that his 
Christian scepticism of Judaism is an assault on her faith. One such problem in 
a novel seems sufficient, while two, merely excessive. And then just as one 
begins to recoil from such schematism, and a suffocating sense that each one of 
the novel's stories is simply a version of the others, one remembers that this 
is a first novel. And relaxes. It has real merit, and the next one will almost 
certainly be even better.
 