
Biographies and autobiographies are always strong sellers at Christmas, 
although the market has bifurcated distinctly in recent years. On one hand, 
there are the heavyweight tomes, exploring the lives of writers, artists and 
other historical figures; on the other, we have celebrities, whether they be 
politicians or pop stars, riding a wave of fame - or notoriety - of Warholian 
brevity.

Starting at the more sober end of the market, Henry: Virtuous Prince 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780007247714&m=34&dc=48&sort=eh_nbd_rank/d&mw=2&st_01=david%20starkey&sf_01=kword_index>
 is David Starkey's account of the life of Old Coppernose before his serial 
matrimony and should trounce historical all comers. Saying that, he has scant 
competition, with his most likely challengers being Kate Williams'Becoming Queen
 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780091794798&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Becoming+Queen&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=16>
 on the youth of Queen Victoria and Arthur Herman'sGandhi and Churchill 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780091921323&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Gandhi+and+Churchill&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=2&dc=9>
 chronicling the statesmen's great rivalry.

The world of literature is impatiently anticipating Gabriel García Márquez: A 
Life 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780747594765&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Gerald+Martin&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=5&dc=42>
, Gerald Martin's biography of the Nobel laureate, written with his 
co-operation. The big event in the visual arts isChagall: The Dream of Life 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780713996524&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Jackie+Wullschlager&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=8&dc=9>
 by Jackie Wullschlager and its success will have a lot to do with the print 
quality of its illustrations.

Richard Attenborough's Entirely Up to You, Darling 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780091797089&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Entirely+Up+To+You%2C+Darling&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=2>
 may well be the acting profession's biggest Christmas seller, although it 
remains to be seen whether Sean Connery'sBeing a Scot 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780297855408&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Being+A+Scot&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=2>
, in an awkward pictorial format, will appeal widely, especially with its 
political content. Might it even be outsold by Roger Moore'sMy Word is my Bond 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9781843173182&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=My+Word+Is+My+Bond&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=5&dc=6>
?

The rather more ephemeral end of the scale is a market full of pitfalls. For 
every Peter Kay or Russell Brand, there are dozens which gather dust in 
bookshops and warehouses. One of the major problems is the long lead time of 
books compared to other media. Who wants to read an out-of-date - and, if 
official, probably sanitised - account of the average C-lister's life, when 
there are far more up-to-date revelations in the latest issue of Heat, probably 
with a lot more photographs?

Of the genuine stars laying all bare this year, Dawn French probably comes 
closest to national treasure status and, with her publisher coughing up £1.5m 
for the rights,Dear Fatty 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9781846053443&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Dear+Fatty&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=2>
 will be prominent in every chain promotion. Julie Walters has already proved 
her writing ability with her 2006 novel, Maggie's Tree, which bodes well for
That's Another Story 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780297852063&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=That%92s+Another+Story&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=2&dc=9>
.

I suspect Alan Carr's Look Who it is! 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780007278220&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Look+Who+It+Is%21&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=7&dc=175>
 will sell to a very broad market; his brand of camp is stereotypically 
unthreatening. Paul O'Grady'sAt My Mother's Knee ... and Other Low Joints 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780593059258&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=At+My+Mother%92s+Knee&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=3&dc=3>
 promises rather more substance. One which could definitely go either way is
Fathers and Sons 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9781847370839&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=richard+madeley&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=3&dc=5>
 by Richard Madeley, of "& Judy" fame, which explores his relationship with his 
father before going onto look more broadly at father-son relationships in a 
changing society.

The title which might well trump them all is The Celeb Diaries 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780091927981&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=The+Celeb+Diaries&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=2>
, an unfettered account of life in the celebrity jetstream by former Heat 
editor Mark Frith. Modelled on, and indeed produced by the same team as, The 
Insider by Piers Morgan, this promises to be full of enough celebrity 
indiscretions to keep you reading until the turkey's finally finished.

Michael Parkinson - Parky 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780340961667&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=Parky&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=1&dc=1>
 - will offer up a feast of celebrity anecdotes from a nobler era and is a good 
each-way bet for Christmas number one. His heir apparent, Jonathan Ross, also 
has an autobiography out,Why do I Say these Things? 
<http://www.foyles.co.uk/display.asp?K=9780593060827&sf_01=kword_index&st_01=jonathan+ross&sort=eh_nbd_rank%2Fd&x=0&y=0&m=15&dc=29>
 (23rd October, Bantam Press, 9780593060827), but his is unlikely to attract 
nearly so many readers as, in Parky's heyday, chat show guests were more likely 
to be genuine stars, not just celebs with a product to push. There's also the 
small matter of Parky being a national institution in a way that Ross simply 
isn't. Mind you, institutions are often funded by millions of pounds of public 
money ...
 