
We're going to get married. I think. Like Ed Miliband we've never got round to 
tying the knot. Unlike the leader of the Labour party, however, J did make the 
effort to accompany me to the register office. Our decision to get married is 
not new. In fact, it's embarrassingly old and based on a desire to have a 
life-affirming celebration after some midlife adverse events. But that 
life-affirming feeling was clearly not sustained as we got engaged two and a 
half years ago, milked the good wishes of friends and family, bought a couple 
of copies of Brides magazine and then did nothing.

"Aren't you meant to be getting married?" people would ask occasionally.

Then I became pregnant with Flora and it didn't seem fair to get married 
before she was born as we hadn't done so for the others. So we continued to do 
nothing and here we are still. In unwedded bliss. Our engagement is a distant 
memory. The girls have long stopped nagging me to look for wedding dresses.

"You'll be 80 before you get married," says Tilly (who is 11).

But now we have to get married. Time is running out. My mother's eyesight is 
failing, J's mother is ill and has hinted (she is far too nice to put it any 
stronger) that even though she may not be able to dance at our wedding it would 
be nice to have something to look forward to. Regardless of the failing health 
of those we love, getting married (to J obviously) is one of the things I 
wanted to do before I reach 50.

So I start googling for wedding venues. I type in late availability wedding 
venues and resist the desire to add "cheap". Then I decide that we should have 
a reception somewhere that means something to us. Like our home. A bit of 
bunting and a cocktail waiter and we'll be all set. I tell the girls the 
wedding is back on and they look disbelievingly at me. The reception-at-home 
idea does not impress them. "That's not a wedding," they chorus. "It's cheap."

"Exactly," I say.

"Are you going to wear white?" asks Lydia.

I look to see if she's joking but she isn't and I explain gently why that 
wouldn't be appropriate â€“ if only because several of our friends would die 
laughing. "I need to go on a diet," I say, once again based on the premise that 
if you say something out loud you will do it.

"You don't," says Lydia loyally.

But one of her older sisters smirks because a couple of weeks ago when I was 
invited to a birthday party (exotic theme) she suggested I went as a pineapple 
and that I wouldn't need a fat suit.

One of the biggest worries (apart from the fact it that seems faintly 
embarrassing) is who we will have as bridesmaids. When we announced our 
engagement all those years ago we were inundated by friends asking for their 
children to be our bridesmaids.

Everyone else we know is married, was the general theme. "You're our last 
hope. We'd love to see little X walk up the aisle."

My children, however, think that they alone should be bridesmaids. I suspect 
even baby Flora is in on this as in the past few days she has been trying to 
stand up. I ask a neighbour what I should do about the venue and number of 
bridesmaids. "Do what you want to do," she says. "It's your wedding."

Which anyone who has ever got married knows is only partly true.
 