
Change the House of Lords <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/lords>? Switch to
a new election system <http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/>? Stay in the 
European Union <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/eu>? Have an elected mayor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/apr/26/elected-mayors-not-wanted-two-thirds?newsfeed=true>
? Any other issue on the horizon? Let's have a referendum - the cure for all 
democratic ills: take it out of politics!

Alas, the referendum has all the appearance of democracy but very little of 
its reality. And, in fact, when push comes to shove, the public agrees. Of 
course, if a pollster approaches you in the street and asks if you want a 
direct vote on your income tax or on dealing with crime, or on the monarchy, or 
on pretty well anything, the likelihood is that you will say "yes." After all, 
it sounds, well, democratic, but when it comes to an actual referendum the 
electorate is far from enthusiastic. At every referendum held in Britain the 
turnout has actually been lower than at the corresponding parliamentary 
election. In other words, even with politics in a miserable state, the 
electorate prefers to vote for politicians than in a referendum.

There are huge political and logistical problems with referendums which ought 
to rule them out completely. First, the phrasing of the question greatly 
influences the outcome. Take the current referendum in which to vote against an 
elected mayor requires the elector to vote for the current situation rather 
than a simple "X" against the proposed innovation.

Second, the vote at a referendum is much a more a vote on the popularity of 
the current government than on the question posed. Almost the entire campaign
against the Alternative Vote <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/av> last May 
was based on whether or not Nick Clegg was doing a good job in government. 
Similarly a government times a referendum for the most propitious moment to 
achieve the desired result.

Third, they are used to paper over party splits. The 1975 referendum  
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/june/6/newsid_2499000/2499297.stm>
on remaining within the European Common Market was enacted byHarold Wilson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/1995/may/25/obituaries> because he was 
unable to maintain a united party on the issue.

Essentially - and the most crucial reason against referendums - they undermine 
the fundamental basis of parliamentary democracy: that we elect Members of 
Parliament for a limited period of time to take decisions on our behalf. We ask 
MPs to put their experience, skills and specialisms to work to examine the 
complex issues facing us and to be accountable to us for the consequences of 
their decisions. Furthermore, in theory, we vote for our MPs from parties which 
represent a broad view of the kind of society they favour so that we are able 
to elect MPs who are in sympathy with our own views. Our MPs 'deputise' for us 
for the set period of their mandate - which is why the equivalents in France 
and Russia are actually called 'Deputies.'
 Napoleon III loved referendums, but in the end the people tore his statue 
down. Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORB 
If we go down the referendum path we will diminish still further the quality 
of representation in parliament and we will make it impossible for MPs to take 
necessary but unpopular decisions in years one and two of a government with the 
judgement that they will be shown to be justified by years four and five - in 
time for the next general election.

Historically the referendum has been the tool of the demagogue. Both Napoleons 
<http://www.ajr.org.uk/journal/issue.Jan12/article.9602>, Hitler 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/GERhitler.htm> and de Gaulle 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/gaulle_charles_de.shtml> all 
used the referendum and the plebiscite to gain support over the heads of 
elected parliamentarians. We need better politics and better parliamentarians 
and we will not get them if we support an unwanted and ineffective sleight of 
hand.

Michael Meadowcroft 
<http://www.liberalhistory.org.uk/item_single.php?item_id=32&item=biography> 
was a Leeds city councillor for 15 years, a West Yorkshire metropolitan county 
councillor for six years and the Liberal MP for Leeds West from 1981 to 1987.
 