 Jane Clark admits to asking the BBC4 producers who are serialising her wayward 
husband's diaries to choose actresses who weren't pretty to portray Alan 
Clark's girlfriends. "They seem to have taken no notice," she admitted 
yesterday from Saltwood Castle in Kent where she reigns - as the diaries put it 
- as Dowager Empress.
Four years after his death the Clark market booms on. Half a million copies of 
the original 1993 Diaries have been bought, volumes 2 and 3 sold 30,000 a piece 
in hardback and tick over in paperback.

A six-part series, in which John Hurt and Jenny Agutter play the Clarks 
strikingly well, begins on the digital channelBBC4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> next week. Mrs Clark is happy with the 
episodes she has seen.

But the diaries nearly didn't make it to the screen. Before the former defence 
minister and MP for Kensington and Chelsea died of a brain tumour in 1999, 
Keith Waterhouse and Ned Sherrin tried to do for the book what they famously 
did for Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell which ran for years in the West End.

"Jane loathed the treatment," recalls Ion Trewin, editor-in-chief at 
Weidenfeld & Nicholson who edited volumes 2 and 3 - despite the diarist's awful 
handwriting. "It wasn't him."

Mrs Clark confirms what is for her a familiar complaint. Much of the interest 
is either "all sex" or sex and drink, or "funny ha ha and sex."

But when the BBC tried again Mrs Clark found Jon Jones's proposals much 
rounder, both funny and serious. When Hurt and Agutter arrived on set at 
Saltwood, Jane Clark started off being both irritated and unnerved. "It was 
quite spooky, she was being me. I started wondering if I should pluck my 
eyebrows like her.

"The BBC said they wanted help and I had sleepless nights over it. This didn't 
happen here. And Al didn't say that. Al never wore white shirts and certainly 
no one ever saw him make a Christmas decoration. Then I realised I had to let 
go."

One detail to which Trewin and the empress are privy is the identity of X, who 
features in the BBC4 series as Clark's last girlfriend. "I would have thought 
it would have come out straight away when the book was published. But it 
hasn't. And she's not spilled the beans," says the publisher.

Jane Clark sounds imperturbable on this subject, it has been part of her life 
since an ex-girlfriend turned up on their honeymoon when she was just 16. "We 
had screaming matches. 'Go, if you want to go, go,' that sort of thing.' He 
thought he could mould me, but later said 'actually, I'm quite frightened of 
you'. I understood him better than he did himself."

Â· The Alan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries 
begin on BBC 4 on Thursday 15 January at 10pm
 