
Buenos Aires 

The reasons usually cited for visiting Buenos Aires are decidedly unholy: 
great food, fantastic wines and a sexy atmosphere. From the street art around 
football mecca La Boca to the cobble-stoned, increasingly gentrified streets of 
San Telmo and the funky shops and buzzing bars of Palermo Viejo, there is so 
much to excite the senses that the lack of ancient, world-class sights on a par 
with those of Pope Francis's new home barely registers among visitors.

There are parrillas (grills) on almost every corner – try Don Julio in 
Palermo, Soho (Guatemala 4691 and Gurruchaga) for a top-quality traditional 
experience, with excellent service from waiters who know their wine – as well 
as their beef. But it's not all big hunks of meat. High-end, avant garde 
restaurants offering new-wave Argentine cuisine (Nueva Cocina Argentina) are 
popping up all over the city. Among them is ultra smart Tarquino in Recoleta 
headed up by renowned chef, Dante Liporace, whose CV includes stints at El 
Bulli (Rodríguez Peña 1967,tarquinorestaurante.com.ar 
<http://www.tarquinorestaurante.com.ar>).

For religious visitors to Buenos Aires, the main attraction lies not in the 
capital itself but 70km west. The town of Lujan, which was founded in 1756 on 
the site of a shrine containing a tiny ceramic figure of the Virgin Mary, is 
one of the major religious centres in Latin America. Its epic basilica erected 
in honour of the Virgin of Lujan in 1887 attracts around eight million visitors 
a year. For a sense of the religious fervour in this small town go at the 
weekend when seven or eight masses are held a day, or during a pilgrimage when 
you'll have to jostle for space with those who've come to honour the Virgin of 
Lujan (on the last Sunday of September up to a million gauchos descend on the 
town; and on the first Sunday of October young people walk here from Buenos 
Aires).

Whether you're religious or not, one must-see is Recoleta cemetery, resting 
place for almost every major Argentine hero and villain, including Evita, 
several presidents and heavyweight boxer Luis Ángel Firpo.

The days of living like a king for a few pesos are long gone. Prices have shot 
up in recent years (in the past week alone, it was announced that taxi fares 
would soon be jumping 20%') so check out our pick ofwhere to stay on a relative 
budget <http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/apr/25/top-10-hotels-buenos-aires>
,how to keep your costs down 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/sep/21/south-america-chile-budget-holidays>
 andwhere to enjoy great food on a day trip from the city 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2010/dec/04/argentina-restaurants-rail-villages>
.

Mendoza
 Vineyards beneath the Andes in Mendoza. Photograph: Prisma Bildagentur 
AG/Alamy 
Mendoza is a must-visit for anyone, whether you're a wine lover or not 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2009/jan/31/argentina-wine>. The city itself 
is lovely – leafy and refined with gobsmackingly good restaurants and bars on 
almost every street. Outside the city, vineyards stretch for miles to the 
foothills of the Andes, which form a constant and magnificent backdrop to the 
vineyards. Many of the wine makers have built architecturally stunning 
buildings housing high-end restaurants in the middle of rows of vines... (check 
outO.Fournier <http://www.ofournier.com/web/ar_03_in.html> and Salentein 
<http://www.bodegasalentein.com/>). There's a wide choice of operators offering 
organised tours of the vineyards; if you're doing it independently, it's 
advisable to book in advance as many bodegas only open for pre-arranged visits.

You could easily spend a few days here working your way through the area's 
fantastic Malbecs but there are other activities on offer in the wildly 
beautiful landscape, from hiking (not many have the experience to tackle the 
daunting Mount Aconcagua but you can walk in its national park), and rafting to 
cycling and, in winter, skiing.

Iguazu
 Iguazu falls. Photograph: Efrain Padro/Alamy 
One of the natural wonders of the world, the Iguazu falls are worth more than 
just a day trip. They straddle the Argentine/Brazilian border, but you can get 
closer to the seething white water on the Argentinian side, where walkways take 
you right over theGarganta de Diablo "Devil's Throat", and you can also explore 
the forest. Once you've marvelled at the sight of 275 falls gushing over a 
2.7km long precipe, spend a few days in the province ofMisiones, exploring the 
remains of the Atlantic rainforest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/sep/30/iguazu-falls-argentina-brazil-rainforest>
.

Patagonia 

The immense wilderness of Patagonia offers incredible trekking in its Los 
Glaciares National Park 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2008/sep/14/argentina.southamerica>, most 
famously on the Perito Moreno Glacier, reached from the bustling tourist hub of 
El Calafate. Then there is the village of El Chaltén, gateway to the Fitz Roy 
mountain range, whale watching at Peninsula Valdes, and the Welsh settlers' 
village at Gaiman – plus miles of untracked steppe doted with estancias. The 
best time to visit is Dec-March, as during the winter months of May-Oct the 
weather gets bitterly cold, places close and transport is less frequent.

The easiest route from Buenos Aires is by plane to El Calafate (
aerolineas.com.ar <http://www.aerolineas.com.ar/Welcome>), or several bus 
companies travel along lonely Ruta 40 – Argentina's answer to Route 66, made 
famous by Ernesto 'Che' Guevara on his motorcyle tour. You can also reach the 
Chilean side of Patagonia from El Calafate by road to Torres Del Paine.

The north-west 

The relatively unexplored yet spectacular north-west of Argentina is well 
worth a detour from the well-trodden route of wine country, waterfalls and 
glaciers. Thecapital Salta is a great base for a few days 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2005/nov/05/argentina.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
, mixing traditional gaucho and indigenous culture with sophisticated modern 
Argentina in the form of elegant boutique hotels and swish restaurants.

Head north of the city and you are soon into rugged mountainous scenery. The 
Quebrada de Humahuaca, a long and dramatic canyon of multi-hued and towering 
rock formations, makes for a memorable road trip ending at the tiny village of 
Iruya, where the road peters out and footpaths provide the only access into the 
mountains. For a sense of the scenery check out the2007 'Domino' Guinness advert
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mAQiuutkxdU> which was filmed in the village.

South of Salta lies the wine region of Cafayate, much less well known than 
Mendoza but producing some of the country's finest wines.
 