
Hasbro has proven to be an asset to Hollywood, thanks to the success of the 
Transformers franchise, which has grossed well over $3bn worldwide. The 
American toy company now has it sights set on Broadway, with a musical based on 
the gameMonopoly <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/monopoly>.

The stage adaptation of the popular board game is to be the first of many for 
Hasbro, according toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/legit/news/monopoly-musical-hasbro-broadway-1201798690/>
. The company has teamed up with the Araca Group, a Broadway producing and 
merchandising company, for a slate of projects that will use Hasbro’s library 
as inspiration for theatrical productions pitched at Broadway, amusement parks, 
cruise ships and other venues across the US. Monopoly is being developed 
strictly for Broadway.

Matthew Rego of the Araca Group told Variety that the musical will not be 
“about sitting around playing Monopoly”, but rather will take inspiration from
The Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/13/the-lego-movie-review>by 
exploring the world of the game in creative ways.

Breakthrough in understanding the chills and thrills of musical rapture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/17/breakthrough-in-understanding-the-chills-and-thrills-of-musical-rapture>
Araca recently produced the Broadway run of Pultizer-winner Disgraced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/22/disgraced-review-pulitzer-winning-play-challenges-audience-to-question-their-tolerance>
, which closed in 2015, as well as the Tony-winningA View from the Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/12/view-from-the-bridge-review-arthur-miller-reinvented>
, starring Mark Strong. The company is also known for doing brand extension 
work for Beyoncé and Britney Spears, and for its investment in the Broadway 
sensation Wicked.

The Hasbro partnership coincides with the recent launch of Araca Media & 
Entertainment <http://www.araca.com/media-entertainment>, a new content 
division focused on adapting iconic brands and franchises into live events 
around the world.

No premiere date has been announced as of yet for Monopoly the Musical, nor 
any of the creatives that will be brought on board to mount the production. 
Variety reports that the show is likely three or four years away.


Further stage projects from Hasbro and Araca are rumored to be announced in 
the coming months.
 