
This is a story of two charitable foundations with strong urges to be generous 
to the Liberal party. One – the Free Enterprise Foundation – is in the news and 
is causing the NSWLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> enormous strife. The 
other – The Greenfields Foundation – is not. And therein lies the problem.

The reason the NSW Electoral Commission has been able to take on the NSW 
Liberal party for “washing” illegal donations through the Free Enterprise 
Foundation is the evidence provided to theIndependent Commission Against 
Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
 (Icac).

Deliberately and forensically, as only a body with those kind of powers can 
be, Icac assembled a wall of verbal and documentary evidence in 2014 that shows 
the NSW party sending donations from property developers to the FEF and 
arranging to have them funnelled back, despite the fact that state law had 
banned donations from property developers from January 2010.

Liberal party has done 'wrong thing' in $4.4m donations scandal, says Mike 
Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/nsw-electoral-commission-withholds-44m-from-liberals-over-donations-scandal>
There was sworn testimony that the idea of routing the donations through the 
FEF was openly discussed at meetings of party officials and cheery emails from 
the NSW party’s chief fundraiser to the chairman of the FEF, Canberra 
accountant Tony Bandle, attaching cheques and informing him the generous donors 
“would like the trustees to consider donating their contribution to the Liberal 
Party of Australia (NSW division)” and asking the FEF to send the donor a 
receipt. And it received as evidence the list of the almost $700,000 in 
donations channelled back to the NSW party, mostly from property developer 
companies,which resurfaced this week 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/revealed-the-angry-donors-in-nsw-liberals-scandal/news-story/a71dcd2e30a7accf4f6797a705836a20>
 as the stand-off between the commission and the NSW party continued.

The donations are not, as has been widely misreported, entirely “secret” or 
“hidden”. Those above the federal threshold for donations (about $13,000) have 
been disclosed by the federal party under federal laws.In fact, my clever 
colleague Nick Evershed graphically documented their intra-party flows in 2014. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/interactive/2014/apr/29/nsw-liberals-free-enterprise-icac>

But the NSW Electoral Commission insists the party is obliged to declare the 
donations at a state level also, and it is withholding $4.38m from the NSW 
Liberal party – money the party needs to fight the imminent federal election – 
to focus the party’s mind on that question. And it is standing its ground 
against the party and former party office holders,including the now Cabinet 
secretary Arthur Sinodinos. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/31/electoral-commission-stands-firm-despite-arthur-sinodinoss-threat-to-sue>

In making its legal case, the Electoral Commission is finally puncturing an 
obvious lie, the fiction that foundations such as the FEF are set up with some 
kind of broad charitable purpose and just happen to feel overcome with the need 
to make regular political donations to the Coalition.

Mystery Liberal donation: Reg Grundy gave $200,000 via secretive foundation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/03/mystery-liberal-donation-reg-grundy-gave-200000>
It was always obvious they were set up to give political donors anonymity and 
to get around electoral disclosure laws, and even after they were forced under 
federal law, in the 1990s, to declare the donations they receive as “associated 
entities” they still gave donors a less direct means of donating to the 
conservative parties and provided a way to circumvent some state laws. (The SMH 
revealed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/reg-grundy-company-says-it-gave-200000-donation-directly-to-the-liberals-20150112-12mgtk.html>
 that in 2013 the former Liberal party federal director Brian Loughnane advised 
television producer Reg Grundy to send a $200,000 donation via the FEF to 
“maintain his privacy”) And you may not be surprised to learn that when the 
Liberal’s former chief fundraiser Paul Nicolaou wrote those nice notes to Tony 
Bandle asking that he donate the money back to NSW, the FEF almost always did.

The Icac received the trust deed by which the FEF was set up in 1981 as a 
charitable trust, in which its “prescribed purposes” are “promoting the 
principle of free enterprise”. The FEF has donated $3.8m to the Liberal party 
in just the past five years, but when Icac asked Bandle when he had made a 
charitable donation he said: “Oh, that was ah, 18 months ago um, certainly 
there’s been another one recently. I’ve got a plaque in my office from Open 
Family in Canberra which looks after street children in Canberra um, where we 
gave a substantial donation, it was something like $10,000 and that was, that 
was many years ago though, yes.”

Many years ago Bandle also featured in a controversy over another foundation, 
but that concerned federal laws, and there was no federal Icac or other 
organisation to force answers. So in the end nothing happened, and the 
Australian Electoral Commission’s recommendations to try to make sure the 
problem never happened again were ignored.

Turnbull's plan to end tax blame game threatens to break Morrison's budget 
pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/turnbulls-idea-to-end-tax-blame-game-threatens-to-break-morrisons-budget-pledge>
That controversy concerned the Greenfields Foundation, which I came across in 
the 1990s in the Liberal party’s annual disclosures of financial information. 
The foundation had lent the Liberal party $4.75m, which allowed it to pay off a 
large debt incurred for the 1993 election campaign. Its postal address was the 
same as the Free Enterprise Foundation. Its trustees were the very same Mr 
Bandle and a former federal Liberal party president. But Bandle insisted he 
could not disclose who had lent the money through the foundation.

“Unfortunately, it’s a private foundation ... I can’t comment at all except to 
say it will make fairly significant contributions to charity,” he said at the 
time. “The Greenfields Foundation will make substantial contributions to 
organisations such as those that look after blind children.”

The AEC began investigating, and, after a lot of public pressure the then 
party treasurer Ron Walker insisted he had lent the money himself. He’s clearly 
a patient lender. According to the Liberal party’s latest return, almost 20 
years on the Liberal party still owes the foundation $3.45m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fa-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9fac399e4d863dc2b902d66de75b5b1db30c23a%2F0_112_1999_1200%2F1999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tale%20of%20two%20charitable%20foundations%2C%20and%20a%20flood%20of%20donations%20to%20the%20Liberals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fa-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tale%20of%20two%20charitable%20foundations%2C%20and%20a%20flood%20of%20donations%20to%20the%20Liberals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Fa-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9fac399e4d863dc2b902d66de75b5b1db30c23a%2F0_112_1999_1200%2F1999.jpg>
 Ron Walker, a former Liberal party treasure, and the self-confessed source of 
a $4.7m debt guarantee. Photograph: Joe Castro/AAP 
Back in 2000 then Labor Senator John Faulkner assessed Walker’s involvement in 
Greenfieldsduring a Senate debate. 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;db=CHAMBER;id=chamber%2Fhansards%2F2000-06-22%2F0159;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansards%2F2000-06-22%2F0000%22>

“It all began back in 1994-95. We had a situation where the national office of 
the Liberal party was in financial trouble ... The National Australia Bank 
requested the title to Menzies House (the Liberal party’s Canberra 
headquarters) as security for the Liberal party’s substantial overdraft. They 
had run up quite a debt in the 1993 federal election. The treasurer of the 
Liberal Party at the time, one Mr Ron Walker, was given the task of remedying 
the situation ... What occurred was that, at least by Mr Walker’s own admission 
– we have no proof of it – he came up with $4.7m himself in the form of a 
guarantee over the debt ... and then apparently assigned his debt to the 
mysterious Greenfields Foundation, a so-called ‘charitable foundation’, some 
time in mid-1996.

“You have to ask yourself: why would Ron Walker want to avoid disclosure? 
Surely if he is putting $4.6m you would think he would be proud of it. You 
would think he would be a hero in the Liberal Party. But, no, the official 
Liberal party’s treasurer ... hid his light under a bushel.”

In Faulkner’s assessment, it was all a “cover-up” and “the Greenfields 
Foundation was just the Liberal Party’s old fundraising arm, the old Free 
Enterprise Foundation, reborn in a new impenetrable form. So up until 1995, the 
Free Enterprise Foundation donated huge sums to the Coalition but was not 
required to reveal the donations it received. The then Labor government closed 
the loophole in the Electoral Act. The Liberal party, it seems, felt that it 
had to find another way to conceal its fundraising. Enter the Greenfields 
Foundation.”

Premiers reject Malcolm Turnbull's plan for them to set income tax rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/01/premiers-agree-consider-malcolm-turnbull-income-tax-plan>
The AEC tried its best to get to the bottom of the Greenfields story, and, as 
Faulkner told the Senate, “in January 1999 ... served Greenfields with a notice 
under section 316 of the Electoral Act to produce documents. That was a serious 
step for the AEC to take. Failure to comply with such a notice is a criminal 
offence and the fine is hefty. In June 1999, such was the concern at the AEC 
over its Greenfields investigation that the AEC briefed senior counsel to 
advise it on the Liberal party’s use of the Greenfields loophole and its 
apparent failure to disclose. At around this time, the AEC also started closely 
consulting the Director of Public Prosecutions in relation to Greenfields.”

But the AEC never did unravel the mystery, and, despite years of effort, nor 
did Labor.

In a 1998 report on Greenfields, after a lengthy investigation, the AEC noted 
that “it is apparent that a person, or in certain circumstances a corporation, 
who wished to avoid full and open disclosure could do so by a series of 
transactions based on the Greenfields model.”

And it recommended that “the simplest and most effective way to close this 
loophole is for the Act to deem the payment of a guarantee to be a donation.”

But nothing was ever done about that either.

Turnbull: double-dissolution election will be called if ABCC bill not passed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/turnbull-double-dissolution-election-will-be-called-if-abcc-bill-is-not-passed>
The difference between what happened after the revelations concerning the two 
foundations appears to be entirely due to the powers that Icac has to force the 
disclosure of documents and information, and the lack of anything similar at a 
federal level.

It is possible the NSW Electoral Commission’s stance will force change to all 
such trusts and foundations, if the NSW party has to concede that the FEF is 
not actually an independent freedom-minded charitable donor. It has already 
highlighted, yet again, the need for a federal anti-corruption body.

And that just happens to be exactly what the Senate crossbench is demanding be 
considered before it will allow the re-establishment of the building and 
construction industry corruption watchdog – a goal Malcolm Turnbull says is so 
important that if the Senate refuses it necessitates taking the whole nation to 
a double-dissolution election.

I came across this word the other day. Zemblanity. It was coined by novelist 
William Boyd to be an antonym for serendipity. With the NSW Electoral 
Commission donations stand-off and the Senate stand-off reaching a crescendo at 
about the same time, I think it’s kind of fitting.
 