
British animator Aardman's latest stop-motion funfest has lots to offer all 
the family. Yet audiences forThe Pirates! In an Adventure with Scientists are 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142794> being denied one intended visual 
gag. In the film's original version, Hugh Grant's pirate captain stormed a ship 
and demanded treasure. One of its occupants replied: "Afraid we don't have any 
gold, old man. This is a leper boat. See …" As he attempted a demonstrative 
gesture, his arm dropped off.

This scene made it to a trailer released in December. Two British leprosy 
support organisations protested 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/25/aardman-pirates-leprosy-gag?>. One 
of them, Colchester-basedLepra Health in Action 
<http://www.leprahealthinaction.org/index.php>, complained on its website 
<http://www.gazette-news.co.uk/news/9476026.Lepers_arms_don_t_fall_off_not_even_for_comic_effect/>
: "Limbs don't just fall off – not even for comic effect." The organisation's 
president,Christian Bonington, added 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-16579015>: "Leprosy stigma not 
only hurts, it is still forcing people to live a life on the fringes of 
society."

Aardman swiftly removed 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/01/the-pirates-aardman-to-change-scene-after-outcry-from-leprosy-orgs/>
 the offending sequence. Ina statement, it explained 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/9035495/Aardman-Animations-removes-leper-scene-after-complaint.html>
: "It is clear to us that the right way to proceed is to honour the efforts 
made by organisations like Lepra and the World Health Organisation to educate 
the public about this disease." Lepra expressed itselfdelighted with this 
response <http://www.leprahealthinaction.org/leprosy-is-no-joke/>. Stephen Fry, 
who hadtweeted his support for the protest, 
<https://twitter.com/#!/search/%40stephenfry> then tweeted: "Tx Aardman!" 
<http://www.leprahealthinaction.org/leprosy-is-no-joke/>

In Britain these days, there may be few lepers to be affronted, stigmatised or 
marginalised by film content. Elsewhere, however, leprosy (or, as some now feel 
it should be called,Hansen's disease 
<http://www.healthfinder.gov/scripts/searchcontext.asp?topic=364>) persists, 
even if it's becoming relatively rare. At the beginning of last year,around 
200,000 cases were <http://www.who.int/lep/situation/prevalence/en/index.html> 
known, with most of the new onesoccurring in India, Brazil, Indonesia, Congo, 
Ethiopia, Nigeria and Bangladesh 
<https://docs.google.com/viewer?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.who.int%2Fentity%2Fwer%2F2011%2Fwer8636.pdf>
. These are not places in which Aardman films are very widely watched. However, 
leprosy is also endemic in the territory that will prove for Pirates! the most 
important of all.

Around 3,600 Americans 
<http://http://articles.latimes.com/2011/apr/27/news/la-heb-armadillo-leprosy-20110427>
 have the disease and around50 new cases are 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1010536#t=articleBackground> 
contracted each year within the US. Most of these occur in Texas and Louisiana, 
although their incidence is spreading. Currently, there's a scare running about 
infection fromcontact with the deep south's armadillos 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=armadillos-leprosy-humans>, 
15% of which carry the same strain of leprosy as affects humans.

Aardman's last feature, Arthur Christmas, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144411/arthur-christmas> took more in the 
US than it did in Britain 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=intl&id=arthurchristmas.htm>, and the 
company will want to repeat this feat. In the prevailing climate, you might 
have thought that the speedy excision of that leper joke would have been a 
vital step towards this goal. Yet the shock provoked in Britain by the 
offending trailer wasn't echoed in the US. On the contrary, it was derided.

In a poll conducted by msnbc, 86% of 15,400 
<http://entertainment.msnbc.msn.com/_news/2012/01/25/10233980-pirates-scene-changed-after-lepers-protest>
 respondents condemned Aardman's decision to back down. "Grow some balls 
Aardman," summed up the view ofDeadline Hollywood's readers 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/01/the-pirates-aardman-to-change-scene-after-outcry-from-leprosy-orgs/>
. "The mother country is dead" wasone comment on Ain't It Cool 
<http://www.aintitcool.com/node/52938>. Another on DVD Talk read 
<http://forum.dvdtalk.com/other-talk/598380-oh-geez-now-you-cant-even-make-leper-jokes-2.html>
: "The mincing british nancy boys who made the pirate movie spend most of their 
days listening to bleeding heart bullshit and crying about the state of all the 
world's victims." America seems to mean what it says.

Series 10 of Family Guy <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mh4j> has yet to 
reach BBC Three, but in the US episode 12 aired in January. During it, Stewie 
befriended a child with leprosy. Guess what: the kid's arm dropped off. Not a 
peep of protest was to be heard from sea to shining sea. Still, it was America 
that gave usThe Fog <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0080749/>, which cheerily 
presented lepers as vengeful mass killers, without an apparent thought for the 
feelings of their real-life indigenous counterparts.

The USA is often disdained in Britain for its supposed thraldom to political 
correctness. In 2008, the use of the word "retard" 17 times inTropic Thunder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125574/tropic.thunder> did provoke 
protests 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/hot_document/features/2008/how_to_picket_tropic_thunder/_4.html>
. Unlike Aardman, however,Ben Stiller's Red Hour Films 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/redhourfilms> remained unmoved. Are Americans just 
more callous than the Brits, or do they have something to teach us?

Aardman's statement said 
<http://www.iwatchstuff.com/2012/01/aardmans-the-pirates-face-criticism-from.php>
: "The last thing anyone intended was to offend anyone," but comedy can ill 
afford to subjugate itself to the burgeoning culture of offence. Pirates! makes 
light of piracy, a subject no more comfortably consigned to history than 
leprosy. Maybe thegrieving victims of Somalia's buccaneers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2012/mar/21/judith-tebbutt-released-somalia-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
 should also have been considered entitled to Stephen Fry's intercession.

The statement cited "sensitivity" as well, yet the laughter industry faces a 
comparable threat from the culture of niceness. The version of Pirates! now 
showing in cinemas reassigns the leper joke somewhat puzzlingly to victims of 
the plague. It's not easy to see why they should be fairer game,since plague, 
too, persists today <http://www.who.int/csr/disease/plague/en/>. Maybe there 
are amputees who will be distressed by the film's piratical peg-leg japes.

Perhaps worthier of concern is the statement's reference to "respect". It's 
one thing to cause offence or to hurt feelings just to get a laugh; it's 
another to treat people with contempt. Yet whatAardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> calls respect could be seen as 
condescension. To assume that the afflicted will be touchy kill-joys, just 
because they're afflicted, might be considered insulting.

You decide. In the interests of promoting balanced judgment, Between the Lines 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/series/betweenthelines> has secured access to 
the dodgy Pirates! trailer that was supposed to have been consigned for ever to 
Davy Jones's locker. You canwatch it here 
<http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/sony_pictures/thepiratesbandofmisfits/> 
(it's the 1'.57" version). But should you?
 