
Leprosy support groups have successfully campaigned for the removal of a gag 
in upcomingAardman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> Animations film 
The Pirates! in which a victim of the disease loses a limb as a result of his 
condition.

The Bristol-based company moved to remove the offending scene following 
complaints from leprosy groups including Lepra Health in Action and the 
International Federation of Anti-Leprosy Associations (ILEP). The scene was 
featured prominently in atrailer for the stop motion 3D feature 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiQNvcYlZVg>, which features the voices of Hugh 
Grant, David Tennant and Salma Hayek.

"After reviewing the matter, we decided to change the scene out of respect and 
sensitivity for those who suffer from leprosy,"an Aardman spokesperson told 
Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/01/the-pirates-aardman-to-change-scene-after-outcry-from-leprosy-orgs/>
. "The last thing anyone intended was to offend anyone and it is clear to us 
that the right way to proceed is to honour the efforts made by organisations 
like LEPRA and the World Health Organisation to educate the public about this 
disease."

The scene depicts the Hugh Grant-voiced Pirate Captain storming a ship in 
search of booty, only to be informed by one of its occupants: "Afraid we don't 
have any gold, old man, this is a leper boat. See â€¦" The speaker's arm then 
drops off.

Lepra Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> in Action praised 
the film-makers' respect and sensitivity, saying it was "genuinely delighted 
that Aardman has decided to amend the film".

The Pirates!, which is directed by Aardman's Peter Lord and Jeff Newitt from a 
screenplay by Gideon Defoe, writer of the book series upon which the film is 
based, is out in the UK and US in March. Its full UK title isThe Pirates! In an 
Adventure with Scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-pirates-in-an-adventure-with-scientists>, 
while in the US and elsewhere it is titled The Pirates! Band of Misfits.
 