
Heading for a First: David Willetts

Whether you agree with him or not, our minister for market forces and chaos, I 
mean universities and science, David Willetts has had a good week. We finally 
got to see the long awaited HE White Paper, which at 70 pages didn't really 
surprise or shock us, but bewilderingly it wasn't clear why such an 
unimpressive document was delayed for eight months. What took them so long?

The reason why I've awarded him a first this week, is not because I agree with 
the White Paper, but rather David Willetts has managed to get his way. The 
establishing of a freer market in higher education, routes for new providers to 
enter the HE arena, weaker regulation on quality, more information for 
consumers and greater competition between institutions is the market revolution 
Willetts and his Conservative colleagues have long craved.

The fact that the Minister of State has clearly won the internal war against 
his boss, and delivered a document that is Tory through and through, means the 
path toward a freer market has been established. The initial reaction from 
academics and students has been sceptical, bordering on the incredulous, but 
the debate will begin in both parliamentary and academic circles, and it will 
take a NHS style u-turn to stop Willetts getting his way.

Heading for a Fail: Vince Cable

The very same document which got David Willetts his first, is exactly the same 
reason why Vince Cable deserves to be awarded a fail. The supposed Secretary of 
State couldn't have looked more disinterested in the HE White Paper 
announcement. Some commented how tortured he looked in the House, sat next to 
Willetts as the speaker first called the Secretary of State to the dispatch 
box, only to realise Dr Cable had abdicated that particular responsibility, and 
instead called the Minister of State to stand in for his boss.

In fact every time the words 'higher education' or 'students' are uttered, 
Vince appears to do a runner. The twitterati started to speculate why Cable was 
so absent from the press work and defence of the document, as unimpressively, 
and without precedent the man once regarded as "the most popular man in 
politics" has been turned into a laughing stock by students and academics 
alike. In April this year, Cable delivered a finger-wagging speech to a packed 
HEFCE Conference, the few allies he had in the sector turned their back on him, 
and his relationship with the sector appears all but broken.

But specifically, after the troubles over tuition fees and the infamous broken 
pledge, this should have been the chance for the Liberal Democrats to prove 
they do care about students, higher education and a chance to stamp some 
authority on the coalition. A chance for tough targets on widening access, 
missing. An opportunity to resist a worrying leap to pure consumerism, or an 
opening to strongly emphasise the importance of academic freedom â€“ all missing. 
Rather than seizing the white paper as a chance to repair the Lib Dem's damaged 
reputation on higher education, Cable went walkabouts.

Not much evidence of "muscular liberalism" here.

Aaron Porter <> is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he has 
just finished his last week as president of the National Union of Students 
(NUS). He tweets at@AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/AaronPorter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 