
According to figures released last month 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/3303.0~2015~Main%20Features~Intentional%20self-harm:%20key%20characteristics~8>
, Australia’s suicide rate is increasing, and death among men from intentional 
self-harm is three times greater than that for women.

In Man Up, a three-part ABC-TV series which aired its second episode on 
Tuesday, radio presenter Gus Worland is spurred by the 2006 suicide of a 
friend, Angus – and, more recently, conversations with his widow and daughter – 
to challenge stoic, self-reliant stereotypes of masculinity, and instead 
champion emotional vulnerability and communication as signs of strength.

It’s a well-meaning, heartfelt show, but flawed: Man Up spends too much time 
trying to entertain and not enough time challenging the normalised, constructed 
identities of Australian manhood – white, heterosexual, masculine – which 
continue to alienate anyone who falls outside them.

Worland jackhammers concrete on a worksite, talking to men in the construction 
industry about their particularly high risk of suicide. He goes yachting with 
returned military servicemen dealing with trauma. He takes part in male nude 
yoga – all in an attempt to get beneath the skin of men.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c368b8b3f14d5565318622d2a43e0e7dc6c80b6%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABC's%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABC%27s%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c368b8b3f14d5565318622d2a43e0e7dc6c80b6%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
 Gus Worland and farmer John Harper at the Mate Helping Mate country man 
organisation meeting, featured in Man Up. Photograph: ABC 
He poses for a GQ shoot, while we learn about commercial, fluffy categories of 
manhood: metrosexuality, retrosexuality and, I kid you not, lumber-sexuality 
(some sort of mix of lumberjack and hipsterism). He tries to craft a media 
campaign to appeal to men to talk, even consulting one advertising guru who was 
responsible for reinforcing the stereotype that the social world of men 
revolves aroundbooze and barmaids with big boobs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlDXTc8IJ7c>. 

All of this is watchable, but it leaves less than a minute for discussion of 
thehigh rate of suicide among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-12/indigenous-youth-suicide-rate-highest-in-world-report-shows/7722112>
. That task falls to Wiradjuri manJoe Williams <http://www.joewilliams.com.au/>
, a former National Rugby League Rabbitohs player who doesn’t appear on screen 
but whose voice is heard as a radio talkback caller.

There is no explicit mention of gay and bisexual men, or those whose identity 
falls outside normalised gender binaries. If, as the Man Up manifesto states, 
the “pressure to be an Aussie man is fuelling a suicide crisis”, then we must 
acknowledge the groups of men who are the most at risk ofdepression, anxiety 
and suicidal feelings 
<https://www.beyondblue.org.au/who-does-it-affect/lesbian-gay-bi-trans-and-intersex-lgbti-people/factors-affecting-lgbti-people>
.

This show cannot be all things to all people, of course – yet it doesn’t even 
seem interested in trying to speak to the spectrum beyond blokey blokes. Man 
Up’s reliance in Tuesday’s episode on UK-born Australian psychologist and author
Steve Biddulph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1999/jun/20/life1.lifemagazine1> – 
whose opinion is unquestioningly sought in on-the-road interviews – makes me 
wonder if the series is coming from a very conservative view of male identity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe939423c3e5b9957445d18b2227ec9ae398adb8e%2F0_636_1834_2292%2F1834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABC's%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABC%27s%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe939423c3e5b9957445d18b2227ec9ae398adb8e%2F0_636_1834_2292%2F1834.jpg>
 Steve Biddulph, author of Raising Boys. Photograph: David Levene for the 
Guardian 
Biddulph’s 1997 book Raising Boys is described in Man Up as “the handbook on 
how we can better raise Australia’s sons” – but I remember it differently. 
Biddulph’s glib, blithe discussion of homosexuality in an early edition 
distressed my own mother, making her fear she was at fault for my orientation – 
even though I’ve been living happily as a gay-identifying man for some time. It 
was in Biddulph’s book, so it must be true, right?

Now in its fourth edition (2013), Biddulph has made a few palatable tweaks to 
his bestseller, but it still raises dubious “mounting evidence” that sexuality 
may be determined by “certain hormonal settings” in the womb – without citing 
an actual scientific reference. The book still makes the outdated, sloppy 
suggestion that having a teenage gay son “demolishes” parents’ “fond hopes” of 
a “rewarding career, marriage and grandchildren”. And it still says that “some 
dads fear that cuddling their son will turn him into a ‘sissy’. In fact, the 
reverse is probably true.” (To his credit, Biddulph has deleted the subsequent 
line of earlier editions: “Many gay or bisexual men I have spoken to say a lack 
of fatherly affection was part of what made male affection more important to 
them.”)

As Flinders University psychologist associate professor Damien Riggs wrote in 
2008 
<http://www.damienriggs.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/All-the-Boys-are-Straight.pdf>
: “[Biddulph’s] inference is that if fathers gave more affection the sons 
wouldn’t grow up to be gay, which is thus constructed as the preferable option.”

The most affecting scenes in Man Up involve Worland’s own teenage son, Jack. 
In the second episode, facilitator Tom Harkin runs a special workshop on 
masculinity, in which Jack and fellow students apply nail polish. “Not a guy 
thing to do,” says Harkin, who then asks: “Who wrote that rule?”


The workshop encourages these teenagers to rethink what it means to be a man, 
to talk, to listen and to show emotion. To cry, which they do, openly and 
cathartically. This would have been the ideal point to say: it’s OK to be 
straight, bisexual, gay, queer; it’s OK to question your identity or gender. 
But the show is too timid to make that important leap, instead relying 
uncritically on Biddulph as a barometer of all men’s emotional lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c2d81c445e3d99254057cc95dde6f9d8db73626%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABC's%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABC%27s%20Man%20Up%20tackles%20the%20tragedy%20of%20male%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20but%20only%20among%20blokey%20blokes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthe-abcs-series-on-male-suicide-falls-short-many-men-are-at-risk-not-just-blokes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c2d81c445e3d99254057cc95dde6f9d8db73626%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
 Gus Worland and his son Jack. Photograph: ABC 
There are other missed opportunities. Man Up vaguely links suicidal ideation 
among men to financial pressures. What these pressures are is not spelled out, 
but surely there is a great deal to say about the growing inequity between rich 
and poor. The rising costs of rent and mortgages under a government unwilling 
to change investment policies. The burden many men take on to be primary 
breadwinners, and where that burden comes from.

We are told in Man Up that women attempt to take their lives more often than 
men, but men are more likely to die. We are told this is because women reach 
out for help more often, but other factors – such asthe preference among women 
for drugs as a means of suicide 
<https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2010/192/8/suicide-australia-meta-analysis-rates-and-methods-suicide-between-1988-and-2007>
 – would have been worth discussing.

My hopes for Man Up clearly overreached its narrowly focused aims. But in its 
sincere efforts to find a new vocabulary for men, the series is a step in the 
right direction.

• Man Up continues on 25 October on the ABC; for information and support in 
Australia call Lifeline on 13 11 14, Mensline on 1300 789 978 or Beyond Blue on 
1300 22 4636
 