
It is very doubtful that you have ever heard of Austin Tice. Yet he is a 
freelance journalist who has been held captive inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> since August 2012.

Too little has been reported about a man who is on the verge of spending his 
fifth Christmas in the hands of unknown captors in an unknown location in a 
war-torn country.

Tice was working for the US newspaper publisher, McClatchy, when he was 
abducted. A month later, a 47-second film of himwas released on to YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dNdA0q9j040>. Blindfolded and forced to read a 
message in Arabic, he was roughly handled. (Warning: it is disturbing to watch. 
His father rightlycalled it brutal 
<http://ac360.blogs.cnn.com/2013/06/16/former-u-s-marine-held-captive-in-syria/?hpt=ac_mid>
).

There has been no contact since from Tice or his captors. However, two months 
ago, Reporters San Frontieres (RSF) cited“diverse credible sources” 
<https://rsf.org/en/news/reporters-without-borders-and-newseum-unveil-banner-austin-tice-only-american-journalist-captive>
 who believe him to be alive and who further say he is not being held by Isis.

His situation remains the same, according to a briefing I received a week ago 
asa member of RSF’s new UK advisory board. 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/reporters-without-borders-secretary-general-warns-of-global-decline-in-press-freedom/>

Aside from the McClatchy chain of newspapers, Tice’s work has been published 
by the Washington Post, theAssociated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press>, CBS and the BBC. His 
reporting has earned him several awards.

In 2012, he won both the George Polk award for war reporting and the McClatchy 
president’s award. Three years later, while a captive, he was given the US 
national press club John Aubuchon press freedom award.

It was on 14 August 2012, three days after his 31st birthday, that Tice was 
abducted while preparing to travel from Daraya, near Damascus, to Beirut in 
neighbouring Lebanon.

In October 2012, the Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/oct/03/journalist-austin-tice-syrian-video>
 that the US state department believed Tice was in the custody of the Syrian 
government led by Bashar al-Assad. By that time RSF had begun assisting and 
advising his family in order to raise awareness of their son’s situation.

In February 2015, RSF launched its #freeaustintice 
<https://twitter.com/freeaustintice?lang=en> campaign. The following month, the 
Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/austin-tice-us-syria-talks-missing-journalist>
 that the US and Syria had entered into “rare direct talks” about Tice. But 
nothing came of the initiative.

Last month, on the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes Against 
Journalists, RSF helpedto organise the unveiling of a banner on the facade of 
the Newseum in Washington. 
<https://rsf.org/en/news/reporters-without-borders-and-newseum-unveil-banner-austin-tice-only-american-journalist-captive>
 It showed a photo of Tice with the message, “Held captive for being a 
journalist since August 2012.” The banner will remain in place until his safe 
return.

Jeffrey Herbst, president and chief executive of the Newseum, said: “We hope 
this banner, prominently displayed on Pennsylvania Avenue in front of citizens 
and lawmakers alike, will raise awareness of his captivity and bring him one 
step closer to home.”


If you want to take part in the campaign to free Tice, please sign the petition
 <https://rsf.org/en/freeaustintice>, which is addressed to President Barack 
Obama, and take the blindfold pledge, a symbol of Austin’s kidnapping.

To participate, people can take photos of themselves blindfolded and post them 
on social media outlets with an explanation of why you are doing so: to raise 
awareness of Tice’s abduction and to call for anyone who might count to help 
bring pressure to bear in order to effect his release.
 