
“If the new abortion law addresses only 10% of the cases, what’s the point?” 
says Dr Chafik Chraibi, a gynaecologist and leading activist against illegal 
abortion inMorocco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>. “What are we 
going to do with the 90% remaining? We need a sustainable law that is going to 
serve this and future generations.”

Morocco is now considering legalising abortion 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-10/abortion-law-reviewed-in-morocco-as-islamists-join-reform-call>
, polarising debate between conservatives and liberals, who fear a partial law 
that will only allow abortions in certain circumstances. At the moment, 
abortion is only legal in Morocco when the woman’s life, or her physical health 
is threatened. The impact on mental health, rape and incest, foetal impairment, 
social and economic reasons, or the woman’s personal choice are still not 
considered valid reasons.


But last month King Mohammed VI, widely perceived as a progressive 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/mfonobongnsehe/2014/08/02/15-years-on-the-throne-the-accomplishments-of-king-mohammed-vi-of-morocco/>
 on certain social issues,opened a consultation around legalising abortion 
<http://www.african-bulletin.com/8399-king-mohammed-vi-opens-a-panel-on-abortion.html>
. As “the commander of the believers”, the king arbitrates religious issues and 
has a mandate to maintain social harmony.

Liberal abortion laws have been proven to save lives. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2014/oct/01/-sp-abortion-rights-around-world-interactive>
 They limit maternal mortality, child mortality, and empower women, therefore 
supporting development goals. It particularly protects young girls, allowing 
them to pursue education, get employed and raise healthy children when they are 
ready, ending the cycle of poverty.

Yet in the modern Muslim country, the debate around abortion is still 
sensitive. Chraibi, former head of gynaecology and obstetrics at the Matérnité 
des Orangers in Rabat, Morocco, can certainly confirm this. In February, he was
fired 
<http://moroccantimes.com/2015/02/leading-moroccan-gynecologist-sacked-interview-given-france-2/>
 from his 30-year career at the hospital for opening the ward’s doors to camera 
crews for a TV documentary that exposed the reality of unsafe abortions. The 
doctor is the founder ofAmlac 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Association-Marocaine-de-Lutte-contre-lAvortement-Clandestin/424315080916124?fref=ts>
, a Moroccan NGO fighting the 800 daily illegal abortions happening nationwide, 
200 in very poor conditions.

Following Chraibi’s dismissal and the subsequent civil society mobilisation 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Soutien-au-Pr-Chafik-Chraibi/758893660860737?sk=timeline>
, the king commissioned theNational Human Rights Council 
<http://www.ccdh.org.ma/an/article/cndh-conduct-broad-consultation-different-stakeholders-abortion-legal-framework>
, the minister of justice and freedoms, and the minister of Habous and Islamic 
affairs to develop an abortion law. A report is expected in mid-May.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fabortion-in-morocco-will-the-king-approve-a-progressive-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430236180930%2F3e80c361-50a6-4305-9c6e-93b400b86dd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abortion%20in%20Morocco%3A%20will%20the%20king%20approve%20a%20progressive%20law%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fabortion-in-morocco-will-the-king-approve-a-progressive-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abortion%20in%20Morocco%3A%20will%20the%20king%20approve%20a%20progressive%20law%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fabortion-in-morocco-will-the-king-approve-a-progressive-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430236180930%2F3e80c361-50a6-4305-9c6e-93b400b86dd4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dr Chraibi in his office Photograph: Salima Yacoubi Soussane 


In developing countries, 47, 000 
<http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/publications/1901-youth-and-unsafe-abortion-a-global-snapshot>
 women die from unsafe abortions each year, 40% of whom are under twenty-five. 
Moreover, 99% of all maternal deaths occur in these countries and they are all 
preventable. Africa and Latin America have the most restrictive abortion laws 
in the world. In Africa, abortion is only legal in South Africa, Cape Verde and 
Tunisia.

“We know that making abortion illegal does not stop it from occurring, it just 
drives it underground,” says Katja Iversen, CEO ofWomen Deliver 
<http://www.womendeliver.org/>. “Abortions should be safe, legal and rare,” she 
adds.

Chraibi could not agree more. “The unmet need for contraception among 
adolescent girls is striking,” he says. “While married women have 70% of their 
contraception needs provided, this is true for less than 10% of adolescent 
girls.”

 Currently, 6.1 million <http://www.guttmacher.org/media/nr/2010/06/07/> 
adolescent girls get unintentionally pregnant in the developing world because 
their need for contraception is unmet. Abortion is rarely legal, leaving them 
with the hazardous choice of unsafe abortion as only contraception method.

The doctor deplores the current restrictive legal framework in Morocco. “We 
suspect some young women have had abortions before, but when they come to the 
ward, they can’t tell us as they can go to jail for it,” he reveals. “As for 
single women who can’t access abortion, they give birth using a false identity 
and never come back for the birth certificate. Some newborns will be left in 
trashcans, some others will be given to orphanages, we don’t really know what 
will happen to them.”

When asked their opinion on abortion, Moroccan teenage girls and young women 
say they are concerned about stigmatisation. “Our society is very judgmental. I 
think it’s about time we asked ourselves how to help instead of being 
critical,” said Hind, a 17-year-old high school student in Casablanca.

Sex education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> and 
non-judgmental communication are key for preventing unplanned pregnancies. 
However, even in moderately conservative families this dialogue is rare. “We 
simply do not talk about it,” says Leila, 21.

With strong stigma and lack of information, society leaves young girls to 
figure out reproductive health themselves. “A teenage girl, probably 16, asked 
me in the street how she could find the morning-after pill,” said Yasmina, 30, 
still perplexed.

Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> stories like the one in 
the television documentary featuring Chraibi, are not hard to find. Maria, a 
23-year-old college graduate, recalls, “My friend had an abortion at 19. She 
learned she was pregnant after four weeks and it took another month to find 
someone who could perform the abortion. It was with a GP after his work hours. 
I don’t know how I had the courage to go with her … But she was alone.”

For Chraibi, a limited law is not a solution. It will leave the majority of 
the cases he witnesses on the fringe. But the legalising of abortion in case of 
rape and incest and foetal impairment seems at least to be likely as the most 
conservative parties havevoiced their approval 
<http://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2015/03/152955/moroccos-former-foreign-minister-calls-for-reforming-abortion-law-2/>
.



But there are still many obstacles to full legalisation of abortion. The 
conservative minister of justice recently confirmed thatextra-marital sex will 
still be illegal after penal code reforms 
<http://www.moroccoworldnews.com/2015/04/156603/wont-soften-moroccos-penal-code-illicit-sexual-relationships-minister/>
 - not a sign of a progressive approach. Many still think abortion is a girls 
and women’s problem, not a collective responsibility.

Chraibi’s hope is that this issue does not drag on for years. “Totally 
legalising abortion is only the first step. After that, the real work only 
begins [education, fight against illegal abortion],” he says, with the same 
energy he had ten years ago, when he first started advocating for women’s 
health.

With the king’s involvement, Morocco significantly advanced women rights 
<http://mondediplo.com/2007/08/07divorce> within the last decade. With an 
efficient abortion law, the kingdom has a chance to mark, once again, its 
commitment to progress, and human and women rights.

 * This article was corrected on 6 May 2015. It originally stated that 
abortion is legal in Morocco if a woman’s mental health is threatened.

Some of the girls’ names have been changed.

Salima Yacoubi Soussane is a UN press correspondent. Follow @salimay 
<https://twitter.com/salimay> on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 