
The British Horseracing Authority’s Authorised Betting Partner scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/new-initiative-racing-betting> 
faces another test of its credentials this weekend following the news Rich 
Ricci, one of National Hunt’s leading owners and the lynchpin of the Willie 
Mullins stable in Ireland, is the new chairman of the internet bookmaker 
BetBright.

Bookmakers warned to pay up or face being barred from sponsorship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/bookmakers-sponsorship-bha> 
Formal confirmation of Ricci’s move into the betting industry is expected 
before the BetBright Trial Chase at Cheltenham on Saturday, for which the 
owner’s seven-year-old Djakadam is expected to start the odds-on favourite.

Djakadam is also the 7-2 favourite for the Cheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup>, while Ricci’s 
outstanding team of horses for the Festival meeting includes four favourites on 
the opening day. Douvan, Faugheen and Annie Power are odds-on for the Arkle 
Trophy, Champion Hurdle and Mares’ Hurdle respectively, while Min, their stable 
companion at the Mullins yard, is 13-8 for the meeting’s first race, the 
Supreme Novice Hurdle. Other star names expected to represent Ricci at 
Cheltenham include Vautour, already a winner at the meeting for the last two 
seasons.

BetBright sponsors the feature race at Cheltenham on Saturday as part of a 
three-year deal that also includes a race at the course on New Year’s Day and 
the BetBright Cup, a secondary competition at the Festival based on the 
friendly rivalry between British and Irish stables.

Ricci will announce the team “captains” for this year’s event at a press 
conference at Cheltenham on Saturday morning but may also face questions about 
BetBright’s willingness to join the ABP scheme, which requires offshore 
bookmakers to agree to pass a percentage of their gross profits on British 
racing back to the sport. To date, only three betting companies – Betfair, 
Bet365 and 32red.com – have signed up for the scheme.

Jockey Club Racecourses, which owns Cheltenham, has stated it will not sign 
sponsorship deals, or renew existing deals, with non-ABP betting firms, a 
stance that has already resulted in BetFred’s replacement by Timico as the 
sponsor of the Gold Cup. Ladbrokes’ long-standing association with the World 
Hurdle is also under serious threat as a result of the firm’s refusal to agree 
ABP status.

BetBright’s deal at Cheltenham concludes at the end of next season but it will 
still be a blow to the credibility of the ABP campaign if a company which has 
appointed such a high-profile owner as its chairman refuses to sign up. It will 
also cast a sharp light on comments by Mullins before last year’s Festival, 
when he suggested the prize money on offer at the Festival was “not fair and 
not on”, and should be “at least doubled, if not more” to reflect the sums 
owners such as Ricci pay for young jumping stock.

Offshore initiative could help racing and betting sort out old differences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/new-initiative-racing-betting> 
The BHA said on Wednesday it had “written to all bookmakers, including 
BetBright,” with details of the ABP scheme and that “the process of speaking to 
the betting industry to outline the benefits of becoming an Authorised Betting 
Partner is ongoing.”

“At the moment we sponsor some fantastic races at Cheltenham, Doncaster and 
Kempton,” Brian Farrell, BetBright’s marketing director, said, “and will 
consider our options once these sponsorships come to an end. For now, we are 
focusing on working hard to make our sponsorships as successful as possible and 
engage with real racing fans. We do have a desire to continue to use race 
sponsorships as part of our brand building and marketing strategy.”

Ricci had three winners at last year’s Festival but the fall of his runner 
Annie Power in the Mares’ Hurdle on the opening day was estimated to have saved 
the bookmaking industry many millions of pounds, as the mare would have 
completed many thousands of Yankees and other accumulator bets on four hot 
favourites from the Mullins stable.

Some punters may feel uneasy about the chairman of a bookmaker having such a 
close interest in horses that could do significant damage to the betting 
industry’s profits in March. Others may wonder whether BetBright will lay all 
requested bets on Ricci’s horses in full at advertised prices or, as is often 
the case with online operators, either restrict stakes or refuse bets 
altogether.

British racing has a long history of bookmakers owning horses, however. 
William Hill and Victor Chandler among those to have owned major winners. More 
recently, Michael Tabor, the former owner of the Arthur Prince betting shop 
chain and now leading member of the powerful Coolmore ownership syndicate on 
the Flat, bought Chandler’s company BetVictor.

The BHA’s rules on laying by owners state that it is an offence for any owner 
“to lay any horse he owns with a Betting Organisation to lose a race, instruct 
another person to do so on his behalf or receive the whole or part of any 
proceeds of such a lay.” Only last week, owner Alan Findlay was banned from 
racing eight years for laying his own horses on Betfair.

However, the rules also make it clear that “nothing in this rule prevents the 
laying of any horse owned by a Betting Organisation in the ordinary course of 
that Betting Organisation’s business”.

Ricci, who has invested many millions of pounds in National Hunt racing, lives 
in Britain but stables his horses exclusively with Mullins in County Carlow. He 
was a high-profile figure in banking and finance, and was one of a number of 
senior executives to leave Barclays’ investment arm in 2013 within months of 
the appointment of Antony Jenkins.

• This article was amended on 15 February 2016 to further clarify the nature 
of Rich Ricci’s departure from Barclays.
 