
Could AC/DC’s Rock N Roll Train finally have reached the end of the line? That 
looks likely to be the case, with the news that singer Brian Johnson has been 
advised by doctors to stop touring immediately, or face “total hearing loss”,
according to a statement on the band’s website. 
<http://www.acdc.com/news?n_id=274>

The band – due to perform in the UK and Europe this summer – have postponed 
the remaining 10 dates of their US tour, though the band say they “will be made 
up later in the year, likely with a guest vocalist”. What happens after that is 
uncertain, though tour dates through to 12 June are still listed on their 
website.

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
Johnson has been AC/DC’s singer since 1980, when he joined following the death 
of Bon Scott. His first record with the group, Back in Black, became the second 
best-selling album of all time, behind Michael Jackson’s Thriller. He became a 
firm favourite with fans for his apparently boundless goodwill, and for a voice 
that seemed as though it could probably pierce armour.

The news caps a troubling couple of years for the band. In September 2014, it 
was announced thatrhythm guitarist Malcolm Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/24/acdc-malcolm-young-master-of-discipline-and-economy>
 – the group’s founder and de facto leader – had been forced to leave the group 
owing to the onset of dementia.

In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
, Johnson and lead guitarist Angus Young revealed that Malcolm had played 
through the group’s world tour in support of their Black Ice album with the 
symptoms already apparent, and was having to relearn the set between shows.

Just before the release of the Rock or Bust album in November 2014, Phil Rudd 
– AC/DC’s drummer for 40 years – was forced to leave the group after being 
charged with attempting to procure a murder and threatening to kill, as well as 
possession of drugs. He pleaded guilty to the drugs charges and one count of 
threatening to kill and in July 2015 was sentenced to eight months’ home 
detention.
 