
It turns out AC/DC’s search for a new singer did not begin and end with Axl 
Rose, who has beenannounced as the replacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/acdc-says-guns-n-roses-singer-axl-rose-to-join-band-for-rest-of-tour>
 for Brian Johnson on the rockers’ final tranche of stadium dates. In fact, 
they came close to doing what Judas Priest had done before them, and plucking a 
new frontman from the obscurity of the tribute band circuit.

Lee Robinson, the frontman of Thunderstruck, an AC/DC covers band from 
Raleigh, North Carolina (the band claim <http://www.thunderstrucknc.com/> to 
“offer the most complete and authentic reproduction of AC/DC’s sound and stage 
performance in North Carolina and beyond”), hastold the metal site Blabbermouth 
<http://www.blabbermouth.net/news/singer-of-tribute-band-thunderstruck-says-he-also-auditioned-for-acdc/>
 that he was summoned by his heroes to audition for them in Atlanta.

At first, he said, he didn’t believe the band were trying to contact him, and 
insisted on calling back their representatives to check they were who they 
claimed to be. He didn’t sleep for three days, studying the songs, until the 
night before the audition on 14 March, when AC/DC’s crew told him Johnson had 
used a teleprompter, which would be available. “When I heard that, I pretty 
much passed out. I didn’t have to worry about forgetting the lyrics anymore,” 
said Robinson.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDGYRb_QAVU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDGYRb_QAVU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbDGYRb_QAVU&media=>
Robinson discovered that AC/DC bassist Cliff Williams had recommended him, 
after finding him on YouTube. The band were impressed by the way he singsAC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> songs in the key they were written in, 
rather than dropping the key. “Stevie [Young, guitarist] said, ‘Hell yeah, 
that’s the right way to do it,’ when I asked if we could do the audition in 
standard,” Robinson said. “But that’s the only way I know how to sing it.”

Cover girls: the Ramonas, Iron Maidens and the rise of the female tribute band
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/07/iron-maidens-joanne-joanne-ramonas-rise-female-tribute-bands>
The audition encompassed Robinson singing with the band for almost two hours, 
performing all but two songs from their current tour setlist, as well as others 
not currently in the band’s repertoire. Angus Young, apparently, was impressed. 
“‘Whatever happens,’ he told me, ‘you’ve got a helluva voice.’”

Sadly for Robinson, AC/DC went for someone with a slightly more high profile. 
Who singer Roger Daltrey, however, is not impressed. “Go and see karaoke with 
Axl Rose? Give me a break,”he told an interviewer this week 
<http://www.lfpress.com/2016/04/20/the-whos-roger-daltrey-talks-touring-pete-townshend-and-axl-joining-acdc>
.

Thunderstruck’s next show is at the Lynchburg music festival on 14 May. 
AC/DC’s next show is at the Passeio Marítimo de Algés on 7 May.
 