
Former AC/DC drummer Phil Rudd might not have been invited back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/21/acdc-hint-that-phil-rudd-may-not-rejoin-group-after-arrest>
 to play with his old band, but he’s making some stipulations about his return 
anyway. Firstly: they have to sack the new singer.


 “If Angus (Young) wanted me to play then that’s up to him – but I don’t 
really want to play with Axl Rose. I don’t really rate him,” Rudd told Bay of 
Plenty Times. Rose has been fronting the band for live dates this year since 
Brian Johnson was forced to stopdue to hearing loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/19/acdc-brian-johnson-hearing-loss-diagnosis-statement>
.


AC/DC review – Axl Rose brings menace as rock legends pull off a triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
Although there is nothing permanent about Rose’s role in the band, it seems 
unlikely Rudd will be allowed to return. The drummer was forced out of the band 
after being convicted fordrug possession and making threats to kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/21/acdc-drummer-phil-rudd-pleads-guilty-threatening-to-kill-drug-charges>
 a former employee. His role is now being performed by Chris Slade.

During the interview 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/bay-of-plenty-times/news/article.cfm?c_id=1503343&objectid=11040076>
, Rudd also revealed that he’d had a heart attack, but has since recovered. He 
said: “I had a fucking heart attack, but I’m good now. I was just at home and I 
started to feel funny. I had a strange pain in my chest. My housekeeper took me 
to the hospital where they hooked me up and did all these tests. Turned out I 
had a big heart attack. My artery was all blocked up, and they said I had to 
stay in and have an operation.”

The future of AC/DC <https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> hangs in the 
balance. Founding guitarist Malcolm Young also quit in 2014 due to dementia and 
other health problems, which leaves the band’s lineup significantly altered 
from the one that recorded their classic 1980 album Back in Black. Bassist 
Cliff Williams has signalled that he is ready to retire from the band too. 
Describing them as a “changed animal” he said: “It’s been what I’ve known for 
the past 40 years, but after this tour I’m backing off of touring and 
recording.”
 