
AC/DC <https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> drummer Phil Rudd has lost his 
appeal against a string of recent convictions in New Zealand.

The musician had been ordered in June to serve a sentence of eight months home 
detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/phil-rudd-acdc-drummer-sentenced-to-home-detention-for-threat-to-kill>
 along with six months of post-release conditions and payment of $NZ120,000 
(£51,000) reparation after pleading guilty to charges of threatening to kill 
and possession of methamphetamine and cannabis.

However, his appeal, which argued that the sentence “was manifestly 
excessive”, was rejected by New Zealand’s high court.

In a judgment released on Tuesday, Justice Raynor Asher dismissed the appeal 
and said he had to decide whether the consequences of a conviction were out of 
all proportion to the gravity of the offence: “In my view they are not.”

Phil Rudd, AC/DC drummer, sentenced to home detention for threat to kill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/phil-rudd-acdc-drummer-sentenced-to-home-detention-for-threat-to-kill>
Rudd has a strained relationship with the other members of AC/DC. He played on 
their most recent album, although the band’s guitarist Angus Young has said he 
was unreliable and that his behaviour had been “strange”. The band decided to 
tour the record without him, although Rudd still maintains that he is a member 
of the group. Inan interview with Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/phil-rudd-talks-crock-of-sh-t-arrest-hopes-to-return-to-ac-dc-20150810?page=3>
 in August, he said: “Me and everyone else says that, but that’s not what Angus 
says. I don’t want to upset Angus by saying the wrong thing. Me and Angus 
kicked serious ass, and he knows if I was there it would be better. I know he 
knows that, because I’ve proven it before. Just give me five minutes in a room 
with him and I’ll get my job back. I promise ya.”

Justice Asher commented on the band’s situation, referring to Rudd’s potential 
loss of income from the sentence. “First, the band would have to want him to 
play with them. Second, the convictions would have to operate as a barrier to 
him travelling with them on tour. Neither are certain. It is far from clear 
that at the time when the offending took place there was any place in the band 
available to Mr Rudd, given his drug addiction and state of mind.”
 