
Having taken a sidestep from the stage, AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/10/ac-dc-brian-johnson-hearing-tour-dates-fans-acdc-call-quits>
 frontman Brian Johnson has put his vocals to use on a new album by the 
Saturday Night Live comedian Jim Breuer.

Johnson appears on two tracks on Songs from the Garage, Breuer’s debut album: 
Mr Rock n Roll and My Rock n Roll Dream.

“To me, Brian is the most powerful voice in rock’n’roll,” Breuer told Rolling 
Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/hear-brian-johnson-jim-breuer-screech-new-song-mr-rock-n-roll-20160517>
. “He is also the funniest and most generous man I have ever known. I am still 
in awe of how he recorded the song and forever thankful.”

Due for release on 27 May via Metal Blade, the album was inspired by the 
comic’s love of rock and metal music, withAC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>, Judas Priest and Ozzy Osbourne cited 
as influences.


“I plan on making great, funny videos for every song and have videos up during 
the concerts,” Breuer says. “I want pure entertainment when you come see this 
live, and now my rock and roll dream is to play this not only in America, but 
anywhere else in the world that will accept it! I’m taking it one day at a 
time, living the dream.”

Johnson recently revealed details about his departure from AC/DC’s tour, for 
which he was replaced byGuns N’ Roses frontman Axl Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/acdc-says-guns-n-roses-singer-axl-rose-to-join-band-for-rest-of-tour>
. He confirmed that while he would continue to record with his band, he would 
no longer be able to play live.

 “On March 7th, after a series of examinations by leading physicians in the 
field of hearing loss, I was advised that if I continued to perform at large 
venues I risked total deafness,”Johnson said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/19/acdc-brian-johnson-hearing-loss-diagnosis-statement>
 in a statement. “While I was horrified at the reality of the news that day, I 
had for a time become aware that my partial hearing loss was beginning to 
interfere with my performance on stage … and because I was not able to hear the 
other musicians clearly, I feared the quality of my performance could be 
compromised.”

The recruitment of Axl Rose was met with praise following AC/DC’s debut 
performance with its new lineup inLisbon last month, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
 which received five stars from the Guardian.
 