
The work of rock band AC/DC may not be an obvious festive choice, but for wily 
board game players it could come to define the sound of every Christmas to 
come. Research by Imperial College London and the Royal College of Music found 
that rock music can distract men (but not women) “undertaking complex surgical 
procedures” in the game Operation. In the experiment, 352 volunteers with no 
previous surgical training were given either a Mozart piano sonata,
Thunderstruck by AC/DC <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2AC41dglnM> or a 
recording of operating theatre sounds to listen to while removing the patient’s 
wishbone, Adam’s apple and that weird plastic horse; those listening to AC/DC 
fared the worst. But what else could put off your opponents and ensure you are 
board-game champion this Christmas?

Right game, right tactics


You can see why games such as the life-or-death Operation (or the lower-stakes 
Buckaroo) require hush – you need concentration and a steady hand. So, playing 
loud rock music might deter your opponent, but this wouldn’t work with, say, 
Hungry Hippos, where a bit ofHighway to Hell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l482T0yNkeo> may aid play. Choose wisely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Facdc-sledging-booze-dirty-deeds-cheat-christmas-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e8ed2fa88beae0dd8428272261f62c7e2f55bf6%2F2515_621_2147_2163%2F2147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AC%2FDC%2C%20sledging%20and%20booze%3A%20dirty%20deeds%20to%20help%20you%20cheat%20at%20Christmas%20board%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Facdc-sledging-booze-dirty-deeds-cheat-christmas-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AC%2FDC%2C%20sledging%20and%20booze%3A%20dirty%20deeds%20to%20help%20you%20cheat%20at%20Christmas%20board%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Facdc-sledging-booze-dirty-deeds-cheat-christmas-board-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e8ed2fa88beae0dd8428272261f62c7e2f55bf6%2F2515_621_2147_2163%2F2147.jpg>
 Botched Operation: you need all your powers of concentration. Photograph: Alamy
Take your time


If the person you’re playing against is the type who gets irritated at someone 
going 20mph in a 30mph zone, draw inspiration from snooker’s Peter Ebdon. He is 
notoriously slow and appears fond of lengthy loo breaks. Although he denies 
it is deliberate, it can rile his opponents. During one match,Ronnie O’Sullivan 
pretended to go to sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/apr/28/snooker.uk> while Ebdon was 
taking his time (Ebdon won). Would work well for Scrabble.

Only play drunk people


Take advantage of the one day when it’s socially acceptable to have booze for 
breakfast. Alcohol impairs judgment, coordination, speech and other essential 
gaming skills. It would be totally wrong to get someone drunk before suggesting 
a bout of Carcassone, but it’s fair to choose favourable timing. “When the 
enemy is relaxed, make them toil,” as military strategist Sun Tzu famously 
noted about the game Twister in The Art of War.

Go sledging 


Cricketers are known for their often deeply personal, and occasionally witty, 
barbs. Sledging is the art of chatting to your opponent in an effort to destroy 
their concentration. You may choose to deploy taunts about your relations’ 
debts or weight gain during a game of Boggle. “Sledging can work to distract 
your opponent and get them thinking about something other than the game,” says 
Paul Davis, associate professor in the department of psychology at Sweden’s 
Umeå University, who has researched sledging. “It raises people’s emotions; it 
might get them angry and out of their ideal performance state, rather than 
thinking about strategy. Emotions also have a physiological impact, in terms of 
raising heart rate and affecting muscle tension. If you are playing a game that 
requires dexterity or coordination, anger, anxiety, frustration and guilt can 
all have an effect on physiological balance.” You’d have to be 
ultra-competitive to use it, however. “You have to ask yourself: how important 
is it to win the match, or would you prefer to come through the festive season 
successfully, without any family blow-ups?”
 