
AC/DC: Rock or Bust review – business as usual, and how
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/30/ac-dc-rock-or-bust-review-kitty-empire>
Many years ago a journalist asked the late Bon Scott whether he was the AC 
(alternate current) or DC (direct current) in his band. Scott’sreported response
 
<https://books.google.com.au/books?id=jE7NCgAAQBAJ&pg=PT218&lpg=PT218&dq=bon+scott+I%E2%80%99m+the+lightning+flash+in+the+middle&source=bl&ots=IJV4ApCghX&sig=fq3lcr76IRtXOfl6bQELmOiyJTc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CEUQ6AEwBmoVChMI_JfFhKbpyAIVEpSICh24Kg55#v=onepage&q=bon%20scott%20I%E2%80%99m%20the%20lightning%20flash%20in%20the%20middle&f=false>
 was as quick-witted and accurate as any of his best double entendres. 
“Neither,” he grinned. “I’m the lightning flash in the middle.”

Many thought Scott, who died in 1980 just as the band was reaching its peak, 
was irreplaceable. But AC/DC were unstoppable. Substituting their lightning 
flash for a forward slash named Brian Johnson, they ploughed on and madeBack in 
Black <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/05/back-in-black-ac-dc>. It 
was the biggest album of their career, vindicating the band’s resolve.

So it would be a foolish writer indeed who ever wrote off AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>. They remain unimpeachable as a live 
act, even if their recordings post Back in Black have never matched the 
brilliance of their early years (for proof, their 
give-the-punters-what-they-want shows lean heavily on the roll call of classics 
from their first six albums).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Facdc-without-rhythm-guitarist-malcolm-young-ac-have-lost-their-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4a3914e9f31278d5ce22b5339dcc7102a4a7e9%2F0_0_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AC%2FDC%3A%20without%20rhythm%20guitarist%20Malcolm%20Young%2C%20AC%20have%20lost%20their%20DC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Facdc-without-rhythm-guitarist-malcolm-young-ac-have-lost-their-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AC%2FDC%3A%20without%20rhythm%20guitarist%20Malcolm%20Young%2C%20AC%20have%20lost%20their%20DC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Facdc-without-rhythm-guitarist-malcolm-young-ac-have-lost-their-dc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4a3914e9f31278d5ce22b5339dcc7102a4a7e9%2F0_0_2400_3000%2F2400.jpg>
 Malcolm Young playing with AC/DC in Sacramento, California in 1988. 
Photograph: Larry Hulst/Getty Images 
Be that as it may, I can’t bring myself to see them on their Rock or Bust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/30/ac-dc-rock-or-bust-review-kitty-empire>
 tour, which kicks off itsAustralian leg <http://acdctour.com.au/> in Sydney on 
Wednesday. For without Malcolm Young, AC have, in effect, lost their DC, the 
man that made them a true rockand roll – as distinct from a mere rock – band. 
(They’ve also lost drummer Phil Rudd, who brings more nuance and swing to the 
4/4 metre than most, but it’s hard to argue withthe reasons behind his exclusion
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/06/ac-dc-drummer-phil-rudd-loses-appeals-against-convictions>
.)

There is nothing consistent about my stance. I have seen MC5 with Deniz Tek 
(brilliantly) filling in for Fred “Sonic” Smith on guitar and Evan Dando 
(lamentably) replacing Rob Tyner on vocals. I have also seen the New York 
Dolls, with David Johansen and Sylvain Sylvain the sole surviving members. Both 
were enjoyable.

And AC/DC have kept it in the family: Angus and Malcolm’s nephew Stevie Young 
will hold down rhythm guitar on the tour (he also played on the band’s latest 
albumRock or Bust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/24/acdc-rock-or-bust-first-listen-review>
). He played in the band briefly in the late 1980s, when Malcolm was drying 
out. Live, when AC/DC are coming at you at 130 decibels, it’s unlikely anyone 
will notice any difference.

So is it plain irrational sentiment that stops me from countenancing the band 
without their indomitable rhythm guitarist? Yes, Angus is still there (indeed 
he is the sole remaining original member). To most he is the star of the band 
and always was, even when Scott stood alongside him. The perpetual schoolboy 
defines AC/DC’s image.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_NdHySPJr8I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_NdHySPJr8I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_NdHySPJr8I&media=>
But it was Malcolm who defined AC/DC’s sound. The band is, first and foremost, 
a rhythm machine: Malcolm’s distinctive chop is inextricable to their identity. 
While Angus is a thrilling soloist (at least on those early records where his 
breaks are mostly short, sharp and shocking), Malcolm was all accent, drive and 
reinforcement.

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
Most of all, he knew when not to play, as this isolated track of Let There Be 
Rock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4dsq2lH20k4>demonstrates. Silence – those 
gaps punctuating the riffs – was as vital a component of the AC/DC sound as 
ear-splitting volume. As Angus and Malcolm’s brother George, the band’s 
co-producer (and ex-Easybeat) once put it, “It’s the stops what rocks.”

Think of the long list of AC/DC riffs which made use of those stops: Highway 
to Hell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gEPmA3USJdI>, Whole Lotta Rosie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QMvE0yFnR0I>, You Shook Me All Night Long 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lo2qQmj0_h4>, It’s a Long Way to the Top, 
Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=whQQpwwvSh4>, 
Jailbreak <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJsaGXaQKpc>. These are the songs 
that have made them a juggernaut for over 30 years (their Black Ice tourgrossed 
US$441m 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1286248/ac-dc-to-tour-with-new-music-this-year>). 

It is sad beyond words that Malcolm Young, who is suffering from dementia, is 
no longer able to remember the riffs that made his band immortal. It is frankly 
unbelievable – and heroic beyond measure – that on his last tour with the band, 
before every show, he had toteach himself each song again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
 before taking the stage.

No one else who cares will ever forget those songs. And there is no right or 
wrong way for AC/DC, or their fans, to honour the legacy of their fallen 
comrades. As Rock or Bust suggests, it’s not AC/DC’s way to admit defeat, ever. 
The show will go on, maybe for the last time, to pay tribute to the man who 
made them what they are.

But while I don’t begrudge them for an second, neither do I want to see AC/DC 
reduced to a tribute to themselves. For those about to rock, I salute you. But 
on the night they come to my town, I’ll stay home, crank Let There Be Rock up 
to 11 and have a drink to Malcolm – the greatest rhythm guitarist of them all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO24AipZ-buQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO24AipZ-buQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO24AipZ-buQ&media=> 