
'If death were a public service there would be a waiting list.' Jean 
Baudrillard had to wait till he was 77 for his appointment. By then even people 
who had never read him had got his simulacra-and-simulations and hyper-reality 
down pat. No one did these parrot-tributes better than Baudrillard himself - it 
is the fate of all distinctive stylists to succumb to self-karaoke.

What was best about Baudrillard spills over from any summing-up of his 
thought. The fragments of Cool Memories are like highlights from a 
transcontinental epic, scenes such as the one at the baggage reclaim where 
'after the death which a flight always to some extent represents, everyone 
comes to pick up what belonged to them in a previous life. It is like the 
distribution of what each person will have the right to take with him into the 
hereafter.'

This is what we want not from theory but from any writing: observation as idea 
- and vice versa. Those craving narrative are best served by America, a road 
trip whose momentum leaves such hunger in its wake. No one has better 
articulated the allure of the deserts of the western States: 'The silence of 
the desert is a visual thing, too... There can be no silence up in the 
mountains, since their very contours roar.' If America is a Euro distillation 
of the great American novel - sans le bulk - then Baudrillard offers a glimpse 
of what an American novelist might look like if he were confined to the brain 
of a French theorist.

Here are two passages about motel culture, one by Baudrillard, one by DeLillo: 
'On the way to your room you can easily forget who you are here; you can sit on 
your bed and become man sitting on bed, an abstraction to compete with infinity 
itself; out of such places and moments does modern chaos raise itself to the 
level of pure mathematics.' 'There is nothing more mysterious than a TV set 
left on in an empty room... Suddenly the TV reveals itself for what it really 
is: a video of another world, ultimately addressed to no one at all, delivering 
its images indifferently, indifferent to its own messages (you can easily 
imagine it still functioning after humanity has disappeared).' Which is by 
whom? Answers on a premium rate postcard please.

Â· The Ongoing Moment will be published by Abacus in July
 