
The Financial Reporting Council is considering an investigation into KPMG’s 
auditing ofHBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, the bank that 
almost collapsed at the peak of the financial crisis.

The accounting regulator said its conduct committee had asked its head of 
enforcement, Gareth Rees, to make inquiries into whetherKPMG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/kpmg> committed misconduct when it signed 
off HBOS’s books for 2007.

Banking Standards Board yet to outline any banking standards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/banking-standards-boards-fails-outline-standards>
Rees will examine whether it was correct for KPMG to allow HBOS to be classed 
as a going concern in its 2007 accounts, and whether major worries about the 
bank’s viability should have been included in the financial statements.

Rees’s inquiries are preliminary and may not lead to a full inquiry but the 
decision to start the process represents a significant step amid political 
pressure for a full investigation of KPMG’s role. If a full inquiry goes ahead, 
the firm and individual accountants who worked on HBOS could face punishment.

HBOS, which traded as Halifax and Bank of Scotland, was forced to ask 
shareholders for £4bn to prop up its finances in April 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/apr/30/hbosbusiness.banking1>just 
two months after its annual accounts gave it a clean bill of health. The bank 
almost imploded in September 2008 andwas rescued by Lloyds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness> 
in a government-engineered takeover. The combined bank was bailed out by 
taxpayers a month later at a cost of £20bn.


The FRC said it asked Rees to investigate after reading a report by financial 
regulators into HBOS’s collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/hbos-collapse-report-recommends-formal-investigation-into-former-executives>
 published in November. The FRC has already looked at HBOS’s bad debt 
provisions and decided there were not grounds for a full investigation but it 
has come under pressure to look further into KPMG’s conduct.

After the HBOS report was published, Andrew Tyrie, chairman of the Treasury 
committee, criticised the FRC for not conducting a full investigation into 
KPMG’s auditing of HBOS. Tyrie wrote to the council urging them to get on with 
an investigation quickly.

Tyrie said on Thursday: “This is not before time. A great deal depends on the 
quality of audited accounts. They were found wanting during the financial 
crisis. It is essential that everybody fully understands why. That is why this 
investigation is so important. The committee will be keeping a close eye on it.”

Simon Walker, director general of the Institute of Directors business lobby 
group, said it was essential that investors had faith in the audited accounts 
of UK companies and that the FRC needed to conduct a thorough review to 
maintain confidence.

Walker said: “Shareholders and customers deserve to know what role the firm’s 
auditors, KPMG, played in this scandal. External audits must be rigorous and 
fit for purpose, especially when it comes to systemically important and 
bewilderingly complex financial institutions.

“There is more at stake here than just the integrity of a few regulators and 
the inquiry cannot just be about spreading blame. Shareholders need confidence 
in the financial statements offered by companies and they have a right to know 
that auditors are properly scrutinising the books.”

A spokesman for KPMG, one of the big four accountancy firms, said it supported 
a thorough review of the HBOS affair and that it was important for conclusions 
to be reached speedily.


He added: “We were pleased that the [Prudential Regulation Authority] and 
Financial Conduct Authority] report issued last November recognised that KPMG 
provided robust challenge and delivered clear warnings to HBOS and that this 
resulted in a more prudent approach to provisioning than would otherwise have 
been adopted. We will continue to cooperate with the FRC as it makes its 
preliminary enquiries.”
 