
It's not been the finest month for old-age powerhouses at the US box office. 
Arnold Schwarzenegger's comeback film proper,The Last Stand 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150110/last-stand>, made a disastrous 
$12m. His old sparring partner Sylvester Stallone might have looked in better 
shape after his successfulRambo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122946/rambo> and Rocky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36312/rocky> resurrections of recent 
years, but his revenge thrillerBullet to the Head 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151227/bullet-to-the-head> did even 
worse: only $9m. Bruce Willis took the safest course, sticking to a tested 
property for hisA Good Day to Die Hard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150229/a-good-day-to-die-hard>, and came 
out tidiest: $59m and counting. But that's stillJohn McClane 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_McClane>'s worst performance on home turf 
(even before inflation-adjustment).

The results cast serious doubts about the future viability of the 1980s 
head-boy brigade – especially Schwarzenegger and Stallone, who are respectively 
eight and nine years older than Willis. It's the first clear sign that age 
might now be working against them – except in cases where they make a song and 
dance of it, like in meathead-carehome franchiseThe Expendables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131950/expendables>. Not only are the 
Hollywood trio battling their own bodies, their dimming star wattage, and 
perhaps the diminishing importance of star power itself, they also have to 
contend against a little commented-on feature of the American film market: a 
marked prejudice against anything old.

It's not just action stars saggy of pec who are affected, but drooping 
concepts, too; sequels, especially. If you examine the returns for repeat 
instalments, something quickly becomes apparent: franchises tend to run out of 
steam faster at the US box office, and hold up better internationally. Die 
Hard, to take an example at hand, follows the pattern, with a couple of 
unexpected swerves:

1. Die Hard, 1988 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/80851/die-hard> ($83m 
US domestic/$57m overseas)

2. Die Hard 2 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/84561/die-hard-2>: Die 
Harder, 1990 ($117m/$122m)

3. Die Hard: With a Vengeance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/59603/die-hard>, 1995 ($100m/$266m)

4. Live Free or Die Hard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/119277/die.hard.4.0>, 2007 ($134m/$249m)

5. A Good Day to Die Hard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150237/good-day-to-die-hard>, 2013 
($59m/$161m)

The US domestic gross drops away as the titles get more comical; apart from 
the store of good faith that buoyed up the first sequel in 1990, and a 
resurgence of interest after a 12-year-gap for the fourth film (which perhaps 
also explains the slight drop in overseas box office for Live Free – the 
franchise had to reintroduce itself to a vastly altered international 
landscape). The fifth film hasn't finished its global run yet, so it should 
finish nearer the fourth's take.

The US domestic gross quickly levels off, or falls away as sequels pile up; 
growth is sustained longer abroad. That's the rule here, and it holds true more 
often than not. It's correct forThe Expendables followup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148845/expendables-2>, Spider-Man 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=spiderman.htm>, Batman 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=batman.htm> and Men in Black 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=meninblackseries.htm>. Shrek 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=shrek.htm> and the Ice Age 
menagerie 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?view=main&id=iceage.htm&sort=date&order=DESC&p=.htm>
 have seen the same trend. This tendency almost seems counterintuitive: the 
received idea is that US audiences, the same ones who run screaming from 
arthouse and subtitled films, are fundamentally risk-averse and conservative. 
Actually, in the mainstream commercial arena, they're the most discerning, 
driven by an appetite for fresh spectacle and novelty, more easily becoming 
impatient with shopworn formulae.

The sequels rush has been fuelled by overseas markets: by the need to create 
franchises that insure against the risk of launching a film in culturally 
diverse territories. One way of interpreting the international audience's 
greater appetite for sequels is that, at blockbuster level, most countries are 
passive consumers for what Hollywood puts out – rather than producing their own 
spectaculars. If you'll pardon a colossal generalisation, they are sometimes in 
an aspirational position vis-à-vis US culture; films and attitudes that might 
seem cheesy or ripe for iconic comment in the States – like John McClane's 
yippie-kay-ayisms – often haven't passed their sell-by date abroad, so the 
potential for repeat business is higher. The noughties fantasy and sci-fi films 
spritzed with eau de Matrix (likethe Resident Evil series 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=residentevil.htm>) are good 
examples. They are strong international sellers, with a long box-office 
half-life for any sequels. Ditto the overseas march of the emptily stylised
Hansel & Gretel: Witch Hunters <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151295>: 
big hauls in Russia, Mexico and Brazil – three strongly capitalistic markets, 
with a low share for domestic films, that tend to drink Hollywood's Kool-Aid 
flavour of the month. If anyone is huffing and puffing for a Hansel & Gretel 
sequel, blame these territories.

Such are the hand-me-downs the US offers to the world. Mainstream America, 
though, always demands nothing less than the newfangled, the brightest and the 
best. It's hard to prove definitively that this disregard for used goods is 
what scuppered Schwarzenegger and co's latest round of films (their shaky 
quality could have been the clincher). How the brawny triumvirate do with their 
films of the next couple of years should tell us whether they're at the mercy 
of wider cultural forces or not.

If they are, then perhaps America simply can't bear to watch its former 
bristling star quarterbacks thick of waist and out of breath. It might just say 
too much: that US culture is hitting superannuation point at the same time. One 
of its biggest tricks of the last decade – in the name of ushering in the new 
expected by domestic audiences – has been returning to the old: the tidal wave 
of nostalgia-borne remakes, almost as if American culture wants to climb into 
itsHot Tub Time Machine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135629/hot-tub-time-machine> and 
experience its own genesis, as if for the first time. The paradox put me in 
mind of a famous line, currently ringing out hoarsely from the end ofBaz 
Luhrmann <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/baz-luhrmann>'s The Great Gatsby 
trailer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/dec/20/the-great-gatsby-trailer-video>
: "Can't repeat the past? Why – of course you can."

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at the gulf between arthouse and 
mainstream in Romania. What global cinematic stories would you like to see 
covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 