
Some of Britain’s most high-profile actors and writers, including the recent 
Oscar-winner Mark Rylance,Juliet Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/juliet-stevenson>, Andrew Garfield, Steve 
Coogan, Michael Palin and Jude Law, have appealed to David Cameron to do more 
to help refugee children and divided families across Europe, ahead of a UN 
summit on Syrian refugees next week.

UK must do more to help reunite Syrian families separated in the refugee 
crisis | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/uk-must-do-more-to-help-reunite-syrian-families-separated-in-the-refugee-crisis>
In a letter to the Guardian, 80 public figures from the worlds of literature, 
theatre, music and business urged the prime minister to increase Britain’s 
resettlement commitment and to strengthen family reunion policies.

The letter, backed by Citizens UK and Refugee Action, welcomed the UK’s 
commitment to resettling 20,000 of the most vulnerable refugees by 2020, but 
said it was not enough in the face of Syria’sgrowing humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2016/feb/03/syria-refugee-crisis-and-international-aid-in-numbers>
.

It said: “We are seeing the reality of this human crisis played out on our TV 
screens week after week. Families are desperate to reach their loved ones. 
Traumatised children have no one to protect them. Men, women and children are 
putting their lives at risk to seek safety.

“We know the UK has a proud history of protecting the victims of war. As the 
UNHCR <http://www.unhcr.org.uk/> convenes a high-level meeting calling for 
world leaders to step up and do more to help Syrian refugees, we urge David 
Cameron to continue that legacy by urgently doing more to protect these 
vulnerable refugees. We call on the prime minister to increase our resettlement 
commitment and to strengthen family reunion policies to help separated children 
and divided families.”

Some of those who have signed the letter are part of a “buddy” scheme aimed at 
helping 150 unaccompanied children in the“jungle” camp in Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/french-authorities-begin-clearance-of-part-of-calais-jungle-camp>
 – who have relatives in the UK and therefore have a legal right to family 
reunion – towards a safe passage into Britain.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Factors-writers-call-cameron-increase-help-refugee-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe09d8215a0cc88c69964bdc48c2f3c4ffaadc2%2F1481_472_2325_2906%2F2325.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Actors%20and%20writers%20call%20on%20Cameron%20to%20increase%20help%20for%20refugee%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Factors-writers-call-cameron-increase-help-refugee-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Actors%20and%20writers%20call%20on%20Cameron%20to%20increase%20help%20for%20refugee%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Factors-writers-call-cameron-increase-help-refugee-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe09d8215a0cc88c69964bdc48c2f3c4ffaadc2%2F1481_472_2325_2906%2F2325.jpg>
 Juliet Stevenson, patron of Refugee Action. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the 
Guardian 
Juliet Stevenson, the actor and patron of Refugee Action 
<http://www.refugee-action.org.uk/>, said: “It’s completely unacceptable in 
this day and age vulnerable refugees – who have fled the horrors of persecution 
and conflict – have been forced to survive in squalid conditions in camps 
across Europe when the government could be reuniting them with their families 
here in the UK. This crisis is not going to go away and the UNHCR summit in 
Geneva offers a unique opportunity for our government to increase its response. 
We will be watching.”

The aim of the UN high commissioner for refugees summit on 30 March is to 
secure pledges for increased admission of Syrian refugees, through a variety of 
legal pathways, which will build on existing promises. The target is to secure 
pathways for at least 10% of the Syrian refugee population over the next three 
years.
 