
Adam Ant <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-ant> has checked into a 
London hospital for what he is reportedly calling a "well-earned rest". The 
British singer, who is currently staging a comeback, was allegedly sectioned 
under the UK Mental Health Act. Ant, who suffers from bipolar disorder, was 
previously hospitalised in 2003.

According to a message posted by the Music Fix 
<http://www.themusicfix.co.uk/content/news-flash/10508/adam-ant-in-hospital.html>
, the New Wave hero is presently at Chelsea and Westminster hospital. He has 
asked fans to send him postcards rather than visiting the site, "as it may 
upset the staff who have been really pleasant". "I am having a well-earned rest 
at Her Majesty's pleasure and am painting and continuing being an art student," 
he wrote. "I have a great view and am considering gigs later in the year."

Although it is 15 years since Adam Ant's last LP, the singer – real name 
Stuart Goddard – is working on a new album and had beguna series of celebratory 
club gigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/28/adam-ant-liam-gallagher>. 
Ragged, jubilant and rather "punk rock", these concerts also attracted some 
complaints: at a gig in Portsmouth earlier this month, he "alienated and 
abused" the crowd, according to the event's promoter. He later raged against 
the entire city, telling the Portsmouth Newsit was a town of "gangsters" 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:GxiqHr9l98sJ:www.portsmouth.co.uk/newshome/It39s-Adam-Rant-as-80s.6288391.jp+/search%3Fhl%3Den%26client%3Dfirefox-a%26hs%3D3K0%26rls%3Dorg.mozilla:en-US:official%26q%3D%2Bsite:www.portsmouth.co.uk%2Badam%2Bant%2Bportsmouth&cd=2&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=ca>
. It's not clear whether Ant was sectioned in relation to his recent onstage 
behaviour, or because of private matters.

Either way, this is not the first time the musician has struggled with mental 
health issues. He was briefly sectioned in 2002, after confronting strangers at 
a pub with an imitation pistol. The next year, he threatened a neighbour with a 
shovel and was found naked at a nearby cafe. "I was sectioned under the Mental 
Health Act, a Victorian law, which upset me because I don't think I'm nuts," he 
recalled inan interview with the Quietus 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/04165-adam-ant-interview-oasis-lady-gaga-madonna-punk>
. "I did wrong, I broke the law, OK. But they made a big fucking display of 
it." Ant, 55, has spoken of a "lifelong battle against manic depression".
 