
Sarah J Edwards recalls her 17-year friendship with Beastie Boy Adam Yauch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-yauch>.

Adam Yauch was a very gentle, kind-spirited and big-hearted human being, and 
he was one of my dearest friends. He encouraged and supported my publishing and 
photography work and together we concocted countless jokes that I recite to 
this day. Our friendship journeyed through my learning curve 20s, which 
included a two-and-a-half-year pit stop on Beastie Boys' publicity team, to my 
more relaxed 30s, when Adam was always a laidback and dependable influence. He 
opened my mind to everything from dining out to understanding the futility of 
materialism; he had started to studyBuddhism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/buddhism> early in our friendship and told 
me wonderful stories of local traditions he'd learned from his travels.

We met in the summer of 1995, in a packed VIP field at Reading festival, his 
attention initially caught by my twin Sally's fine wolf-whistling skills. On 
that day, Sally, Adam, Mike Diamond and I bonded over stories of indie 
publishing – Sally and I had just advanced our magazine,Blag 
<http://blagmagazine.com/>, from fanzine to glossy, while Adam, along with 
fellow Beastie Boys Adam Horovitz and Mike Diamond, was producing cult magazine
Grand Royal. The following evening, Adam invited us to join them at a 
restaurant. Little did we expect a night of dessert sharing, arcade motorbike 
racing, watchingBabe and leaving a club because it was too loud.

A few days later, the home phone rang and a gruff cockney voice shouted down 
the line: it was Adam doing his British punk alter-ego Johnny Rocket. We would 
often refer to him under this name and continued to greet each other with "Oi" 
for 17 years.

Adam would frequently catch you by surprise, blurting out the funniest things 
followed by his trademark cheeky fixed grin, as if to say: "Yes, I knew that 
was a good one. I knew it would make you laugh." His jokes would regularly 
incorporate impressive Scottish, northern and German accents.

We had an unwritten rule to "always meet up when on the same turf", usually 
involving a juice or Japanese spot, or cookouts and movie nights. We'd always 
take a walk in our respective cities together – mine London, his New York – and 
talk about the serious and lighter sides of life, each time guaranteed the 
creation of a new joke or catchphrase.

Adam Yauch: cherished, unforgettable.

Read the Guardian obituary here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/05/adam-yauch>
 