
Adam Driver, 31, is the Emmy-nominated star from the HBO series Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls>, in which he plays Hannah 
Horvath’s (Lena Dunham) on-off love interest Adam Sackler. As Sackler, Driver 
combines memorable looks (6ft 3in frame, raven hair, a face like human 
origami), with an intensity that seems part apocalyptic internalised rage, part 
brittle vulnerability, part no-nonsense brio, leading many to cite him as a new 
kind of modern screen male.

Driver was raised in Mishawaka, Indiana, by a paralegal mother and Baptist 
minister stepfather. After 9/11, he joined the US marines, but before being 
deployed to Iraq he broke his sternum during an exercise and was medically 
discharged. Driver has since founded the non-profit organisationArts in the 
Armed Forces <http://www.aitaf.org/>, which performs theatre for military 
personnel.

Driver won a place to study drama at New York’s Juilliard School, where he met 
classmate Joanne Tucker, whom he married in 2013. He’s been cast in films such 
asInside Llewyn Davis and JJ Abrams’s forthcoming Star Wars: The Force Awakens. 
When I speak with Driver on the telephone, he’s in Taiwan, filming Martin 
Scorsese’sSilence, in which he plays a Jesuit priest. His latest film is Noah 
Baumbach <https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah-baumbach>’s black comedy While 
We’re Young.

What’s it like being directed by Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>?

Surreal. I grew up watching his movies. In my culture, in Indiana, it was all 
about going to Blockbuster Video and renting Martin Scorsese movies. So to get 
to work with him is pretty surreal. It’s suddenly gone from watching as an 
audience member to feeling like a participant in a way that’s pretty exciting.

With projects such as Silence and Star Wars, do you feel a gravitational 
career pull from indie to the mainstream?

I’ve been fortunate to do things in both worlds so that’s been interesting. 
There’s no set plan, or feeling pulled to do anything other than getting to 
work with really good people.

While We’re Young has definitely got an indie feel to it.

I worked with Noah before on Frances Ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/28/frances-ha-gerwig-baumbach-review>
. I think he’s fucking brilliant! I could work with him on anything. All these 
great directors, like the Coen brothers, Scorsese and Noah, obviously they have 
different ways of working, but they’re allspecific – they know what the story 
is. At the same time, they surrender to not knowing when it comes to actually 
doing it. So they surprise themselves.

They’re not rigid?

Yeah, they don’t come in with the right answer.

In While We’re Young, an older blocked documentary maker(Ben Stiller) and his 
wife (Naomi Watts) get involved with a younger hipster documentary maker 
(Driver) and his wife (Amanda Seyfried). At first, the older couple feel that 
they can learn from the younger bohemian couple, but then it turns sour. There 
seems to be a battle going on between old-school authenticity and phoney 
culture?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427990767715%2Fcrop_KP_156531_640x360.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=While%20We're%20Young%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=While%20We%27re%20Young%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fwhile-were-young-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427990767715%2Fcrop_KP_156531_640x360.png>
 The film team review While We’re Young 



Yes, that’s a big theme of the movie. When I first read it, the character I 
related to most was Josh. I love watching Ben Stiller playing him, but also I 
believe in so much of what he preaches. I believe in creating history with 
something – not just being connected to the internet, and appropriating things 
and adopting history. But my character, Jamie, can take that 
interconnectiveness and make something pretty great, pretty fast. He’s 
unprecious and by operating on impulses he’s creating something, getting it out 
there. That’s why it’s such a good script. It argues both sides pretty well.

You’ve spoken before about how you worry about the culture of instant 
gratification among your generation, specifically regarding the Internet.

Yes, you have information at your fingertips, but there’s something about 
going through all the steps, as painful as the process is. And I’m not by any 
means immune – I’m completely susceptible. I think we’re almost too 
interconnected, with no emphasis on putting in the time, because there’s an 
expectation in the culture that things will happen immediately.

Your breakthrough character, Adam in Girls, was widely judged to be a new kind 
of young male. Did you see him as a boy or a man initially?

I’ve never thought of him as a boy or a man. I think of him in moments. I 
don’t think that he thinks of himself as a boy or a man either – he probably 
thinks of himself as “in process”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fadam-driver-lots-things-said-about-face-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427307557911%2F0496b5c3-477d-486e-a86a-614c0f27752e-2060x1367.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Driver%3A%20%E2%80%98Lots%20of%20things%20have%20been%20said%20about%20my%20face%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fadam-driver-lots-things-said-about-face-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Driver%3A%20%E2%80%98Lots%20of%20things%20have%20been%20said%20about%20my%20face%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fadam-driver-lots-things-said-about-face-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427307557911%2F0496b5c3-477d-486e-a86a-614c0f27752e-2060x1367.jpeg>
 With Lena Dunham in Girls. Photograph: c.HBO/Everett/REX 
There was a mad energy about Adam at first. Recently, he’s seemed slightly 
tamed – not so much domesticated as less feral?

Hopefully he’s changed. I think it’s about him growing up, and putting his 
energy in different places.

Adam had some graphic sex scenes (telling Hannah that she was 11 years old; 
urinating on her in a shower). For me, such scenes represented a jadedness 
among some modern young males – the saturation of readily available internet 
porn made them desensitised so they had to raise the erotic stakes to feel 
anything?

This is not something that we talked about or made a conscious decision about. 
But I see what you’re saying.

Did the sex scenes ever make you feel uncomfortable?

No, if it was just sexual things for the sake of being sexual, then that would 
make me uncomfortable, but it was part of the storytelling that Lena was going 
for.

Did you feel empathy for how Lena Dunham was treated when Girls came out - the 
personal criticisms directed at her?

Empathetic? Always, when a friend is being attacked. Lena is a grown woman and 
totally capable of handling it, way better than I would ever be able to. That’s 
because she’s thought it through and she’s not just making arbitrary choices. 
That’s the great thing about her writing – again it’s specific and it’s not for 
everyone. Some people get it, some people don’t. That’s par for the course with 
everything. She’s more than capable of handling it.

Do you consider yourself feminist in spirit?

No… well, yes. But I don’t go in for “I am this” or “I am that”.

I read that you joined the marines because you were overwhelmed by feelings of 
patriotism after 9/11.

That’s why I initially joined. Then you forget your original reason for 
joining – it transforms into something different. It’s about serving with the 
platoon of people that you’ve grown to love – serving them as much as serving 
your country. You’re surprised by how strongly you can bond with a group of 
strangers. That bond is a powerful thing – difficult to find in the civilian 
world.

At the time you joined, it sounds as though your life wasn’t really going 
anywhere?

No, it wasn’t going anywhere. I was working a bunch of odd jobs and living in 
the back of my parents’ house, paying rent.

When you were forced to leave the marines, you said you were devastated. Do 
you still feel that way?

Well, it’s easier now, but at the time I was pretty disappointed that I 
couldn’t go overseas with my group of guys. I think I’ll always regret that.

Is there crossover with the marines and acting?

Of course, big time! The small group of people trying to accomplish a mission 
greater than themselves. It’s not about one person; it’s a collaborative 
effort. You have to know your role, and sometimes within that group there’s one 
person who knows what your mission is. That’s a direct crossover. You can’t act 
alone in a room – no one is going to see it. You can’t create something alone. 
You need people to support you.

Was the impetus behind starting your non-profit organisation, Arts in the 
Armed Forces, that forces personnel are more complex and cultural than people 
might think?

Yes – it’s to bring thought-provoking theatre-based troop entertainment to an 
audience that wouldn’t normally be associated with theatre. And we get the 
reactions that we’re going for. “Most troop entertainment is so bad and this is 
so good.” “I’ve never been to a play before.” “I didn’t know theatre was like 
that.” The responses are overwhelming. I get a tremendous amount from it.

How are you with the frothy side of celebrity?

I don’t think of myself as a celebrity. There are things about being known for 
your work that are good and there are things that are bad, so I try to keep 
perspective. I’m surrounded by people who keep things as real as possible.

You had quite a religious upbringing. Are you drawing on that as a priest in 
Silence?

I was raised in a Baptist church in the midwest. Religion was part of my 
upbringing, so yes.

Do you have faith yourself?

No, I try not to have the right answer about anything.

You got married in 2013. Is it important for you to have stability in your 
private life?

Isn’t that important to everybody?

Some artists may prefer to live as wild, unstructured and bohemian a life as 
possible. They might think that’s how artists need to live - to mix things up?

Well, you can still mix things up in married life.

What about being a sex symbol?

[Laughs loudly] I have nothing to say about that.

You must have been told before that you have an amazing unusual face? It’s a 
compliment - not being the standard Hollywood McHunk has worked in your favour.

I have been told before that I have an unusual face. But my face is my face. I 
had a whole life before acting, over the years. Lots of things have been said 
about my face.

What about awards and general public reaction – people coming up to you in the 
street?

As far as awards go, it’s flattering and humbling to be honoured by your 
peers, but it doesn’t mean anything. Reactions in the street are always good – 
people don’t tend to come up to you and tell you you’re an asshole. It’s never 
a long conversation anyway – they usually see that I’m more scared of them than 
they are of me and the whole power dynamic shifts.

What is the actor’s job?

It’s a good question. I don’t know. Sometimes it’s a service; sometimes it 
feels like a business; sometimes it feels like just storytelling; sometimes it 
feels more powerful than that.

There are said to be east coast and west coast acting sensibilities – are you 
equally comfortable with both?

I very much live in New York and I’m very much simpatico with a New York 
sensibility. But I just want to work where the writing is good. The scale or 
the budget shouldn’t be where you put your energy. The size doesn’t matter to 
me. You could work on something that’s big budget but it’s not creatively 
challenging.

What are your immediate plans?

After this, I’ll be working on Girls again, and whatever happens after that 
will happen. As far as plans go, I try not to have one. I hope I’ve learned 
that having a plan turns out to be a waste of energy.

While We’re Young opens in cinemas on 3 April
 