
For decades the UK has maintained hydroelectric power stations simply to cope 
with the power surges that come from people switching on kettles during the 
Coronation Street ad break. Yet we think of adblocking as a new crisis.

Marketing people form two extreme groups at the moment. Those who think 
everything is changing faster than ever and only consider the new and those who 
feel the changes are small, incremental and we need to base new learning on 
centuries-old techniques.

Adblocking is a good example of this. It’s common to see adblocking discussed 
as an existential threat to advertisers and publishers. It’s easy to chart the 
accelerating adoption rates and make scary predictions, so many do. It’s also 
possible to see that there is little new.Adblocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> in the pre-digital age was 
turning the page or turning your head, then TiVo created the skip button – all 
this before the new war of adblockers.

One of the most crucial roles for advertising agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/04/advertising-agencies-dying-marketers-challenges>
 today is leading a path through what is changing and what is not for clients. 
It’s vital that instead of clamouring for solutions, jumping to conclusions and 
joining bombastic “X is dead” conversations, that we understand these changes 
further. We need to understand the motivations, the behaviours and, most of 
all, establish the opportunities and threats. It’s from deep understanding and 
real empathy that we can create solutions and strategies.

Looking back in a few years’ time, we will be amazed that we let our attention 
become the default way to pay for content and we will be amazed how cheaply it 
traded. We’ll see that after paying too little respect to consumers, in an age 
of abundant content, there was no other way for things to go.

Advertisers want your attention, but how do they know they have it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/aug/11/advertising-measuring-consumer-attention>
The solutions so far for adblocking represent less in the way of creative 
solutions and more like a battle. We seeadblocking companies allow whitelisting 
of ads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
 they deem of high-enough quality while accepting payments for the service. We 
see some sites block entry from those with adblockers, while others allow you 
to access their sites and continue to use adblocking software for an amount so 
high it feels more like reparation than a business model and most recently we 
seepublishers in Sweden 
<http://digiday.com/publishers/swedens-publishers-gearing-block-ad-blockers/> 
uniting against adblockers. We’ve increasingly got Facebook trying to take the 
entire internet within its walled garden where it can monetise attention on 
publishers’ behalf, that’s ifmobile operators such as Three 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2016/02/19/three-cuts-ad-blocking-deal-shine-technologies-deal-spans-europe>
 don’t strip it out. It’s all tense, aggressive, but most of all unprogressive.

It’s a war on our eyeballs and they feel tired. If it’s constraints that drive 
creativity, if it’s empathy and an understanding of consumer that can create 
solutions, then it’s time for advertising executives to create a solution for 
all stakeholders, and I see things going four ways.

1. Premium advertising

The abundance of inventory, which isn’t constrained and merely gets larger as 
we spend more time online, has created a vicious circle. Ads are cheap, 
production budgets low, ads are poor, bad results follow, which leads to 
cheaper ads. We need to reverse this cycle. To have fewer, better-produced ads 
would serve the interests of everybody.

2. Personalised advertising

The only thing people hate more than targeted ads are irrelevant ads. If 
people tacitly understood that some anonymised browsing data would be used to 
serve them fewer, more relevant, more valuable ads, there could be a trade off 
that helps all. We all hate retargeting for the TV we decided not to buy, but 
there are moments we’re oddly open to learning about a new airline route, 
seeing a car’s interior or knowing more about the latest 4K TV.

3. Beyond native advertising 

I’m expecting there to be a rise in integration between brands and content. 
From product placement from tools such asMirriad <http://www.mirriad.com/> in 
popular videos, to brands inserting themselves in storylines for world-class 
sitcoms toUber’s functional integration with Google Maps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/07/google-maps-app-uber-minicab-taxi>
 orWashington Post’s integration with the Amazon Echo 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/pr/wp/2016/03/23/the-washington-post-now-available-on-alexa-enabled-devices/>
. We’re talking about a whole series of creative units that go beyond current 
thinking.

4. A new way to work, think, produce and measure

This new way of thinking raises new demands we now need to retool for since 
we’ve spent years creating techniques to create and monitor success that 
increasingly don’t apply to this world.

Premium ads would look vastly and indulgently expensive in a race for lower 
cost per impressions (CPMs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost_per_impression>
). We may have to measure their success over brand metrics rather than clicks 
since the content may be brand-building but not immediately action-driving. 
Personalised advertising would require a level of trust we’ve so far been 
unable to get because we’ve run away from a mature debate.

We’ve decades of knowing how our industry has long used objective metrics such 
as impressions, views and clicks to model return-on-investment and other 
outcomes perfectly. But what are the new metrics for native content? Do we 
measure shares, likes, impressions? And what are these even worth? How do we 
scale content that’s produced specifically for one brand, moment and media 
opportunity?


As an industry, given the changes and the new opportunities, we need to be 
more comfortable with ambiguity.

Adblocking may be the best thing for the advertising industry. A chance to 
rise to the challenge, create more meaningful connections and serve people 
better.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 