
I started using an adblocker almost before they existed because I dislike 
distractions when I am reading. The early Norwegian web browser Opera did 
almost everything better and faster than its more famous rivals: it was the 
first to have tabbed browsing, which was why I switched to it. Then I 
discovered what it called “element hiding”, which meant you could nuke 
particular areas of a web page. In particular, I could kill advertisements that 
had animated gifs.

Fears of adblocking ‘epidemic’ as report forecasts almost 15m UK users next 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users> 
Nothing would any longer squirm in one corner of my eye while I was trying to 
read text. I could read faster and with more concentration. You didn’t need to 
think about making the choice. As soon as it was possible, it was obvious.

But now what had been a secret known only to nerds has moved into the 
mainstream. Adblocking is available for every browser, and the take-up is 
explosive, especially among young people. Themost recent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users> 
predicts that 30% of British internet users will have taken it up by the end of 
the year, but among younger and savvier users the figure is already much 
higher. An estimated 47% of 18- to 24-year-olds in the UKare already blocking 
ads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/more-than-nine-million-brits-now-use-adblockers>
.

The culture secretary, John Whittingdale, has described adblocking as “a 
modern-day protection racket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
”, and promises round-table discussions on the issue. “If people don’t pay in 
some way for content, then that content will eventually no longer exist,” he 
said. But it’s hard to see where this resounding platitude will get us. 
Adblocking software provides a service that people overwhelmingly want and for 
which they might even pay.

The desperation of the ad industry offers a tempting opportunity for profit in 
an industry not famous for its ethics

Indeed there are people making money already. It’s just that they are charging 
the advertisers not to be blocked. That is the business model of Eyeo, a German 
company that produces one of the most widely used programs. According to the 
Financial Times, Google, Amazon and Microsofthave all paid up rather than have 
their ads blocked 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/80a8ce54-a61d-11e4-9bd3-00144feab7de.html#axzz46N6i4hKN>
. This model may also have been adopted by the mobile network 3, which has 
announced plansto block adverts on its network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/19/mobile-operator-three-ad-blocking>
, except for those it chooses to let through. I would have thought this was a 
pretty dangerous precedent for a network operator to set – if it is technically 
capable of censoring adverts, then there is all sorts of other content that 
governments might want taken off the airwaves, too. Nonetheless, the 
combination of consumer demand and the increasing desperation of the ad 
industry offers a tempting opportunity for profit in an industry not famous for 
its ethics.

Adblocking, viewability and the death of mobile advertising - video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/06/adblocking-app-viewability-death-mobile-advertising-publishing>
In a similar vein, the Chinese web giant Alibaba owns the most popular mobile 
browser in India, which comes with adblocking already turned on. In all these 
cases, the sharks are consuming the minnows of the business. The strong get 
stronger and the weak get weaker. The giants of the internet advertising 
business are Facebook and Google, which have about 85% of the business between 
them, and which are also the hardest to block. The weakest parties might seem 
to be the newspapers, but there is actually a tier below us, of all the smaller 
news sites run for and by enthusiasts, which are being crushed by the collapse 
in revenue.

Take graphic cards, a subject of compelling interest to gamers. One site 
specialising in them, Guru3D, gets about 4.5m hits a month, a figure that was 
about the same in 2014. Butits revenue halved between October 2014 
<http://www.guru3d.com/news-story/the-devastating-effect-of-ad-blockers-for-guru3d-com.html>
 and October 2015, in large part because its readership is drawn from the kind 
of people who knew about adblockers early. Now the problem spreads. The Toast, 
an occasionally hilarious site for sharp feminism, is alsoappealing for 
donations to make up for the damage caused by adblockers 
<http://thebread.wpengine.com/donate/>.

The most respectable answer to the problem is that advertisements need to 
become more interesting and compelling. This is extremely unlikely to happen, 
though. To make anything interesting and compelling is highly skilled labour – 
let alone something that is trying to take another person’s money.

One thing that does make ads more engaging is when the advertiser already 
knows that you want a product quite like what they’re selling. That knowledge 
is what makes Google rich. The text ads on Google can afford to look dull 
because you are actually looking for them. But if you’re not looking for 
something to buy, tracked advertising is like being followed around by a horde 
of intrusive chuggers.

In the end, there are two great pressures on the market: advertisers want to 
sell, and we don’t want to be sold to. There has to be some way to make money 
from moderating this conflict, though so far the only people to have found one 
are a few of the adblocking companies. If no one finds a better way, Mark 
Zuckerberg will end up far richer, and far more powerful, than Bill Gates ever 
was.
 