
I cannot overestimate John Berger’s importance to me. It wasn’t so much his 
critical opinions or insights I valued, so much as the man himself, whose 
vitality and receptiveness to the things about him had a force I have rarely 
encountered.

John Berger obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-obituary> 
 It was his freedom as a writer I admired most. He had both backbone and 
playfulness, approaching things at tangents but always illuminating his 
subjects in unexpected and often disconcerting ways. In hisgroundbreaking 1972 
television series, Ways of Seeing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pDE4VX_9Kk>
, Berger described the purposes of art, and artists’ intentions, in ways that 
felt flexible, undogmatic and grounded both in experience and in delight. He 
helped us look for ourselves, which is the best a critic can do.

 Berger provoked intense loyalties and animosities. There were those who saw 
his defence of vernacular art as waging war against modernism, a man fighting a 
rearguard action against all kinds of artistic progress. This was 
oversimplistic, as his writing shows. I got to know Berger largely through our 
mutual friendship withthe late Spanish artist Juan Muñoz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/10/juan-munoz-installation-retrospective-playful-optical-illusions-review>
. In the mid 1990s Muñoz and Berger collaborated on a radio play, which won a 
big prize in Germany and in 2005 was turned into a stage production at the Casa 
Encendida in Madrid. Berger, acting the part of a radio chatshow host, fielded 
imaginary calls and talked about illusion and presence and Goya’s dog, while an 
elderly Turkish foley artist, seated on the edge of the stage, provided sound 
effects. Already almost 80, Berger performed under sweltering stage lights in 
the Madrid summer heat and never lost his cool. Although there were several 
other actors in the work, it was almost a solo performance. John carried it; he 
had presence.

A life in quotes: John Berger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/a-life-in-quotes-john-berger> 
I asked Berger if he had ever wanted to be an actor and he admitted that he 
had been approached by an agent who encouraged him to go on the stage after 
seeing him perform in the annual Chelsea School ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> student revue. His stage 
presence and manner reminded me, disconcertingly, of Frankie Howerd. He was a 
natural and one of the reasons Ways of Seeing was so good was that he never 
came over as the patrician smart-arse superior critic. He made you feel he was 
thinking on his feet, right there in front of you. John would screw up his face 
and affect an expression somewhere between bewilderment and anguish, before 
launching into an argument that seemed to arrive fully formed. He was 
enormously compelling. He made me aware that writing itself was performative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5cca5a3bae2903a7dfc6205249a1babd1c38d4d%2F794_0_3279_3280%2F3279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Searle%20on%20John%20Berger%3A%20'Art%20for%20him%20was%20never%20apart%20from%20being%20alive'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Searle%20on%20John%20Berger%3A%20%27Art%20for%20him%20was%20never%20apart%20from%20being%20alive%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5cca5a3bae2903a7dfc6205249a1babd1c38d4d%2F794_0_3279_3280%2F3279.jpg>
 John Berger rehearsing the play “Est-ce que tu dors?” (are you sleeping?) in 
2012 in Avignon, France. Photograph: Anne-Christine Poujoulat/AFP/Getty Images 
 He reminisced about his time sharing a Paris apartment with the young David 
Sylvester <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jun/20/guardianobituaries.arts>
, who never let go of an early falling out. It had something to do with 
Berger’s complaints about Sylvester leaving his “voluminous underpants” draped 
over a chair in a shared room in the early 1950s. Sylvester, I always thought, 
was jealous of Berger’s abilities as a writer of fiction as well as of art, 
though his career-long public animosity was also about Berger’s left-wing 
politics and his championing of socially engaged art.

John Berger: ‘If I’m a storyteller it’s because I listen’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/john-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller>
 It strikes me that art for Berger was the beginning of a journey of his own, 
a way of igniting responses and provoking thoughts. He approached art with a 
kind of innocent curiosity. He had enthusiasms I couldn’t share (from Soviet 
artist Ernst Neizvestny 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/obituary/ernst-neizvestny-sculptor-who-stood-up-to-khrushchev-s-criticism-dies-aged-91/>
toBritish painter Maggi Hambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/23/maggi-hambling-national-gallery-walls-of-water-waves-amy-winehouse>
) but was open to work as diverse asRachel Whiteread’s House 
<https://www.artangel.org.uk/project/house/> and Muñoz’s enigmatic figurations. 
There are things I wish he had written on, but never did. If he was wrong about 
Picasso (whom he called a “vertical invader”, slicing through tradition) or 
just plain weird about Francis Bacon (whose paintings he once compared to Walt 
Disney animations – though Berger later revised his opinion) it didn’t matter. 
His ideas remained useful, because they always felt part of a bigger, ongoing 
conversation. It is healthy for a critic to beware of fixed opinions.

 Whatever he did, Berger was a teller of stories, and alert to the 
complexities of all kinds of art-making and writing. Dip into him anywhere – an 
essay on Courbet, on drawing hands, or Roman Egypt funerary portraiture – 
whatever it is, his subject is vivid on the page. His writing is filled with 
insights. That he trained as a painter gave him a sympathy and understanding of 
the act of making and its difficulties – rare among critics now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5856e38b24f18eceb9bd9d3fdb4dd7c15ca39f45%2F0_0_702_1080%2F702.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Searle%20on%20John%20Berger%3A%20'Art%20for%20him%20was%20never%20apart%20from%20being%20alive'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Searle%20on%20John%20Berger%3A%20%27Art%20for%20him%20was%20never%20apart%20from%20being%20alive%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fadrian-searle-on-john-berger-art-for-him-was-never-apart-from-being-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5856e38b24f18eceb9bd9d3fdb4dd7c15ca39f45%2F0_0_702_1080%2F702.jpg>
 G, John Berger’s Booker prize-winning novel. Photograph: Bloomsbury 
 Intensely observant, Berger had the ability to focus the smallest quotidian 
detail – a penknife in a boy’s pocket, or a pear grown inside a bottle in a 
farmer’s orchard, bringing in the cows or sharpening a pencil – in order to 
tell us something about life and human relations, in an unending chain of acts 
and expressions. Everything he wrote has humour in it as well as sorrow. His 
writing never forgets the vagaries of the everyday. He revelled in all this.

 Art for him was never something apart from the business of being alive. He 
was grounded. He struck me as a man who was both supremely astute and 
perceptive, and a sentimentalist. He could be a wonderfully engaging companion. 
A1983 television debate with Susan Sontag 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9PcJR5MWrzc> – both wrestling with what a 
story could be – remains electrifying, mostly because they were both struggling 
with thoughts and ideas rather than trading certainties. Always worth reading, 
even when one disagrees with him, Berger went his own way, which was the only 
way to go.
 