
It’s a little known fact that George Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> once considered Star Wars 
spin-off movies about wookiees and robots. In a 1980 interview with Prevue 
magazine, the film-maker revealed he had abandoned plans for a film based on 
Chewbacca’s fellow dog-faced humanoids, and another about life among the 
droids, because the stories “really didn’t have anything to do with the Star 
Wars saga”. Instead, Lucas reduced his plans for the nascent franchise to nine 
movies (later brought down to six).

What we learned from the Rogue One panel at Star Wars Celebration Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/rogue-one-panel-star-wars-celebration-europe>
The only time the wookiees have ended up taking centre stage is in the 
execrable 1978 Star Wars Holiday Special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/01/star-wars-holiday-special-1978-tv-george-lucas>
, which perhaps tells us everything we know about their suitability for 
elevation to the big time. As for the robots of the long-running space opera, 
they have remained sidekicks, though Pixar’sWall-E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/16/wall-e-romance> hinted that Lucas 
might have been on to something here.

More than three decades after Star Wars’ creator abandoned his plans to 
explore the more far-out reaches of the galaxy, the Force is once again with 
the spin-off movie. This December, we’ll get to seeRogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/07/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer>
, which tells the tale of the Rebel grunts who stole the plans to the first 
Death Star. Gareth Edwards’s movie has been plagued by rumours that Disney 
ordered reshoots to inject a bit more knockabout space fun, butearly footage 
from the recent Star Wars Celebration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/rogue-one-panel-star-wars-celebration-europe>
 suggests the film has maintained its identity as a dark war movie painting a 
picture of life on the margins of galactic society, when the Jedi and Sith have 
taken their fancy lightsaber battles elsewhere and ordinary people are forced 
to deal with the horrors of imperial invasion. It could be a new direction for 
Star Wars, or it might turn out to be a strange anomaly in the pantheon, one 
that unwisely dispenses with the cosmic B-movie veneer that gave Lucas’s wildly 
successful original trilogy so much of its identity and magic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07a90ee8e9b058030bf373ffa929839b4bc022b%2F45_0_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07a90ee8e9b058030bf373ffa929839b4bc022b%2F45_0_2303_1382%2F2303.jpg>
 Harrison Ford as Han Solo in 1977’s Star Wars. We will soon learn more about 
the smuggler’s earlier life Photograph: Allstar Picture Library 
Then there’s the as-yet-untitled Han Solo origins movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/06/alden-ehrenreich-han-solo-star-wars-harrison-ford>
, starring Alden Ehrenreich as the wily Corellian space scoundrel, and with 
Lego Movie directors Phil Lord and Christopher Miller at the controls of the 
Millennium Falcon. Like Rogue One, it’s being pitched as a one-off, but anyone 
who thinks Disney won’t continue the story if Ehrenreich turns out to be a 
popular replacement for Harrison Ford has clearly knocked back one too many in 
theMos Eisley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g6PDcBhODqo> cantina.

Star Wars: Episode VIII inspired by old war movies, says Rian Johnson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/18/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson>
Where else might Disney venture, if it finds success with these tentative 
steps into spin-off territory? Star Wars: The Force Awakens director JJ Abrams
this week suggested a Knights of Ren movie 
<http://collider.com/star-wars-anthology-movie-knights-of-ren-jj-abrams/>, 
detailing the backstory of Kylo Ren’s murderous platoon of dark side disciples. 
Would this cover young Ben Solo’s conversion from trainee Jedi to proto-Sith? 
Or might there be a wider significance to the knights beyond making their 
leader look good in scary flashback sequences?

Lucas is also said to have once considered a movie about the roots of the Jedi 
themselves. But given we know, thanks to the prequels, that aStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> galaxy with thousands of 
lightsaber-wielding space monks is infinitely less exciting than one with just 
a few, that seems like a risky proposition. A Yoda movie, with some elements of 
the “Jedi history” concept, might have more squat, green little legs, but only 
if Disney works out how to reconcile CGI Zebedee Yoda from the prequels (and 
numerous mobile-phone telly ads) with the wise and honourable, inspired 
puppet-based version essayed by Frank Oz in the original trilogy. And that’s 
some ask.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bfa99b6eb51651f3f1438088034632ec873447%2F0_253_2400_1352%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31bfa99b6eb51651f3f1438088034632ec873447%2F0_253_2400_1352%2F2400.jpg>
 A Boba Fett spin-off might give the faceless bounty hunter charisma. 
Photograph: Atlaspix/Alamy Stock Photo 
Mighty mouse: how Disney has dominated the 2016 box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/13/disney-box-office-marvel-pixar-lucasfilm-finding-dory-star-wars>
Disney allowed rumours of a Boba Fett spin-off to circulate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/han-solo-boba-fett-star-wars> not 
so long ago – there have been suggestions this is the abandoned Star Wars movie 
thatChronicle’s Josh Trank was once set to direct 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/inside-a-star-wars-firing-792933>
. But you have to wonder quite how a character who always seemed to side with 
the evil Empire, and appears to have all the personality of those dodgy blokes 
from the Trade Federation, is suddenly going to morph into a charismatic, 
all-action antihero type capable of lighting up his own space adventure.


My predictions for future Star Wars spin-offs are these. I think we will 
eventually get a movie aboutthe young Obi-Wan Kenobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/15/ewan-mcgregor-star-wars-movie>, 
though I suspect Ewan McGregor might not be asked back. And I think there’s 
definitely appetite, and decent material, for a standalone film about the young 
Leia.

McGregor was, let’s face it, handed a poisoned chalice in the prequels, yet 
still came out of them with dignity and career intact. But freed from the need 
to join the dots of tedious Star Wars history that dogged Lucas’s efforts on 
the prequels, Kenobi could be a pull. Disney should throw the Jedi knight into 
a linear adventure, perhaps even in the company of his old palQui-Gon Jinn 
<http://www.starwars.com/databank/qui-gon-jinn>. Those guys would be so much 
more fun to follow were they not being forced to spend all their screen time 
trying to work out the midichlorean count of a whiny eight-year-old future 
shiny death cyborg.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f2476d2c171a808d4462c3295145f3e7e6f0f54%2F0_0_2357_3504%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Rogue%20One%20and%20Han%20Solo%2C%20where%20should%20Star%20Wars%20spin%20off%20to%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwhere-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f2476d2c171a808d4462c3295145f3e7e6f0f54%2F0_0_2357_3504%2F2357.jpg>
 Princess Leia, surely much to anticipate in any exploration of her life. 
Photograph: Allstar/Lucasfilm 
Meanwhile, a Leia movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/14/carrie-fisher-star-wars-princess-leia-history-profile>
 featuring a twentysomething version of the spunky space princess, long before 
she became too embroiled in galactic politics to get busy with a good old 
blaster, might also work well. The only problem here is that Disney/Lucasfilm 
would have to keep Solo well out of the picture for fear the sardonic smuggler 
might upstage his sometime squeeze. That shouldn’t be too much of a problem 
with at least three decades to play with between Return of the Jedi and The 
Force Awakens. It shouldn’t be forgotten that Leia remains one of the most 
popular icons in the entire Star Wars canon. Every single fan is dying to see 
if she’s able to use the Force, and has new fancy space tresses to show off.

The key with any of these movies is for producers to ensure they don’t get too 
bogged down in Star Wars history, and instead focus on giving us rollicking 
space adventures of the kind we saw in The Force Awakens, and which Lucas was 
once the master of, a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away … also known as 
the 70s and 80s.
 