
Writing After Hollywood didn't turn out exactly how I expected. When I pitched 
the column <https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/after-hollywood> two years 
ago, I assumed what happened in the late 90s and noughties would continue: the 
prolific flow of mainstream hits from beyond Hollywood's borders, from Ringu to 
Slumdog Millionaire, that seemed to be making the cinema world more 
multilateral. That shift was what I wanted to explore week by week, flitting 
between countries, as well as examine the effects on Hollywood itself. How it 
responded to popular film-makers working in their own languages, foreign CGI 
houses that could match it for quality but beat it on price, audiences that 
wouldn't swallow the same US-centric stories; the whole new globalised rubric.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoTtz7g2tiuI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoTtz7g2tiuI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoTtz7g2tiuI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
That idea hit the bin. I now believe Slumdog, hailed as cracking open the 
Oscars for foreign-language pictures when it bagged best picture in 2009, can 
actually be seen as the end of an era; a little one at least. What's become 
clear is that the foreign breakthroughs have slowed to a trickle since, 
especially compared with the upswell of noughties new waves – J-horror, 
Mexican, South Korean, Romanian – that hit cinemas in the west. Part of the 
reason surely was the constricted financial climate that followed the credit 
crunch, which affected cinema at all levels. It's definitely noticeable in the 
UK, for instance, that foreign film distribution, since the heady days ofTartan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2008/jun/30/riptartan>, has thinned 
(though VOD has possibly played a part, too). When Third Window, our premier 
Asian-film outlet, announced last year it wasgiving up on theatrical 
<http://twitchfilm.com/2012/06/third-window-films-stops-with-theatrical-distribution-and-this-is-why.html>
, it seemed a sign of the times.

But if there was less to see, I still had the sense the ground was moving 
beneath our feet in cinema. Quiet jolts had been registered since the early 
1990s, but the media seriously cottoned on toHollywood's seismic priority-shift 
from US domestic to overseas box office in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/aug/11/hollywood-international-box-office>
. The daddy of these emerging markets was, of course, China, which became the 
second-largest film territory that same year –another zinger of a headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/30/hollywood-china-film-industry> 
making it into news sections. So while After Hollywood managed to zero in on 
the occasional sleeper hit, I found myself drawn back repeatedly to these more 
macro stories, the players slugging it out in geological time like Pacific Rim 
kaiju.
 JA Bayona's The Orphanage (2007), one of the biggest non-English-language 
crossovers of the decade. Photograph: c.PicHouse/Everett / Rex Feature 
 What is clear is the Usain Bolt-like gap Hollywood still maintains over the 
rest worldwide – which is weird considering the panic attacks it's been prone 
to over the last few years. At the same time as Ron Meyer, president of 
Universal, voiced what everybody had been thinking about making "really shitty 
movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/04/universal-studios-ron-meyer>", 
said excremental blockbusters were the ones securing global control for 
Hollywood, applying the big demographic rolling pin to flatten out the world. 
So is it the best of times; is it the worst? The strangest, no doubt. The US 
industry, as we saw last week, is alsomaking successful inroads into 
foreign-language film-making 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/13/hollywood-backing-local-language-films>
 (resurrecting a strategy first used in the late 1920s). Could this be, with 
studio policy aiming at recouping profit inside the country of origin, why 
foreign breakout films were becoming scarce?

One recurring comment from readers was that the column had an anti-American 
bias. I suppose the clue was in the name, but I hoped After Hollywood could be 
read both ways, and also as a tribute to the lynchpin influence of the US 
industry. It was a rare article that didn't mention the H-word at some point. 
But the underlying hope, I confess, was that a real challenger to the 
Entertainment Hub That Shall Not Be Named, with a different take on 
"mainstream", might be in the offing. The evidence on the ground was 
frustrating, fromthe Gulf countries' unrealistic expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/12/disappearance-djinn-uae-horror-movie>
, toBollywood's international marketing aversion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/oct/23/why-arent-bollywood-films-marketed-english>
, toJapan's near disappearance at global level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/may/29/thermae-romae-japan-cinema>
, toNollywood's struggle to reach the next level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/aug/21/why-nigeria-film-cant-square-up-hollywood>
.

"Global breakout hits need to be in English" was another suggestion I heard 
more than once, from several insiders. I'm not so sure: the noughties provided 
numerous counter-examples; nor does it appear to be the rule in TV, supposedly 
the new old cutting-edge medium. That mantra had the air of a piece of received 
wisdom propping up the status quo.
 Stealing Hollywood's tricks, and its actors ... Christian Bale in The Flowers 
of War. Photograph: Revolver 
 It's a proposition that could be tested to destruction once the Chinese 
industry finds its feet, and starts to assert itself as a cinematic powerhouse. 
It's certainly got enough of a home foundation. Its domestic market, if current 
growth rates are sustained, will outstrip the US by 2017; it has a massive 
global diaspora (twice the size of the Indian one), as well as the potential to 
culturally dominate Pacific cinema; the Chinese government, despite Hollywood's 
efforts to penetrate the market, seems likely to retain local control. It 
doesn't mean their films will be any better: there's still little sign of a 
Chinese commercial cinema with a distinct, dynamic identity of its own. With so 
much money on the table, the temptation is to play safe, and just steal 
Hollywood's tricks.

Maybe, if Chinawood (sorry!) and Bollywood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bollywood> truly want to compete, it's time 
for their visionaries, megalomaniacs, mavericks and crazies, their DeMilles and 
DW Griffiths, to come out. The global landscape has turned out to be much more 
bleak and intimidating than I thought when I start writing After Hollywood – 
all billion-dollar grosses and multi-part franchises stampeding over the 
egalitarian global village fete I had in mind. I'm taking a break, but I hope 
to cover the same beat for the Guardian in future; less frequently, more in 
sync with global cinema's largissimo sweeps. And maybe better placed to pick 
out the odd intriguing bright glint, too.

More on the state of the global box office

• The complete After Hollywood archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/after-hollywood>
• Read more about the state of the US box office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/hollywood-report>
 