
Nick Clegg has moved to reassure shattered Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> that he could engineer 
a political recovery by the time of the next election, and that the current 
mood of anger at his "betrayal" would dissipate over two to three years.

As the economy recovers, voters will slowly and grudgingly recognise the 
party's difficult role in saving the country from crisis, he feels.

Senior party figures were predicting the Lib Dems would suffer at least two 
more years in the doldrums. Despite the loss of more than 500 English council 
seats, 13 Scottish parliament seats and one in the Welsh assembly, there is no 
sign of any half-serious move against Clegg's leadership. The judgment across 
the party remains that Clegg had no choice but to form a coalition with the 
Tories last May.

But the pressure he has been under from within his party for months to 
highlight the its distinctiveness is now increasing. It will be a key test of 
Clegg's still developing leadership how he balances these competing demands.

In the first sign that Clegg understands he needs to do more to distance his 
party from its coalition partners, he argued in a change of tone that one role 
for his party would be to protect the country from a return to the unfairness 
of Thatcherism. He is implying that the ideology of an unalloyed majority 
Conservative administration would be well to the right.

The Lib Dem federal committee will meet shortly to set out the specific ways 
in which it expects the party to do more to differentiate itself from the 
Tories in line with a lengthy motion passed at the party's spring conference in 
Sheffield.

Senior party figures almost universally predicted the Lib Dems were now 
entering "a transactional business relationship" with their coalition partners 
â€“ a phrase first urged on the deputy prime minister by Vince Cable, the 
business secretary, last autumn.

Many Lib Dem activists have been demanding distinctiveness and a willingness 
by their leadership to spell out what they have stopped, as well as what they 
have achieved, by being in coalition. Clegg will explain more about his 
approach to coalition politics in a speech next week.

Cable warned at his party conference in the autumn that "to hold our own we 
need to maintain our party's identity and our authentic voice".

That point was echoed strongly by Evan Harris, the former MP and vice-chairman 
of the party's federal policy committee and the authentic voice of the social 
liberal left in the party.

He said no one was turning on Clegg inside the party, but his approach had to 
be less "collegiate" towards the prime minister. "He has got to deliver a 
strategy change, which is to do more than point out what we have achieved but 
also point out what bits of the programme come from a Conservative philosophy 
that we do not share," Harris said.

Disgruntled senior Lib Dems, knowing the beating was coming, were privately 
spitting at what they regard as an ill-judged attempt by some in Clegg's circle 
to project the coalition as some kind of new ideological fusion of JS Mill and 
Friedrich Hayek.

One Clegg aide said: "We are not going to behave like an opposition in the 
government, but we will have greater latitude to talk about when we disagree, 
as we already have over multiculturalism. That set the template. We are not 
going suddenly to Defcon 2 [a reference to the US armed forces expression for a 
defence-ready condition], or have poisonous rubbish briefed into the papers.

""We cannot play silly buggers or spring surprises on the Tories. It has to be 
managed and agreed. Nor can you have a German system where ministers from 
different sides of the coalition go on television to set out their differences. 
We are not ready for that culturally."

But it was being argued that too many Lib Dem ministers in departments of 
state have been happy, in the words of the former leader Sir Menzies Campbell, 
to give the impression that "they get on like a house on fire with their Tory 
secretaries of state".

One Lib Dem official admitted the "power dynamics" of the coalition had 
changed after Thursday's vote. "I guess people that voted Tory last time sort 
of knew what they were getting. They were hardly surprised by what Cameron did, 
and did not feel the need to punish him," the official said.

"If you had to say on the basis of these results which party is going to form 
an overall majority at the next election, it is the Conservatives."

For the moment, Clegg will just have to go through the grind of government as 
it undertakes plans to shake up health, the police, welfare and the House of 
Lords and introduces a more radical form of recall for MPs guilty of wrongdoing 
than previously envisaged.

There is a deeper malaise for his party, however. The battle wounds of the 
alternative vote referendum campaign are going to leave permanent scars. For 
some, the anger is directed at Cameron for implicitly endorsing attacks by the 
NOtoAV campaign that trashed Clegg's leadership.

Neil O'Brien, director of right-leaning thinktank Policy Exchange, said: "The 
real threat is that the coalition will be crippled inside. When trust and 
goodwill flow, the coalition can make real progress. Each partner is prepared 
to swallow decisions that are unpalatable, knowing that, in the not too distant 
future, the favour will be returned. That could get harder now."

There is a deeper disappointment for some. One wing of the Tory party and the 
Liberal Democrats had been harbouring hopes that Cameron could actually have 
embraced the alternative vote, as Michael Gove, his education secretary, 
intended to do. In 1911, the Tory party had split on Lords reform between the 
hedgers and ditchers. There was optimistic talk in some circles that Cameron 
would prove to be a hedger.

If AV went through, it would have been possible for the Tories and Lib Dems to 
come to second preference arrangements at the next election. Cameron would then 
have achieved a realignment of politics. He chose to retain the existing 
divisions.
 