
"Once David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> moved 
in the way he did," a senior Liberal Democrat told the Guardian on Thursday, 
"the polls moved. It was unstoppable."

Well, perhaps. Certainly, along with the right-wing press, (lest we forget) 
the big trade unions and the more Neanderthal aspects of the Labour party, loud 
backing from the Tory leadership made theanti-AV camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/06/av-referendum-charade> 
some foe to beat.

But we could also look at the defeat from another angle. The great opening up 
of the gap between the yes and no campaigns also coincided with the point at 
which senior Lib Dems decisively got involved, and tried to turn their backing 
for the change into a badge of difference vis-à-vis their coalition partners. I 
can well remember Gordon Brown's deathbed conversion to the alternative vote 
prompting mutterings that he was the last person you'd want to back any 
campaign for electoral reform, and the same surely applied toNick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg>, to the power of 10.

As is often the case, I can do without the pompous fury of Paddy Ashdown: the 
Lib Dems should shoulder a lot of the blame for AV's demise, largely because 
they were toxic to start with, but partly because they occasionally ended up 
backing reform in almost as stagey and shrill a way as its opponents, and 
doubtless turned off thousands in the process.Chris Huhne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/mar/30/huhne-goebbels-propaganda-av-referendum?INTCMP=SRCH>
 extending Godwin's law into the campaign via his "Goebbels" moment springs to 
mind.

I thought it wasn't supposed to be like this, at all.

Back in November 2010, the Yes to fairer votes 
<http://www.yestofairervotes.org/> chair Katie Ghose said this: 
 "The campaign will be completely different from anything that has gone 
before. We have simply got to organise from the grassroots up."
A month later, the Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/21/david-cameron-hints-conservative-liberal-democrat-pact?INTCMP=SRCH>
 on a Downing Street press conference in which Clegg "said that the 'Yes to 
fairer votes' campaign should be led by voters not politicians", and hoped that 
the case for reform would be "made particularly by people outside politics who 
want politicians to be made accountable to them." The vision, as far as I could 
tell, was of the spirit of the "purple people" demo that followed last year's 
election result being rolled out all over the country.
That happened, to a limited extent. But by the campaign's last stretch, the 
national stage was crowded with politicians trying to sell voters something 
they said would be bad news for politicians themselves, which is surely the 
dictionary definition of a questionable pitch. In Friday's Guardian,Timothy 
Garton-Ash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/05/av-electoral-reform-for-best>
bemoaned the yes campaign's failure to capture the public mood, and wrote this:
 "It is amazing how the anger at the dysfunctional, corrupt old politics of 
Westminster, which exploded in 2009 over the issue of MPs' expenses, seems to 
have evaporated."
Not so, and it's precisely that lingering fury and scepticism that played some 
role in doing for the Yes campaign's chances: if you're trying to harness 
momentum for a change to the political system, you'd be well advised to keep 
politicians' voices to a minimum.
So there we are: a fairly miserable little compromise, an equally miserable 
defeat, a very crafty prime minister, and arguably the greatest Lib Dem failure 
of all. It really is remarkable: I've just scanned thedistrict-by-district 
results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/06/av-referendum-results-district>
, and so far there are precious few parts of the UK where the yes campaign had 
a prayer (though hats off to Lambeth, Camden, Islington, Haringey, Glasgow 
Kelvin and Cambridge). Yes: AV is a preferable system to FPTP, and the usual 
voices were just as dastardly as you'd expect them to be, but that's really no 
excuse. And now there comes the redrawing of all those constituencies; to say 
that the Tories are currently winning is an almost cosmic understatement.

And what of the future for electoral reform? Bleak, undoubtedly, though like 
plenty of people, my belief that so many of the failures of British politics 
are down to our creaking voting system remains as strong as ever. Knowing that 
that might be it for a lifetime, I guess people of like mind should do what 
should always have been done: clearly set out the goal (thesingle transferable 
vote <http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk/article.php?id=48> in multimember 
constituencies, always the only satisfactory option) and stick to it, try to 
amass the right collection of voices and organisations (Eddie Izzard and Colin 
Firth were not it, I'd wager), understand that any convincing moves will 
originate well beyond Westminster, and make the arguments again, and again, and 
again.

We all know the drill. Why are our politics eternally in thrall to a somewhat 
strange and very small number of people who want great public services but 
wince at the requisite taxes? Why no traction for urgent issues like social 
housing and rights at work? What are we doing privileging Mondeo man and 
Worcester woman? Why Milton Keynes and Harlow, but not Pontypridd and 
Rotherham? Why bother voting Labour in Camberley, or Tory in Llanelli? Why the 
tyranny of a cynically constructed centre ground that ignores just as many 
people on the right as it does on the left?

The questions linger, and AV was never any kind of truly convincing answer, 
which leaves us with a simple enough story: a very British refusal to embrace a 
change, compounded by an equally British failure to convince people otherwise, 
whereby"progressive" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/06/local-election-results-progressive-majority>
 forces made an array of the usual mistakes. All we can do, inevitably, is 
learn – which probably sounds as washed-out as I currently feel.
 