
The cold snap has given Aga Rangemaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aga-rangemaster> a boost, with people 
scurrying home to their cast-iron cookers and wood-burning stoves.

After a bad first half when orders for its upmarket cookers plunged 20%, Aga 
enjoyed a bounce in the second half of last year. "The weather has been running 
something of a marketing campaign for us," chief executive William McGrath said 
today. "The benefits will probably come through in 2010." The idea of having a 
second energy source at home and being less reliant on the grid has become more 
appealing during the big freeze and highlighted the benefits of the firm's 
all-in-one cookers and boilers. With temperatures in Britain dropping well 
below zero, sales of Aga wood-burning stoves have soared.

The company is also benefiting from signs of life in the housing market, which 
should have underpinned a return to profitability in the full year, from a loss 
in the first half. The shares jumped by nearly a fifth on the news.

Orders were down 12% over 2009, but Aga's order book finished the year higher 
than a year ago.

The company's fortunes are closely tied to the housing market, which looks to 
be on the road to recovery. McGrath noted thatmortgage approvals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/dec/23/mortgage-approvals-two-year-high>
 started to climb again a year ago, even though they are still running at half 
their peak levels. "With a bit of a time lag, you'd expect Aga to reflect the 
improvement in housing transactions," he said. And those people that decide not 
to move may spend more on upgrading their homes, he added.

He shrugged off the suggestion that bankers' wives were back buying Agas ahead 
of what promises to be a bumper bonus season.

McGrath defended Aga's green credentials, which have come under attack from 
Guardian commentator George Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2009/mar/20/william-mcgrath-aga-foodservice>
. He pointed to the benefits of the Rayburn all-in-one cookers and boilers. The 
company is also matching thegovernment's boiler scrappage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/jan/05/boiler-scrappage-scheme-launched>
 incentive by dropping the price of its Rayburn 480CD gas central heating range 
cooker by £400.

"Aga offers a strong stable of brands, a business clearly demonstrating 
operational and commercial self-help, and an earnings recovery profile geared 
into the improving housing market," said Numis analyst Andrew Wade. The broker 
raised its pre-tax profit forecast for 2009 to £3.5m from £1.4m.

To keep its pension scheme affordable, which moved into deficit last year, Aga 
has already frozen the pensionable salaries of senior staff, including 
management, and is now freezing those of the remaining 700 members. The scheme 
remains open to new members.
 