
Against Me's Laura Jane Grace has reproached Arcade Fire for casting Andrew 
Garfield as a trans woman in their new music video. Grace, who is herself 
transgender, joined a chorus of criticism for the selection of acisgendered 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cisgender> male actor in the clip for We Exist. 

"Dear @arcadefire, maybe when making a video for a song called 'We Exist' you 
should get an actual 'trans' actor instead of Spider-Man?"Grace tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/LauraJaneGrace/status/469510201511387137>, adding later: 

The video for We Exist, which was released on 16 May, is described by the band 
as "the story of a young person's struggle with gender identity". Garfield 
plays a character who shaves his head and dons a wig and women's clothing 
before going out to a bar. There, confronted by yobs, he is kicked in the face; 
the ensuing fantasy sequence ends as Garfield's character joinsArcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> on stage at Coachella.

Grace is certainly not alone in criticising the casting of Garfield. "There 
seems to be a prevalent idea in Hollywood that viable transgender actors and 
actresses simply do not exist," wroteBustle's Kat Haché 
<http://www.bustle.com/articles/24934-arcade-fires-video-for-we-exist-stars-andrew-garfield-yet-another-cisgender-white-man>
. "This becomes particularly problematic when you’re casting a video for a song 
entitled We Exist. If so, where?"


Others have taken issue with the shape of We Exist's narrative. "I can’t help 
but feel the whole thing plays into the pervasive idea of trans characters as 
victims and freaks, destined to be oppressed by a world that doesn’t understand 
them," Tom Hawking wroteon Flavorwire 
<http://flavorwire.com/457829/arcade-fire-have-nothing-to-say-about-the-transgender-experience>
. "Almost every time you see trans characters in popular culture, they’re 
either a) tragic, sensitive figures brutalised by the horrible world or b) 
flamboyant, hedonistic female impersonators who still end up as a) eventually." 
OnMetafilter <http://www.metafilter.com/139152/We-Exist#5547015>, a user called 
emmtee claimed Arcade Fire's clip reinforces the idea that trans people can 
only find "beauty, happiness [and] acceptance ... in death".

Win Butler has also complicated matters by saying that the song We Exist is 
"about a gay kid talking to his dad". "If the song’s about a gay kid, why is 
the character in the video trans?" asked Hawking. "Surely Arcade Fire don’t 
think they're the same thing?"


Grace, who founded Against Me in 1997, made headlines in 2012 by revealing that
she is transgender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/09/against-me-tom-gabel-transgender>
. She has become a leading spokesperson for trans rights and recently announced 
that she will be the subject of a new documentary TV series, So Much More, 
which will follow Grace's touring life and gender transition, as well as her 
conversations with other trans people.


"I'm not the person I was yesterday, and I'm not the person that I'm going to 
be tomorrow," Gracetold Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/against-me-singer-laura-jane-grace-stars-in-new-reality-series-20140430>
. "I hope [the show] gives other people [the sense that] ... they're not alone 
in the world."

 