
The Turf’s big will-he-run-or-won’t-he saga switched to the Bluegrass State on 
Sunday after the trainer Aidan O’Brien announced thatGleneagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gleneagles> would be entered in the $5m 
Breeders’ Cup Classic in Kentucky a week on Saturday.

The colt has missed numerous engagements due to soft ground since winning the 
St James’s Palace Stakes in June. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/16/aidan-obrien-st-james-palace-royal-ascot>
 He was aimed at top races, including ones at Goodwood, Deauville and York this 
summer, but O’Brien withdrew him shortly before each race.

Finally, on Saturday, O’Brien and his Coolmore owners sent Gleneagles to post 
for Ascot’s Queen Elizabeth II Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/17/solow-sinks-gleneagles-champions-day-queen-elizabeth-ii-stakes>
 following a decision taken an hour before. The trainer’s fears were justified, 
however, when the colt lost for the first time as a three-year-old, trailing in 
sixth.

The Ballydoyle trainer said on Sunday: “He seems to be fine. The ground has 
been holding us up all year and I was saying ‘no’ [to him running] all year. We 
always do what’s right for the horse. He’s a very low moving, very fast miler 
and I should have said no again yesterday.

“We’ll do a little bit with him in the morning and we’ll also make an entry 
for the Breeders’ Cup in the morning.”

Gleneagles, the winner of this year’s 2,000 Guineas at Newmarket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/02/gleneagles-2000-guineas-aidan-obrien-newmarket>
 and The Curragh, is a best-priced 16-1 for the Classic – run on dirt at 
Keeneland at the end of October – where he could clash withthe Triple Crown 
hero American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-belmont-stakes-triple-crown-live>
.

A factor that could weigh on O’Brien’s mind is the fact that Gleneagles’ sire, 
the great Galileo, ran his last race in the 2011 Breeders’ Cup Classic, at 
Belmont Park on dirt – and finished sixth of 13 runners.

At Kempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> Park on Sunday The New 
One started the long road back to a third tilt at the Champion Hurdle with 
success in the William Hill Hurdle for the third year in succession.

Nigel Twiston-Davies, the winner’s trainer, said afterwards: “I’m chuffed to 
bits.” The 2-11 favourite was making his first start since finishingfifth 
behind Faugheen at the Cheltenham Festival in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/10/faugheen-wins-champion-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
.

Although needing to be shaken up by Sam Twiston-Davies, the dual Grade One 
winner soon asserted on the run-in, seeing off the attentions of Stephanie 
Frances by two lengths in workmanlike fashion, to complete a double on the day 
for the father and son team

The New One was nevertheless pushed out to 20-1 from 16-1 for the Champion 
Hurdle by William Hill.

Twiston-Davies said: “He has not run for a long time and he’s bigger than he 
has been at this time of the season. The race was run slowly and it was a bit 
of a dawdle, but he was very quick over the last two, which was lovely to see.”

Also at Kempton, Maputo continued his rise through the ranks since switching 
from the Flat when outclassing his opponents with consummate ease in a novice 
hurdle.

Jumping with fluency, the 5-6 favourite, a Group Three winner on the level 
when trained by Mark Johnston, crossed the line with six lengths in hand under 
Aidan Coleman. The trainer John Ferguson said: “He has got bags of pace from 
the Flat and he has taken to hurdling well.

“He was a bit keen on his first run at Perth and the hood has helped him. He 
is an exciting horse to have in the yard. The Paddy Power meeting is a 
possibility as that is where we took Sea Lord and Parlour Games after this.”
 