
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> was held 
back by aides today after a reporter asked if he was “running away” from 
answering questions about his beleaguered leadership.

Video appears to show aides trying to hold the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader back after Victoria 
Macdonald of Channel 4 News shouted questions at him about his future as leader 
and told him he appeared to be running away from the media.

The Labour leader turned around and told her: “If you want to arrange an 
interview, speak to my press office.”

One aide tries to grab hold of his arm, while another says “don’t, Jeremy, 
don’t, come on” while manhandling him, before he turns back and walks off.

Macdonald later tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/vsmacdonald/status/749251337808932864?lang=en-gb> that 
Corbyn was “angry, yes, but contrary to reports I didn’t feel ‘lunged at’”.

A spokesman for Corbyn said he could not see “anything to respond to” when 
asked for comment.

Shadow cabinet resignations: who has gone and who is staying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/labour-shadow-cabinet-resignations-jeremy-corbyn-who-has-gone>
The incident occurred on Highbury Fields in north London after Corbyn spoke at 
an anti-racism rally.

Photographer Julian Andrews told the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/02/jeremy-corbyn-urged-to-retire-with-dignity-as-hard-left-recruit/>
 that Corbyn was walking back to his car when the incident occurred.

“There were three or four camera crews and a handful of photographers. 
Everyone had been told that he wasn’t answering questions,” he said. “The 
reporter asked him if he was running away and he completely fired up. He swung 
around and made his way to confront her, but two or three aides carried him 
away. He was really pissed off.”

Corbyn had earlier posed for selfies and chatted with the crowd at the Say No 
To Hate Crime rally in his north London constituency.

Thousands brought banners and flag to a rally in support of Corbyn in 
Liverpool today, theLiverpool Echo reported 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/thousands-attend-liverpool-rally-support-11558159>
.

Speakers voiced their support for the Labour leader and criticised those who 
said Corbyn was losing support among the electorate.


Meanwhile, Angela Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> 
made a renewed call on Saturday for Corbyn to stand down for the good of the 
party and the country.

The former shadow business secretary is poised to mount a challenge to Corbyn, 
with the former shadow work and pensions secretary Owen Smith also believed to 
be considering a bid.

Eagle told ITV News: “Let’s face it, the country is in a crisis and we need 
strong opposition. It’s all about Jeremy considering his position and I don’t 
think speculation about anything else is useful.”

Dear Jeremy … the art of the political resignation letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/dear-jeremy-corbyn-art-of-the-political-resignation-letter>
Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, is continuing to seek a 
meeting with Corbyn’s team to find a way of negotiating a settlement as the 
crisis engulfing the party shows no sign of abating.

Momentum, the grassroots movement that supports Corybn, dismissed claims the 
leader could go after being offered a settlement that would ensure his top 
priorities were continued under his successor.

James Schneider, a national organiser, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: 
“The coup plotters are now flailing about because they have had 10 months to 
plot this coup and it seems like it has failed. Jeremy Corbyn has shown 
incredible steel in staying there and not falling, and staying there on behalf 
of the principle of democracy in the party.”

Schneider claimed that Corbyn would win a new leadership ballot and insisted 
the wave of people signing up for Labour membership were largely supportive of 
the leader. “They don’t have a candidate who can beat Jeremy Corbyn,” he added.

Polling has indicated more than half the members of Unite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>, Britain’s biggest trade union, 
want him to quit. Almost 50% of members said they wanted Corbyn to go 
immediately, while a further 10% believe he should resign before the next 
general election, according to a poll seen by the Guardian.

Among Labour voters, 61% said he was doing badly in the job, the YouGov 
Election Data survey found. Overall, 35% said Corbyn should stay at the helm in 
the face of overwhelming opposition from MPs, MEPs and politicians in Scotland.

The YouGov poll of 775 voters will be seized on by opponents as proof that 
Corbyn lacks support on the ground. It was not commissioned by the union, which 
has 1.4 million members, and the Unite general secretary,Len McCluskey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, was among the first to 
rally to Corbyn’s support as the attempt to oust him emerged.

A Unite spokesman said: “Unite’s policy is made in 3,500 branches by at least 
100,000 activists, by our policy conference and our elected executive council 
of lay members. This democratic procedure is not going to be set aside in 
favour of an opinion poll conducted by an organisation with a miserable 
accuracy record of late.”
 