
Internet lore has it that Steven Spielberg and George Lucas turned down the 
chance to pick up the rights to the exalted1988 anime Akira 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76882/akira>, believing it to be 
unmarketable in America. Twenty years later, something had changed: Spielberg 
and DreamWorks were in production on alive-action remake of Ghost in the Shell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/oct/19/hollywood-ghost-in-the-shell>, 
perhaps the next-biggest crossover anime title, with the beard buttering it up 
in the press as "one of my favourite stories". But he missed the chance to be 
there at the beginning for artist-directorKatsuhiro Otomo 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0960028/>'s earlier masterpiece – 25 this year – 
when its enervating hyper-realism left retina burn in the eyes of action fans 
and film-makers worldwide.

Akira swiftly became midnight-movie fodder in the US, on a small release 
through Streamline Entertainment. Its dynamism and attention to detail – honed 
by Otomo in the 2,300-page manga version he published during the 80s in aYoung 
magazine anthology <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young_Magazine> – caught 
everyone's attention. The New York Times critic Janet Maslin wrote: "The 
drawings of Neo-Tokyo by night are so intricately detailed that all the 
individual windows of huge skyscrapers appear distinct. And these night scenes 
glow with subtle, vibrant colour. When its characters hurtle through space, 
they do it with breathtaking energy."

Perhaps the metaphysical gloss applied by Otomo to his apocalyptic, 
future-Tokyo story – the kind of quasi-philosophical yadda-yadda that would 
became an anime trademark – also helped lend Akira its cult credentials. It 
went on release at the London's taste-making ICA (also crucial to spreading the 
word about J-horror several years later) in January 1991. Later that year, 
Streamline put the film out on VHS, and a subsidiary of Island Records followed 
suit in the UK; the company createdManga Entertainment 
<https://twitter.com/MangaUK> to handle the release and exploit growing 
interest in Japanese animation.
 'Violent, abrasive, radically stylised': a biker gang in the Neo-Tokyo of 
Akira 
"I started thinking [Akira] was more than a great film," Andy Frain, Manga 
Entertainment's founder,later recalled 
<http://www.mangauk.com/index.php?p=the-impact-ofakira>. "This might be a 
phenomenon. Were there more films like this in Japan? If so, we could treat 
them in music terms like Def Jam, a genre in itself."

Indeed there were more. Manga Entertainment alone handled Ninja Scroll 
<http://www.youtube.com/channel/HCtA5z94jxCUk>, Battle Angel Alita 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZImWfSmESs0>, Vampire Hunter D 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1QEwCH2E9U>, Death Note, Satashi Kon's 
Millennium Actress and Perfect Blue, and the infamousUrotsukidoji 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qy5rL5rRbwI>, becoming the premium anime label 
in the west in the process. Anime (and its print sibling, manga) arrived in the 
west at the right time; its thrilling sense of spatial possibilities and 
destructive glee showed up Disney's sentimental, character-focused approach and 
conservatism, as the American company slipped into its mid-90s slump. (Though 
Otomo had also admired Disney's professionalism when he was making Akira – he 
took on their practice of prerecording dialogue, which, because it slowed down 
the animation process, was not the norm in Japan at the time.)

Led by Akira, anime expanded the idea of what animation could be: violent, 
abrasive, radically stylised, thoughtful and above all, adult. It arguably 
readjusted expectations ahead of the later revitalisation and maturation of the 
industry under Pixar – sweeping away the prejudice that anything with drawings 
was for kids. Along with a host of other cult and alternative influences 
percolating into the mainstream, its presence was widely felt by the late 
1990s, from the west's embrace of Pokémon fever, to tabloid moral panics, to 
the obvious visual transfusion received by The Matrix – which became the key 
touchstone for the next decade of Hollywood actioners. The Wachowskis put their 
debt on the record with their spin-offThe Animatrix 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jx_jlOb5sbw> in 2003, just as Quentin Tarantino 
did withThe Origin of O-Ren <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ImyntxVxZyE>, the 
cartoon segment of Kill Bill Volume I.

But anime's relationship with the western mainstream was elusive – all about 
influence, rather than grabbing the headlines directly itself. There was a lack 
of true breakthrough titles to follow Akira, which eventually grossed $80m 
globally. Otomo himself went back to completing the Akira manga and didn't 
resurface with another full-length feature until 2004'sSteamboy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/109876/steamboy>. Manga Entertainment 
co-produced Mamoru Oshii's $10m Ghost in the Shell, which left dropped jaws in 
its wake but lost money in theatres. Too many foreign distributors focused on 
the usual talk-heavy techno-orgies (such as Metropolis,Appleseed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/107658/appleseed>, Paprika), which left 
anime firmly mired in geek territory. Fundamentally, anime stayed niche. It was 
only ever worth around a quarter of a billion dollars annually in exports at 
its mid-noughties peak – less than most blockbuster US animations grossed solo.

The one Japanese company that broke out big, Studio Ghibli 
<http://www.onlineghibli.com/>, did so by targeting the family demographic. But 
its films, carefully tied to the personal cult ofHayao Miyazaki 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/hayaomiyazaki>, are so distinctive, so Ghibli, 
that they don't seem to belong with traditional anime. They're a last hurrah 
for hand-drawn 2D animation in an age of CGI, and there's a strain running 
through Ghibli that's reminiscent of vintage Disney: an emphasis on 
craftsmanship, a cultural nostalgia and a perfectly pitched sentimentalism. 
Only the first of those applies to the ruthlessly forward-looking Akira, which 
hits the ground running as it assembles its science-fiction apocalypse from 
memories of the second world war, immortalising sensory ephemera in the beats 
of its glorious animation. 2019 – Otomo's era of Neo-Tokyo – is just over the 
horizon, but Akira's futurist soul may well now be a thing of the past.

Akira is rereleased on 13 July at selected cinemas 
<http://www.mangauk.com/akira/>. 

Next week's After Hollywood will look at English cinema's USP: bathos. Which 
global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let us 
know in the comments below.
 