
On Margaret Thatcher

He found her attractive, particularly her "dainty" ankles but said "I didn't 
want to jump on her".

Asked if he liked her: "Like her? She is not there to be liked. She's a force 
of nature."

"There is a certain grandiose innocence about the manner in which Margaret 
Thatcher met her end."

On other politicians

Tony Blair: "I do admire Blair. He's like Michael Schumacher driving with one 
hand. He'll end up upside down in the ditch."

Michael Heseltine: "An arriviste, certainly, who can't shoot straight and in 
Jopling's damning phrase 'bought all his own furniture', but who at any rate 
seeks the cachet. All the nouves in the party think he is the real thing."

Douglas Hurd: "His is a split personality. A deux he is delightful, clever, 
funny, observant, dryly cynical. But get him anywhere near 'display mode', 
particularly if there are officials around, and he might as well have a corn 
cob up his arse. Pompous, trite, high-sounding, cautiously guarded."

Kenneth Clarke: "A pudgy puffball."

Cecil Parkinson: "Cecil Parkinson loathed me - particularly because I used 
four-letter words in front of the PM, which he thought monstrously intimate."

Virginia Bottomley: "She has lost her looks almost as fast as I did when I 
first went into the House. And her husband is so odd that it grates. Even 
watching him, and that curious little half-giggling smile and 'scamp' haircut, 
brings out the worst in me."

Douglas Hogg: "I can't decide whether he is likeable or not. I don't mind 
people being rude, provided that they are not uncouth with it. But he is 
colossally self-satisfied - or is it a chip? It is said that in the days of 
their courtship he used to follow the object of his desire and her paramour at 
a distance, and stalk them, peeping from shop doorways, like a bad secret 
agent."

John Gummer: "A poxy little runt."

To Geoffrey Howe, who was wearing a dinner jacket: "Bring us three Bucks 
Fizzes and keep the change." Turning to Thatcher, he explained: "The head 
waiter wants to know what you'd like to drink."

On the royal family

"The Queen is all right and Princess Diana is a goddess, but most of the rest 
are so awful it is quite a work to describe their vulgarity."

On his education

Eton: "An early introduction to human cruelty, treachery and extreme physical 
hardship."

Oxford: "A waste of time and petrol." 

On the IRA

"The only solution is to kill 600 people in one night. Let the UN and Bill 
Clinton and everyone else make a scene - and it is over for 20 years."

On sex

"Yesterday I travelled down by train, and a plump young lady came into my 
compartment at Waterloo. She was not wearing a bra, and her delightful globes 
bounced prominently... I gave her a huge grin; I couldn't help it."

"Bonking on a train? I honestly don't think the public would mind. I don't see 
how it could."

"Girls have to be succulent - and that means under 25." 

"I can only really enjoy a Christmas carol concert if I'm having an illicit 
affair with one of the choir."

On the Harkess affair
 (in which he was revealed to have seduced the wife and daughters of a South 
African judge)

"I have been bitterly traduced by people who, many years ago, I held in 
affection and trust. I make no complaint, recognising that, sadly, human 
relationships can degenerate, particularly when inducements of media exposure 
are present."

"I totally regret what happened and I deserve to be horsewhipped. I probably 
have a different sense of morality to most people... I have changed my ways and 
am a reformed character now.'

Jane Clark, his wife, on the Harkess affair: "If you bed people of 
below-stairs class, they will go to the papers."

The late Dame Barbara Cartland on the Harkess affair: "I think I would feel 
very insulted if my husband found a girl from out of the slums more attractive 
than me."

On Nazism

"I was a Nazi; I really believed it to be the ideal system, and that it was a 
disaster for the Anglo-Saxon races and for the world that it was extinguished. 
I was completely committed to the whole philosophy. The blood and violence was 
an essential ingredient of its strength, the heroic tradition of cruelty every 
bit as powerful and a thousand times more ancient than the Judaeo-Christian 
ethic."

When asked if was a vegetarian: "Yes, like the Fuhrer. He was ahead of his 
time in that as in so many other things, like the genetic need for racial 
purity."

"There won't be an NF candidate against me because they know I'm the nearest 
thing they're ever likely to get to an MP."

On Americans

"I don't care how much the Americans pollute their own environment and 
society. My objection to them is that whenever they try to play on the world 
scene they just blunder about the place bumping into the furniture. Invading 
Grenada, smashing up Panama, making a total breakfast in Somalia - all these 
operations are designed for CNN and to enhance the electoral prospects of the 
president. When Saddam began to kick sand in their face it took them six months 
to mount the Gulf war, and evidence which has come out since shows that most of 
their military were dubious."

Â· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857
 