
My family and I were saddened on Thursday morning to learn of the death of 
Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69>
 – too sad to write our feelings at the time. Alan, of course, is famous as an 
actor and director, both on stage and in film. But we first came to know him 
when, withKatharine Viner <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katharineviner> 
(now editor-in-chief of the Guardian), he editedour daughter Rachel’s writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rachel-corrie> into the play My Name is 
Rachel Corrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/14/theatre.politicaltheatre>. The 
care Alan took for our family, his courage to take on this particular project 
and, most of all, the respect he showed for Rachel and her writing, impress me 
still as truly extraordinary.

My Name is Rachel Corrie, Royal Court, London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/14/theatre.politicaltheatre> 
Imagine a person of Alan Rickman’s talent, stature and experience stepping 
into the space between a recently bereaved family, the Israel/Palestine 
conflict and a young woman’s private email and journals. Voluntarily. I could 
not imagine such a thing had Alan not done exactly that. As My Name isRachel 
Corrie <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rachel-corrie> concluded its first 
run in New York late in 2006, I told Alan: “You know, you were working without 
a net. There was a very real risk that no matter what you did with Rachel’s 
writing, our family would not be in the emotional state to approve of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fcd5c104377d33d2907869cd9cec851683d7628%2F306_25_2394_1437%2F2394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%20gave%20the%20greatest%20gift%20to%20my%20late%20daughter%2C%20Rachel%20Corrie%20%7C%20Craig%20Corrie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%20gave%20the%20greatest%20gift%20to%20my%20late%20daughter%2C%20Rachel%20Corrie%20%7C%20Craig%20Corrie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fcd5c104377d33d2907869cd9cec851683d7628%2F306_25_2394_1437%2F2394.jpg>
 The opening night of My Name is Rachel Corrie with (from left) Katharine 
Viner, actor Megan Dodds and Alan Rickman. Photograph: Rob Loud/Getty Images 
He responded: “If it doesn’t have risk it is not worth doing.”

We know Alan as a giving person, and most of all, he gave of himself. He was 
working on a film during the 2005 Royal CourtTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> runs of My Name is Rachel Corrie, 
but managed to direct not only the play, but also our family’s first trips to 
London to see it. Not that our new friends at the Royal Court needed any 
instruction on how to host us. But there were things that, with time, we came 
to recognise as “Alan touches”. Lunch here, tickets to a play there. We were 
treated always with incredible care and kindness – and it could have been so 
different.

Alan Rickman: the most loyal, playful and generous of friends | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends>
When David Johnson brought the play to the Playhouse theatre in the West End 
in spring 2006, Alan was in town. He and his partner, Rima, met our evening 
plane with a car and gave us a ride – not to our hotel, but across the Thames. 
We walked for a while on the right bank of the river and then turned onto the 
downstream side of Golden Jubilee Bridge towards Embankment and the Playhouse. 
About half way across, Rima called out: “Alan, we’re on the wrong side!”

It seems Alan had done all of this so our first view of the West End marquee 
would be lit up and reflected in the water of the Thames. But from the side 
where we walked, the marquee lights were obscured by the Hungerford Bridge 
until the last few steps. Of our group, Alan was perhaps the most disappointed 
by that aborted first sighting, but then he was the one getting the ribbing!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5a24bbc645cf6c8bbe06eeb8262230438b8617%2F36_165_2069_1865%2F2069.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%20gave%20the%20greatest%20gift%20to%20my%20late%20daughter%2C%20Rachel%20Corrie%20%7C%20Craig%20Corrie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%20gave%20the%20greatest%20gift%20to%20my%20late%20daughter%2C%20Rachel%20Corrie%20%7C%20Craig%20Corrie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Falan-rickman-rachel-corrie-play-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5a24bbc645cf6c8bbe06eeb8262230438b8617%2F36_165_2069_1865%2F2069.jpg>
 ‘Although they never met in person, Alan was a great friend to Rachel.’ 
Photograph: Holger Bennewitz/Reuters 
Although they never met in person, Alan was a great friend to Rachel. I 
remember after the play’s New York run at the Minetta Lane theatre, when he 
gently explained to us the rather obvious truth that after two years of editing 
and directing My Name is Rachel Corrie, it was time for him to move on to other 
projects. He told me: “It is clear the play has ‘legs’.”

“Wings” is more like it. My Name is Rachel Corrie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Name_Is_Rachel_Corrie> has flown to every 
continent except Antarctica and been translated into more than a dozen 
languages. Cindy and I have lost track of the number of times we have seen it – 
but not of the foster daughters we have collected from the actresses who have 
played Rachel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheriff%20of%20Nottingham%20to%20Severus%20Snape%3A%20Alan%20Rickman's%20most%20memorable%20roles%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheriff%20of%20Nottingham%20to%20Severus%20Snape%3A%20Alan%20Rickman%27s%20most%20memorable%20roles%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video&media=>
Alan Rickman’s most memorable roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/14/sheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video>
Nevertheless, it is not the wide attention to her writing that has been the 
greatest gift to our daughter. To many people, Rachel had become an icon. Some 
would say “larger than life”, but I would say smaller.

Icons are two-dimensional. They lack depth. When Alan and Katharine Viner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katharine-viner> crafted My Name is Rachel 
Corrie from Rachel’s writing, and he shepherded it through those first four 
theatre runs, they managed to capture Rachel’s energy, her humour and her 
ability to question herself, as well as her world. For those who did not know 
Rachel but only knew of her, the play gave back to my daughter her humanity – 
no small achievement.

Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary> was and 
remains deeply loved and appreciated by all of Rachel’s family and will be 
missed immensely.
 