
Doctors are urging Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> to raise the price of 
alcohol to tackle the “scourge” of drink-related harm after it emerged that 
crime, ill health and lost productivity cost up to £52bn a year, far more than 
previously thought.


They want the chancellor to increase the price of cheap, potent drinks such as 
high-strength white cider, which are mainly consumed by heavy drinkers, 
homeless people and underage drinkers.

Forty-three doctors, medical groups, campaigners, and public health, religious 
and children’s organisations have written to Hammond asking him to use his 
first budget in spring 2017 to increase the duty on certain alcohol products.

“Targeted pricing policies such as minimum unit pricing [MUP] and tax 
increases on the cheapest high-strength drinks would reduce the amount of 
alcohol-related death and disease in our country, and would place alcoholic 
products out of the financial reach of children,” said the signatories, which 
include many medical royal colleges, cancer charities and theSalvation Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/salvation-army>.

Minimum UK alcohol pricing gets backing of official health advisers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/minimum-alcohol-pricing-gets-backing-of-uk-governments-health-advisers>
The plea comes after a government-commissioned review of the evidence of 
alcohol-related harm and what to do about it recommended that ministersabandon 
their opposition to MUP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/minimum-alcohol-pricing-gets-backing-of-uk-governments-health-advisers>
 and start planning to implement it.

The review was undertaken by Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England (PHE) and leading academic 
and medical experts on alcohol. It found that the true cost of alcohol-related 
harm, which had usually been cited as £21bn a year across the UK, has been 
“generally underestimated”.

The overall economic burden is due to be between £27bn and £52bn in 2016 
(1.3%-2.7% of GDP), the researchers said.

Prof Ian Gilmore, the chair of the Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> Health Alliance, said: “Ordinary 
drinkers will not be penalised. MUP will leave pub prices untouched and tax on 
the cheapest, strongest drinks will be targeted at those drinks that are 
preferentially consumed by harmful and dependent drinkers.”

Jeremy Swain, the chief executive of London-based homelessness charity Thames 
Reach, said: “Among the homeless people we work with, our figures indicate that 
super-strength beers and ciders at 7.5% to 9% ABV [alcohol by volume] are doing 
more damage than both heroin and crack cocaine.”

In 2012, the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government pledged to 
bring in MUP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/23/coalition-minimum-alcohol-price-40p>
, but then decided against it in July 2013, which led health bodies to accuse 
David Cameron’s administration ofgiving in to alcohol industry lobbying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/17/minimum-unit-price-alcohol-shelved>
.

On Friday, the Treasury said the possibility of the policy being introduced in 
England and Wales remained under review and it would consider carefully the 
evidence collected by PHE.

A Treasury spokesman said: “While no one would want to interfere with the 
right of adults to enjoy a drink responsibly, PHE’s report shows clearly that 
the abuse of alcohol can cause significant health problems.

“The independent UK chief medical officers recently released new guidance on 
the risk alcohol can pose so people can make informed choices.”

Henry Ashworth, the chief executive of drinks industry body Portman Group, 
said PHE’s 241-page report “does not contain any new policy ideas, nor does it 
fully reflect the significant declines in harmful drinking in the last decade. 
Alcohol policy is on the right track and is consistent and proportionate”.
 