
“How paranoid were you before you made this movie and how paranoid are you 
now?” That question was perhaps the only moment of levity during a conversation 
with documentarianAlex Gibney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney> 
after the credits rolled on Zero Days, a terrifying account of the cyberwar 
that is already raging on thumb drives and mainframes from Washington to Tel 
Aviv to Isfahan Province in Iran and anywhere else that can connect to the 
internet.

Zero Days review – a disturbing portrait of malware as the future of war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/zero-days-review-malware-cyberwar-berlin-film-festival>
Zero Days is a thorough look at the Stuxnet worm, a computer virus created by 
branches of the CIA and Mossad to cripple an Iranian nuclear plant that was 
(probably) doing more than creating civilian energy resources. There’s a lot 
that’s fascinating about this story: from how the virus got into the relevant 
networks, to what it actually did when it got there, to how it was discovered 
(and whose fault that was) and the fact that no one in the United States or 
Israel has ever acknowledged its existence. At its debut at the Berlin film 
festival the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw called Gibney’s latest film “intriguing 
and disturbing” in hisfour-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/zero-days-review-malware-cyberwar-berlin-film-festival>
.

Gibney has concluded that the sovereign nations of this pale blue dot had 
better work hard on some sort of cyber-nonproliferation treaty if we want to 
make it much further into this new century. “The danger is that itseems 
innocent,” Gibney said after a recent screening in New York. “Command and 
control machinery were never intended to be integrated with the internet in 
such a way,” he said, referring to the fact that the Stuxnet worm didn’t just 
clog up a bunch of email accounts, it caused actual machinery to spin out of 
control until they were destroyed. Part of his research involved talking to 
agency moles (whose identity the film weaves into one composite character) and 
Zero Days explains how the US has another cyberweapon ready to launch at Iran 
calledNitro Zeus 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/17/world/middleeast/us-had-cyberattack-planned-if-iran-nuclear-negotiations-failed.html?_r=0>
 that would essentially knock out all civic infrastructure. That isn’t just 
cable television, it’s hospitals and transport.

“‘We’ve got a power plant, let’s hook it up to the internet to make it more 
convenient, but without thinking about problems 10 or 20 years hence,’” Gibney 
mused, consider the way all industrialised nations are threatened by the new 
age of cyberwarfare.


Gibney, a classic iconoclast, is eager to show how the US and Israel are 
mostly to blame for this. “Stuxnet was the first cyberweapon to cross the 
boundary from the cyber realm to physical realm. Iran hadn’t even contemplated 
the possibility. At first, their engineers thought they had screwed up.”


As the film goes on, it shows how Washington and Tel Aviv didn’t exactly see 
eye to eye, and the Israeli agency’s desire to push for increased destruction 
was what eventually gave the game away. According to Zero Days, the Bush 
administration agreed to create Stuxnet as a form of Israeli appeasement. 
Without some sort of programme, the Netanyahu administration was likely to bomb 
the nuclear facility at Natanz. “Obama inherited the programme and, as with 
drones, cranked it up,” Gibney said.

As most of Gibney’s sources are on the US side, the film doesn’t paint a rosy 
picture of Israel’s espionage tactics. “Any criticism of Israel gets blowback,” 
Gibney said, “but this is an important object lesson in how that alliance can 
be problematic, especially when sharing military technology.”


After all his research, Gibney is concerned about the future. He cited the 
recent Iran deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-programme-world-powers-historic-deal-lift-sanctions>
 as a ray of hope (as does the composited character of American informants) but 
is cautiously eyeingRussia’s use of cyberweapons in Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/13/russia-accused-international-cyber-attacks-apt-28-sofacy-sandworm>
 and the US’s currentengagements with Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/pentagon-admits-cyber-attacks-against-isis>
: “This is the first time the US has admitted to using cyber. They are talking 
about changing text, so when you send an email instead of saying, ‘I love you,’ 
it says, ‘I hate you and I will kill you.’”


It may somewhat harmless at first (especially if it is deployed against Isis) 
but an attack that could lead to critical physical damage might be considered 
an act of war.


Then there’s also the issue of attribution. “How long were we arguing if the 
Sony hack was from North Korea?” he asked. “We need to get to where we’re at 
with nuclear or chemical weapons with cyber. There are no agreements on their 
use.”


Zero Days is a cold, two-hour, sky-is-falling case designed to make everyone 
agree.


 *  Zero Days is in cinemas and on VOD in the US.
 