
When Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> failed to 
answer his mobile on Saturday, friends feared the worst, broke down the door of 
his small flat in sheltered accommodation in Belfast and discovered him dead in 
bed at the age of 61.

Forty years after his arrival in snooker had galvanised the sport with new 
energy, the twice world champion's existence had become progressively more 
hellish. Cancers of the throat and palate demanded so much chemotherapy that 
his teeth were cinderised. He could eat only babyfood and his voice had 
degenerated into a faint, croaking whisper. He existed on state benefits but 
with his characteristic reluctance to compromise went on smoking and downing 
pints of Guinness.

His last appearance with cue in hand was in April on the opening night of a 
Legends Tour at the Crucible theatre, Sheffield, scene not only of his 
extraordinary capture of his second world title in 1982 but countless matches 
which kept spectators and television viewers spellbound. He had been discharged 
from a week's stay in hospital only the previous day and his physical frailty 
and the depressing deterioration of his talent was all too plain to see.

Nevertheless, the full house took heartfelt advantage of the opportunity to 
show their appreciation of all the drama and enjoyment his matches had given 
them in his long, colourful career. Some sensed it was his last hurrah and so 
it proved. Not even for a desperately needed Â£1,000 a night was he up to 
fulfilling another engagement.

He did not get along with everyone in the snooker world, far from it. No one, 
though, could deny the immense contribution he made to its popularisation and 
all, in the immediate aftermath of his passing, wanted to dwell on his best 
side.

Ronnie O'Sullivan said that Higgins was "one of the real inspirations behind 
me getting into snooker in the first place"; Jimmy White modelled his approach 
on him and became the most loyal of friends, sharing many an escapade and 
putting money-earning evenings his way whenever he could.

Terry Griffiths, who beat him 13-12 in an epic Crucible quarter-final as, like 
Higgins in 1972, he captured the title at his first attempt, said: "I enjoyed 
my matches against him more than against any other player because of the 
atmosphere he created. The first time I played him in the Masters at Wembley 
there were 2,700 people there. I was introduced and there were a few boos from 
his supporters amongst the applause. Then Alex came out and the reception was 
just fantastic. I've never felt that level of excitement anywhere. It made me 
think, 'There's nowhere else in the world I would rather be'.

"Playing Alex, more than any other player, you just never knew what the next 
frame would be like. There was something about the way he played that got you 
on his side."

Steve Davis said: "Alex got a lot of people who wouldn't have watched it 
interested in snooker. He caused all sorts of problems but he was loved all the 
more for it and he was a snooker genius. He had bottle and heart."

Higgins loved the limelight so much that it seemed at times as if it was more 
important to him than winning. Maybe it was because of his taste for living on 
life's dangerous edge that he seldom beat a top player easily. Dancing too near 
the flame, he lost more close ones than perhaps he should have done.Invariably, 
he raised the emotional temperature of the arena. It was the battle, the 
action, the roar of the crowd in which he revelled whereas Davis, for example, 
had the temperament to accumulate results whether before an audience of 
millions or the proverbial man and a dog.

Leading Cliff Thorburn 10-6 in the 1980 world final, Higgins disastrously 
abandoned the measured game which had given him this commanding position and 
started playing to the gallery. Thorburn was far too good a player to allow any 
such liberties and beat him 18-16.

Off table, these two were frequently at loggerheads. In fact, they had played 
for money on the Canadian's first day in England. As Thorburn was to recall: 
"There I am at the bottom of these stairs, I haven't been paid and Alex is at 
the top of the stairs with a ball in his hand about to throw it at me."

Last September, though, when Thorburn beat him embarrassingly easily in a 
Legends tournament, it upset him so much to see his old adversary so reduced 
that he shed a tear as he gave him an emotional hug.

Some of the things that Higgins did are unforgivable. There can be no excuse 
for headbutting a tournament director, punching a press officer or, backstage, 
grabbing a referee round the neck. There was a hint of paranoia in some of his 
abuse towards referees in the arena. In hotel bars late at night, when he had a 
heavy ashtray in his hand, for instance, there was often a threat of violence.

Nor was he always the most gracious of losers. When Stephen Hendry beat him 
9-2 in the 1991 UK Championship, Higgins remembered accompanying his handshake 
with: "Well done, Stephen. I thought you were a little bit lucky." Hendry heard 
this as "Up your arse, you cunt," a difference of recollection which led to one 
of his innumerable disciplinary charges.

Many people tried to guide him away from self-destruction only to give up the 
struggle. Dave Moorhouse, a former policeman, looked after him for a while at 
his small hotel, Pymgate Lodge. "When he's good, he's charming. On Christmas 
Day and Boxing Day, he helped serve the guests and tidy up. I'm genuinely fond 
of him and so were the guests but then he snaps."

Perhaps he would have won more titles if he had lived even a slightly more 
temperate life but full throttle, all out, death or glory, on and off the table 
was his style and snooker, for all his faults, is lucky to have had him.
 