
Johnny Depp forms supergroup with Alice Cooper and Aerosmith's Joe Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/16/johnny-depp-supergroup-hollywood-vampires-alice-cooper-joe-perry-aerosmith>
Those of you eagerly anticipating the results of a two-year musical 
collaboration betweenAlice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper>, Johnny Depp and Aerosmith’s 
Joe Perry need wait no longer. Hollywood Vampires, named after Cooper’s boozing 
social group of rock musicians in the 70s, have announced a self-titled album 
that’s due for release on 11 September 2015.

This time round, the so-called Vampires have ditched heavy drinking in favour 
of sobriety, and a variety of cameos from other big-name rockers.

Depp and Cooper appear on every one of the album’s 14 tracks, joined by the 
likes of Foo Fighters frontman Dave Grohl, Slash, AC/DC’s Brian Johnson, Jane’s 
Addiction frontman Perry Farrell, Ringo Starr’s son Zak Starkey and Paul 
McCartney – still fresh off hisKanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/01/kanye-west-paul-mccartney-only-one>
,Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/25/rihanna-paul-mccartney-and-kanye-west-release-new-song-four-five-seconds>
 andLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/21/paul-mccartney-lady-gaga-high-clouds-film-soundtrack>
 collaborations from earlier this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1T8GSIiD8lc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1T8GSIiD8lc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1T8GSIiD8lc&media=>
 Hollywood Vampires album trailer. 
If the idea of a few aging rockers and one film star jamming over cups of tea 
doesn’t excite you, the group have also released the album’s full tracklisting.
As previously reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/21/alice-cooper-album-paul-mccartney-johnny-depp-acdc-brian-johnson>
, the album consists mostly of cover songs, in an homage to Cooper’s original 
Vampire drinking buddies from days past.

Some of the 12 songs covered include Led Zeppelin’s Whole Lotta Love, Cooper’s 
School’s Out, Pink Floyd’s Another Brick in the Wall, Harry Nillson’s Jump in 
the Fire, My Generation by the Who and the Doors’ Break on Through.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Falice-cooper-hollywood-vampires-september-paul-mccartney-johnny-depp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd0461d890c5431c26e54e5f9cacd915b025588%2F0_46_2993_2920%2F2993.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Cooper's%20Hollywood%20Vampires%20album%20due%20for%20September%20release&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Falice-cooper-hollywood-vampires-september-paul-mccartney-johnny-depp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Cooper%27s%20Hollywood%20Vampires%20album%20due%20for%20September%20release&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Falice-cooper-hollywood-vampires-september-paul-mccartney-johnny-depp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd0461d890c5431c26e54e5f9cacd915b025588%2F0_46_2993_2920%2F2993.jpg>
 Heavy drinking out, high-end design in … The Hollywood Vampires album package 
by John Varvatos. 
Hollywood Vampires will be packaged in a vintage book designed by menswear 
designer John Varvatos. All proceeds from the album are due to go toMusiCares 
<https://www.grammy.org/musicares>, a foundation set up to assist people in 
music suffering financial, medical and personal emergencies, which was founded 
by the academy responsible for the Grammy awards.

See the album’s full tracklist, below:

 * The Last Vampire

 * Raise The Dead

 * My Generation

 * Whole Lotta Love

 * I Got A Line

 * Five to One/Break On Through

 * One/Jump Into The Fire

 * Come And Get It

 * Jeepster

 * Cold Turkey

 * Manic Depression

 * Itchycoo Park

 * School’s Out/Another Brick in The Wall part 2

 * Dead Drunk Friends 
 