
Alice Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> is reminiscing 
about the days when he killed himself for a living. "Any time you have moving 
parts on stage, you are asking for Spinal Tap," he says of the gallows and the 
guillotine that were climactic fixtures of his live shows in the early 1970s. 
"And when it doesn't work, you have to play it for comedy."

But the time in England when the gallows broke was no laughing matter. "There 
was a wire connected to my back, it stopped the noose from hitting my neck – 
we'd done the trick 100 times, never thinking: 'Maybe that wire is getting 
brittle.' Then it snapped and the noose grabbed me for real." Cooper was 
quick-witted enough to tilt his chin up and slip through the noose. He was 
lucky to escape with a nasty rope burn to his throat.

Now, 41 years after that close shave, Cooper sits in a downtown Los Angeles 
hotel suite. Directly opposite is the Grammy Museum, where the previous night 
Super Duper Alice Cooper, a documentary film about his life, made its West 
Coast debut. Among the invitation-only audience were the legendary groupie 
Pamela Des Barres (a friend of the band, who were collectively called Alice 
Cooper before the singer, previously known as Vincent Furnier, went solo and 
adopted the name for himself) and sundry Cooper-influenced metal performers 
such as Twisted Sister singer Dee Snider.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjXZcJojTucg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjXZcJojTucg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjXZcJojTucg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXZcJojTucg>

Wearing white jeans with an excess of zips, a black T-shirt, and a sepulchral 
medallion nestled in a thicket of chest hair, Cooper looks much the same at 66 
as he did in his 70s heyday, give or take a few wrinkles and some paunch. But 
then when you watch the archive footage spliced into Super Duper, it is 
striking that he never really seemed like a young man. From his swarthy, 
crow-like countenance to his scrawny body, Cooper was never going to become a 
rock star through sexual magnetism, nor through the strength and beauty of his 
voice.

Instead he became one of the best "bad" singers rock'n'roll has ever known, 
his haggard rasp equally suited to the proto-grunge snarl of I'm Eighteen (his 
breakthrough US hit) and the megalomaniacal bombast of Elected. Abandoning 
"erotic politics" as a faded relic of the idealistic 1960s, Cooper based his 
act around death, releasing albums includingKiller 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/killer-mw0000194657> and Love It to Death 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/love-it-to-death-mw0000650017>, and tracks such 
as the necrophilia anthemI Love the Dead 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jVHXAlL8WRk>. The band's hard-riffing tunes 
and grand guignol theatrics drew a vast following of "sick things": young kids 
looking fora nihilistic new sensibility that was as repellent to older rock 
fans as it was to their parents' generation.

For a while Cooper was even bigger in Britain than he was in the US. His 
infamy was boosted by a campaign to ban his concerts led by the Labour MP Leo 
Abse and by Mary Whitehouse's efforts to stop the BBC airing the group's No 1 
single School's Out. "Boy, we could not have bought that publicity," Cooper 
laughs. "They couldn't figure out why we were sending him cigars and her 
flowers. But every time they spent an extra hour trying to ban us in England, 
they helped us so much."

Abse and Whitehouse formed an unlikely alliance, given that the Pontypool MP 
had been an architect of the permissive society by pushing for the 
decriminalisation of homosexuality. But at a time of anxiety about rising 
levels of youth crime, Alice Cooper's disturbing imagery and gory theatrics 
were easily connected in the popular imagination with A Clockwork Orange and 
the copycat ultraviolence that Stanley Kubrick's movie had allegedly inspired.

"When I saw the film, I thought, there's an awful lot of Alice in Alex," 
Cooper says of Malcolm McDowell's delinquent anti-hero. "Like me, he's got a 
snake, he's wearing eye make-up. And later McDowell actually told me: 'There's 
a few Alice references in there.' So I totally related to A Clockwork Orange – 
not the mindless violence, but the fact that violence has its place in 
theatrics."

British rock always was more theatrical than its US counterpart. Often this 
involved destruction or macabre gimmickry: the Move smashing TV sets, Arthur 
Brown and his flaming helmet, Screamin' Lord Sutch making a entrance from 
inside a coffin. "That's why most people thought we were British at first," 
Cooper says.
 Cooper's on stage theatrics remain an influence on metal. Photograph: Brian 
Rasic/REX 
Another thing in common with UK rock was the band's art-school genesis. "Me 
and Dennis Dunaway, our bassist, were both art majors and probably the two 
strongest forces as far as the image and the staging," says Cooper. "We were 
Salvador Dalí fans."

As Super Duper Alice Cooper relates, via its interweaving of photographs and 
voiceovers, the group started out in Phoenix, Arizona as a high-school Beatles 
parody act called the Earwigs, before evolving into the more serious punkadelic 
garage band the Spiders. By 1969, they had moved to LA and hooked up with 
manager Shep Gordon, a young man with no music industry experience but an 
instinctive grasp of the Andrew Loog Oldham principle: not only is there no 
such thing as bad publicity, but the manager's job is to engineer outrage, 
propagate rumours, incite hysteria.

It was Gordon who blagged the band a prime spot at the 1969 Toronto Rock and 
Roll Revival festival, playing just before the headlining John Lennon, and who 
most likely arranged for a chicken to find its way on stage mid-set. Thrown by 
Cooper into the audience, the poor bird was torn to shreds.

"It seemed to upset the whole world," Cooper recalls. "That's when I realised 
rock was looking for a villain, somebody that would have done that on purpose. 
That spurred me to create the Alice character to be darker." It was Gordon also 
who conceived a stunt that ratcheted up Alice Cooper's notoriety in Britain. A 
flatbed truck carried a giant billboard of Cooper, nude except for his pet 
snake, through London, only to mysteriously break down in Piccadilly Circus, 
where a group of reporters and photographers just happened to be waiting to 
document the ensuing traffic jam and police fracas.

Alice Cooper - Poison HD 
<http://www.muzu.tv/alice-cooper/poison-hd-video/35598/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Billion Dollar Babies, the 1973 album that spawned two of Alice Cooper's 
biggest UK hits (Elected <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fs6AExtcNEQ> and 
Hello Hooray <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4weis3TZN_w>) represents the 
band's peak. The massive tour of America raked in so much money that Cooper 
made the cover of Forbes as emblem of a new breed of rock tycoon. But in 
reality, the band were funnelling most of the proceeds back into their 
increasingly spectacular stage production. Frustration with this situation, 
says Cooper, is one reason the original group split.

Cooper went solo with Welcome to My Nightmare. The 1975 album/tour/TV special 
was his most extravagant production yet, the consummation of his driving 
intuition that ultimately rock was just another branch of showbiz. A fan of 
Hollywood and Broadway who was influenced as much by West Side Story and 
Hellzapoppin' as by the Who and the Doors, Cooper thought of himself as "the 
Busby Berkeley of rock".

In the second half of the 70s, he became an increasingly mainstream figure: 
palling around with George Burns and Groucho Marx, appearing on TV shows such 
as Hollywood Squares and The Muppets, even playing golf with the then US 
president Gerald Ford. Privately, he battled alcoholism.

Cooper drank Budweiser from breakfast to bedtime, sustaining what he calls "a 
golden buzz. I was the most functional alcoholic there ever was. But when he 
graduated from beer to whiskey and "started throwing up blood in the morning", 
he realised: "I'm really killing myself."
 Cooper was subject to campaigns by Mary Whitehouse and the Labour politician 
Leo Abse. Photograph: Rb/Redferns 
Drained and distracted, Cooper was poorly placed to maintain his relevance in 
a changing rock scene. As so often happens, the very people who idolised and 
emulated Cooper now eclipsed him. Punk made his exploits seem tame, even though 
Johnny Rotten was a huge fan, auditioning for the Sex Pistols by miming to I'm 
Eighteen and decades later penning gushing sleeve notes for an Alice Cooper box 
set. In the 80s, goth, industrial and extreme metal took death-tripping even 
further, while hair metal bands adopted his look. In Super Duper, Dee Snider 
pays tribute: "We came from this man's loins. He ejaculated – and glam metal 
was born."

After overcoming his addictions and renewing his Christian faith (both his 
father and grandfather were pastors), Cooper returned in the late 80s as a 
revered elder of metal in much the same way as Ozzy Osbourne. But in the 
process, he says, he underwent a personality shift. The original, alcohol-era 
Alice Cooper was a victim as much as a violator. "He was always in a 
straitjacket, getting his head cut off. He represented kids that were bullied, 
the artistic kind of outcasts."

The post-comeback, sober version, who has sold millions of records and 
continues to play large concerts worldwide, is more like a cartoon bad guy. 
"Alice had to be reborn as an arrogant villain. Now he wasn't the one who was 
beaten, he was the one who was going to beat. He was the dominatrix, he wasn't 
the trick."

• Super Duper Alice Cooper is available on DVD now.
 