
One of the strangest creatures Alice meets in Wonderland is the Caterpillar, 
who languidly asks her “Who are you?” and receives the uncertain reply: “I – I 
hardly know, sir, at present – at least I know who I was when I got up this 
morning, but I think I must have been changed several times since then.” 
Alice’s confusion is understandable – over the course of her adventures she is 
variously mistaken for a housemaid, a serpent, a volcano, a flower and a 
monster. Today the Caterpillar’s question would be even harder to answer. Who 
is Alice?

Alice in Wonderland – what does it all mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/20/alice-in-wonderland-what-does-it-all-mean>
Since the first publication of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland 150 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/20/100-best-novels-alice-wonderland>
, Lewis Carroll’s playful and puzzling work has spawned a whole industry, from 
films and theme park rides to products such as a “cute and sassy” Alice costume 
(“petticoat and stockings not included”). Whether she is being viewed as an 
icon of innocence or an opportunity to play out more disturbing fantasies, the 
blank-faced little girl made famousby John Tenniel’s original illustrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/06/alice-in-wonderland-carroll-review>
 has become a cultural inkblot we can interpret in any way we like.

In her anniversary year, theatrical highlights include a highly inventive 
production ofAlice’s Adventures Underground, which opens next month in the 
Vaults deep underneath Waterloo Station, and in July the Manchester 
international festival premiere of Damon Albarn’s musicalWonder.land, directed 
byRufus Norris <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rufus-norris>. There will be 
exhibitions at theV&A Museum of Childhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/dec/10/art.museums> and the 
British Library, a special set of stamps issued by the Royal Mail, and whole 
bookshelves of new publications. Once again, Alice will prove to be as hard to 
pin down as a thought bubble.

Usually she is simply taken for granted. Although we might enjoy her feats of 
literary escapology, repeatedly wriggling out of the covers of her original 
book, we rarely stop to think about why it is Alice, rather than other 
fictional characters such as Heidi or Dorothy, who has come to exert such a 
powerful grip on the public imagination.

My own memories of the Alice books go back much further than my earliest 
memory of reading. They were always there, full of quirky figures that helped 
to populate the busy borderland where real life shaded into the world of 
stories, and that is where they remained for the next 40-odd years. I visited 
Wonderland as a reader from time to time, but for the most part Carroll’s story 
remained quietly in the background. Only when I started to investigate Alice’s 
literary birth and afterlife did I discover that I knew far less about her than 
I had assumed.

When Henry James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames> described the 
creative process that lay behind his novelThe Ambassadors 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ambassadors-2.html>, he pointed out that 
“There is the story of one’s hero”, but also “the story of one’s story” – a 
hidden timeline that involves much staring into space and cursing the empty 
page, punctuated by those rare moments when words can be shuffled into a 
sequence that will make them sing. However, if an unfinished piece of writing 
is a work in progress, the same is true of a book that continues to morph into 
new shapes after publication. And from the “golden afternoon” on 4 July, 1862 
when Carroll first dreamed up his story, to the global popularity it enjoys 
today,Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland has never stopped being a work in 
progress <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/nov/19/robertmccrum>.

The afternoon on which Carroll tried to entertain the three young daughters of 
his Christ Church, Oxford, colleague Dean Liddell has since become almost as 
famous as the story itself. Many years later, Carroll and his unwitting muse, 
the 10-year-old Alice, separately recorded their memories, and although they 
differed in some details they agreed on a broad outline of events. There was a 
blazing sun, a river trip up the Thames and then a picnic during which Carroll 
created a fictional elsewhere for his “dream-child” Alice to explore. 
Wonderland came into existence as anadventure playground for the imagination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/27/as-byatt-alice-in-wonderland>.

***
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783263406%2F9acb73da-08a1-473d-8f57-d72af5d17b1c-2060x1598.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783263406%2F9acb73da-08a1-473d-8f57-d72af5d17b1c-2060x1598.jpeg>
 Tenniel’s drawing of Alice meeting Tweedledum and Tweedledee, from 1872. 
Photograph: Rischgitz/Getty Images 
The truth may have been rather different. Official meteorological reports 
record the day’s weather as dreary rather than dreamy: “cool and rather wet”, 
with total cloud cover and a maximum temperature of 19.9C. But facts were less 
powerful than the tug of fiction, especially when it became clear that the 
Oxfordshire riverbank had been the scene of a modern creation myth, and soon 
the memories of everyone present had been gilded and polished until they shone. 
The shifting moods of real life were replaced by an afternoon of permanent 
sunshine.

Retracing the boat trip today is like a journey back in time. The first thing 
that strikes a modern passenger is how fit Carroll and his rowing partner 
Robinson Duckworth must have been. It takes a pleasure boat at least 30 minutes 
to putter upriver to Godstow, sliding through water that is as green as turtle 
soup, and rowing against the current can take two hours or more. The first part 
of the journey is visibly hemmed in by modern life, thanks to a concrete ribbon 
of embankments and an architectural patchwork of housing developments, but soon 
the river returns to a more unchanging landscape. Willows bend overhead; 
rabbits lollop comically in the undergrowth; occasionally there is the metallic 
flash of a kingfisher. A few hundred yards beyond Osney Lock, the river passes 
by Port Meadow, a bleakly beautiful expanse of grassland where cattle and 
horses have grazed for centuries. A few distant church towers peep over the 
treetops, but otherwise it is easy to feel geographically and historically 
dislocated from the rest of Oxford.

After the party reached Godstow, the Liddell girls demanded a story, and in 
drawing inspiration from his surroundings Carroll could have chosen from many 
different narrative scenarios. He could have anticipated Charles Kingsley’sThe 
Water-Babies, which would begin its serialisation the following month, by 
making a fictional Alice frolic underwater with assorted river creatures. 
Looking further ahead, he could have drawn on the riverbank’s wildlife to 
create a different kind of underground adventure, as Kenneth Grahame would 
later do inThe Wind in the Willows. Instead he decided to send Alice “straight 
down a rabbit hole”, although he later confessed that he did not have “the 
least idea what was to happen afterwards”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426784026665%2F954afee0-73e5-4042-8146-69af98c2feba-1336x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426784026665%2F954afee0-73e5-4042-8146-69af98c2feba-1336x2040.jpeg>
 Alice Pleasance Liddell, daughter of the Dean of Christ Church, Oxford. 
Photograph: Sam Abell/National Geographic/Getty Images 
The first thing that happens is a pun – appropriately from a writer who 
treated language as his personal plaything: as Alice falls slowly down a “very 
deep well” she is falling asleep. As she continues to tumble, she passes 
cupboards and bookshelves on which fragments from her waking life are stored, 
such as a jar labelled “ORANGE MARMALADE”, and gradually it becomes clear what 
kind of adventure awaits her in Wonderland. It is one that will take the 
contents of Alice Liddell’s head and mix them together until they are 
transformed.

Many of the scenes that follow also include fragments of Carroll’s memory. He 
had long enjoyed assembling homemade magazines, and several of Wonderland’s 
inhabitants are refugees from his earlier writings. The Dormouse, for example, 
who tells a “long tale” that snakes away to nothing, is a close fictional 
relative of the dog Carroll had drawn as a boy, with a “tail of desperate 
length” straggling limply across the page. The endless tea party is like a set 
of variations on another childhood drawing, this one showing a man staring 
fixedly at a clock – the joke being that a clock in a picture always looks as 
if it has stopped.

At the same time, Carroll’s decision to send Alice below the earth’s surface 
ensured his story was fully up to date. By 1862, few literary environments were 
as crowded as the underground. Carroll’s most obvious models were the 
traditional folk tales in which it was the location of Fairyland, a secret 
world that was usually entered not by falling down a burrow but by braving the 
damp and dark of a barrow, one of the ancient mounds of earth that pimpled the 
landscape and housed the bones of the dead. Dante’sInferno was another possible 
influence, producing creatures such as the Hatter and his friends, who are like 
comic versions of the souls doomed to spend eternity stuck in the same punitive 
loops of behaviour. Modern science fiction provided Carroll with a more recent 
set of narratives to play with, because plots in which characters discovered 
strange new civilisations underground were becoming increasingly popular – 
hence Jules Verne’s decision two years later to send his explorers journeying 
to the centre of the Earth.

Even without these literary associations, the underworld was a place to which 
the Victorians increasingly enjoyed making mental excursions. The Earth’s 
surface was being reconceived as a skin that was tightly stretched over the 
veins of communication and arteries of power that kept modern life moving – in 
1862 the world’s first underground line was close to completion after years of 
construction that had left ragged scars across London – and what lay beneath 
was a place where stories germinated in the dark like mushrooms. Above ground 
might have been where most people spent their lives, but as John Hollingshead 
observed in his 1862 workUnderground London, it was in a civilisation’s subways 
and hiding places that the imagination could “run wild” and indulge in a 
“passion for dreaming”.

***
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783180992%2F09cac545-1fe5-4e2f-b4d5-d0a75261f8c6-2060x1500.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783180992%2F09cac545-1fe5-4e2f-b4d5-d0a75261f8c6-2060x1500.jpeg>
 Alice at the Mad Hatter’s tea party from Walt Disney’s 1951 film Alice in 
Wonderland. Photograph: Allstar/Walt Disney 
When Carroll completed the first manuscript version of his story, which he 
presented to Alice Liddell in 1864, he gave it the titleAlice’s Adventures 
Under Ground. Simultaneously he was expanding it into the more familiar version 
he published in 1865, in which he altered “Under” to “Wonder” and “Ground” to 
“land”. Carroll’s title has since become so well known that it slips off the 
tongue without any thought, but at the time it was an unusual choice. Alice 
often “wonders”, but never names the place she enters in her dream, and nor do 
any of the creatures who live there. It is only her older sister, on the final 
page of the story, who thinks of it as Wonderland.

Perhaps the book she is reading on the riverbank is supposed to be one of the 
earlier attempts to locate this enchanted country. If so, she would have had a 
small library of examples to choose from. It was an idea firmly rooted in 
Romanticism. For German writers such as Friedrich Schiller or Joseph Freiherr 
von Eichendorff, whose poems “In fernem Wunderland” (“In a Distant Wonderland”) 
and “Ein Wunderland” (“A Wonderland”) were often translated and anthologised in 
the period, Wunderland referred to a place where anything could happen because 
it existed only in the imagination. The same idea also attracted English and 
American authors. InSartor Resartus, Thomas Carlyle had referred to “Fantasy” 
as a “mystic wonder-land”, and the word was frequently applied to areas of life 
that could not be explained by reason alone. In John William Jackson’s poem “My 
Lady-Love”, an angel’s voice is heard singing “A mystic melody from 
wonder-land”, while Carlyle himself had been praised for making “the old dead 
past a new and beautiful, and living Wonder-land”.

If Carroll had a specific source in mind, however, it was probably a poem 
published by FT Palgrave in his 1854 collectionIdyls and Songs. It is rarely 
read today, but Palgrave was well known in Oxford, where he was a fellow of 
Exeter College and later professor of poetry. His book had already attracted 
the attention of Carroll, who noted that its poems “chiefly on children” 
included a sonnet addressed to Agnes Weld, a girl he would later photograph as 
Little Red Riding-Hood. But the poem that seems to have particularly snagged on 
his memory was “The Age of Innocence”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783661956%2F6a025c2d-abb7-4d24-9593-8bb58f037afe-1495x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783661956%2F6a025c2d-abb7-4d24-9593-8bb58f037afe-1495x2040.jpeg>
 The Queen of Hearts. An illustration by John Tenniel, colour printed by Edward 
Evans for a series of cigarette cards in 1930. Photograph: Print 
Collector/Print Collector/Getty Images 
It opens with a burst of praise for a child named Alice: “On little Alice late 
one morn I gazed, / Darling of many hearts, half risen from sleep … ” There 
follows a long description of another girl, whom the speaker eagerly watches as 
she plays, asking himself “What fancy lodges in thy breast?” She clasps his 
knee and asks for “A fairy tale”, and he agrees in exchange for a kiss 
(“There’s nothing gain’d on earth for nought”), although he confesses that he 
tried to read the book earlier and was unable to “re-awake the spell”. With a 
child beside him, however, he can unlock the secret magic of the story, and 
more importantly the buried power of his own imagination: “That wonder-land 
once more I see – / Once more I am a child in Thee”. Parts of Palgrave’s 
description are disconcertingly physical, as he dwells on the girl’s “sock 
turn’d down – the ancle fine – / The wavy folds – the bosom line”, but his 
conscious intention is clear. The imagination of his “little wonderer” is a 
passport back to a state of innocent creativity. “Wonder-land” represents 
paradise regained.

Not all modern readers are convinced that Carroll was equally innocent. In 
Wonderland, the Knave of Hearts is accused of stealing some tarts – a crime 
that in a nursery rhyme is as unavoidable as rhyme itself – and the King 
mutters selected phrases of the evidence to himself: “We know it to be true” … 
“If she should push the matter on” … “What would become of you?” Some of 
Carroll’s Christ Church colleagues might have had similar thoughts about his 
friendship with the Dean’s daughter. On the other hand, the Queen’s conclusion, 
“Sentence first – verdict afterwards”, is a joke that recognises how the court 
of public opinion might treat accusations that are considerably more serious 
than tart-theft. It is far easier to condemn Carroll than it is to decide 
exactly what he should be accused of.

He sometimes worried that a child’s imagination might be equally vulnerable to 
the more troubling aspects of life. Even Alice repeatedly finds herself being 
threatened by her own dream. Almost all the creatures she meets are cranky 
rather than cuddly, from a young crab that talks “snappishly” to a mouse that 
“growls”. In addition to the dangers of execution or being “snuffed out like a 
candle”, Alice at various times risks breaking her neck against a ceiling, 
being trampled under the feet of a giant puppy and having her toes trodden on. 
Although her dream occurs on a riverbank, Wonderland turns out to be more like 
the “entangled bank” at the end of Darwin’sOrigin of Species, where “forms most 
beautiful and most wonderful” are engaged in an endless “Struggle for Life”. 
Even the “good-natured” Cheshire Cat has “very long claws and a great many 
teeth”, while Alice ends her dream with a violent display of temper. There is 
more than an element of truth in Carroll’s sly joke to one young reader that 
his story “was about ‘malice’”.

Yet none of that stopped Carroll from thinking of Wonderland as a hazy mixture 
of fairyland and heaven. It was a place that welcomed people of all ages, but 
only if they followed the biblical injunction to become as little children, by 
agreeing to see life through Alice’s eyes. Only in this way could they join her 
in glimpsing “bright flowers” and “cool fountains” at the end of a dark 
passage, and then shrink even smaller to enter “the loveliest garden you ever 
saw”. Only in this way could they share in her discovery that Wonderland was 
not a place but a state of mind.

***
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783353660%2Fa539c040-b540-4e19-9014-450b5f1756ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783353660%2Fa539c040-b540-4e19-9014-450b5f1756ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mia Wasikowska as Alice in Tim Burton’s 2010 film version. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney 
Alice Liddell soon outgrew the miniature world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/16/alice-behind-wonderland-simon-winchester-review>
 Carroll had created for her. On 11 May 1865, a fortnight before he received a 
specimen copy of his book from the publisher Macmillan, Carroll confided to his 
diary that “Alice seems changed a good deal, and hardly for the better,” adding 
that she was “probably going through the usual awkward stage of transition”, ie 
puberty. Whether it was more awkward for him or her he did not say. The 
fictional Alice, on the other hand, was a girl he could keep close without any 
fear of her leaving him behind. As with his photographs, his stories were 
sealed environments in which little girls could stay little.

Over the next 30 years, Carroll experimented with this idea in various ways. 
At the end of 1871, he publishedThrough the Looking-Glass, a sequel he 
privately referred to as “Alice II”, in which he proved that time could be 
manipulated much more effectively on paper than it could in real life. The 
fictional Alice was now seven and a half, as she tells Humpty Dumpty, meaning 
that in the six years that had passed since her last appearance, she had aged 
only six months. Some of Carroll’s other versions of the story involved equally 
ambitious attempts to slow down time’s arrow or make it loop back on itself. In 
1886, he collaborated on a theatrical version, which brought Alice to life on 
the stage, but also allowed her to be replaced whenever she grew too old. In 
1890, he produced a large-format picture book for young children,The Nursery 
“Alice”, which meant that Alice looked physically bigger, but only because the 
length of her story had been drastically reduced.

Carroll was not alone in wondering whether his heroine would always remain the 
same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/28/alice-in-wonderland-exhibition>. 
One of Alice’s initial fears in Wonderland is that she has been replaced by a 
doppelganger, as she thinks over “all the children she knew that were of the 
same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them”. In 
the years after Carroll’s death, this started to look uncannily like a 
premonition. His original stories continued to be the standard against which 
all successors would be measured, but alongside the original Alice there was 
now a growing army of Alice-alikes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783732137%2F84e380b5-2c6b-4983-bf73-c98333e5c4e4-1410x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783732137%2F84e380b5-2c6b-4983-bf73-c98333e5c4e4-1410x2040.jpeg>
 The White Rabbit. From a series of cigarette cards produced by Carreras Ltd in 
1930. Photograph: Print Collector/Getty Images 
Together these fictional offspring created the curious phenomenon of a 
literary figure who was becoming more complex not within a single work, by 
revealing more with each turn of the page, but by generating extra versions of 
herself. There were parodies, adaptations, new illustrated editions, and 
hundreds of other attempts to hitch a ride on Alice’s fame. Advertisers 
competed with each other to come up with punning twists on Carroll’s original 
jokes, a competition that was probably won by the Pears soap jingle 
“Beau—ootiful So—oap!” Publishers retitled their books in the hope of 
attracting new readers: an early American edition ofPinocchio appeared as 
Pinocchio’s Adventures in Wonderland. Plagiarists boldly offered unauthorised 
reprints of Carroll’s works, as if secretly acknowledging that one of the 
original meanings ofplagiarius was someone who kidnapped or seduced another 
man’s child.

Carroll’s fictional world was also starting to lose its identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/17/alice-in-wonderland-fame-letter-lewis-carroll-charles-dodgson>
. Already any clear distinction between the two Alice books had started to 
dissolve, and Wonderland was widely assumed to include both territories, 
forming a Greater Wonderland, or Onederland, in the public imagination. Soon it 
had spawned a whole galaxy of literary rivals, as modern Alices busied 
themselves exploring Blunderland, Pictureland, Merryland, Emblemland, 
Monsterland, Motorland, Thunderland, Plunderland, Rainbowland, Justnowland, 
and, in a rare concession to realism, Cambridge.

By the start of the 20th century, “Wonderland” had become a piece of cultural 
shorthand for any part of the real world that seemed enchantingly strange, as 
travel books introduced readers toThe Eastern Wonderland or The Wonderland of 
the Pacific. Some spiritualists tried to argue that ghosts were drifting around 
in a posthumous Wonderland of their own. Even Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle>, who published a set of 
photographs in 1920 of two girls from the Yorkshire village of Cottingley, 
alongside what they claimed were frolicking fairies, felt the need to rename 
one of the girls Alice, as if the real Wonderland was the invisible world that 
surrounded us every day. Increasingly, Carroll’s book was much more than a book 
for thinking about: it was a book for thinking with.

This wasn’t always a cheerfully optimistic process. Alice’s Wonderland often 
resembles a dream that is on the verge of toppling over into a nightmare, so 
perhaps it isn’t surprising that it became a popular reference point during the 
first world war. As early as December 1915, a regimental magazine was 
describing the snaking maze of trenches outside Ypres as “a sad, enchanted 
region” in which bullets and shells turned the air into a soundscape as clotted 
as Carroll’s poem “Jabberwocky”, where slithy toves gyred and mome raths 
outgrabe. And a decade after the end of the war, writers were still using 
Carroll’s story to make sense of events that more often resembled savage 
nonsense.

RC Sherriff’s 1928 play Journey’s End provides a powerful example. For most of 
the action, the Alice books remain in the background, like the steady grumbling 
of the guns; only occasionally do they flare into life to remind the audience 
that they have been there all along. The night before a planned raid on the 
German lines, the officer Osborne takes a small leather-bound copy of the story 
from his pocket and starts to read. Initially it appears to be straightforward 
escapism, rather as he proposes that they avoid thinking about the busy worms 
in their trench by talking about croquet instead. (The Alice books would fulfil 
a similar function in the 1942 filmMrs Miniver, where a mother recites 
Carroll’s line about “remembering her own child-life and the happy summer days” 
as her family listens to the muffled thump of bombs falling during the blitz.) 
Yet asJourney’s End grinds on to its inevitable conclusion, it becomes clear 
that nobody fighting on the front line really needs to read Carroll’s story. 
They are already living out a version of its mad logic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783461305%2F48b92ecd-9ec8-4ef7-bfde-09c606c43e5c-1875x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426783461305%2F48b92ecd-9ec8-4ef7-bfde-09c606c43e5c-1875x2040.jpeg>
 The Dodo solemnly presents Alice with a thimble, by Tenniel. Photograph: 
Universal Images Group/Getty Images 
Much of what happens in the shelter involves a distorted version of Carroll’s 
writing, from the need to include plenty of pepper in the soup (“It’s a 
disinfectant”), to the list of objects that Osborne recites (“Of shoes – and 
ships – and sealing wax – / And cabbages – and kings”), which later returns in 
a mutilated form when a British soldier searches the pockets of a young 
captured German and discovers “bit of string … little box o’ fruit drops; 
pocket-knife … bit o’ cedar pencil … and a stick o’ chocolate”. Soon a second 
soldier is wounded by shrapnel, and whispers his final line “It’s – it’s so 
frightfully dark and cold”. Within a minute the shelling rises in intensity and 
the shelter’s timber props cave in. It turns out that not all underground 
adventures have a happy ending.

By 1928 the theatre had a modern rival, cinema, and here Carroll’s story also 
played a prominent role in showing what might be possible. The first edition of
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland already contained a primitive version of 
moving pictures, because the two illustrations that showed the Cheshire Cat 
fading to an enigmatic grin were printed on consecutive pages, allowing a 
reader to make the Cat materialise or dematerialise by flicking the first page 
back and forth.

Within a few years technology had caught up with Carroll’s imagination. The 
Wonderland music hall in Stepney was just one of the venues that were converted 
into cinemas, and by 1915 three silent versions of Carroll’s story had offered 
viewers the chance to see “real” versions of Alice moving jerkily across a 
screen. Yet while these films attempted to flesh out Carroll’s narrative with 
human actors, the most successful adaptations took a different approach.

When Walt Disney arrived in Los Angeles in August 1923, he was holding a cheap 
suitcase that contained an equally cheap suit, a sweater, some drawing 
materials, $40 andAlice’s Wonderland, a 12-and-a-half-minute reel of film 
mixing live action and animation, in which a ringletted four‑year-old named 
Virginia Davis explored Cartoonland. BetweenAlice’s Day at the Sea in 1924 and 
Alice in the Big League in 1927, the Disney brothers produced a total of 56 
“Alice Comedies”, and slowly the future direction of their newly formed studio 
became clear. As the screen time of the real Alice was gradually reduced, so 
Cartoonland was taken over by Disney’s anthropomorphic animals. It turned out 
that the jokes were better when people weren’t getting in the way.

In 1926, a book on nonsense poetry had suggested that “The realm of Nonsense 
is not so much Fairyland as Dreamland”, where “the memories of the day are 
twisted into many queer and unexpected shapes by the imaginations of the 
night”. Carroll had already shown how this could produce stories on the page; 
now Disney invited spectators to enjoy a contemporary alternative. Watching a 
cartoon was another way of dreaming while remaining awake.

***
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426784423473%2F80d75cfd-85d8-4327-9145-b8705fb6c08e-2060x1351.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20in%20Wonderland%3A%20the%20never-ending%20adventures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Flewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426784423473%2F80d75cfd-85d8-4327-9145-b8705fb6c08e-2060x1351.jpeg>
 Sammy Davis Jr and Natalie Gregory in a 1985 made-for-TV version. Photograph: 
Allstar/American Ent 
By the time of Alice Liddell’s death in 1934, her fictional alter ego was 
busier than ever. That year saw the release ofBetty in Blunderland, in which a 
saucer-eyed Betty Boop passed through a mirror to meet manically inventive 
cartoon versions of Carroll’s characters, and alsoBabes in Toyland, in which 
Laurel and Hardy, as “Stanley Dum” and “Ollie Dee”, encountered the actor 
(Charlotte Henry) who had starred as Alice the previous year in a major 
Paramount film.

Meanwhile, psychoanalytical critics were starting to wonder if Alice’s rabbit 
hole wasn’t only a rabbit hole. (William Empson reportedly told IA Richards 
“There are things in Alice that would give Freud the creeps”.) While this 
alarmed many readers, it also created a new layer of the story for writers such 
asJames Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce> to burrow into. 
That is why his own dream vision,Finnegans Wake, included so many versions of 
Carroll and his characters, who repeatedly rise to the surface of the text 
before sinking back into a bubbling melting pot of words: “Wonderlawn’s lost us 
for ever”, “knives of hearts”, “from tweedledeedumms down to twiddledeedees”, 
and many similar “loose carolleries”. It reminded readers that language was a 
jigsaw puzzle with an infinite number of solutions.

Since then, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland has taken on a dizzying variety 
of new forms, including toys, comics, fan fiction, computer games and 
pornography. Many of these have been created online, turning the computer 
screen into a modern looking glass through which it is possible to explore an 
entirely new WWWonderland. Yet reading the book remains the best way of 
exploring its full creative range. And this is because Wonderland is an 
imaginary universe that is still expanding.

Not only has Carroll’s story proven to be infinitely elastic since 1865, 
happily accommodating cultural changes from the suffragette movement to 
mushrooming drug use; it also grows up with us as individuals. It reminds us 
that the Caterpillar’s question “Who are you?” is one that we are unlikely to 
be able to answer any better than Alice.

Francis Spufford once suggested that the pleasure of reading stories in 
childhood that begin in the real world, and then take you somewhere else, is 
that “once opened, the door would never entirely shut behind you”. The door 
into Wonderland works like that. Wonderland may exist only in Alice’s head, but 
once we have visited it in her company it exists in our heads, too. And because 
this door never altogether shuts behind us, after we return to the life that 
exists outside books it never seems quite the same again.

 * Robert Douglas-Fairhurst’s The Story of Alice is published by Harvill 
Secker.
 