
Alice Cooper has been many things in his time: a rock god, a chicken-chucker, 
a guillotine-operator, a welcomer of nightmares – and now, it seems, a 
dewy-eyed advocate for the teaching of classical music in schools. Seriously. 
In a recording studio in central London, Cooper is embarking on one of the most 
unlikely projects of his half-century tenure as the world’s 
shock-rocker-in-chief: he’s providing the narration for a new recording of a
Prokofiev <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergei_Prokofiev> classic, although 
his version is called Peter and the Wolf in Hollywood.

As well as updating the tale, about a boy’s encounter with a hungry wolf, the 
twist in Cooper’s version is the inclusion of a narrated prequel, in which the 
wolf escapes from a zoo in Los Angeles, where Peter lives with his grandfather. 
Thanks to a robot and a helicopter, Peter saves the day. Cooper introduces me 
to some early highlights of the piece, which has also been sumptuously animated 
for a lively interactive app. He’s especially fond of the voices he created for 
the grandfather, an ageing LA hippy, and the sleazy, self-satisfied drawl he 
found for the cat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZG-Y7nmkkEo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZG-Y7nmkkEo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZG-Y7nmkkEo&media=>
He first heard Prokofiev’s 1936 work, he says, before Alice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> was even a glint in eye of 
Vincent Furnier (as he was originally known). “Every kid listened to Peter and 
the Wolf,” he says of the piece which introduces children to the symphony 
orchestra by assigning different instruments to each character. “It was our 
first exposure to classical music – an easy way to get kids involved. You think 
you’re getting the story, but what you’re really getting is the classical 
music. Of course, this was in the 1950s in Detroit. Back then, you had to take 
a classical music test, a general appreciation. I don’t think that exists any 
more in schools in America.”

It’s odd to hear such rose-tinted reminiscence about the good old days of 
music education coming from Cooper’s lips, which are often stained scarlet with 
stage blood and uttering lines such as: “Ethyl’s frigid as an eskimo pie.” But 
the Prokofiev project has inspired him to make wider connections between his 
music and classical. Does he remember anything from those tests he was put 
through? “We learned a lot of stuff we forgot immediately because the Rolling 
Stones never used any of it. We dismissed it. But now, I don’t think it’s 
possible to write an original melody that hasn’t been written somewhere before 
in classical. You hear these pieces and don’t even realise you’re borrowing 
from them. You write a song and, later on, you hear a classical piece and go, 
‘Oh my gosh, that’s the melody from my song!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446661796958%2F93a57ac5-9b58-4852-a04a-c92b63b1f9bb-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20'These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20%27These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F4%2F1446661796958%2F93a57ac5-9b58-4852-a04a-c92b63b1f9bb-1020x612.jpeg>
 Peter and Grandfather in Giants are Small 
<http://www.peterandthewolfinhollywood.com/>’s animation of Peter and the Wolf 
in Hollywood. Photograph: PR Handout 
Yet Cooper – who is just as charming in person as that genteel oh-my-goshing 
suggests – says there’s an even deeper connection between classical culture and 
his work. “My stuff is built like an opera: it’s a melody line and a lyric 
that’s put to music. Some people call it vaudeville, but it’s as much of an 
opera asTommy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/12/tommy-pete-townshend> is. 
There’s storytelling and characters that come in and out. You know, if you say 
Welcome to My Nightmare, you’d better give them the nightmare. I was lucky 
because my producer on that album, Bob Ezrin, was classically trained, so a lot 
of the musical themes you hear – like Steven’s – he was able to craft in. We 
would get to a certain point and he would say, let’s go back to that theme 
here, let’s weave it in, to remind them. That’s a classical device.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502dcf3190c8feaa497adb73002357c671778c43%2F168_111_1769_2652%2F1769.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20'These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20%27These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502dcf3190c8feaa497adb73002357c671778c43%2F168_111_1769_2652%2F1769.jpg>
 Alice Cooper on stage in Plymouth. Photograph: Vaughan Pickhaver/Rex 
Shutterstock 
It sure is. It’s a positively Wagnerian approach: creating a web of 
connections across a whole drama, so that characters and states of mind are 
tied to a particular melodic idea. A leitmotif, in other words. Intriguingly, 
it’s exactly what Prokofiev does in Peter and the Wolf, giving each animal and 
human in his drama a different instrumental colour, as well as a new tune.

“We did a rock-meets-classic show last year in Germany,” he goes on. “They 
took five of our songs and this guy scored them for orchestra. So we had a rock 
band as well as the orchestra, and we were playing a song likeSchool’s Out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Oo8QzDHimQ>. I turned around and there was 
this tidal wave of sound behind me that I never knew could exist. It was 
spectacular. You know, it really turns these songs into something else. I kept 
looking round to watch them play my songs. It just sounded magnificent. After 
that, I’d go back to my band and think, ‘There’s something missing here – like 
90 instruments behind me.”

It was an experience that led Cooper to dwell on how rock defines itself. 
“What do we call ‘classic rock’? Well, it’s a song that lasts from when it came 
out until now. And why it’s ‘classic’ is that the music hasn’t changed – those 
notes still work.

“I’ll tell you something I’ve learnt about songwriting, thanks to my wife and 
daughters. Take a song like Only Women Bleed or You and Me. I’d know they were 
going to be hits if there was one point where the chord and the lyric and the 
emotion break the girls’ hearts. So I would play for my wife and daughters, and 
they would sit there listening, and I would be like, ‘Here it comes, here it 
comes.’ And then, on that one chord, that one lyric, they would go, ‘Ohhhh!’ 
And I would know, yes, I broke her heart right there, that works, that’s going 
to be a hit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cbd5541759df090e185086b5c4c705a1cfa39e6%2F938_57_1471_2205%2F1471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20'These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alice%20Cooper%3A%20%27These%20classical%20composers%20were%20crazier%20than%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Falice-cooper-prokofiev-peter-and-the-wolf-classical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cbd5541759df090e185086b5c4c705a1cfa39e6%2F938_57_1471_2205%2F1471.jpg>
 Sergei Prokofiev, who wrote the work in 1936 for the Moscow Central Children’s 
Theatre. Photograph: Corbis 
And that staying power, says Cooper, just isn’t there among younger 
songwriters today. “I hear a great song from a young band, but 50 years from 
now, are they going to be playing it? No. But 50 years from now, they are going 
to be playing Sgt Pepper and the Who and hopefully a couple of mine, too.”

And of course Prokofiev. “These classical writers were insane, when you think 
of how crazy they were. These guys were out of their minds. They were just 
eaten by this music, they were mentally insane over it. They were the rock 
stars of their time. But I think they would have been a lot crazier than we 
were.”

Prokofiev a proto-rock shocker? Far from an aberration in a career of metal 
high-jinks, Cooper’s narration for Peter and the Wolf in Hollywood seems like 
an act of homage to a musician who was even more extreme than him.

• Peter and the Wolf in Hollywood 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/us/album/peter-and-the-wolf.html> is out on 
Deutsche Grammophon on 13 November, with an accompanying app from Giants Are 
Small available to download on iTunes.
 