
District 9 director Neill Blomkamp has confirmed that an Alien movie 
<http://instagram.com/p/zQwEQ0qhBq/?modal=true> will be his next big-screen 
project.

Blomkamp, who has been feeding concept art for the proposed film to excited 
fans since the beginning of January, took toInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> with a new image of the 
celebrated xenomorph. The South African film-maker’s caption read: “Um … So I 
think it’s officially my next film. #alien.”

Hollywood trade magazine Variety said its sources at studio 20th Century Fox 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/new-alien-movie-confirmed-at-fox-with-director-neill-blomkamp-1201436551/>
 had confirmed that a new Alien movie would be moving ahead with Blomkamp 
writing and directing. The project will be distinct from Ridley Scott’s planned 
Prometheus sequel, the British director’s follow-up to his own 2012 return to 
the Alien universe after more than three decades.

Blomkamp initially took to Instagram on New Year’s Day to post artwork for an 
Alien project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
he said he was no longer working on. The mocked-up concept art featured 
Sigourney Weaver, who played Ellen Ripley in four Alien movies between 1979 and 
1997, and Michael Biehn, who played Hicks in 1986’s Aliens.

Blomkamp later revealed he worked with Weaver on the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/neill-blomkamp-my-alien-film-is-ready-to-go>
 during downtime from his forthcoming sci-fi movie Chappie, which features the 
former Ghostbusters star in a supporting role. “Speaking to Sigourney Weaver, 
when we were doing Chappie, she set off a bunch of thoughts in my head — I had 
come up with an idea that didn’t have Sigourney, it was a different idea,” said 
the film-maker. “But I spent all of the shooting time with her, it was like, 
holy shit, that could actually be really interesting. When I came back to 
Vancouver, I had an entire year to work on Chappie. And when I wasn’t needed in 
the edit, I could think about Alien. So, I basically developed an entire movie 
and I did all of this artwork as well.”

Neill Blomkamp reveals concept art for 'abandoned' Alien project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
Earlier this month Weaver admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/13/sigourney-weaver-keen-to-reprise-alien-role-once-more>
 being intrigued by the prospect of a return to her best known role. “If 
something happens from this, it would be very organic and very original, and 
because of that it would make me want to do it,” she said. “If it was [directed 
by] someone as talented as Neill, I’d certainly listen.”

It is not clear if Weaver is now attached to the project, a move which would 
create a number of issues for the film-makers. Ripley was last seen as a 
human-xenomorph clone in the 1997 film Alien: Resurrection, after the original 
extraterrestrial-exterminating warrant officer died at the end of 1992’sAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> 3.
 