
She ought to have been the breakout star of Aliens as the little girl, Newt, 
who defies all odds to escape from a remote planetoid overrun by lethal extra 
terrestrials, butCarrie Henn never saw her name in lights again 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001343/>. Now the actor is to return to the screen 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/movies/news/a655872/carrie-henn-to-return-as-newts-mother-in-alien-identity-fan-film.html#~phav8gmFIf8Tcw>
 almost 30 years on from the release of James Cameron’s brutal space thriller 
in a fan film set in the Alien universe.

Henn, 39, will play Anne Jorden, young Newt’s mother, in a flashback sequence 
forAlien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> Identity, which is being 
directed by Adam Sonnet. Newt herself will be portrayed by the film-maker’s 
wife Elle Viane Sonnet.

“I am looking forward to working on Aliens from a different perspective,” said 
Henn, who has been active on fan convention circuits in recent years. “I can’t 
wait to hear what all the fans think!”

Ricco Ross, who played space grunt Private Robert Frost in Aliens, is also 
returning for the new film. He will play the role of Richard Frost, the late 
Robert’s brother, as well as taking a producer’s credit.

I'll ignore Alien 3 and take the franchise back to familiar territory, says 
Neill Blomkamp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/alien-neill-blomkamp-sigourney-weaver>
Fans of the Alien series have long speculated on how Henn’s career might have 
developed had her character not been written out by Alien 3 director David 
Fincher at the start of the film. Many remain angry at the way Newt was so 
quickly dispensed with after audiences had spent so much time rooting for her 
and Sigourney Weaver’s Ellen Ripley in Cameron’s film.

Henn is known for the line “They mostly come at night … mostly”. According to 
Alien fan sites <http://avp.wikia.com/wiki/Carrie_Henn> she was discovered by 
casting agents while living with her US air force-employed father on a base in 
Lakenheath, England, in the mid-80s. The agents sent a photograph to producers 
and the eight-year-old girl won the part after auditioning at Pinewood Studos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB436avtEXzs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB436avtEXzs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB436avtEXzs&media=>
The Alien saga, which began with Ridley Scott’s Alien in 1979 and has spanned 
four films and two Alien vs Predator spin-offs, not to mention the 
pseudo-prequel Prometheus,is also set for a big screen return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/alien-neill-blomkamp-sigourney-weaver>
. In fact, Newt but might still be alive in District 9 director Neill 
Blomkamp’s proposed film, which will see Weaver returning as Ripley. The South 
African film-maker said in February that he planned to ignore Alien 3 and 
Alien: Resurrection to return to the “Freudian nightmare” of the earlier films,
though he later appeared to backtrack 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/actually-blomkamps-alien-movie-wont-ignore-alien-3-215905>
.

Alien Identity takes place 14 years after the events of Aliens, which was 
released in 1986. Producers are currently crowdfunding via Kickstarter at
www.AlienTwoPointFive.com <http://www.alientwopointfive.com>.
 