
How the BBC must wish its headlines in recent weeks were more like those on 
the day it began broadcasting regular news bulletins exactly 90 years ago, on 
14 November 1922. The subjects of the first stories included a speech byBonar 
Law <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bonar_Law>, recently returned to the 
leadership of the Conservative party and newly into Britain's briefest stint as 
prime minister, notwithstanding his victory in the general election the 
following day. There were reports of Old Bailey sessions, a train robbery, the 
sale of a Shakespeare folio, fog in London and the latest billiards scores.

To help mark the anniversary, we celebrate again the legacy of Alistair Cooke, 
for more than a quarter of a century the US correspondent for the Manchester 
Guardian and its successor, as well as author of Letter from America for the 
BBC for nearly six decades, by publishingletters between Cooke and Alastair 
Hetherington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/nov/14/alistair-cooke-alastair-hetherington-letters>
, then editor of the newspaper, written during the dreadful days of 1968.

That year Martin Luther King 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1964/king-bio.html> and 
Robert Kennedy were assassinated and there were race riots in major cities as 
the US divided over civil rights and the Vietnam war. The violence included an 
infamous confrontation in August between Chicago police, the Illinois national 
guard, troops and secret service agents and anti-war demonstrators outside the 
Democratic national convention.

The correspondence, held in the Guardian archive at the John Rylands 
University Library of Manchester <http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/>, sheds 
light on Cooke's dispatches both for this newspaper and for the BBC, which has 
recently publishedtranscripts and audio recordings of more than 900 of his 
broadcasts <http:/www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00f6hbp>, roughly a third of the 
total output. They include the memorable letter of 9 June 1968 aboutKennedy's 
assassination in Los Angeles days earlier 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00yqjy8>, "in a small narrow serving pantry 
of the Ambassador Hotel, a place that I suppose will never be wiped out of my 
memory as a sinister alley, a Roman circus run amok and a charnel house".

We have previously republished Cooke's account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1968/jun/06/usa.fromthearchive> printed in 
the Guardian on 6 June. "Over the gabble of the television, there was suddenly 
from the direction of the kitchen a crackle of sharp sounds. Like a balloon 
popping. An exploded flash bulb maybe, more like a man banging a tray several 
times against a wall …"

Tensions between the Guardian and Cooke – Hetherington doubted his 
correspondent's grasp of race issues – have become legendary, some of it 
documented in Nick Clarke's biography of Cooke. A later Guardian editor, Peter 
Preston, who joined the paper in 1963,has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/31/pressandpublishing.usnews> much 
of the legend of Cooke as a "nuisance" was just that. Here, anyway, is 
Hetherington on the day of publication of the Kennedy piece sending warmest 
thanks: "The Ambassador hotel must have been a terrible place to be but you've 
conveyed the sense and feeling of the occasion excellently."

Later that month Hetherington apologises for non-delivery of an earlier letter 
that went astray, congratulating Cooke on his 1,000th Letter from America, 
aired in March 1968. In this broadcast Cooke had talked of the "realisation 
that America which has never lost a war is not invincible and the very late 
discovery than an elephant can trumpet and shake the earth but not the 
self-possesssion of the ants who hold it".

The editor, after discussing the nuts and bolts of covering the continuing US 
presidential race,revives an idea that had already been floated for months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/31/pressandpublishing.usnews1>: 
that of Cooke writing "some of your discursive and thoughtful comments" for the 
Guardian, even if "what can be a conversational piece on the air would not 
necessarily read well in print". Aware of the previous unhappy postal failure, 
Hetherington repeats his thanks for the Kennedy coverage. Despite what must 
have been a gruesome experience, from a cold-blooded newspaper point of view, 
the Guardian had been admirably served by Cooke and other reporters, 
Hetherington said.

Cooke's reply the following month expresses ambivalence over a more discursive 
column for the Guardian, but in March the following year one appeared, soon to 
be titled Alistair Cooke's America. This title would appear again, in 1973, on 
the book that followed his landmark television series America. By then Cooke 
had resigned from the paper.

Cooke's letter to Hetherington then turns to political coverage, reflecting 
Cooke's estimation of himself and the paper's reporting compared with that of 
rivals with their "bits of colour" and "flash dubious hard news". The 
Democratic convention would, it turned out, provide plenty of hard news.

His concluding sentences warn Hetherington that the Guardian must not "bore 
the reader", however. "My fanmail on Letter from America is very instructive 
here. It is overwhelmingly against saturation by American politics. And most of 
the protesters are obviously intelligent people."

By 25 September 1968, Cooke is reflecting on "drastic changes" in political 
campaigning as TV begins to dominate electioneering, and asserting that 
Britons, who see less of such coverage, need his interpretation of events on 
the ground. "The balance of the political social situation is something you 
can't see on television."

Cooke now wants a holiday. "I am pretty pooped (strangely, it took me a month 
or more get over the nervous trauma of the Bobby Kennedy horror) what with ML 
King, the conventions, Chicago and the rest. I badly need a break."
 