
Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie: a marriage that started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
Like the second world war itself, the second world war movie is an ocean of 
stories: global, universal, all-encompassing. As a genre unto itself, it is the 
same age as the post-Stagecoach western and the post-Angels With Dirty Faces 
gangster movie, and as varied and multifaceted as either.

And like all oceans, it comes at us in waves, occasionally depositing flotsam 
likeAllied <https://www.theguardian.com/film/allied> on our shores. The first 
was the wave of movies made in the US and in Britain as the war was actually 
happening. Then came the celebratory postwar wave of nostalgic revisitings 
that, in Britain, offered consolation and compensation – for decades – to a 
nation drastically reduced in wealth and stature by the war’s end; and, in the 
forward-looking US, seemed designed to motivate citizen-patriots in the 
emergent cold war. The 60s offered a lot of 20th anniversaries to celebrate 
with bloated European co-productions like The Battle Of The Bulge. But at the 
end of the decade, each celebratory war movie, say Battle Of Britain or Army Of 
Shadows, would be offset by a starkly reproving history such as Marcel Ophüls’s 
The Sorrow And The Pity. Then, a slow decline from the late 1970s to century’s 
end, by when not just the second world war but even Vietnam had faded from folk 
memory.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20as%20second%20world%20war%20spies%20in%20trailer%20for%20Allied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20as%20second%20world%20war%20spies%20in%20trailer%20for%20Allied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video&media=>
Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard as second world war spies in trailer for Allied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/oct/05/brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video>
Marion Cotillard issues statement denying role in Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie 
divorce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/marion-cotillard-issues-statement-denying-role-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce>
Saving Private Ryan changed all that, and for all its shortcomings, 
Spielberg’s Tom Hanks vehicle showed what could be achieved with modern CGI and 
horror-movie gore. Along with 2001’s masterly miniseries Band Of Brothers, 
exec-produced by the pair, it rebooted the genre, just in time for the wars of 
Bush and Cheney. The second world war movie now lives in their shadows, or 
perhaps just those of Hanks and Spielberg.

Now we are back to repeating ourselves. Sean Ellis’s Anthropoid was an 
unsatisfactory stab at the story told in Lewis Gilbert’s Operation Daybreak 
(1975), while Christopher Nolan’s upcoming Dunkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/05/dunkirk-first-teaser-for-christopher-nolans-second-world-war-epic-video>
 will doubtless add all the horror that went awol in Leslie Norman’s version in 
1958, just as The Eagle Has Landed was a replay of Went The Day Well? and 
Downfall was take two of Hitler: The Last Ten Days. Allied, from Fury producer 
Brad Pitt, seems doomed to be a different kind of remake, a bookend toMr And 
Mrs Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/10/1>, both 
plot-wise – concerning two assassins, Pitt and Marion Cotillard, who fall in 
love – and in the tabloid lives of its stars.

The one thing we can’t call these movies, though, is forgetful. Here in the 
United States of Amnesia, as the shadows darken perceptibly, it may be that one 
day soon we may have to fight such a war – and the whole 20th century with it – 
all over again. Everything in waves.

Allied is in cinemas from Friday 25 November



 