
Google’s AlphaGo computer program has won a third and decisive encounter with 
a top-ranked player of the Chinese board game Go in a victory marking 
significant developments in artificial intelligence.

Lee Sedol, who is the world’s second best player of the strategy game, lost 
three games in a row in Seoul this week, with the latest AlphaGo victory on 
Saturday handingGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> the 
best-of-five match.

“I’ve never played a game where I felt this amount of pressure, and I wasn’t 
able to overcome this pressure,” Lee said at a post-game press conference.

Go has simple rules, but is highly intuitive and complex in practice. 
Mastering it has been an exceptionally difficult task for even the world’s best 
IT designers.

“We came here to challenge Lee, to learn from him and see what AG was capable 
of,” said Demis Hassabis, co-founder of Google’s artificial intelligence 
business, DeepMind, which created the program.

“AlphaGo controlled the momentum over more than four hours of gameplay, with 
Lee struggling to maintain territory against the program’s creative approach. 
Google DeepMind taught AlphaGo to recognise the optimal move in thousands of 
possible scenarios.”

AlphaGo’s dominance amounts to a significant, and much faster than previously 
expected, advance in artificial intelligence.


Google co-founder Sergey Brin, who was in Seoul to watch the third match, 
described Go as a beautiful game and said he was excited the company had been 
able to “instil that kind of beauty in our computers”.

Michael Redmond, one of the match’s commentators and a professional Go player, 
said some people initially doubted AlphaGo’s abilities. “After three matches 
and three straight victories, we are convinced,” he said.

AlphaGo won $1m in prize money, which Google DeepMind said would be donated to 
charities, including Unicef and Go organisations.

“AlphaGo controlled the game amazingly,” said Fan Hui, the European Go 
champion who was the first professional player to lose to the program when he 
played it in October.

Hui said the advances in artificial intelligence appeared to bode well for the 
future of the ancient game.

“We now have this new way of learning about Go. And look how many people are 
watching this now. More and more people are interested in Go now.”
 