
Three years ago I was travelling in Istanbul, snapping away with my Canon 
600D, when four girls came up and asked if they could take a look at my camera. 
I started teaching them how to take pictures. Even though they did not speak 
much English, we connected over photography. I realised then that taking 
pictures is a universal language that transcends cultural boundaries.

I started thinking about whether photography could transcend other types of 
boundaries that hold girls back from achieving their potential. That led to me 
and an old classmate setting upLensational <http://lensational.org>, a social 
enterprise aiming to empower women and girls in the developing world by 
equipping them with cameras and photography training.

We started teaching photography to Filipino and Indonesian domestic helpers in 
Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>. Jem, one of our 
Filipino domestic helpers, told us that learning to take photos helped her to 
overcome the loneliness of being far away from her family.

When thinking about where to go next, I looked at the World Economic Forum’s 
Global Gender Gap Report <http://www.weforum.org/issues/global-gender-gap>. 
Pakistan caught my eye. It bred heroines like Benazir Bhutto, the first woman 
elected to head a Muslim country, and Malala Yousafzai, who risked her life in 
the fight for access to education for girls. I was curious to find out if they 
have inspired their fellow Pakistani women and girls to fight for their own 
rights.

In the summer of 2013 I started an internship at Pakistan’s Citizens’ 
Commission for Human Development <http://cchd.org.pk/> (CCHD) in Lahore, which 
was organised byAiesec <http://aiesec.org/>, a global NGO that provides young 
people with cross-cultural internships. On the first day I pitched Lensational 
to my boss, Farrah Azeem Khan, an inspirational leader who worked closely with 
Benazir Bhutto. She liked the idea, especially how it could help women and 
girls discover their inner selves. She helped me arrange workshops and assigned 
two interns to my photography workshops to help with translation. I had brought 
12 disposable cameras with me from Hong Kong, donated by an NGO calledThe 
PhotoCrafters <http://www.thephotocrafters.org/>.

Over the next month I ran photography workshops for 60 Pakistanis, mainly 
women and girls. I tried to engage men and boys in my photography workshops 
too, as they have a crucial role to play in gender equality. In Hong Kong, we 
only conducted workshops for women as our aim is to empower women through 
photography. However inPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, I 
was given the advice that in order for my programmes to be socially accepted, I 
needed to engage men and boys as well.

I adapted my workshop content to the needs of men and boys, with more 
technical details around ISO, lighting and flash. I had to overcome my own 
self-consciousness of speaking in front of 30 18-year-old male students and 
realised that the art form is a neutral entry point to engage men and boys. The 
desire to capture memories, thoughts and emotions through photography is 
universal, regardless of income and gender.

Our photography workshops focus not only on the technicalities of operating 
cameras, but also on how the participants can express their thoughts and 
feelings through the press of the shutter. I encouraged them to share their 
aspirations for the future with each other. We ran workshops with students and 
teachers at non-formal schools, children in the slums and the children of sex 
workers in Lahore’s red light district.

Following a successful crowdfunding campaign 
<https://www.helpingb.co.uk/projects/lensational-empowering-women-through-photography/>
, we will return to Pakistan in April 2015 to equip the previous participants 
with their own cameras. The workshops provide them with the medium to express 
themselves despite illiteracy. With their own cameras they also have the 
possibility of earning extra income through selling photographs. Part of the 
Lensastional model is to sell pictures taken through the workshops. In 2015, I 
hope that Lensational will help workshop participants earn extra income either 
through selling pictures in the developed world, or finding freelance 
photography opportunities locally.

Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> is a 
powerful agent of social change. During one of our workshops in Pakistan, we 
were taking pictures near a motorbike. Some boys rushed to pose on it, but not 
one girl moved forward. One of the girls eventually raised her hand with 
courage. She jumped on the motorbike, probably the first time in her life. This 
is a country where women and girls are not seen driving motorbikes. Her eyes 
were sparkling. I named this photograph ‘Courage to Drive’. The press of 
shutter created an image to challenge the definition of women and girls in this 
society. Men and boys may show skepticism in the beginning, as the faces in 
this photograph suggest, but as they see new images of girls and women they may 
change their minds. We hope that other girls we engage through Lensational can 
be as brave as this girl.

Bonnie Chiu is the co-founder of Lensational <http://lensational.org/>. Follow 
@LensationalOrg <https://twitter.com/LensationalOrg> on Twitter. 


Read more stories like this: 

• #HeForShe: how to engage men in the fight for gender equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/engaging-boys-men-gender-equality>


• From barrier to enabler: how politics can help girls live up to their 
potential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/oct/22/politics-adolescent-girls-empowerment>


• I’m a man running a girls’ rights campaign. So what? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/18/im-a-man-running-a-girls-rights-campaign-so-what>


• Advertising feature: When is violence against girls going to stop? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/dec/11/when-is-violence-against-girls-going-to-stop>


Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox.
 