
I’m writing this in the car park of a secondary school. My oldest son – nearly 
14 – is playing football for his Sunday league team on the school pitch.Am I a 
good mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/30/being-good-mother> right 
now?

Related: I am not a good mother, nor do I aspire to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/30/being-good-mother> 

Well, I got myself out of bed early on a frosty Sunday to take him to 
football: 1-0 to me. He had breakfast (2-0), but it wasCoco Pops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/07/kelloggs-coco-pops-schoolchildren>
 and sugary tea: 2-1. I’ve been to the supermarket to get ingredients for a 
Sunday roast: 3-1 (but there wereMaoams 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/929986/maoam-says-carnal-wrapper-complaint-genuine>
 and Pringles in there for afternoon snacks: 3-2). Because of going to the 
supermarket and writing this piece, I’m not actually on the touchline watching 
him play: 3-3. And I forgot to bring jogging bottoms, so he’s texting me saying 
that he’s cold: 3-4. He’s texting me at all: I’m going to call that 4-4. Were I 
to factor in the overarching context that I’m on football duty today because I 
split up with his father seven years ago and this is “my” weekend with the 
children, I would – let’s face it – lose. Badly.

I perform this scoring exercise on myself constantly; I suspect many of us 
mothers do. The thing aboutbeing a good mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/26/are-you-a-good-mother-stop-asking-just-enjoy>
 is that it matters so much. Any misstep, any failure, any ill-judged absence 
could be the thing: a splinter that your child still broods over when he’s 70, 
the seed of a lifelong insecurity that places unwarranted boundaries around 
their choices. This sentence is not any sort of objective truth, it’s just what 
many of us believe.

My failure to insist on lean protein, vegetables and whole grains could 
already have planted the seeds of future ill-health. My lenience over screen 
time could definitely go either way. Bad-tempered outbursts may be my 
children’s most vivid memories of me in years to come: if you saw a middle-aged 
woman screaming at her son outside HMS Belfast a couple of months ago, that was 
me. I had my reasons, believe me. Whether they were good enough I really do not 
know.

Related: Anne Karpf on the best parenting book you've never heard of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/05/booksforchildrenandteenagers.familyandrelationships>

In her book What Mothers Do, Naomi Stadlen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/05/booksforchildrenandteenagers.familyandrelationships>
 writes that one of the roles of the mother is to be constantly available for 
interruption. This may sound simple, but putting it into practice is the work 
of decades, which may be why grandparents tend to be so much better at it. In 
our mind’s eye, when pregnant, we imagine ourselves calmly laying aside our 
book/needlepoint/power tool to joyfully interact with our offspring at every 
opportunity. In reality, responding calmly to each of the daily cries of “MUM!” 
– especially when mid-wee, mid-sentence, holding a boiling chip-pan, or halfway 
through applying a coat of gloss paint – is probably the hardest thing I’ve 
ever failed at.

Are you a good mother? If you measure yourself against the fantasies projected 
all around you, almost certainly not. But back in the real world, you almost 
certainly are: you’re a good mother because you love your children, because you 
do what you can to keep them safe, and because when they take all the skin off 
their knees it’s you they come looking for. You’re a good mother because you 
have to be; because the alternative is unthinkable.

My own mother (who was very good at it, until she died – which to be honest is 
a bit of a black mark against her performance these days) pointed out to me 
that frantically re-running the tape of my parenting failures was not only 
fruitless; it actively stopped me from functioning effectively during the next 
domestic mini-crisis. The parents I admire most – and whose children are kind 
and quietly confident – are those who second-guess themselves least. Do they 
make the right decision every time? Who knows? The crucial thing seems to be 
that they believe they do.

As with so many of the fretful questions that we submit to California’s most 
mysterious algorithm, we’re probably starting from entirely the wrong place. 
Stop asking whether you’re a bad mother: the question itself is part of the 
madness. But if you’re unable, as I am, to step outside the neurotic spiral, I 
can offer my own parenting mantra, by way ofSamuel Beckett: Try again. Fail 
again. Fail better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/07/samuel-beckett-the-maestro-of-failure>
.
 