
Andrea Arnold shocked at lack of women directors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/andrea-arnold-shocked-at-lack-of-women-directors-american-honey>
With American Honey, Andrea Arnold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold>, a Briton, has made the 
richest, sublimest US movie of the year: a docu-fairytale that’s also a musical 
of sorts, an odyssey-like road trip through the other America, with a 
working-class teenager’s bildungsroman at its ever-beating heart.

Plot-wise, there’s not much to tell: 18-year-old Star (newcomer Sasha Lane), 
stuck in Oklahoman poverty, looking after her siblings and harassed by her 
abusive step-dad, sees a charismatic bunch of kids turn into a Rihanna-led 
song-and-dance flashmob at Walmart and falls for their rat-tailed leader Jake 
(Shia Le Boeuf). He drops a talisman: a golden iPhone! She picks it up and 
follows him, donning red slippers and leaving home for ever. The Wizard Of Oz, 
the Pied Piper and The Red Shoes all conjured in a flurry of images; will Star, 
like Dorothy, step into her own tornado to discover a new realm of colour and 
beauty? Or, like the girl in The Red Shoes, will she simply dance herself to 
death?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&media=>
American Honey: first trailer for Andrea Arnold's Cannes winner teases rebel 
spirit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/21/american-honey-first-trailer-for-andrea-arnolds-cannes-winner-teases-rebel-spirit>
Don’t sweat the answer, just hang on for the ride and enjoy the scenery. The 
troupe of kids are magazine-subscription sellers, criss-crossing the country in 
a minivan under the piratical leadership of crew-boss Krystal (Riley Keough, 
ruling every scene she’s in), who speeds ahead in her Mustang seeking new 
markets and new marks. The kids hype themselves up for this by singing along to 
rap and country anthems (all chosen by the amateur cast) as the miles roll 
under them. They love, encourage and guard one another in ways that suggest a 
lost tribe, a children’s crusade, a pirate ship or a 21st-century remake of 
Wild Boys Of The Road.


American Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-honey> never becomes 
any of the many movies it calls to mind, for instance, Another Day In Paradise 
or Spring Breakers (though it has certainly internalised certain lessons of the 
latter masterpiece). On a solid British chassis of Loach-y social realism and 
neorealist strategies, Arnold has built a wild, gritty and tough, yet utterly 
joyous and optimistic, incantatory siren song of a movie, visually intoxicating 
and musically transformative.

Andrea Arnold, above all, has shed her British reserve in a way few British 
film-makers have ever done while making their first US movie (the distasteful 
idea of “becoming American” always stymies them). This one really earns its 
titular “American”: it’s an Arnold movie to its back teeth, but it truly 
accesses the vibrant swagger and energy of such ur-American film-makers as Wild 
Bill Wellman and Raoul Walsh. American Honey, like their work, and like no 
other movie this year, is almost ridiculously full of life.

American Honey is out on Friday 14 October
 