
The most common adjective employed by weather reporters on Saturday 23 
November 2013 was “treacherous”. But in reality there was not a hint of 
betrayal about it. The day was every bit as foul as one would expect the week 
before Thanksgiving. A Nordic outbreak of snow, rain and high winds barrelled 
through the desert states and northern plains towards the midwest.

There was precious little in the news to distract anyone from the weather. A 
poll gaveBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> his 
lowest approval ratings in years. The same day, he announced a tentative deal 
with Iran over its nuclear programme. That night, Fox News was the most popular 
cable news channel; The Hunger Games: Catching Fire was the highest-grossing 
movie.

It was just another day in America. And as befits an unremarkable Saturday, 10 
children and teens were killed by gunfire. They died in altercations at gas 
stations, accidents in bedrooms, standing on stairwells and walking down the 
street, in gangland hits and by mistaken identity. Like the weather, none of 
them would make the national news because, like the weather, their deaths did 
not disturb the accepted order of things. Every day, on average,seven children 
and teens are killed by guns in America 
<http://www.bradycampaign.org/key-gun-violence-statistics>. Firearms are the 
leading cause of death among black children under 19, and the second greatest 
cause of death for all children of the same age, after car accidents.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fkids-killed-by-guns-americas-daily-nightmare-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20killed%20by%20guns%3A%20America's%20daily%20nightmare%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fkids-killed-by-guns-americas-daily-nightmare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20killed%20by%20guns%3A%20America%27s%20daily%20nightmare%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fkids-killed-by-guns-americas-daily-nightmare-video&media=>
Kids killed by guns: America’s daily nightmare
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/23/kids-killed-by-guns-americas-daily-nightmare-video>
Video byLaurence Topham <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/laurencetopham> 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/23/kids-killed-by-guns-americas-daily-nightmare-video>
I picked this day at random, and spent two years trying to find out who these 
children were. I searched for their parents, pastors, baseball coaches, and 
scoured their Facebook and Twitter feeds. The youngest child was nine, the 
oldest 19.

Four years ago, for a moment, there was considerable interest in the fact that 
large numbers of Americans were being fatally shot. On 14 December 2012, 
20-year-old Adam Lanza shot his mother, then drove to Sandy Hook Elementary 
School andshot 20 small children and six staff dead 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandy_Hook_Elementary_School_shooting>. Mass 
shootings comprise a small proportion of gun violence, but they disturb 
America’s self-image in a way that the daily torrent of gun deaths does not. 
“Seeing the massacre of so many innocent children … it’s changed America,” said 
the Democrat senator Joe Manchin, who championed a tepid gun-control bill. 
“We’ve never seen this happen.”

The truth is, it’s happening every day, only most do not see it; 23 November 
2013 was just one of those days. Here are two of the boys’ (they were all boys) 
stories.

Jaiden Dixon, Grove City, Ohio 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d9789e3154d23b486580ac5fc79ec80edca5e0%2F0_30_720_900%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d9789e3154d23b486580ac5fc79ec80edca5e0%2F0_30_720_900%2F720.jpg>
 Jaiden Dixon outside his Grove City home. Photograph: Courtesy Facebook/Nicole 
Fitzpatrick 



School mornings in Nicole Fitzpatrick’s home followed a predictable routine. 
As soon as her three sons – Jarid, 17, Jordin, 16, and Jaiden, nine – heard her 
footsteps, they would pull the covers over their heads because they knew what 
was coming: the lights. The older two would take this as a cue for the 
inevitable and get up. But Jaiden would try to string it out. He would climb 
into his mother’s bed. Then came the cajoling. “I’d tickle him,” Nicole says. 
“I’d pull him by his ankle.” They had a deal. If he could get himself ready – 
“all the way ready: socks, shoes, shirt, everything” – the rest of the morning 
was his. “He could play Minecraft, watch Duck Dynasty.”


It was Friday 22 November, the 50th anniversary of John F Kennedy’s 
assassination, and the papers were full of nostalgia for the nation’s lost 
innocence. They might have found it on Nicole’s street in Grove City, a 
dependably humdrum suburb of Columbus, crowned “best hometown” in central Ohio 
that year. It was its dependability that convinced people to stay. Nicole went 
to school with the parents of the children her kids went to school with.

Jaiden was ready that morning with time to spare. When Nicole threw him his 
socks, he threw them back, telling her he wanted to try out as a pitcher for 
his baseball team. He was playing on his Xbox when, shortly after 7.30am, the 
doorbell rang. This was not part of the routine, but nor was it out of the 
ordinary. The teenage girls at the end of the road would pop around if they 
were short of sugar or needed a lift.

Slowly, curiously, Jaiden walked around the door. That’s when Nicole heard the 
'pop'

Jaiden opened the door gingerly, hiding behind it, poised to jump out and 
shout, “Boo!” when one of the girls showed her face. But nobody stepped 
forward. Time was suspended as the minor commotion of an unexpected visitor 
failed to materialise. Nicole craned her neck into the cleft of silence to find 
out who it was. She looked to Jarid; Jarid shrugged.

Slowly, curiously, Jaiden walked around the door. That’s when Nicole heard the 
“pop”. Her first thought was, “Why are these girls popping a balloon? What are 
they trying to do, scare me to death?” But then she saw Jaiden’s head snap 
back, first once, then twice, before he hit the floor. “It was just real quiet. 
It was like everything stopped. And I remember staring at Jarid.” She knew what 
had happened. It was Danny.

Danny Thornton was Jarid’s father. Nicole had met him years earlier at Sears, 
where he made keys. She was 19; he was 28. “We were never really together,” she 
says. “It was a back-and-forth kind of thing.” She hadn’t seen him since July. 
He’d found her over a year earlier, in January 2012, when he was in need of 
help. “He was getting ready to be evicted, and we decided to let him stay. He 
could spend time with Jarid and keep him under control, and I could help him 
get a job.”

While he was staying, Danny got to know Jaiden. He took him bowling. He told 
Nicole that Jaiden made him laugh, even that he preferred him to his own son.

But Nicole needed her room back. That made Danny angry, and he didn’t deal 
with anger well. His criminal history included charges of felonious assault, 
domestic violence, attempted possession of drugs and carrying a concealed 
weapon. He was also a semi-pro, super-middleweight boxer, 5ft 11in and around 
160lb, who favoured the southpaw stance: right hand and right foot forward, 
leading with right jabs, and following up with a left cross, right hook. “He 
moved all his stuff out,” Nicole says. “I don’t know where. I didn’t care.”

What she also didn’t know for some time was that, as he was packing, he told 
Jarid, “I have no problem making you an orphan. I’m not going to be living out 
of my car at 47. I have no problem shooting your mom and shooting your 
brothers.” He’d end his life in a shootout with the cops, he said.

Danny had talked to her about shooting other people. “He had twins. He was 
pissed off with the mom for filing child support on him. And he talked about if 
he knew where she lived, he’d shoot her and shoot the babies,” Nicole’s best 
friend, Amy Sanders, tells me. “He had a list – an actual, physical list – of 
people he wanted to kill. Nicole always thought if she was nice to him, she 
wouldn’t be on his list. And unfortunately she was the first one.”

Jarid didn’t tell his mother what Danny had said until September. “I stopped 
dead in my tracks,” Nicole says. “I said, ‘Jarid, he’s going to kill me.’ And 
Jarid said, ‘He’s just blowing off steam.’ I was petrified.” But time passed, 
and she began to wonder if Jarid was right.
Gun Nation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/docs-4×3-card/embed.html> 
Then Danny’s mobile phone subscription expired. Nicole had been paying it, but 
Christmas was approaching and she couldn’t afford it. On 20 November she wrote 
a text telling him his contract was up: “The phone’s yours. You can go and turn 
it on at any provider.” The message sat on her phone for a while, unsent. “I 
knew what he was capable of,” she says. “But I had to look out for my kids. I 
had to look out for me.” She pressed send.

He replied within an hour: “What fucking took you so long?”

Nicole forwarded the message to Amy. “I swear he’s gonna kill me one day,” 
Nicole texted. “In two years, when nobody suspects him.”

Two days later, this was the man who sped away in a blue Toyota, leaving 
Jaiden with a bullet in his skull. “And I struggle to try and understand,” 
Nicole says. “Did he shoot whoever answered the door, or was Jaiden his target? 
Because, honestly, he could have stepped one foot in that house and shot me, 
shot Jarid, shot Jordin.” Jarid fled the house, asking a neighbour to call 911. 
Once he got hold of the emergency services, he could barely make himself 
understood.

“Sir, please calm down so I can understand what you’re saying,” the operator 
says. “We’ve got to learn what’s going on.”

“My dad just shot my baby brother,” Jarid replies.

“Who shot him?”

“Danny Thornton. D-a-n-n-y T-h-o-r-n-t-o-n.” There is desperation and the 
occasional expletive interspersed with formal niceties: “Sir”, “Ma’am”, “fuck”, 
“please God”.

“C’mon, Jaiden. C’mon, baby.”

Nicole did her best to focus. She put one hand over the wound and the other on 
the back of Jaiden’s head, where she could feel the bullet. She scooped him up, 
then laid him back down. Still unconscious, Jaiden lifted his left arm three or 
four inches off the ground and let it fall.

“I freaked out,” Nicole says. “I said, ‘He’s still alive. He’s still OK.’ I 
was thinking, this is what they do on TV. CPR. Mouth to mouth. And all it was, 
was just gurgle…”

The emergency services arrived and took over. Nicole felt there was still 
hope. “I hugged the boys and was saying, ‘Be strong. We’ll get to the hospital 
and get him fixed.’ I kept thinking, ‘Just get him to surgery, get the bullet 
out.’”

With Danny’s whereabouts still unknown, the suburb’s security apparatus curled 
into a tight foetal ball. Within five minutes of the first 911 call, Highland 
Park Elementary, just one block away, went into lockdown. School hadn’t 
started, so the police diverted buses and told parents arriving in cars to take 
their children home.

But Danny was long gone, heading eastbound on Interstate 270 to Groveport, 20 
minutes away, where his ex-partner, Vicki Vertin, with whom he had an 
18-year-old daughter, worked as a dental hygienist. Vicki came out to meet him 
in the lobby. She hadn’t seen Danny for 12 years, but still lived in fear of 
his temper. He was wearing a grey hoodie and had his hands in the front pocket. 
“Haven’t seen you in a while,” Vicki told him. Danny took out his gun and shot 
her in the stomach.

By now, the 911 dispatch office was in overdrive. Calls were pouring in. One 
of Vicki’s co-workers was on the line. It took them six minutes to link the two 
shootings. Two of Danny’s friends also called the police. He’d told them that 
he’d “killed two people and that he’s not going back to jail”, and “he will not 
go down without a fight with police”. More schools went into lockdown. Vicki’s 
family were taken to a protective room.

Nicole, meanwhile, had arrived at the hospital. Detectives pulled her aside to 
ask if she had any idea where Danny would be going. That was when she found out 
he’d shot somebody else.

An hour and 45 minutes after he shot Vicki, Danny was traced to a Walmart 
parking lot. It was 9.46am. A shootout ensued in which one policeman was 
injured and Danny finally got his wish: suicide by cop.

I keep replaying seeing him falling to the ground. I keep replaying: ‘I should 
have done this, I should have done that'

Vicki’s first thought when she woke from surgery was that he could still be 
out there. ‘“Did they get him?” she asked her dad. “No,” he replied. She tried 
to get out of bed: “Oh my God, he’s coming back.” Her father clarified: Danny 
had been shot dead. It was the first time in years she’d felt safe.

Across town, Nicole was told that Jaiden wouldn’t make it. The neurologist 
told her that Jaiden’s CT scan was one of the worst she’d ever seen. The bullet 
had taken a path straight to the back of his brain, where it had ricocheted, 
causing irreparable damage. They put Jaiden on a ventilator while a decision 
was made about organ donation. “I don’t remember feeling anything,” Nicole 
says. “All I remember is having this image of him in his shoes. He’d just put 
his shoes on, and his T-shirt was on the floor. And now he’s in a hospital gown 
with a thing down his throat. All in about an hour or so.”

Jaiden was pronounced dead at 3.47pm the next day. Until they wheeled him away 
to the operating room, Nicole kept it together, but witnessing that was too 
much to bear. “I couldn’t see the doors close,” she says. “It was almost like 
they were taking him to have his tonsils out.” She had been up for 45 hours. “I 
just remember breaking down and crying, and then somebody put me in a 
wheelchair and took me out. I didn’t go back to the hospital at all.”

The fog did not clear until the viewing. “It was maybe a week after he died,” 
she recalls. “He was lying in his casket. And because I’d been able to touch 
him so much at the hospital, I went right up and kissed him, and I grabbed his 
hand and it was cold as stone and hard. That was when the reality hit me: Oh my 
God. My baby’s gone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5d464a58fa5dd5250036f78d96052c71384207%2F21_36_2014_1208%2F2014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5d464a58fa5dd5250036f78d96052c71384207%2F21_36_2014_1208%2F2014.jpg>
 Jaiden Dixon with his mother Nicole Fitzpatrick. 
Nicole’s world is now divided into before and after. “It was like, before I 
was in a theatre watching this movie, and since then it’s been like walking 
into a parking lot and trying to adjust to the bright lights from being so 
engrossed in this movie for so long.”

It’s not as though the movie was necessarily uplifting. As a single mother of 
three, she remembers being exhausted, overwhelmed and, at times, very down. 
“There were nights when I would come home and just order pizza because I didn’t 
feel like cooking. And I would stare at the TV, and Jaiden would be out or 
upstairs or whatever. And I wish I’d gone and played with them.”

The first time I met Nicole was in her office, four months after Jaiden’s 
death. It was her birthday, but she hadn’t let on to her co-workers and had no 
plans. She was wearing a hoodie bearing Jaiden’s name and face and the word 
legendary. Her friend had set up a website so they could sell them to raise 
funds. But she found it difficult to see his face. “I have school pictures in 
the living room over the mantel. I catch myself diverting my attention so that 
I don’t have to look.” She was in therapy, but struggling with the advice. 
“They keep saying that there’s a light at the end of the tunnel. They keep 
saying, ‘It’ll get better.’ But I’m kind of at the point where I don’t see it.”

Five months later, she still couldn’t see it. We had dinner at the Longhorn 
Steakhouse and went back to her house to meet friends. If anything, she was in 
a darker place. Most evenings she stayed up late to avoid going to sleep. Her 
mind kept whirring – an apparently endless loop of what-ifs and horror 
sequences. “I keep replaying seeing him falling to the ground. I keep 
replaying: ‘I should have done this, I should have done that. I should have 
opened the door.’”

In the reception area of St Joseph’s Cemetery, where Jaiden is buried, a range 
of pamphlets is assembled to assist the bereaved: Losing Your Mom, Losing Your 
Dad, Talking With Your Kids About Funerals, Grieving The Death Of A Grown Son 
Or Daughter, to name but a few. There is pretty much every permutation of grief 
but one – a pamphlet entitled Losing Your Young Child. Because that’s not 
supposed to happen.

Tyler Dunn, Marlette, Michigan 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43789dc553447742a5ae739d83083e03bc15b54%2F0_68_1529_1911%2F1529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43789dc553447742a5ae739d83083e03bc15b54%2F0_68_1529_1911%2F1529.jpg>
 Tyler Dunn at home in Marlette, Michigan. Photograph: Courtesy 
Facebook/Justice for Tyler Dunn 
Sanilac County has a lower population density than Finland and is slightly 
less racially diverse than Norway (it is over 95% white). According to 
Michigan’s department of agriculture, Sanilac leads the state in the acreage 
devoted to soy, corn, wheat, dairy farms and general cattle operations. 
Straight roads lead past silos, Dutch barns, grazing livestock and fallow 
fields, interspersed with the occasional township and homestead.

Marlette, population 1,879, is Sanilac’s third-biggest town and a 25-minute 
drive from the county seat of Sandusky. The shiny blue water tower bearing the 
town’s name announces itself from afar to the left, while McDonald’s golden 
arches peer over the trees to the right. Brittany Dunn, 20, wouldn’t be 
anywhere else. “I’d rather live here than in the city,” she says.

“It’s more laid-back,” agrees her grandmother, Janet Allen.

I am sitting in a pizzeria with four generations of the Dunn family: Janet, 
Lora Dunn Bartz (Janet’s daughter), Brittany (Lora’s daughter) and Ciannah 
(Brittany’s seven-month-old baby), as well as Thomas Bartz, Lora’s husband.

This vast expanse of land was Tyler Dunn’s playground. To a city dweller like 
me, the 11-year-old sounds like a character from Mark Twain. He loved trapping 
animals, hunting, catching fish in the creek behind the house, four-wheeling 
and dirt-biking in the summer, sledding in the winter. The Dunns lived three 
miles down a dirt road off Highway 53. Several miles from the nearest traffic 
light, even streetlight, and surrounded by fields, he was safe to do his own 
thing.

That year, deer hunting season started on 15 November, pheasant shooting on 
the 20th. “Tradition here is that the opening day you can just about close all 
the schools, because the kids are going hunting,” Sanilac County sheriff Garry 
Biniecki tells me. But with the exception of Tyler, hunting season didn’t 
particularly excite the Dunns. None of his immediate family hunted, and 
although Tyler enjoyed field sports, there is little evidence he was 
particularly good at them. One winter, Brittany’s boyfriend took Tyler 
trapping, but for more regular hunting trips Tyler turned to his friend Brandon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4378bca47036ecce2086fb69fda23adddc2f778%2F5_22_1029_618%2F1029.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20war%3A%20the%20killing%20of%20Jaiden%20Dixon%20and%20Tyler%20Dunn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Famericas-war-the-killing-jaiden-dixon-and-tyler-dunn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4378bca47036ecce2086fb69fda23adddc2f778%2F5_22_1029_618%2F1029.jpg>
 Marlette, Michigan – population: 1,879. 
Brandon (not his real name) lived about a mile away, on a dirt road off 
Tyler’s. Brandon, who was 12, would sometimes pick up Tyler on his go-kart, and 
they would roam the neighbourhood. They had been friends since kindergarten, 
but weren’t inseparable. Once, Lora told Tyler he could no longer play with 
Brandon after Brandon abandoned him in town and went off with another friend.

Brandon was living with his father Jerry, who owned a trucking company. Jerry 
often took his son hunting and occasionally trucking, too. If Tyler was over, 
Jerry would take them both. Jerry’s truck runs, ferrying milk and topsoil 
around the midwest, usually took him away for 11 hours at a time. He’d give the 
boys some money to help him out. Sometimes Jerry would have them sit up front; 
at other times, they’d be in the back playing video games. Tyler loved it.

On Thursday 21 November, Jerry had taken the boys hunting. Tyler had slept 
over on Friday night, and on Saturday afternoon the boys were scheduled to 
accompany Jerry in the truck down to Springfield, Ohio, 260 miles south and 
back. Lora dropped Tyler’s bike off at the house around 2pm, but the boys never 
used it because it was too cold: –8C, with winds of over 25 miles an hour.

Shortly before Jerry was about to leave, the boys said they wanted to stay 
home. He left them to it. He made this trip as often as three times a week, and 
Brandon took care of himself fine. Lora didn’t know that by the time she 
dropped the bike off, Jerry was already gone. “Tyler knew he wasn’t allowed 
there unless there was supervision,” she says. But he didn’t call, and nor did 
Jerry. Lora went out with Thomas to celebrate a girlfriend’s birthday 90 
minutes away in Union Lake. Jerry checked in with the boys a few times. The 
last time Brandon called Jerry was around 6.30pm, to ask if he could order 
pizza.

Almost two hours later, Brandon walked out of the house with his hands up, 
wearing red shorts with no shirt or socks, the police telling him to keep his 
hands where they could see them. He had just called 911 and told them he had 
shot Tyler.

“Do you have any weapons?” the policeman yelled.

“No,” Brandon said. “It’s on the kitchen floor.”

I would want eye for eye. Brandon needs to be gone. I don’t think he should be 
able to live his life

A policeman walked Brandon to his car as he pleaded: “It was an accident. I 
didn’t know the gun was loaded.”

An officer went inside, where he found a lever-action rifle on the kitchen 
floor and Tyler on the dining-room floor, in a Mountain Dew T-shirt and 
sweatpants, with a large pool of blood surrounding his head. There was a huge 
wound on the left side of his head. The policeman found no pulse, called 
dispatch, and told them Tyler was dead. As he left, he saw a shotgun lying on 
the living room couch and four holes in the dining-room window.

Nobody but Brandon will ever know for sure what happened that night, Sheriff 
Biniecki says. Brandon claims they were playing Xbox when he got a rifle out of 
Jerry’s closet to show Tyler. He asked Tyler to hold it while he went to get 
his milkshake from the bedroom. He came back and took the rifle from Tyler, who 
passed it to him butt first, the muzzle pointing in Tyler’s direction. Brandon 
was resting it against the wall when the gun got caught on his pocket and went 
off.

Brandon sat in the car while police combed the house. He’d been crying and was 
visibly shaken. When they searched him, they found two 12-gauge Remington 
buckshot shells and a mobile phone. There was blood on his hands and on the 
phone. When asked how he’d come by the shells, Brandon said he’d found them 
earlier that day and stuck them in his pocket for safekeeping.

Inside the property, the police found a veritable arsenal. In Brandon’s room 
was a Remington 1100 shotgun, loaded and perched against the dresser with one 
round in the chamber and four in reserve. There were two more single-shot 
shotguns near the closet. In the top dresser drawer, there was some marijuana 
in tin foil and two rolled joints. When asked later how many guns he had in the 
house, Jerry couldn’t remember. First he said seven or eight, then between five 
and 10.

Brandon didn’t know Tyler’s address, but he could describe his house. The 
police went there to find only his sisters at home, who told them to call their 
grandmother. Janet came shortly after midnight and was told the news. She 
called Lora. There was no reply: she’d left her phone in the car to charge. 
When she came out, she saw several missed calls and dialled Janet.

“Are you on your way home?” her mother asked.

“No – why?” Lora replied.

“I think you need to come home.”

She wouldn’t explain why, but that didn’t unduly concern Lora. She assumed her 
daughters had thrown a party and got caught.

Night falls heavy in Sanilac County, cloaking the land in uncluttered 
darkness. On dirt roads with no street lamps for miles, the flashing lights of 
stationary police vehicles announce themselves with the force of a lighthouse. 
On the way to her mother’s house, Lora saw the lights on Brandon’s road and 
drove towards them.

She called her mother. “Mom, do you have Tyler?”

“I think you’d better just come here,” Janet said.

“And then she put the police officer on the phone,” Lora recalls.

“Don’t go there. Just come here,” she told her, and Lora obliged.

“There’s been an accident,” the policewoman said when she got to the house.

“OK,” Lora said.

“Your son’s in Lapeer county hospital.”

“OK,” Lora said. “Why didn’t you tell me, because I just came through Lapeer?”

“No, Lora,” the policewoman said. “He’s been shot and killed.”

While Lora was halfway home, Jerry was at the sheriff’s office in Sandusky. It 
was 2am. He had been called and asked to pick Brandon up. The police asked him 
whether there were any custody issues between him and Brandon’s mother, Connie, 
and whether he often left his son alone. Asked if any of his weapons were 
loaded, he said they might have been. Finally, they asked if Brandon had taken 
hunter safety classes. Jerry said he was doing the apprenticeship programme, in 
which a child aged 10 or more can hunt for two years without a safety 
certificate if with an adult. Beyond that, he had given basic instructions. “I 
told him to hold the gun with the barrel pointing in the air. Never to point 
the gun at anyone, and never put any shells in the gun unless you are outside.”

How the gun got into Brandon’s bedroom was a mystery to Jerry. He thought it 
had originally been in the living room and didn’t remember moving it. All the 
guns were his, apart from the 20-gauge, which he’d bought Brandon. He said the 
.30-30 rifle that killed Tyler had been in his closet the whole time; he’d put 
three rounds in it a year earlier and not touched it since. It was only then 
that Jerry was told why Brandon was there.

Guns were more available in Brandon and Tyler’s world than for any of the 
day’s other victims

Had Brandon not shot Tyler, a handful of minor episodes relating to his 
behaviour would probably never have amounted to anything. But he did, and over 
the next few days police interviews provided hints that, even if this was not 
an expected turn of events, it was always a possibility.

In her police interview, Connie said she had always been nervous about the 
number of guns Jerry had in the house, and assumed they were loaded. And then 
there were the incidents at school: the day before hunting season began, 
Brandon had boasted that he had pointed a 20-gauge at a boy’s stomach while it 
was loaded without the safety on. He also joked that the boy should put antlers 
on his head and run around so Brandon could shoot him. The child who overheard 
them thought they were “goofing around” about the antlers; he also thought 
“they were serious” about aiming at the boy’s stomach.

Guns were more available in Brandon and Tyler’s world than for any of the 
day’s other victims. In much of rural America, guns are an everyday part of 
life, for recreational and practical reasons. “Being a rural community, we have 
problems with everything from skunks to critters,” Sheriff Biniecki explains. 
“It’s not uncommon for a farmer to have a firearm handy.”

With so many guns around, the potential for calamity is ever present. A few 
weeks earlier, two local men said they were shot at by a duck hunter. Five days 
after Tyler was shot, a 16-year-old shot himself in the foot while hunting 20 
minutes away. Although Biniecki treats each gun death as its own discrete 
tragedy, one nonetheless detects in his voice a weary familiarity with cases 
such as Tyler’s. The key to preventing accidents, he says, is education and 
parental responsibility. “I think we need to use the opportunity to further 
educate parents that if you do have a gun, unload it and put it away. Teach 
your kids the safety rules. And then, over time, don’t get lax with it, because 
children are always curious. Put those two things together and bad things can 
happen.”

In January 2013, in the wake of the Sandy Hook shootings, Barack Obama started 
a second term that became increasingly strident in its advocacy for gun 
control. He sought to shift the climate of caution by issuing “a presidential 
memorandum directing the Centers for Disease Control to research the causes and 
prevention of gun violence”.

But the problem has been ongoing. On 14 November 2013, nine days before Tyler 
was shot, Obama nominated Vivek Murthy for surgeon general. Republican 
legislators focused on Murthy’s support for an assault-weapons ban and a tweet 
he’d sent in 2012, after the mass shootings at a cinema in Aurora, Colorado. 
“Tired of politicians playing politics w/guns, putting lives at risk b/c 
they’re scared ofNRA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra>. Guns are a 
health care issue. #DebateHealth,” he wrote. It took more than a year for him 
to be confirmed by the narrowest of margins, after the National Rifle 
Association rallied its members.

On 20 February 2014, Jerry and Brandon appeared in district court. Jerry was a 
three-time felon, previously convicted, among other things, of dealing drugs 
and operating a vehicle while impaired.

In the US, felons are not allowed to have guns, so Jerry was charged with 
possession, a crime carrying a maximum of five years in prison. For leaving two 
boys alone with loaded guns that ended in the death of one of them, he was 
charged with contributing to the delinquency of a minor, a 90-day misdemeanour. 
He was released on $2,500 bail. Brandon was arraigned in juvenile court and 
charged with careless discharge of a firearm, causing death, which carries a 
maximum two-year sentence. On 10 April, Brandon pleaded guilty; on 5 May, Jerry 
pleaded no contest.

At a hearing on 1 May, Lora told me, Connie wept as her son stood in grey 
sweatpants and a hoodie, and the judge placed him in “intense probation” at her 
home. The next day he was sentenced. There were 29 terms to his probation. He 
was sent to a junior detention facility for 10 days, with a further 20 days to 
be enforced if he failed to comply with the other 28 restrictions (including a 
7pm-to-7am curfew, participation in anger-management classes, random drug and 
alcohol testing, paying for Tyler’s cremation, and a minimum of 10 written 
assignments). The probation would be reviewed every 30 days, said the 
prosecutor, who expected it to last until Brandon was 18 or 19. Six weeks 
later, the judge sentenced Jerry to a year for weapons-firearms possession and 
90 days for contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

Tyler’s family believes they both got off too lightly – particularly Brandon, 
who they are convinced shot Tyler on purpose. To them, the story doesn’t hang 
together. Lora doesn’t buy the idea that the latch got caught on his shorts: “I 
believe his finger was on the trigger.”

Over pizza with Brittany, her mother, stepfather and grandmother, I ask what 
would constitute justice.

Brittany pauses. “I would want eye for eye.”

“You mean you want Brandon executed?” I ask.

She nods. “Brandon needs to be gone. I don’t think he should be able to live 
his life.”

I look around the table. “Does everyone agree?”

They all nod.

“And Jerry?”

“He should have time for what he did,” Lora says.

“He should probably sit inside for the rest of his life,” Brittany adds. “He 
had a role in it, but he technically didn’t pull the trigger.”

According to the Sanilac County News, Lora has since filed suit against both 
Brandon and Jerry, seeking more than $25,000. I ask her if Jerry or Connie have 
reached out to them. She says they have had no contact since Jerry’s girlfriend 
came over, a few days after, to return Tyler’s effects. Would they have liked 
to? “It would have been nice for them to say something. Put a card in my 
mailbox or something.”

“Even at the court they could have turned around,” Janet said.

“Yeah, when he stood up in front of the judge and said it wasn’t his fault,” 
Lora recalls.

“Well,” Janet says, “it wasn’t his fault. Because he wasn’t home.”

***

This is not a story about gun control. It is a story made possible by the 
absence of gun control. Americans are no more violent than anybody else. What 
makes their society more deadly is the widespread availability of firearms. To 
defend this by way of the second amendment – the right to bear arms – has about 
the same relevance as seeking to understand the roots of modern terrorism 
through readings of the Qur’an. To base an argument on an ancient text is 
effectively to abdicate your responsibility to understand the present. Adopted 
in 1791, the second amendment states: “A well–regulated militia being necessary 
to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms 
shall not be infringed.” These 27 words have been elevated to the level of 
scripture, inscribed on a blood-soaked pedestal thwarting all debate, more than 
200 years after its passing.

None of the family members I spoke to raised the second amendment. Almost all 
believed guns were too readily available; none believed there was anything that 
could be done. But when I told them of other families who had lost children 
that day, they seemed shocked. It was as though they had lost a loved one in a 
war, unaware that the same war was simultaneously claiming other lives – 
indeed, unaware that a war was taking place. As though it were happening only 
to them, when in fact it was happening to America. Every day.

• This is an edited extract from Another Day In The Death Of America, 
published next week by Guardian Faber at £16.99.Order a copy for £12.50 from 
the guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/another-day-in-the-death-of-america.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
.


• Another Day In The Death Of America is published by Nation Books on 4 
October in north America. To pre-order a copy for $16.89, go to
barnesandnoble.com 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/another-day-in-the-death-of-america-gary-younge/1123562067?ean=9781568589756>
Embed 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/america-gun-side/embed.html> 