
Amercian Pharoah is coming back to New York.

The bay colt who in June became the first horse in 37 years to capture 
thoroughbred racing’s Triple Crown will run in Saturday’s Travers Stakes at 
historic Saratoga Race Course.

“Saratoga here we come!!!!!!!” owner Ahmad Zayat tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/jazz3162/status/635485079939104768> on Sunday.

The three-year-old son of Pioneerof the Nile and Littleprincessemma, who 
worked fractions of four furlongs in 47.2, five in 58.8, seven in 1:23.2 and a 
mile in 1:36.4 before about 2,000 fans on Sunday at California’s Del Mar 
Racetrack, will fly to Saratoga on Wednesday in advance of the Midsummer Derby, 
which will carry a $1.6m purse.

American Pharoah wins, and fans enjoy the day at Belmont Park – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jun/08/american-pharoah-belmont-park-scenes>
The Kentucky Derby, Preakness and Belmont Stakes champion owned by Zayat 
Stables and trained by Bob Baffert will be the fourth of 12 Triple Crown 
winners to run in the Travers. Of the previous three, only Whirlaway won in 
1941. Even the great Secretariatlost at Saratoga in 1973 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/01/forgotten-story-onion-secretariat-triple-crown>
, felled by an unheralded horse named Onion.

It will mark American Pharoah’s second race since his history-making triumph 
at Belmont Park in June. On 2 August, hewon the $1.75m Haskell Invitational 
Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/02/american-pharoah-makes-winning-return-at-haskell-invitational>
 by two and a half lengths at Monmouth Park.

The Haskell marked American Pharoah’s eighth consecutive victory, including 
seven Grade I races.

It’s unclear whether Zayat will try for one more race between the Travers and 
the Breeders’ Cup Classic on 31 October at Keeneland. Intrigue surrounding that 
race only redoubled over the weekend as the five-year-old mare Beholder became 
thefirst female to win the Pacific Classic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_hNk8QHsJg> on Saturday, running away by an 
eight-and-a-quarter-length margin and prompting buzz over a showdown in 
Lexington.

The post-position draw for the 146th running of the Travers will take place 
Tuesday night.
 