
A crowd of 50,155, a record for Keeneland, gave American Pharoah the roaring 
valediction he deserved on Saturday night, after a Breeders’ Cup Classic that 
was so one-sided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/american-pharoah-breeders-cup-classic-keeneland-found-golden-horn>
 it did not really qualify as a race. American Pharoah was the horse of a 
lifetime for his owner, trainer and jockey, and for countless American racing 
fans, both casual and committed. His final performance, fittingly, was one of 
his best.

As soon as their hero had left the stage, however, it was time to move on. 
Keeneland emptied in minutes rather than hours, thanks in part to a big college 
football game on the other side of town which was due to kick off an hour after 
the Classic. With the 12th Triple Crown winneron his way to Ashford Stud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/03/american-pharoah-to-hold-off-retirement-for-breeders-cup>
, American racing now sets off on what could be a long search for the 13th.

American Pharoah in spectacular Breeders’ Cup Classic win at Keeneland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/american-pharoah-breeders-cup-classic-keeneland-found-golden-horn>
It is in the nature of the game that racing’s star performers come and go at a 
furious rate, thanks to the demands of the sport and also, on the Flat at 
least, the financial realities of the breeding industry. Racing will never have 
a Roger Federer or Rory McIlroy to pull in the crowds year after year.

But it is part of American Pharoah’s legacy that he has reminded many in the 
sport here that optimism, too, is in the nature of the game. It is often said 
that racing “needs” horses like American Pharoah, and also like the Derby and
Arc winner Golden Horn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/04/frankie-dettori-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe-golden-horn>
, who was beaten by Found in Saturday’s Turf.

When a racing industry is as big as the one in America, however – or 
Britain’s, for that matter – the only real need is for patience. The 37 years 
that the US was forced to wait for its latest Triple Crown winner was, 
admittedly, a little extreme, but it was worth it when American Pharoah finally 
arrived. The 90,000 sell-out crowd at Belmont i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-belmont-stakes-triple-crown-live>
n June, meanwhile, included many thousands who were not even born when Affirmed 
completed the Crown in 1978.

The greatest horses will always be a rare treat but there is huge pleasure to 
be taken from all of the others too. What racing needs anywhere is interest and 
enthusiasm from a core group of big-money owners and also from enough fans to 
keep the turnstiles and betting turnover ticking over. The long line of private 
jets parked at nearby Blue Grass Airport on Saturday – they were forced to 
close a runway to find room for them all – and the sell-out crowd in the stands 
suggest that those writing American racing’s obituary in recent years were 
being a little premature.

It has its problems, of course, such as the near-universal administration of 
race-day drugs to its runners. The other star turn on Saturday was Maria 
Borell, the trainer of the Sprint winner, Runhappy, who does not use the 
anti-bleeding drug Lasix on her horse and is outspoken in her belief that it is 
not just unnecessary but poisonous to the long-term strength of the breed.

“You guys don’t need to run on Lasix,” Borell said. “It’s better for the 
long-term integrity of the breed. I want us to have stronger horses that can 
run 30, 40 times in the future, like they used to be able to, and not be masked 
by drugs.”

Sadly the “you guys” Borell was thinking about include Bob Baffert, the 
trainer ofAmerican Pharoah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah>
, every other American trainer with a runner on the card and, for that matter, 
Aidan O’Brien, whose two winners at the meeting, Found and Hit It A Bomb, both 
raced on Lasix. One winner, even in a punishing race like the Sprint, will not 
change the drugs culture. In fact, it seems unlikely that anything short of 
federal legislation ever will. Golden Horn did not race on Lasix on Saturday, 
though it would be stretching things too far to suggest that it made any 
difference to the result. A series of minor misfortunes, from the wet weather 
earlier in the week to an inside draw that steered him onto the worst of the 
ground, contributed to his defeat, but he still ran a fine race to finish a 
half-length second.

Both Golden Horn and Found, who was racing at Group One level for the third 
time in a month, deserve great credit for their efforts. So too doesRyan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore>, the rider of Found, who became 
only the second overseas rider – after Frankie Dettori in 2006 – to win the 
Bill Shoemaker Award for the meeting’s top rider.

Japanese raider Fame Game short-priced favourite for Melbourne Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/japanese-raider-fame-game-short-priced-favourite-for-melbourne-cup>
Moore was out of Keeneland even faster than the punters in order to ride at 
Saint-Cloud in Paris on Sunday, where he took yet another Group One, the 
Criterium International, on O’Brien’s Johannes Vermeer. From there it was 
straight to the airport again for a flight to Australia, where he is due to 
ride in theMelbourne Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/melbourne-cup>, a 
race he won 12 months ago, on Tuesday.

Moore’s performance on Hit It A Bomb in the Juvenile Turf on Friday was so 
perfectly judged that it recalled Lester Piggott’s extraordinary performance on 
Royal Academy in 1990.

Moore is, quite simply, the best jockey we have seen for many years. As Flat 
racing prepares to hibernate before starting to search for the stars of 2016 it 
is good to know that Moore will be around to help ride them.
 