
For a few minutes on Breeders’ Cup Saturday at Keeneland in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/american-pharoah-breeders-cup-classic-keeneland-found-golden-horn>
 American Pharoah and Golden Horn, the two finest middle-distance 
three-year-olds of 2015, were within a few dozen yards of each other.Golden 
Horn, the Derby and Arc winner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/04/frankie-dettori-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe-golden-horn>
 had just finished a close second in the Turf, while American Pharoah, already
the first Triple Crown winner for 37 years, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-belmont-stakes-triple-crown-live>
 was about to be saddled for the Classic.

That, however, was as close as they ever got on a racecourse and so it was 
left to racing’s international panel of handicappers to determine which of the 
two was the outstanding horse in a memorable year. When their decision was 
published on Tuesday, it was emphatic. American Pharoah, with a final rating of 
134, was 4lb clear of Golden Horn, who was in turn another 4lb ahead ofTreve, 
the Arc winner in 2013 and 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/05/treve-wins-2014-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe>
. Shared Belief, who died of colic in December, was a second US-trained horse 
in the top three, rated the equal of Treve on 126.

American Pharoah in spectacular Breeders’ Cup Classic win at Keeneland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/american-pharoah-breeders-cup-classic-keeneland-found-golden-horn>
Some, perhaps many, racing fans, in Europe in particular, may disagree or 
point out thatAmerican Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah>, like all but a tiny 
handful of US-trained horses, raced on the controversial anti-bleeding 
medication Lasix throughout his career. Yet the scale of his achievement in 
becoming the 12th Triple Crown winner is undeniable while the form of his final 
and most impressive success, in the Breeders’ Cup Classic was franked a few 
weeks later when Effinex, the six-and-a-half-length runner-up, took the Grade 
One Clark Handicap.

Nor is there any doubt that, between them, American Pharoah and Golden Horn 
dominated racing on either side of the Atlantic. American Pharoah recorded 
three of the top five individual performances of 2015, in the Classic (134), 
the Haskell Invitational (130) and theBelmont Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes> (129), while Golden Horn, in 
the Derby and Eclipse (both 130), was responsible for the other two. Treve’s 
easy win in the Prix Vermeille (126) the only other victory in Europe rated 
above 125

Ahmed Zayat, Bob Baffert and Victor Espinoza, respectively the owner, trainer 
and jockey of American Pharoah, were all present at a ceremony in London on 
Tuesday to see their colt named the Longines World’s Best Racehorse for 2015.

“Not only was he brilliant on the racetrack, he connected with everyone in 
America,” Zayat said. “For 37 years, we were waiting for a horse like that and 
he was finally the one. What I want everyone to remember about American Pharoah 
is not only was he majestic and brilliant in the way he raced and how much he 
liked winning the way he did, [it] is how much he was the people’s horse.”

Baffert said that American Pharoah “was the kind of horse who was unique and I 
could let him do that and share him; and to me that was fun. I was his trainer 
but I was also a big fan. It was so uplifting for the people of America.” 
Epinoza, meanwhile, summed up the Triple Crown winner very simply. “Every time 
I sat on him, it was like I was in the clouds.”

At a press conference which followed the publication of both the international 
classifications and Europe’s juvenile rankings, Phil Smith, the British 
Horseracing Authority’s senior handicapper, paid tribute to the talent and 
consistency of both American Pharoah andGolden Horn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-horn>.

“They both kept their form remarkably well,” Smith said. “Golden Horn raced in 
four different countries, though he didn’t quite log as many miles [in the air] 
as American Pharoah. Looking back at his form in the Derby, it really worked 
out this year, as the second horse, Jack Hobbs, went on to win [the Derby] in 
Ireland. It was as good as his performance shortly afterwards in the Eclipse,” 
said Smith

“American Pharoah was the champion in three categories [eight to nine 
furlongs, 10 furlongs and 12 furlongs] and Golden Horn was the champion in two.”

There was never a realistic chance that American Pharoah and Golden Horn would 
meet on the track, or race on as four-year-olds given their immense value as 
stallions.

“It’s a shame that more three-year-olds don’t stay in training,” Phil Smith, 
the British Horseracing Authority’s senior handicapper said later, at a press 
conference following the publication of both the international classifications 
and Europe’s juvenile rankings. “If you look at Frankel, he was rated 126 as a 
two-year-old, 136 as a three-year-old and 140 as a four-year-old. Who is to say 
how far those horses could have gone?

“As a racing enthusiast, I’d love to see more of these horses kept in 
training, not just for European racing but for world racing. American Pharoah’s 
last performance was his best performance, so who can say he would not have 
progressed ever further at four if he was still improving?”

Geoff Banks’ action against BHA in Speculative Bid case will go to court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/geoff-banks-action-british-horseracing-authority-specualtive-bid-case-court>
The outstanding three-year-old prospect for the Flat season ahead is Aidan 
O’Brien’s Air Force Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/air-force-blue-dewhurst-stakes-emotionless-aidan-obrien-william-buick>
, who became the first horse to complete a treble in the Phoenix Stakes, the 
National Stakes and the Dewhurst Stakes and was 2015’s champion juvenile on a 
mark of 124.

His rating is the joint-highest of the last five years alongside Dawn 
Approach, who took the 2,000 Guineas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/04/sheikh-mohammed-2000-guineas-dawn-approach>
 and St James’s Palace Stakes as a three-year-old. In all, only three juveniles 
– Frankel, New Approach and Dream Ahead – have earned a higher rating in the 
last 12 years, and all were Group One winners at three.

“There have been only four or five two-year-olds in recent years who were good 
enough to win three Group Ones in the season,” Mark Bird, the handicapper 
responsible for Irish juveniles, said, “so he is in good company with the likes 
of Arazi and Zafonic and more recently, Fasliyev and Johannesburg.

“[But] there are no guarantees as to what he may or may not achieve as a 
three-year-old. Only five or six of the top 20 last year went on to improve 
their ratings as three-year-olds. It will be interesting to see whether he 
fails to train on, like Johannesburg, or goes on like Zafonic or a horse like 
[O’Brien’s] St Nicholas Abbey.”

Minding, another juvenile from the O’Brien stable, was the season’s champion 
two-year-old filly with a rating of 120, the highest for a juvenile filly since 
Six Perfections in 2002. “Minding put up the best performances in the Dubai 
Fillies’ Mile in the last 25 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/minding-aidan-obrien-future-champions-weekend>
,” Matthew Tester, Britain’s senior two-year-old handicapper, said. “She is a 
very worthy favourite for the 1,000 Guineas.”
 