
The makers of the Oscar-winning documentary Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/27/asif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc> 
are working on a film about former prime minister Tony Blair, it has been 
reported.

According to the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/14/la-la-land-look-top-producer-talks-make-blair-movie/amp/>
, members of Blair’s staff met producer James Gay-Rees, whose On the Corner 
production company was behind the Amy Winehouse film, which won the best 
documentary Oscar in 2016, as well as Formula One documentarySenna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/senna> and music film Oasis: Supersonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/supersonic-review-oasis-documentary-noel-gallagher-liam-gallagher-mat-whitecross>
.

A source is quoted as saying: “Blair’s people met with James Gay-Rees. It got 
to the stage of Blair’s people saying ‘What about making a documentary around 
Tony?’ They were really keen on the idea. It just ticks all the boxes … If you 
look at everything that James has done, he has focused on really interesting 
people.”

Gay-Rees is currently making a documentary about Diego Maradona with Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy> director Asif Kapadia, though it is not 
clear if Kapadia will be involved in any Blair-related project.

Blair’s spokesperson said: “We receive many requests from documentary makers 
on a variety of subjects, but have neither sought nor agreed to do anything of 
the nature you describe.”

Any film is likely to be part of Blair’s attempt to re-establish his 
credibility as a political force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/tony-blair-to-launch-new-institute-for-centre-ground-politics>
, which recently saw him announce a new policy unit for the centre ground, and 
an end to his business activities. Blair was previously the subject ofGeorge 
Galloway’s film The Killings of Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/the-killing-of-tony-blair-review-george-galloway-chilcot-iraq>
, released in 2016.
 