
The Barbie movie has unveiled what might appear to be an unlikely star. Amy 
Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer>, the standup comedian 
known for her frank discussions of casual sex and politics, and who found 
big-screen success with the bawdy comedy Trainwreck, is lined up for the lead 
in Mattel’s debut movie outing for its ambitiously proportioned plastic 
bestseller.

The film, to be released in summer 2018, is an Enchanted-style mix of 
animation and live action which sees Schumer evicted from Barbieland for 
eccentricities.

She then has an adventure in the real world, and, according to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/amy-schumer-barbie-movie-sony-pictures-mattel-1201863294/>
, realises that “perfection comes on the inside, not the outside, and that the 
key to happiness is belief in oneself, free of the obligation to adhere to some 
unattainable standard of perfection”. Barbie then returns home to save her 
fellow dolls.

Sony bought the rights in 2014 from Mattel, which has generated $3bn (£2.3bn) 
in sales from the 180-odd incarnations of Barbie and her friends. The changing 
shape and occupational status of the doll has generated much debate over the 
years.


Production over the last two years has been somewhat bumpy: the original 
script was written by Rio 2’s Jenny Bicks, before Juno’s Diablo Codywas brought 
on board by Sony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/living-doll-diablo-cody-working-on-rewrite-of-live-action-barbie-film>
 in March 2015 to bring “a legitimately contemporary tone” to the character. 
She was replaced by Hilary Winston; and Schumer and her sister, Kim Caramele, 
are to do a partial rewrite before production begins.

A director for the film has yet to be finalised. It is the second in what 
appears to be a revisionist take on a product once perceived to promote an 
unattainable ideal of female physique: Reese Witherspoon isproducing and may 
star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/26/reese-witherspoon-barbie-film-ruth-handler-doll>
 in a biopic of the doll’s creator, Ruth Handler.

Schumer has three high-profile, upcoming films: an untitled comedy from 50/50 
director Jonathan Levine, Jason Hall’s Thank You for Your Service, and a film 
she has co-scripted with Jennifer Lawrence in which they will both star.
 