
I sometimes feel a bit sorry for Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/27/amy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable>
. Her phenomenally successful career, which includes sellout arena tours, a 
bestselling book, a Hollywood career and, for many young women, rising 
feminist-icon status, makes it difficult, admittedly – but I do.

Why? Because simply by being a woman in the public eye, existing, and having 
the audacity to do so without the perfect size-zero proportions demanded of the 
women on our screens, she has been forced to become a spokeswoman on society’s 
body-image fixation.

The latest “controversy” is being cast as the lead in the upcoming Barbie movie
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/06/amy-schumer-barbie-doll-film-sony-pictures-mattel-iconic-toy>
 (she is also, incidentally, working on the script, not that anyone seems 
interested in this). Apparently shedoesn’t have the right figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/07/amy-schumer-says-trolls-backlash-over-barbie-casting-shows-shes-right-for-role>
 to play Barbie. (Actually no actor does; a real woman with the conventional 
Barbie proportionswould be unable to lift her head or stand 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/life-style/health/barbie-real-womaan-anatomically-impossible-article-1.1316533>
). Having kept shtum during the casting process, Schumer obviously felt she 
needed to respond to the people criticising her body. “Is it fat-shaming if you 
know you’re not fat and have zero shame in your game? I don’t think so … When I 
look in the mirror I know who I am,” she said, continuing: “It’s that kind of 
response that lets you know something’s wrong with our culture and we all need 
to work together to change it.”

You might argue that Schumer would be better off ignoring the trolls and the 
misogynists. And were such proclamations about which female bodies are fit to 
enter our lines of vision limited to social media, I would probably say that 
she should do so. But this body fascism is our culture – it surrounds us, 
seeping into our minds from the pages of women’s magazines and the garishly 
coloured humiliation boxes that make up thesidebar of shame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/24/mail-online-sidebar-of-shame>
, criticism spieling like hateful streamers from the mouths of celebrated 
people, and our own peers, too.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> will be aware how often 
we direct this at ourselves too; we have our own internal trolls. We learned 
the script from a very young age.

Which is why it’s important to think of the girls who see this happening every 
day, and – no matter how strong they are – absorb it. To have just one woman 
stand up and say, “I’m not having this” is a much-needed, powerful statement.

The girls are also the reason why Schumer is perfect for this role. I’ll admit 
that when I heard she was considering it, I was initially disappointed. That 
disappointment was nothing to do with her body, and everything to do with my 
feminist reservations about the Barbie brand (I had forgotten that, a year ago, 
Matteldiversified its range of dolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/28/barbie-finally-becomes-a-real-girl-with-more-realistic-figure-and-skin-colours>
 to include different body types and ethnicities, with great success).

The Barbie I grew up knowing was beautiful, saccharine – and dumb: “Math is 
hard”, declared her automated voice. But then I realised that Schumer was 
unlikely to kowtow to this vision of femininity, especially not if she is 
involved in the writing process. Instead, she will be cheeky, and sharp, and 
funny, and silly.

Think of any little girl you know. They love nothing more than a bit of 
silliness, and they don’t get it nearly enough. I am sure that they will love 
her when the film comes out. Maybe some boys will too.

The criticism of Schumer’s body is not coming from little girls, though. It is 
symptomatic of the predictable backlash that certain women in the public eye 
inevitably face. Now that the media machine has tired of Lena Dunham, the 
Schumer backlash has kicked into gear.

It’s not just about these women being successful and refusing to pipe down. 
Otherwise Tina Fey, Amy Poehler, Sarah Silverman, Ilana Glazer and Abbi 
Jacobson, and Jennifer Lawrence would all be facing similar tidal waves of hate 
(though it’s worth noting that men found another way to “humiliate” Lawrence; by
revealing her naked body to the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/nude-photos-of-jennifer-lawrence-and-others-posted-online-by-alleged-hacker>
). It is about their bodies not looking how women’s bodies are “supposed” to 
look, and – even worse – the fact that these women are unapologetic about that 
fact.

The only way to combat this body-shaming is to continue being unapologetic, 
which is tiring, sometimes soul-destroying work, and to champion better media 
diversity until it gets to the point where a woman’s words and talent count for 
more than the size of her backside. Schumer is doing her level best to help 
change the culture of body-shaming. It is, sadly, a task of Barbie 
dreamhouse-sized proportions.
 