
Moments into Kubo and the Two Strings, Laika’s latest masterful missive from 
the darkling heart of childhood reveries, it is clear that this is no ordinary 
Hollywood animation. In place of talking dinosaurs or cuddly anthropomorphic 
critters, we witness a desperate young mother trying to save her newborn child 
from the treacherous waves. She catches the precious bundle before it is swept 
away, but it’s revealed the helpless baby has been horribly wounded, one tiny 
eye gouged out by unknown assailants.


Kubo and the Two Strings review – lyrical stop-motion tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/kubo-and-two-strings-review> 
This is standard stuff for a feature from Laika, the Portland, Oregon-based 
studio that’s now given us four vivid, imaginative films dating back to 2009’s 
phantasmagorical Neil Gaiman adaptationCoraline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/07/coraline-film-review> – a movie 
that featured small children having their eyes removed by petrifying banshees 
from an eerie netherworld. Ghastly zombies, child-killing mobs, monstrous 
parents,hideous cheese-eating members <http://www.laika.com/details.php?id=625> 
of a stinking-rich, steampunky 1% – all these are to be found within the 
production company’s fiercely offbeatback catalogue <http://www.laika.com/films>
 of stop-motion treasures.

Laika’s offerings tend to fare well with critics – Kubo and the Two Strings is 
its best-reviewed work thus far at a whopping 97% “fresh” on Rotten Tomatoes – 
and yet the studio routinely goes under the radar come awards season. Last 
night’s Golden Globes awards preferred to hand this year’s best animated film 
award to Disney’sZootopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/zootropolis-review-disney-animated-odd-couple-mark-kermode>
 (Zootropolis in the UK), a cheery Disney allegory about the importance of 
celebrating diversity and refusing to judge by appearance. It’s a strong film, 
and it is the odds-on favourite to triumph at this year’s Oscars, but I wonder 
if determined trainee police bunny Judy will have quite the enduring cultural 
resonance of one-eyed Kubo and his magical origami puppets in years to come.

The Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s decision to garland the year’s 
better-known animated movies is nothing new. Laika’s films receive nominations, 
but always seem to lose out on the top prize, in part as an unfortunate 
consequence of timing. Coraline, Henry Selick’s bewitching tale of a young girl 
who discovers a sinister dystopia through a psychedelically rendered bolt-hole 
in the wall of her new home, lost out to Pixar’s equally fabulous Up at both 
the Oscars and the Golden Globes in 2009. Laika’s wonderfully whimsicalThe 
Boxtrolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/the-boxtrolls-review-animated-childrens-film>
 was beaten by Disney’s soaring cross-cultural comic book caper Big Hero Six at 
the Oscars and (less reasonably) by How to Train Your Dragon 2 at the Globes, 
in a competitive 2014 in which The Lego Movie and Studio Ghibli’s The Tale of 
the Princess Kaguya were also under consideration.

La La Land's landmark haul is lovely, but expect more drama at the Oscars | 
Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/09/la-la-lands-landmark-haul-is-lovely-but-expect-more-drama-at-the-oscars>
The Golden Globe for best animated film has also been won, lest we forget, by 
such lesser offerings as Pixar’s Cars, in 2006, and The Adventures of Tintin, 
in 2011. The equivalent Oscar has gone to George Miller’s middling tale of 
toe-tapping Penguins, Happy Feet, and the hardly stupendous, Cat Ballou-riffing 
western Rango.

With the success of animated movies at the box office over the past decade, 
competition in this once threadbare category has picked up radically in recent 
years. Nevertheless it is a travesty that none of Laika’s films have ever won 
either top prize.ParaNorman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/13/paranorman-review>, the studio’s 
kidney-curdling tale of a young boy who sees dead people, had a strong shout in 
2012 but lost out to a lesser Pixar effort, the rambunctious medieval fantasy
Brave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2012/jun/24/brave-the-movie-pixar-lost-plot>
. Kubo and the Two Strings will most likely have to beat not just Zootopia, but 
Pixar’s $1bn Finding Dory and another much-seen Disney effort, Moana, if it is 
to buck the trend at this year’s Oscars.

When Studio Ghibli closed its doors – perhaps for good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/03/studio-ghibli-hayao-miyazaki-wind-rises>
 – in 2014, there was palpable distress from animation fans and professionals 
alike that we may never again get the chance to witness such eccentric tales 
from the hidden corners of our barely formed dreams as Howl’s Moving Castle, 
Spirited Away orMy Neighbour Totoro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/my-neighbour-totoro-review>. 
Laika seems to tap into the same rich vein of half-remembered youthful 
fantasies as the Japanese company, yet it is rarely mentioned in the same 
breath by critics. Ghibli won the best animated film Oscar in 2003 for Spirited 
Away, so why does the US animation community that votes for these prizes 
routinely fail to honour an American equivalent based on its own doorstep?

Instead, the Academy and HFPA usually go for the year’s biggest animated hits 
at the box office, despite the fact that these movies have already been seen by 
the vast majority of filmgoers. It’s a completely different approach to the one 
taken by voters in other categories, who often use their influence to garland 
lesser known films that might only be on the radar of critics or dedicated 
cineastes. Slumdog Millionaire in 2009, The King’s Speech the following year, 
and last year’s The Revenant only became blockbusters once they found 
themselves enveloped in a warm cloak of awards season buzz.

Next month’s Oscars will naturally offer the greatest dose thus far of the 
vital oxygen of publicity, with Damien Chazelle’s La La Land already looking 
likely to be this year’s grateful recipient. Kubo and the Two Strings, which 
has so far made just $70m at the global box office – barely covering its 
production budget – is more than deserving of a hit.
 