
The Middle East is not known for frank, open and mature discussions about sex, 
but a social media platform is hoping to change that.Al Hubb Thaqafa 
<http://www.lmarabic.com> offers young people, particularly girls, straight 
talk on sex, love and relationships in Arabic. The name means “love is culture” 
and the site aims to tackle taboos surrounding sex by offering visitors not 
just the facts of life, but also a chance to ask questions, express opinions 
and debate with one another – opportunities still rare in Egypt and the wider 
Arab world, when it comes to sexuality.

The formula has proved hugely successful; since its launch almost a year ago, 
Al Hubb Thaqafa’s main website has received more than 3m views, mainly from 
Egypt and Saudi Arabia, with almost a quarter of a million users following the 
the complementaryFacebook page <https://www.facebook.com/LoveMattersArabic> and 
Twitter feed <https://twitter.com/LoveMattersAR>.

Al Hubb Thaqafa is part of Love Matters 
<http://www.rnw.org/activities/love-matters>, a collection of similar platforms 
targeting audiences in half a dozen languages and markets around the world. 
They’re run byRadio Netherlands Worldwide <http://www.rnw.org/> as a media 
development project, part of a wider remit to encourage freedom of expression 
and human rights.

“What you see most often is that sexual reproductive health programmes online 
and offline solely focus on avoiding sexually transmitted diseases and unwanted 
pregnancies,” saysMichelle Ernsting, head of Love Matters 
<http://www.thnk.org/people-of-thnk/person/michele-ernsting/>. “Both are 
important for young people, but these are not what draw people to sex. Young 
people have sex because it feels good. So why not use pleasure, love and 
relationships as the way to address taboos?”

This pleasure principle has been rolled out across half-a-dozen websites since 
2010, targeting audiences in India, Kenya, China, Mexico and Venezuela – and 
now Egypt. There is no shortage of sexual context accessible to internet users 
in the Middle East – Pakistan,Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> 
and Iran top the Google league tables for sex-related searches – but material 
available in Arabic tends to be either pornographic or puritanical with nothing 
in between.

Girls and media: how TV chat shows and soaps can have a positive influence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/girls-and-media-how-tv-chat-shows-and-soaps-can-have-a-positive-influence>
Given the absence of sex education in schools, and general reticence within 
families to broach such a matters, young people are largely at a loss when it 
comes to accurate information and advice to help them navigate their sexual 
lives. Much of Al Hubb Thaqafa’s main website consists of the nuts and bolts of 
sex and reproduction, but its most interesting and popular pages take visitors 
far beyond.

Local bloggers tackle taboos head on through their own experiences; one 
fascinating post by a male contributor puts the “men” into “menstruation” by 
recounting his own shopping adventurebuying sanitary pads 
<http://lmarabic.com/news/men-buying-menstrual-pads> for his sister, and asks 
what makes this basic bit of biology so culturally awkward.Online agony aunt 
Marwa Rakha <http://lmarabic.com/category/questions> tackles visitors’ 
predicaments from straight-up heartbreak to the finer points of BDSM.Discuss 
with Me <http://lmarabic.com/category/naqeshny> asks visitors to vote on hot 
topics, from polygamy to homosexuality, and explain their positions. In a 
society where keeping up appearances means that women often hesitate to talk 
about sex – even with their husband – the chance for a free and frank exchange 
with men on such matters is, for many, unprecedented.

Altered images: photography as a tool for gender equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/02/altered-images-photography-as-a-tool-for-gender-equality>
Indeed, women are in charge at Al Hubb Thaqafa: its editorial team, many of 
its contributors and almost half of its Facebook followers are female. There 
are few more remarkable sights in the Arab region than that of a woman showing 
male viewers how to roll on a condom (indeed, women showing men how to do 
anything is notable in its own right), but this is exactly what Alyaa Gad, an 
Egyptian sexologist, tackles, and more,in a series of hugely popular videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pWXTLOrDzJI> on the platform’s YouTube 
channel, which have attracted more than 5m views since launch.

So far, reaction from the region has been enthusiastic – the usual fatwas that 
condemn any challenge to the sexual status quo as a corruption of “traditional” 
values have yet to be flung. The creators of Al Hubb Thaqafa are keen to keep 
it that way, and in their choice of topics, use of language and selection of 
images, walk a fine line between awakening, and shocking, their audience.

#HeForShe: how to engage men in the fight for gender equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/engaging-boys-men-gender-equality>
We haven’t seen as free and frank an exchange on sexuality in the region since 
the golden age ofArabic erotica a millennium ago 
<http://www.arabicerotica.com/introduction>. The climax of the Arab Spring may 
be a distant memory, but Al Hubb Thaqafa and its newfound freedom of expression 
is a welcome sign of things to come.

Dr Shereen El Feki  <http://www.ted.com/speakers/shereen_el_feki>is the author 
ofSex and the Citadel: Intimate Life in a Changing Arab World 
<http://sexandthecitadel.com/>. Follow @shereenelfeki 
<https://twitter.com/shereenelfeki> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 