
Flights: buy international and domestic flights together


Book all your flights at the same time for the best prices. Some large 
airlines have agreements with small local carriers, or, like Lan, operate both 
international and domestic flights, which means they can offer either 
discounted multi-destination airpasses or add internal flights for a small 
additional cost. For example, Journey Latin America (journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk/>) offers a return fare to Santiago for 
£975, or one with added stops in both Puerto Montt and Punto Arenas for £1,048. 
If you do buy separately, good prices can often be found on lesser-known 
airlines Sky (skyairline.cl <https://www.skyairline.cl>) and Pal (palair.cl 
<http://www.palair.cl/>).

Buses: go long haul

Long-distance coaches in South America are in a league of their own.When 
taking a sleeper, forget about first and second class, and learn that all 
categories based around the word for bed:cama, semi-cama, and cama VIP/executivo
 refer to how much your seat reclines, with the top-end ones not far off an 
airline business-class seat. You'll often be served a hot meal and maybe even a 
glass of wine, but ask exactly what is included when you book and take your own 
snacks too, as quality can be hit and miss. Travelling by bus is the best way 
to appreciate the sheer size of various countries in South America, and can 
save you the cost of a night's accommodation if it's an overnighter.

Accommodation: explore alternatives
 Cabanas make great places to stay for families Photograph: Alamy 
While foreigners rush to the nearest hotel, Argentinians and Chileans often 
holiday incabañas, self-catering cabins that are great for families and small 
groups. Just type your destination into a search engine plus the word cabaña 
for plenty of affordable, no-frills options. Sleeping under canvas in national 
parks will also cut costs.

Shafik Meghji, co-author of the new Rough Guide to Chile, says: "If you want 
to escape the crowds and reach the most spectacular areas, you generally have 
to camp. Some sites are free and, although very basic, usually have wonderfully 
isolated locations. Others charge a fee and offer equipment for hire, 
bathrooms, cooking facilities and even cafes."

Some parks also have refugios (mountain huts with bunk beds, hot showers and 
gas stoves), but be sure to book in advance during high season. For cities, try 
peer-to-peer accommodation networks, such asAirBnB.com 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/s/Chile>, Wimdu.co.uk <http://www.wimdu.co.uk> and 
Tripping.com <https://www.tripping.com/>, which now have much better coverage 
in South America.

Wine tours: go solo 

Organised wine tours are often expensive. Cut costs by arranging your own 
visits, using public transport. Several vineyards around Santiago, including 
Vina Undurraga (undurraga.cl <http://www.undurraga.cl>), Cousiño Macul (
cousinomacul.com <http://www.cousinomacul.com/>) and Concha y Toro (
conchaytoro.com <http://www.conchaytoro.com>) can be visited by bus or metro. 
You'll usually be expected to book a time slot in advance. La Rural (
bodegalarural.com.ar <http://www.bodegalarural.com.ar/home.htm>), about 12km 
from Mendoza, also has a wine museum.

Food: opt for meal deals

Chile does a fine line in set lunches, so make this the main meal of your day. 
Look for chalkboards outside restaurants. The key words aremenú ejecutivo, 
sometimes shortened to simply menú, usually comprising starter, main course, 
dessert and drink. Similar deals exist in some Argentina restaurants too, 
although they are not so common.

City transport: go public

A few years ago, taxis were so cheap in Buenos Aires that some foreigners 
never even set foot on a bus orsubte (underground train). Now they are learning 
to appreciate public transport as one of the best bargains in the city, with 
fares from 15p to 30p. The city's bus system is very comprehensive, but getting 
to grips with it – the official guide is Guia T, a book packed with grids and 
cross references – can seem harder than cracking the Da Vinci Code.

But help is at hand: British expat Jonathan Evans will teach you all you need 
to know, while offering an introductory tour to the city sights (
buenosaireslocaltours.com <http://www.buenosaireslocaltours.com/>). The tour is 
free (leave a tip) and runs entirely on public transport, including a stint on 
an underground line with original wooden carriages dating from 1913.

Shopping: step behind closed doors
 Designer bags from Jungle Vi.ai.pi in Buenos Aires 
Buenos Aires pioneered the in-house restaurant scene and now it's taking 
fashion behind closed doors, too. Clothing has been one of the areas hardest 
hit by Argentina's soaring inflation, so instead of paying for rental premises, 
many designers open up their studios or workshops, offering well-priced limited 
editions that make unusual souvenirs.

Try Vendaval (vendavalbuenosaires.com.ar 
<http://www.vendavalbuenosaires.com.ar/>), Pippy Miller (
facebook.com/PippyMiller <http://www.facebook.com/PippyMiller>), Maison Abbey (
facebook.com/maison.abbey <http://www.facebook.com/maison.abbey>), Jungle 
Vi.ai.pi (jungleviaipi.blogspot.com.ar <http://jungleviaipi.blogspot.com.ar/>) 
and Blit Bags (bolu.us <http://bolu.us/>). Pop-up fashion ferias (markets) are 
also popular in Santiago. Most are advertised via Facebook or Twitter. For a 
short cut, arrange a tour with Santiago stylist Ameriga Giannone (agstyling.com 
<http://www.agstyling.com>). In Buenos Aires, try Shop Hop BA (
shop-buenosaires.com <http://www.shop-buenosaires.com/>) or Creme de la Creme (
cremedelacreme.com.ar <http://cremedelacreme.com.ar/>).

Money take : dollars

It's not wise to carry large amounts of cash, but a handful of dollars could 
lead to discounts on, well, almost anything in Argentina. The government has 
recently introduced very strict laws that make it incredibly hard for residents 
to change money, so people are clamouring for international currency, namely 
dollars. Keep a few in your hotel safe for negotiating deals.

Stay longer: work in a hostel

Looking to extend your trip and learn the lingo while keeping accommodation 
costs low? Hostels often offer travellers medium-term accommodation and other 
benefits (sometimes meals and Spanish lessons) in exchange for a few hours' 
work. You can arrange this on the hoof or by contacting establishments in 
advance. Or, for a guaranteed placement, try Real Hostel Work (
realhostelwork.com <http://realhostelwork.com/>), a new site that has links 
with hostels across South America.
 