
In 1997, just before I set off for a year’s adventuring, I had a fling with a 
man that quickly became more serious than we intended. We decided to keep in 
touch, be honest about any other relationships that occurred and maybe meet up 
at the end of the year. We did, and are still together today. During my 
travels, though, I had a fling with an Aussie man and spent the final three 
months of my trip with him. A year ago, we reconnected on social media. We have 
exchanged news, but there has been no flirting or rekindling of old flames – 
he, too, has a long-term partner. But two weeks ago, he told me he is ill and 
hasn’t long to live. This has put me in a spin. I would love to see him again 
before it is too late, but at least four people’s feelings are involved here. 
Has anyone encountered anything similar and regretted what they did, or didn’t, 
do?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 