
When the Socceroos take on South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southkorea> in the final of the Asian Cup 
on Saturday, they will have firsthand knowledge of who and what they are about 
to face. It is rare for two sides to play each other twice in the same 
tournament but with both sides coming through Group A and advancing through 
different sides of the knockout draw, the meeting in the final is somewhat 
fitting.

The Socceroos have proved themselves able in every match bar one – the final 
group game against South Korea in Brisbane. Scoring for fun against Kuwait and 
Oman, breaking down China’s resolute first half defence and withstanding the 
second half attacks of United Arab Emirates is what Australia has achieved so 
far. But their game against South Korea was one whereAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> fell short – unable to take 
advantage of their chances in a game where Ange Postecoglou felt his side 
deserved to win.

The final represents an intriguing clash of styles – attack versus defence. 
Coached by a man fittingly nicknamed “the Stopper”, German Uli Stielike, South 
Korea have not conceded a single goal in the tournament, keeping five clean 
sheets. On the other hand, Australia have been by far the most potent side 
going forward, hitting the back of the net 12 times, a goal a game more, on 
average, than their opponents on Saturday.

Soldiering on: the sentimental star of South Korea's Asian Cup heroics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/30/sentimental-star-south-korea-asian-cup-heroics>
There is a simple explanation for these differences. Whereas Postecoglou is a 
manager that demands a high tempo, fluid, attacking brand of football, 
Stielike’s South Korean side have been conservative in their approach to the 
tournament. With little time to work with the side, just five games in charge 
after taking over before the Asian Cup began, Stielike has developed a system 
which is focused more on being effective rather than being entertaining 
(whereas Postecoglou strives for both). The result is a team which builds up 
patiently and slowly and then when out of possession drops back, remains 
compact and hard to break down.

The ever presents in this pragmatic system are Park Joo-ho and captain Ki 
Sung-yueng. Both form the midfield duo of South Korea’s 4-2-3-1 formation and 
have started every game. When out of possession, both work hard to protect 
their centre backs, sliding from side to side in a defensive unit which forms a 
4-4-2 formation – this occurs when the two wingers drop back beside Park and Ki 
while the ‘No.10’ and striker form a front two without the ball.

Park and Ki also play an important role during possession, which is 
characterised by its slow, conservative ball movement. Both central midfielders 
drop back into deep positions to receive the ball off the back four at the same 
time. This leaves the front four isolated up the pitch and South Korea are slow 
to work the ball forward. Once Park and Ki are in deep positions, the fullbacks 
– Kim Jin-su on the left and either Kim Chang-soo or Cha Du-ri on the right – 
push high up the pitch.

But it is these two main characteristics – South Korea’s conservative build up 
play and their compact defensive shape – which will pose the most opportunities 
and challenges for Australia.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422533420056%2Fcrop_KP_81207_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korea%3A%20Australia%20have%20home%20advantage%20in%20Asian%20Cup%20final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korea%3A%20Australia%20have%20home%20advantage%20in%20Asian%20Cup%20final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422533420056%2Fcrop_KP_81207_640x360.jpeg>
 South Korean players Lee Keun-ho and Kim Chang-soo talk about their upcoming 
Asia Cup final against Australia on Saturday. 
Given their slow ball movement at the back, Australia’s pressing game could 
cause problems for South Korea. While the focus for Postecoglou’s side is their 
possession game, playing out from the back and their constant desire to attack, 
it is pressing which is often an underappreciated component. In their last 
meeting in Brisbane pressing was the major factor, with the Socceroos’ first 
chance of the match coming when Nathan Burns forced a turnover from left centre 
back Kim Young-gwon on the edge of South Korea’s box.

When South Korea are building up from the back, Tim Cahill will pressure the 
centre back in possession – most likely Kwak Tae-hwi partnered with Kim 
Young-gwon – and force them out towards the sideline. The nearest winger will 
then get tight to the fullback and the opposite winger will come inside to box 
the opposition in. In midfield, Australia’s dual ‘No.8s’, the more advanced 
midfielders in the 4-3-3 formation, will move forward to apply pressure on Park 
and Ki.

If the match unfolds like it did during the previous meeting, once the 
Socceroos regain possession, South Korea will drop off and allow them to have 
possession in deep areas – not pressing until the ball passes halfway. From 
their 4-4-2 defensive shape, South Korea made it difficult for the Socceroos to 
consistently pass forward through the lines and create space in the final third.

Asian Cup: the players who could decide the final – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jan/29/asian-cup-the-players-who-could-decide-the-final-in-pictures>
One of the Socceroos’ main patterns was nullified due to the organisation of 
the South Korean defence. This pattern is when a central midfielder drops deep 
to allow the fullback to push forward, with the winger then moving inside, in 
between the lines to pick up the ball in space. If this is done on Australia’s 
left side, South Korea defend it by having their right winger push onto the 
central midfielder who is in a deep position. The right fullback of South Korea 
then pushes forward to close Australia’s advancing left fullback and it is the 
task of Ki and Park in midfield to block passes into the feet of the Australian 
winger. But fast ball movement and a high tempo will make it difficult for the 
opposition to maintain defensive concentration and Australia must take their 
chances when they arise.

Taking their chances, particularly early in the match, is a must for Australia 
if they are to lift the Asian Cup on home soil. The Socceroos will take 
confidence from their ability to break down China, who had also defended deep 
and compact, and also their early goals against UAE in the semi-final, but 
South Korea remains a key challenge for Australia to overcome.
 