
President Donald J Trump. Imagine, if you can, beginning the trading day on 
Wednesday with those words ringing in your ears. It’s a scenario that has a lot 
of investors worried.

 “I think we’d have to brace for tremendous volatility and an initial drop in 
the market,” says Timothy Fisher, a New York-based tax attorney and an investor 
with retirement savings invested in stocks and bonds, and in whose eyes this 
election involves both high political principles and economic arguments.

Like his peers, Fisher has been watching the last-minute shifts in the polls 
anxiously. Trump, he argues, simply wouldn’t be a good president for financial 
markets or for investors – or for the economy as a whole, given that his 
adversarial approach to dealing with trading partners could dampen export 
earnings for US businesses and hurt the country’s GDP.

Asian shares slide again after market's 'fear index' spikes for eighth day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/04/asian-shares-slide-again-after-markets-fear-index-spikes-for-eighth-day>
Fisher and other investment strategists and economists have been burning the 
midnight oil of late, analyzing what a Trump victory would mean for the United 
States. Their response? ThinkBrexit 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/06/26/investing/markets-brexit-reaction-monday/> and 
multiply.

Hundreds of US economists working in academic institutions (including several 
Nobel laureates) havewarned against electing Trump 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2016/11/01/prominent-economists-including-eight-nobel-laureates-do-not-vote-for-donald-trump/>
, precisely because of what they referred to, in a public letter, as his 
propensity to misinform the electorate and promote “willful delusion over 
engagement with reality”.

 “It would be the US version of Brexit,” says Mark Zandi, chief economist of 
Moody’s Analytics. The election of the Republican candidate for president would 
be, like theBritish vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/george-osborne-brexit-won-majority-hard-brexit-did-not>
, an event that “is not expected, but that is very consequential, while also 
being very uncertain in terms of precisely what it means for us all, now and 
into the future”.

 Given that stock markets loathe uncertainty above all else, the initial 
reaction to a Trump victory – as with the Brexit vote – would be astock market 
selloff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/economics-blog/2016/jun/24/the-day-brexit-pushed-the-markets-into-freefall>
. “This kind of wave of emotionally fuelled selling could lead to the market 
losing between 5% to 10% in a couple of weeks or a couple of months,” says Jack 
Ablin, the chief investment officer at BMO Private Bank.

 Following that poll, we saw a kind of Brexit bounce 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-economy-idUKKCN11B0TQ>, when 
investors realized that Britain’s departure from the United Kingdom wouldn’t 
happen overnight and that it would take years to negotiate a new relationship 
with its trading partners in Europe.

 But the United States is a different kind of animal. It’s a much larger 
market, for one thing: about a quarter of global GDP and some half of the value 
of all the stocks traded in the world are US companies, changing hands on US 
stock exchanges. Add to that the fact that a lot of investors havealready 
placed big bets 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/donald-trump-wall-street-effect-markets-230164#ixzz4PATlxIQy>
 that Trump’s Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, will prevail in Tuesday’s 
presidential election, and you’ve got all the makings of a nasty market shock. 
The starting point for a selloff in the stock market could be 10%, and it could 
get worse from there, some suggest – and that shock would almost certainly be a 
global one, rippling outward from the peso and the Canadian dollar to the yen 
and European markets.

 Simon Johnson, an economist at the MIT Sloan School of Management, has argued 
that the kind of “big adverse surprise” that Trump’s election would pose to the 
system, causing the stock market to crash,could prove cataclysmic 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/economic-consequences-of-trump-victory-by-simon-johnson-2016-10>
. Trump, whose promises to boost economic growth immediately to between 4% and 
5% are “pure fantasy” – in Johnson’s opinion – has advocated anti-trade 
policies that would lead to anything but growth, the economist argues. And a 
Trump victory? Well, that might just be enough to cause a worldwide recession, 
Johnson says.

 Nonetheless, some investors are preparing for the heightened risk of a Trump 
presidency, stocking up on cash, gold and such hedges against the US market as
German bonds 
<http://fortune.com/2016/11/02/donald-trump-investors-safe-havens-german-bonds/>
 in their portfolios. They have done so as the political situation has become 
more fraught and Trump has succeededin narrowing the polling gap 
<http://www.newsweek.com/trump-narrows-polling-gap-rigged-message-512682> 
between Clinton and himself and making a Trump presidency more likely.

 Should Trump actually triumph, the immediate market shock isn’t the only 
factor that these investors will have to consider, however.

 “In the near term, I think a Trump administration would affect business 
investment and hiring decisions,” says Zandi, a former adviser to Republican 
presidential candidate John McCain. “No one is sure what kind of specific 
policy decisions president Trump would make and businesses would pause until 
they got more clarity. That would slow economic growth.”

Longer term, Zandi adds, the outlook depends on what choices a president Trump 
would make. What form would his anti-immigration stance take? If Trump chooses 
to follow through on all his policies – deporting undocumented immigrants, 
building a wall along the Mexican border – it could shrink the size of the US 
economy or trigger a trade war.

“This is what markets will worry about most,” says Stuart Hoffman, chief 
economist of PNC Financial Services. “If we were to impose tariffs or quotas on 
imported goods, our trading partners would likely retaliate, and our exports to 
those countries, like China and Mexico, would suffer.” There would be no 
winners; global growth would slow.

 Trump has promised that he would cut taxes if elected, which sounds appealing 
to voters. That has the potential to give the consumer sector at least a brief 
jolt, to the extent that those tax cuts are significant enough to register for 
individual taxpayers, and if those people choose to spend their windfall.

 But Hoffman notes that Trump’s tax plan is set up to benefit wealthy 
Americans most 
<http://www.thefiscaltimes.com/2016/09/26/Trump-s-Tax-Plan-Would-Benefit-Wealthy-Most-Study-Finds>
. Many economists believe that changes in tax policy have less effect on 
spending by affluent households. There’s also the pesky question of how Trump 
would pay for those tax cuts. “He is not at all clear how he would do that,” 
says Hoffman. “Do you just run higher deficits? That would be a longer-term 
negative.”

Why a surging stock market isn't making ordinary investors happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/us-money-blog/2016/aug/21/stock-market-records-ordinary-investors>
 Still, investors who confront a Trump-induced market selloff on Wednesday 
morning shouldn’t imagine that there are no economic upsides to his election. 
Trump has promised to take a light approach to regulating businesses – that 
could be good for corporate profits, and for stock prices, when the shock is 
over. “Many of his ideas are pro-market policies,” Ablin says.

 And if you shudder at the idea of a President Trump, remember that some of 
what he is able to accomplish will be governed by the makeup of Congress. He 
can’t abrogate existing trade treaties, like the Nafta trade pact between the 
US, Canada and Mexico, single-handedly; he could find working with Congress to 
pass some of the more protectionist measures that investors find so terrifying 
to be far harder than he expects.

The idea of President Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is one that investors 
have had plenty of time to accustom themselves to, and the Democratic 
candidate’s policies are clearly articulated and by now offer few surprises to 
anyone who has been paying attention. Trump? He’d bring nothing but surprises 
with him, starting with the astonishment of his victory. So, buckle your 
seatbelts – just in case.
 