
It might be hard to believe, but in just three weeks we’ll be back in the 
thick of an all-new awards season mere months afterthe #OscarsSoWhite 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience>
 ignited a fire in Hollywood that’s still smouldering.

First up is the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/venice-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
, where a number of potential awards contenders are poised to make their 
debuts, including a Jackie Kennedy biopic starring Natalie Portman and a 
romance featuring real-life couple Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander.

The Telluride <https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluridefilmfestival> and 
Toronto festivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/toronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup>
 follow swiftly afterwards. While Telluride is famous for not revealing its 
lineup until the day before the event kicks off, Torontohas already announced 
its lineup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/toronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup>
 - and among them are promising picks, like Oliver Stone’s 
sure-to-be-controversial Edward Snowden thriller, and Antoine Fuqua’s all-star 
Magnificent Seven remake.

Venice film festival 2016: full line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/venice-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
Following that, Selma director Ava DuVernay is bound to shake up the 
documentary race with her explosive-sounding first non-fiction film,The 13th, 
about racial inequality in America, that launches the New York film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
, where Oscar winners such as The Social Network and Life of Pi were first 
screened. All in all, there’s plenty of great stuff to watch over the next few 
months.

The front-runners

Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa768081789b84035d205378860cda7671d717355%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa768081789b84035d205378860cda7671d717355%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Joe Alwyn as Billy Lynn in Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk. Photograph: Mary 
Cybulski/Sony 
Among film-makers, Ang Lee is the Academy’s gold standard. The two-time Oscar 
winner (for Brokeback Mountain and Life of Pi) is back this fall with this 
adaptation ofBen Fountain’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/06/billy-lynn-ben-fountain-review>. 
It’s being billed as Lee’s most innovative project yet, thanks to his 
unprecedented decision to shoot the film at 120 frames per second, up from the 
normal 24. Early footage previewed in Las Vegas drewrave reviews 
<https://www.inverse.com/article/15570-billy-lynn-s-long-halftime-walk-trailer-shows-off-its-insane-120-fps-frame-rate>
 for Lee’s bold approach.

As for the subject matter, the book was called the Catch-22 of the Iraq war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/06/billy-lynn-ben-fountain-review>. 
Told in flashbacks, it recounts a 19-year-old army private’s experience of the 
war as he and his squad embark on a victory tour. Newcomer Joe Alwyn heads the 
cast, which includes Kristen Stewart, Vin Diesel and Steve Martin.

The Oscar race for best documentary is on – here are the early contenders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/oscars-2017-best-feature-length-documentary-early-contenders>
Allied

With its release date set for an an awards-friendly November, Paramount is 
placing its bets on the latest from Robert Zemeckis to deliver. That didn’t 
work last year for his tightrope-walking dramaThe Walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/the-walk-review-imax-twin-towers-tightrope>
, which failed to win over critics and voters, despite nabbing the prestigious 
opening night slot of the New York film festival. This film, however, seems 
like a surer bet by being a second world war romantic thriller starring two 
Academy favorites, Marion Cotillard and Brad Pitt. Zemeckis hasn’t tackled a 
war scenario since 1994’s Forrest Gump, which turned out pretty well for the 
film-maker.

Jackie
 Jackie oooh ... Natalie Portman as Jackie Kennedy. Photograph: PR Company 
Handout 
Natalie Portman is poised for a major awards season comeback, six years after 
winning her first Oscar forBlack Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/20/black-swan-review>, with Jackie, 
which sees her play Jackie Kennedy. Adding to the must-see factor is its 
director, Parblo Larraín, the acclaimed Chiean film-maker behind 2013’s 
Oscar-nominatedNo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/no-film-review>
, who’s making his English-language debut with the drama. Footage screened to 
buyers at this year’s Cannes film festival isrumored 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/05/natalie-portmans-kennedy-biopic-jackie-swarmed-by-cannes-buyers-exclusive-290738/>
 to have wowed all those who saw it.

La La Land

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVDMf9m7FXd4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVDMf9m7FXd4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVDMf9m7FXd4&media=>
Damien Chazelle rode his last film, Whiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review>, from the 
Sundance film festival all the way to Oscar glory. His anticipated third film 
is poised to rocket him back into awards season, by attempting to resurrect the 
big screen musical with some help from Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone. The 
romance, about a jazz pianist (Gosling) who woos an aspiring actor (Stone) in 
sun-kissed Los Angeles, boasts a swoon-inducing first trailer that hints at 
something truly special. Adding to the buzz is its opening night slot at the 
Venice film festival, which in previous years went to a number of Oscar-winners 
includingBirdman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/25/birdman-unexpected-virtue-of-ignorance-film-review>
 andGravity <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>.


Nocturnal Animals

The last (and first) time fashion designer Tom Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> took a detour into film-making, 
he surprised his naysayers to deliverA Single Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/11/a-single-man-review>, an 
emotionally rich and formally ravishing drama that earned an Oscar nomination 
for its lead actor, Colin Firth. He’s now back, seven years later, with his 
anticipated second offering, Nocturnal Animals, based onAustin Wright’s 
acclaimed novel Tony and Susan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright>, 
about an art gallery owner haunted by her ex-husband’s novel. The cast is among 
the best of the year: led by Jake Gyllenhaal, it also stars Amy Adams, Michael 
Shannon, Isla Fisher, Laura Linney and Armie Hammer.

The Founder
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAX2uz2XYkbo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAX2uz2XYkbo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAX2uz2XYkbo&media=>
Michael Keaton continues his quest for that elusive Oscar in this biopic of 
McDonald’s co-founder Ray Kroc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/mar/30/ray-kroc-the-wily-businessman-who-made-mcdonalds>
. John Lee Hancock, who nabbed a surprise best picture nomination for The Blind 
Side in 2009, directs.


A United Kingdom

In the wake of #OscarsSoWhite, the latest drama from Belle film-maker Amma 
Asante seems ideally poised to stake a mark this season. The romance starsDavid 
Oyelowo as Seretse Khama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/27/david-oyelowo-rosamund-pike-african-king-marriage-british-woman-seretse-khama-ruth-williams>
, who in 1925 became king of Bechuanaland (then a British protectorate, now the 
republic of Botswana) aged four, and Rosamund Pike asRuth Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/29/guardianobituaries>, the Londoner 
who married him despite considerable controversy at the highest political 
levels, both in apartheid South Africa and in the UK.

Arrival

The Academy isn’t known for typically rewarding films about aliens – but if 
anyone can reverse that trend, it’sDenis Villeneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/denis-villeneuve-sicario-cannes-2015>
, who’s overdue for a gong following Prisoners and Sicario. Helping his chances 
are Amy Adams and Jeremy Renner, who both star in this present-based thriller 
about a linguist expert (Adams) recruited by the military to determine whether 
aliens that have recently landed on Earth come in peace or are a threat. The 
film is said to be more cerebral than your average extraterrestrial blockbuster.

American Pastoral
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6f6406660d1a51f6bbe18d45a6a149f5174decf%2F0_0_960_540%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6f6406660d1a51f6bbe18d45a6a149f5174decf%2F0_0_960_540%2F960.jpg>
 Dakota Fanning in American Pastoral. Photograph: PR 
Ewan McGregor makes a bold leap into film-making with this adaptation of 
Philip Roth’s universally acclaimed 1997 novel 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/97/04/20/reviews/970420.20woodlt.html> about the 
disintegrating life of an apparently successful family man. Based on early 
buzz, he appears to have succeeded at Roth’s dense source material – and the
trailer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SAAqiO_Z9Vs> harks back the suburban 
dread that characterized American Beauty, a best picture winner.

20th Century Women
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff86d9d32c389c9e3ed55d5e16caf38962c134bf3%2F0_994_4016_2406%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff86d9d32c389c9e3ed55d5e16caf38962c134bf3%2F0_994_4016_2406%2F4016.jpg>
 20th Century Women. Photograph: The cast of 20th Century Women/A24 
Annette Bening looks to once again be in the running for her lead turn in the 
new film fromBeginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/21/beginners-review> writer/director 
Mike Mills. The four-time nominee – who has yet to win – leads a cast including 
Greta Gerwig and Elle Fanning. Bening plays a single mother raising her teenage 
son in a sprawling bohemian house during the 70s. Mills has a way with actors: 
Beginners netted a supporting actor Oscar for Christopher Plummer in 2010.

And the Oscar might go to: the sure bets and underdogs critics have already 
seen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/oscars-contenders-festivals-birth-of-a-nation-florence-foster-jenkins>
Silence

While the latest film from Martin Scorsese is unlikely to reach the commercial 
heights attained byThe Wolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/wolf-of-wall-street-review>, the 
biggest hit of his career, it’s bound to win over the Academy. Scorsese’s epic 
adaptation of Shusaku Endo’s novel about two Jesuit Portuguese Catholic priests 
(Andrew Garfield and Adam Driver) facing persecution on a trip to Japan to find 
a priest (Liam Neeson) who has lost his faith, ranks as the most challenging 
project of the film-maker’s storied career. He’s been trying to complete his 
passion project for a rumored 23 years – and its road to the screen has been 
shadowed by tragedy: aconstruction worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/30/construction-worker-killed-martin-scorsese-film-set-silence-tapei-taiwan>
 was killed after scaffolding collapsed on set.

The 13th


Ava DuVernay shot to the top of the documentary race as soon as the New York 
film festivalrevealed her first documentary, The 13th, as its opening night film
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
, marking the first time a non-fiction film has been chosen to kick off the 
prestigious event. Former openers include The Social Network and Gone Girl. Her 
timely film tackles racial inequality in the US – making it sure to draw 
attention.

The Mercy

After seeing his Stephen Hawking biopic The Theory of Everything go on to 
Oscar glory, James Marsh is back in familiar territory with this true tale 
about Donald Crowhurt, a businessman whose attempt to sail around the world by 
himself ended in tragedy. To help Marsh’s chances at landing back in the race, 
he’s cast Oscar winners Colin Firth and Rachel Weisz.

The possible bets

Fences

Few films this year boast more prestige than Denzel Washington’s third outing 
behind the camera. Adapted fromAugust Wilson’s Pulitzer-winning play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/27/fences-duchess-lenny-henry-review>
, Fences reunites Washington and Viola Davis together, after the pair won Tony 
awards for their performances in the Broadway production of the drama. While 
the source material is undoubtedly strong, it remains to be seen if Washington, 
whose last directorial efforts (The Great Debaters and Antwone Fisher) were 
just decent, can deliver a film worthy of the play.

Snowden

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619a99a8416bbfefefcec70a567eec651b4446bf%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619a99a8416bbfefefcec70a567eec651b4446bf%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Oliver Stone, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Shailene Woodley and Zachary Quinto 
promote Snowden at Comic-Con. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
Laura Poitras won the best documentary Oscar this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/edward-snowden-documentary-citizenfour-wins-oscar>
 forCitizenfour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/citizenfour>, her profile of 
Edward Snowden, the former CIA employee who leaked classified documents from 
the National Security Agency to newspapers including this one. Now, she’s one 
of the real-life figures played by actors in Snowden, Oliver Stone’s drama 
based on the booksThe Snowden Files by Luke Harding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/13/snowden-files-luke-harding-review>
 and Time of the Octopus by Anatoly Kucherena. Joseph Gordon-Levitt stars, with 
Shailene Woodley as his girlfriend, and Zachary Quinto and Tom Wilkinson as 
Guardian journalists Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill. Stone’s past few 
movies were tepidly received; the source material and subject matter should 
hopefully up his game here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fedward-snowden-nsa-trailer-oliver-stone-thriller-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fedward-snowden-nsa-trailer-oliver-stone-thriller-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone%E2%80%99s%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fedward-snowden-nsa-trailer-oliver-stone-thriller-video&media=>
Snowden: the trailer for Oliver Stone’s thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/28/edward-snowden-nsa-trailer-oliver-stone-thriller-video>
The Light Between Oceans
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffedbb49c6c3336ab08aece1b67a2e6a8622f9a95%2F0_114_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffedbb49c6c3336ab08aece1b67a2e6a8622f9a95%2F0_114_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Michael Fassbender stars as Tom Sherbourne and Alicia Vikander as his wife 
Isabel in The Light Between Oceans. Photograph: Davi Russo/PR Company Handout 
The buzz around the first film featuring real-life couple Alicia Vikander and 
Michael Fassbender has dampened somewhat, since it was first rumored that The 
Light Between Oceans would factor into last year’s awards race. Despite the 
holdup, Derek Cianfrance’s follow-up toThe Place Beyond the Pines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/11/place-beyond-the-pines-review> 
looks solid, with the pair in strong form as a couple torn apart after rescuing 
a baby and adopting the child as their own.

Lion


Starring Oscar heavyweights Nicole Kidman and Rooney Mara, Lion has the 
makings of a potential awards contender – bolstered by its inspirational and 
fact-based story about a young man adopted as a child who used Good Maps to 
track down the family he left in India.Dev Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/21/dev-patel-didn-t-know-what-getting-into-slumdog-marigold-hotel>
 heads the cast, in his highest-profile role since Slumdog Millionaire. The 
question mark is its director, Garth Davis, who’s making his debut with the 
uplifting drama.

Deepwater Horizon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4771420500a94cc04c9c84b57493ecd2e93e285%2F56_0_888_533%2F888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4771420500a94cc04c9c84b57493ecd2e93e285%2F56_0_888_533%2F888.jpg>
 A still from Peter Berg’s film about the Deepwater Horizon disaster. 
Photograph: PR 
Peter Berg reunites with his Lone Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/30/lone-survivor-review> star Mark 
Wahlberg for this disaster film, based around the BP oil spill, considered of 
the largest accidental marine oil spills to date – and the worst man-made 
disaster in human history. Lone Survivor, while a hit with audiences, was 
ravaged by some critics who found it bone-crunching violence near-pornographic. 
Probably for the same reason, it failed to resonate with voters. Perhaps this 
eco-conscious thriller could do the trick?

Hacksaw Ridge
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba72b1e31eb13af0ec5215dff687ab543c175058%2F41_0_628_377%2F628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba72b1e31eb13af0ec5215dff687ab543c175058%2F41_0_628_377%2F628.jpg>
 Hacksaw Ridge. Photograph: Photo Credit: Mark Rogers/PR Company Handout 
This war drama – about Desmond T Doss, a real-life medic who served in the 
battle of Okinawa despite refusing to carry a weapon because of his Seventh-day 
Adventist beliefs, becoming the first conscientious objector to receive the 
medal of honor – screams Oscar. Potentially spoiling its chances at glory is 
the involvement of director Mel Gibson, who’s still one of Hollywood’s most 
controversial figures.

The underdogs

The Girl on the Train
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy5yk-HGqKmM&media=>
Like the novel by Paula Hawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/21/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-new-gone-girl-female-thriller-authors-gillian-flynn>
 on which it’s based, The Girl on the Train has been drawing comparisons to 
Gone Girl for its twisty, sex-laced plot, and shady heroine, portrayed by Emily 
Blunt. Director Tate Taylor (The Help), however, is no David Fincher. It’s 
unlikely this thriller can reach the heights set by Fincher’s scorcher, which 
made a star out of Rosamund Pike.

The Lost City of Z

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdddeca16f7416f5c4eb0e50ad66f6d36e4110c4f%2F543_0_8145_4887%2F8145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20Oscar%20might%20go%20to%3A%2025%20sure%20bets%20and%20underdog%20films%20premiering%20this%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Foscars-2017-predictions-movie-reviews-film-festival-favorites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdddeca16f7416f5c4eb0e50ad66f6d36e4110c4f%2F543_0_8145_4887%2F8145.jpg>
 Charlie Hunnam in The Lost City of Z. Photograph: The Lost City of Z/Aidan 
Monaghan 
Writer/director James Gray is a favorite among critics 
<http://filmmakermagazine.com/82732-james-gray-blasts-film-critic-peter-bradshaw-over-immigrant-review-and-bradshaw-responds/#.V6pIsZOU2i4>
, but so far his films have failed to convince Academy members of his talent 
behind the lens. The Lost City of Z, which recently nabbed the closing night 
slot at the New York film festival, appears to be his biggest and most 
mainstream effort to date, by telling a true story about British military man 
(Charlie Hunnam) who embarks on a decades-long search for a lost city deep in 
the Amazon during the 1920s. But knowing Gray, his epic is probably anything 
but conventional.

Rules Don’t Apply


Warren Beatty hasn’t directed a film since 1998’s political comedy Bulworth – 
and judging by the firsttrailer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1JrMOiG5hc> 
for Rules Don’t Apply, a period comedy set in Hollywood, he seems to have 
gotten a bit rusty. Whether the film, about a small town aspiring starlet (Lily 
Collins) who arrives in Hollywood under contract to star in a film for an 
eccentric billionaire (Beatty), is as messy as its scattershot preview is still 
up for debate. Beatty’s involvement, plus that of that new Han Solo, Alden 
Ehrenreich, lends hope that it’s better than it seems.

Queen of Katwe
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Disney's%20Queen%20of%20Katwe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%20in%20the%20trailer%20for%20Disney%27s%20Queen%20of%20Katwe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Flupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess&media=>
Lupita Nyong’o in the trailer for Disney’s Queen of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/may/11/lupita-nyongo-the-trailer-disney-queen-of-katwe-chess>
Disney’s Uganda-set fact-based drama about a young girl who trains to become a 
world chess champion seems more Million Dollar Arm than Oscar player, but we’d 
be overjoyed for director Mira Nair (Monsoon Wedding) to prove us wrong.Lupita 
Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/12/lupita-nyongo-interview-star-wars>
 stars as the prodigy’s mother in a rare live action role for the actor (we 
were only allowed to hear her in Star Wars: The Force Awakens and The Jungle 
Book).

The Magnificent Seven


Antoine Fuqua’s remake is by no mean standard awards fodder – its trailer 
pitches it as a robustly commercial Hollywood shoot ’em up, starring everyone’s 
favorite heartthrob Chris Pratt. But the film’s upcoming festival appearances 
are telling: on top of being selected to open the Toronto international film 
festival, it’s also closing Venice. Perhaps there’s more to it than meets the 
eye.

Sully

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&media=>
Clint Eastwood’s Sully: Miracle on the Hudson – exclusive trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/30/clint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Clint Eastwood enjoyed great awards success with his last flag-waving drama, 
American Sniper, buthis recent comments defending Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/03/clint-eastwood-donald-trump-racism-esquire-interview>
 could result in his follow-up from even entering the arena. Shame, because it 
sounds right up the Academy’s alley: Tom Hanks plays Chelsey Sullenberger, the 
airplane captain responsible for the “Miracle on the Hudson”, who endured an 
ensuing investigation that threatened to destroy his reputation.
 