
On the unassuming second-floor office of a tech startup in Clerkenwell, 
London, Simon Fox is teaching me how to breathe. “You’re not trying to shove 
your stomach out with muscular force,” advises the design director of BfB Labs. 
“Instead, what you’re trying to do is feel your lungs expanding into your body. 
You don’t want to breathe hard, but you do want to be breathing into the bottom 
of your lungs.”

Clipped to my earlobe is a tiny heart-rate monitor, linked to a Bluetooth 
device that is attached to my T-shirt. I’m here to try out what Fox and his 
colleagues have dubbed emotionally responsive gaming (ERG): computer games 
designed to increase players’ resilience to mental health problems by using 
biofeedback to monitor and reward their ability to remain calm under pressure.

Can apps improve your mental wellbeing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/12/can-apps-improve-your-mental-wellbeing>
Between rounds in Champions of the Shengha, the company’s first offering, 
gamers must spend about a minute practising the kind of diaphragmatic breathing 
that is widely recommended as a relaxation technique; the more successfully 
they control their breathing, the more gems they win to spend on weapons and 
spells to defeat their opponents. In fact, it’s not the breathing itself that 
is tracked, but the player’s heart-rate variability (HRV), which increases in 
response to diaphragmatic breathing and lower levels of stress. A higher 
variation shows a body with a healthy ability to relax and respond to events.

That sounds pretty easy, I think, especially as I’m not really bothered how I 
fare in the fantasy-themed battling game (“Like Top Trumps but with way more 
interesting stuff going on,” is Fox’s explanation to a non-gamer). On my first 
attempt, I get four gems out of a possible 10; not bad for a first try, says 
Fox, who cites his own experiences of chronic anxiety as a driving force in his 
work. I’m determined to do better next time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7e27cb3eb18eb44ab8154788fe62ec0a73df5bf%2F0_5_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20breathe%3A%20the%20computer%20games%20helping%20kids%20relax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20breathe%3A%20the%20computer%20games%20helping%20kids%20relax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7e27cb3eb18eb44ab8154788fe62ec0a73df5bf%2F0_5_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The more successfully players control their breathing, the more gems they win 
to spend on weapons and spells to defeat their opponents. Photograph: Mark 
Waugh Manchester Press Phot 
Champions of the Shengha began life more than two years ago, when Shift, a 
charity that works on behaviour change and social problems, was looking for a 
way to boost young people’s wellbeing in response to growing evidence of mental 
health issues among school-age children. It hit upon a computer game as a way 
of making the prospect of being trained in “emotional regulation” an attractive 
one, and was awarded £200,000 funding by Google’s Impact Challenge scheme.

Shift later incubated BfB Labs, which took on the development of the game. 
Keeping it genuinely enjoyable and credible as a game in its own right has 
always been key; ERG is being marketed to gamers not so much on the basis of 
its health benefits, but as an exciting new challenge.

“Half of all cases of mental health disorder start by the age of 14, and 
three-quarters by 24,” says Naomi Stoll, the project’s lead researcher. 
“Meditation, mindfulness and yoga are not the kinds of things that teenage 
kids, especially teenagers from disadvantaged backgrounds, are going to think 
are relevant to them and practise. Even 20 minutes of breathing every day is 
just not fun in any way.”

In a randomised control trial at the Billericay school in Essex earlier this 
year, more than four-fifths of the 90 pupils who played the game could reliably 
double their HRV through focused breathing. Three-quarters reported getting 
better at staying calm within the game, and a quarter said they had started 
using the techniques in everyday life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5f2c10822bac29dfc5b94701f2e4aea6afdc7de%2F1765_0_1983_3325%2F1983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20breathe%3A%20the%20computer%20games%20helping%20kids%20relax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20breathe%3A%20the%20computer%20games%20helping%20kids%20relax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fbreathtaking-winners-the-computer-games-helping-kids-relax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5f2c10822bac29dfc5b94701f2e4aea6afdc7de%2F1765_0_1983_3325%2F1983.jpg>
 Three-quarters of players reported getting better at staying calm within the 
game, and a quarter said they had started using the techniques in everyday 
life. Photograph: Mark Waugh Manchester Press Phot 
The school had already seen a good take-up of mindfulness sessions, says 
deputy head Charlotte Berry, but it has mainly been girls, whereas Champions of 
the Shengha, which is played on a phone or tablet, has been embraced by both 
boys and girls.

“They very quickly started talking about how they were using the breathing in 
other aspects of their lives,” she says – including before important football 
matches, on occasions when they feared they would lose their tempers, and to 
deal with stress. Twelve-year-old Ryan Gibson used diaphragmatic breathing 
before his end-of-year exams and says it has also been handy at home: “I’ve got 
a younger sister who always annoys me. I use it to stop myself from reacting 
and saying something that would get me in trouble.”

Although there are a handful of other developers producing computer games that 
feed players’ emotions back into play, it’s a tool in its infancy. But gaming 
seems to have a wider role in promoting good mental health, says Dr Paul 
Cairns, a reader in human computer interaction at the University of York. “We 
feel better when we have a feeling of competence and autonomy,” he says. And 
games, unlike real life, present well-defined problems that are designed for 
people to succeed at: “They offer us the rewards we need.” Crucially, they also 
provide an escape from isolation, especially when you can play against people 
around the world online.

BfB Labs is planning future games to appeal to different audiences: Fox 
describes one as a “noir-y detective thing” where you have to keep your cool 
through a series of interrogations. Champions of the Shengha has just gone on 
sale onthe crowdfunding site Indiegogo 
<https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/champions-of-the-shengha-play-with-your-emotions>
, where a beta version, including the biofeedback sensor, costs about £27, and 
there are also options to donate the kit to schools.

Back in Clerkenwell, Fox instructs me to place my hands on my chest and 
stomach to see which bits are moving as I breathe. I may not be engaged with 
the game itself, but it appears my naturally competitive nature is doing a fine 
job of ramping up the pressure: I overbreathe noisily. Only on my seventh try 
do I finally manage a five.

The next week, with multiple deadlines looming, I find myself absent-mindedly 
moving my hand to my stomach and adjusting my breathing. Something, it seems, 
has stuck.
 