
Andrew Garfield, who plays the lead in The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2>, has complained of 
studio interference in the film.

Talking to The Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/09/10/andrew-garfield-on-the-evils-of-capitalism-the-hacking-scandal-and-criticism-of-spider-man-2.html>
, he said that he “genuinely loved” the original script, but “certain people at 
the studio [Sony Pictures] had problems with certain parts of it”. He said:

I think what happened was, through the pre-production, production, and 
post-production, when you have something that works as a whole, and then you 
start removing portions of it – because there was even more of it than was in 
the final cut, and everything was related. Once you start removing things and 
saying, ‘No, that doesn’t work,’ then the thread is broken, and it’s hard to go 
with the flow of the story.

He also lamented that “deep scenes” exploring his character Peter Parker were 
cut.

The film was criticised for being crammed with villains and plot strands, and 
has only a 53% rating on reviews aggregator Rotten Tomatoes (though the Guardian
reviewed it favourably 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/09/amazing-spiderman-2-review>, 
calling it “savvy, punchy and dashing”). The film somewhat underperformed at 
the US box office, but made a respectable $708m worldwide.

Garfield said that he was “proud of a lot of it and had a good time, and was a 
bit taken aback by the response... Is it that this is the fifth Spider-Man 
movie in however many years, and there’s a bit of fatigue? Is it that there was 
too much in there? Is it that it didn’t link? If it linked seamlessly, would 
that be too much? Were there tonal issues? What is it? I think all that is 
valuable... I love constructive criticism.”

Elsewhere in the interview, Garfield addresses the recent leak of private 
photos of his peers, includingJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> and others. “It’s 
disgusting,” he said. “It’s this violent, abusive violation of womanhood – of 
divine womanhood. It’s violent, and it’s misogynistic, and it’s revolting, and 
it’s another example of what this [online] distance has enabled us to do – it’s 
enabled us to be disassociated from each other.”
 