
Oscar-winning British director Andrea Arnold has said that she finds her 
acclaimed 2011 adaptation ofWuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wuthering-heights> a difficult film to enjoy.

The film-maker, who won the Academy award for best live-action short in 2005 
for Wasp, spoke about Wuthering Heights during a discussion at this year’s
Tribeca film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tribeca-film-festival>.

Cannes 2016: big names and some great Brits swell an exciting lineup | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/14/cannes-2016-lineup-peter-bradshaw-verdict>
“People keep saying one day I will come to like it,” she said. “It was a 
difficult experience making it, for various reasons. I find it hard to look at 
it.”

Arnold, who has also directed acclaimed dramas Red Road and Fish Tank, claims 
that her “pure and beautiful” vision of the novel was not what ultimately made 
it to the screen. She described “a misty moor on a day when the earth and sky 
are merging, and there’s a big animal climbing inside of the moor. But you went 
in and saw that it was a man, carrying rabbits on his back.”

But, she said, “When we got to film it, we had half an hour to get it before 
the day was over. It was bright sunshine and blue sky, and we had about three 
rabbits.”

Arnold was unhappy but still used the shot. “What can you do at that point?” 
she said. “You can’t because you’re working with a whole team of people and 
there’s money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fandrea-arnold-wuthering-heights-american-honey-tribeca-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b154c297dfd0bd81a369e382ee05a83047aecf2%2F2231_1159_3302_1981%2F3302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20I%20find%20my%20adaptation%20of%20Wuthering%20Heights%20'hard%20to%20look%20at'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fandrea-arnold-wuthering-heights-american-honey-tribeca-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrea%20Arnold%3A%20I%20find%20my%20adaptation%20of%20Wuthering%20Heights%20%27hard%20to%20look%20at%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fandrea-arnold-wuthering-heights-american-honey-tribeca-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b154c297dfd0bd81a369e382ee05a83047aecf2%2F2231_1159_3302_1981%2F3302.jpg>
 Andrea Arnold at the Cannes film festival in 2012. Photograph: Loic 
Venance/AFP/Getty Images 
She also added that it was a tough period for her off-screen as well. “It was 
a very difficult time for me, that film,” she said. “I was in a dark place. 
When I think about how it was, it’s associated with some personal stuff.”

Her take on Wuthering Heights was met with mostly positive reviews on release, 
with the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw calling it“exhilarating” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/10/wuthering-heights-film-review>.

Wuthering Heights – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/10/wuthering-heights-film-review> 
The director also spoke about her new film American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-honey>, her first to be shot in the 
US. The drama, which stars Shia LaBeouf as part of a group of travelling 
magazine salespeople, will premiere in competition at this year’s Cannes film 
festival.

“I really do think I pushed it,” she said. “It was very tough, there were 
scenes when I had loads of non-actors and we were running out of time, and I 
thought, ‘I really don’t know how I’m going to get this done.’”

She was also surprised at what she discovered while filming in the US. “Some 
of the poverty in some of the places really shocked me,” she said. “It seemed 
more intense than Britain. There was a town I went through in the south – I did 
a lot of driving in the south, I loved the south – and I was quite upset by 
what I saw: closed factories and shops, huge poverty. I guess I didn’t know 
that, to the degree that I saw it. And drugs ... loads of drugs.”
 