
Ukraine’s hopes of finally ending their play-off hoodoo and qualifying for 
Euro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> were given a huge 
boost with a 2-0 first-leg victory over Slovenia in Lviv.

Denmark’s Nicolai Jorgensen restricts Sweden to narrow play-off edge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
The Ukrainians have failed in play-offs on five occasions, with Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia> among the countries who have 
dashed their dream in two-legged contests in a tie to qualify for Euro 2000. 
However, Mykhaylo Fomenko’s men are well placed to be in France next summer 
after Andriy Yarmolenko and Yevhen Seleznyov scored in either half.

The cushion they will take to Slovenia on Tuesday could have been even 
greater, though, yet Denys Garmash and Seleznyov were unable to add a third 
goal against the lacklustre visitors.

Yarmolenko was his nation’s top scorer in qualifying and it was the Dynamo 
Kyiv winger who struck 22 minutes in. Yevhen Konoplyanka’s corner was only 
half-cleared and the Sevilla midfielder crossed the ball back in and Samir 
Handanovic’s punch fell to Yarmolenko at the back post. Rene Krhin and Jasmin 
Kurtic believed the 26-year‑old was going to pull the trigger with his left 
foot, but he feigned a shot and moved the ball on to his right to rifle past 
Handanovic and into the far corner.

Up until that point the visitors had showed little attacking threat, and a 
half-volley from Josip Ilicic that sailed over the top in the 28th minute was 
their first attempt on goal.

They had a great chance to pull level before the half-hour mark, though, when 
Valter Birsa fed an unmarked Milivoje Novakovic inside the area but his first 
touch was appalling and the ball span through to goalkeeper Andriy Pyatov.

Handanovic made a one-handed save from Serhiy Rybalka’s long-range try and 
pushed Garmash’s header from another Konoplyanka header over the top asUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> ended the first period on top.

Euro 2016 organisers facing up to growing terrorism risk to finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/euro-2016-finals-terrorism-risk>
The home side doubled their lead nine minutes after the break. Again 
Yarmolenko was involved, finding an overlapping Artem Fedetskiy with a pass 
inside the full-back, and his ball across the six-yard box found Seleznyov 
sliding in to score from virtually on the line.

The Dnipro forward immediately checked for an offside flag, which was not 
forthcoming, and he appeared to be level with the last man when Fedetskiy’s 
centre was delivered.

Having put the game to bed, Ukraine looked to sew up the tie too. Garmash’s 
header from close range was directed straight at Handanovic and Seleznyov’s 
placed attempt came back off a post, with Bojan Jokic clearing the danger as 
Yarmolenko lurked for the rebound.

Konoplyanka was then allowed to drive into the box but he got his shot all 
wrong and although Ukraine won an eighth successive international in Lviv, 
Slovenia will feel fortunate to escape with just a two-goal deficit ahead of 
the return leg. 
 