
It's what every Punchdrunk <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/punchdrunk> 
theatre fan craves: a one-on-one encounter with a cast member in one of its 
interactive, site-specific performances.

But visitors to the company's Temple Studios venue in London on Tuesday night 
got more than they paid for when they came face to face with the Hollywood actor
Andrew Garfield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield>, making an 
unannounced cameo.

Pictures of the Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137709/social-network> star emerged on 
Twitter and Instagram on Wednesday, showing Garfieldin full costume 
<http://instagram.com/p/mkjUG8oE1b/> for Punchdrunk's current show, The Drowned 
Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/jul/19/punchrunk-hype-drowned-man-lyn-gardner>
,chewing seductively on a stick of straw 
<https://twitter.com/Temple_Studios/status/453887491708178432>.

Subtitled A Hollywood Fable, The Drowned Man relocates the destructive love 
stories of Georg Büchner's Woyzeck to a seedy 1960s film underworld of trailer 
trash and treasure, recreated across four floors of a former sorting office 
behind Paddington station. Having opened in 2013, the show isnow booking until 
at least June <http://templestudioslondon.com/history.html>, emulating the 
success of Punchdrunk's long-running US productionSleep No More 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/feb/06/punchdrunk-sleep-no-more-commercial>
, which has occupied a block of Manhattan warehouses since 2011.

Garfield, 30, is in London to promote his new film, The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/09/amazing-spiderman-2-review>, in 
which he co-stars opposite his girlfriendEmma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone>.

Born in Los Angeles but raised in Surrey, the British-American actor starting 
acting as a teenager, later playing in Kes and Romeo and Juliet at the Royal 
Exchange theatre in Manchester. In 2006, he was namedoutstanding newcomer at 
the Evening Standard theatre awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/07/andrew-garfield-british-film-talent>
, while his performance as Biff Loman in a March 2012 Broadway revival of Death 
of a Salesmanearned him a Tony award nomination 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2012/jun/10/entertainment/la-et-cm-tony-awards-andrew-garfield-20120607>
. Fans will be hoping his Punchdrunk outing may have given him a renewed taste 
for the stage – and not just hay bales.
 