
The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> has “no 
mandate” for its 2016 election platform and would need to rewrite the budget if 
it governs in a hung parliament, a key lower house independent has said.

MP for Denison, Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, made the comments 
on Radio National on Monday, demonstrating the difficulty the Coalition would 
have delivering on election promises if it governs in a hung parliament.

Wilkie and fellow independent Cathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan> reiterated they 
would not make a deal with either major party, but rather consider each piece 
of parliamentary business on its merits.

Australian election 2016: wait for results leaves independents on centre stage 
– politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/04/australian-election-2016-labor-coalition-independents-politics-live>
The Coalition and Labor have both begun courting the independents to prepare 
to form government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/turnbull-and-shorten-court-independents-with-hung-parliament-in-play>
, despite warnings from Malcolm Turnbull before the election thata parliament 
controlled by independents would be a “chaotic disaster” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/turnbull-contacts-independents-he-warned-would-be-chaotic-disaster>
.

Asked what factors they would consider when deciding whether to back Turnbull 
or Bill Shorten as prime minister, Wilkie said it would depend on a number of 
factors including who won the most votes and most seats.

“More importantly who is fit to govern? Who is best able to deliver stable, 
ethical and effective government?”

“If by chance it ends up being Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> who is given 
another opportunity to govern, [the Coalition] for a start would have to go 
back to the drawing board and rewrite a whole lot of their policy positions, 
and rewrite their budget.

“Because this election was as much a referendum on their proposed budget and 
it’s been rejected – I don’t think Malcolm Turnbull now has a mandate to 
implement what he took to the election.”

But Wilkie added that Labor would also need to change some elements of its 
platform.

He rejected the idea that a hung parliament would necessarily be unstable.

“Some people say that that would be unstable … but stability is born of 
consistency. Once I have formed a view, so long as circumstances don’t change 
and I’m consistent in my view, wherever we end up, hopefully, would be very 
stable.”

“Neither Labor nor Liberal have a god-given right to rule, they do it by 
virtue of the support they have in the community.”

Election showed voters want something authentic – Australian politics live 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/jul/04/election-showed-voters-want-something-authentic-australian-politics-live-podcast>
McGowan criticised what she said were “personal attacks” by the Liberal party 
against herin the contest for Indi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/28/election-2016-cathy-mcgowan-sophie-mirabella-will-indi-hold-on-to-the-power-of-one>
.

McGowan said her community overwhelmingly wanted more consideration of values, 
trust and respect inAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>.

She said she had also detected “enormous disappointment that large percentages 
of my community … with the way the government has been working”.

“They want me to work with government to bring in really good legislation. The 
problem with making a deal at the beginning … is that you take away your 
ability to actually make a decision on legislation at the time depending on the 
circumstances.”

Radio National host Fran Kelly asked the cabinet secretary, Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, how the election 
result could be seen as anything other than rejection of the government’s 
economic plan including $50bn of company tax cuts and superannuation changes.

Sinodinos replied there were “a number of issues playing on people’s minds”. 
“The challenge now is to reconcile all this,” he said.

“The reason we had a jobs and growth plan, and a plan for a company tax cut … 
was to provide a growth element to the economy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Faustralian-election-has-malcolm-turnbulls-big-gamble-backfired-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20election%3A%20has%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%E2%80%99s%20big%20gamble%20backfired%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Faustralian-election-has-malcolm-turnbulls-big-gamble-backfired-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20election%3A%20has%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%E2%80%99s%20big%20gamble%20backfired%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Faustralian-election-has-malcolm-turnbulls-big-gamble-backfired-video&media=>
Australian election: has Malcolm Turnbull’s big gamble backfired? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/04/australian-election-has-malcolm-turnbulls-big-gamble-backfired-video>
Sinodinos said that it was clear from the result that, in addition to the 
economy, voters were concerned about health. He accused Labor of finding a 
“cynical” way to exploit voters concern, through what he called its Medicare 
scare campaign.

Sinodinos said all sides had to work with the parliament the Australian people 
had delivered. “Jaw-jaw is better than war-war, what we need to do is calmly 
sit down, work through the issues … we have to respect all the people that have 
been elected to the Senate and House of Representatives.”

“That’s what Malcolm Turnbull as prime minister can do – he has the 
temperament for it.”
 