
Comedian Andy Zaltzman does not understate the implications of Donald Trump’s 
US election victory. “Spend as much time as you can with the people you care 
about,” he says. “Tell them you love them, just in case.”

How to find solace in dark times: there's always art to look up to
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/political-grieving-us-election-art-mark-rothko-martin-scorsese>
It’s almost a decade since Zaltzman launched his satirical podcast The Bugle 
<http://thebuglepodcast.com/> alongside co-host John Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/07/john-oliver-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
, then a correspondent on The Daily Show and now thehost of HBO’s Last Week 
Tonight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/27/john-oliver-explains-the-us-to-the-uk-and-vice-versa>
. Over the years it’s covered tumultuous global events with a blend of wit, 
irreverence and surreal, Pythonesque humour, taking on topics as diverse as the 
worldwide financial crash, the Arab spring and theFifa corruption scandal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/27/several-top-fifa-officials-arrested>
 In the process it’s attracted more than half a million regular listeners.

Now the show has returned from a hiatus sparked by Oliver’s departure this 
summer, just in time to catch the fallout from the most outlandish and 
acrimonious presidential campaign in living memory. And while it might be 
tempting to think of a Trump presidency as the ultimate gift to political 
satire, Zaltzman is perturbed by the result.

“He’s such an unprecedented person to have in a position of such power,” he 
says. “There’s no way to know what he’s going to do. But who knows? Maybe 
beneath the external lunatic there’s a more moderate, even-minded lunatic that 
we just haven’t seen yet.

“The odds at one point were two to one for him to win it, which when you think 
about it was about 2,500 times more likely than Leicester City winning the 
English Premier League, so I wasn’t massively surprised. But still, if making 
Trump president was the answer, I don’t think I’ll ever understand exactly what 
the question was.

“It’s difficult to understand his appeal, beyond the fact that he’s a 
non-politician. That seems to have been his main selling point to people who 
were understandably sickened by the mainstream political system. In that sense 
I suppose he might be the new Che Guevara. In 50 years’ time, students will be 
hangingDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> posters 
on their walls.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61bbec83c8c29869241a1167f5966cdfa9c9721%2F0_95_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Zaltzman%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20decided%20the%20way%20to%20power%20was%20debasing%20humanity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Zaltzman%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20decided%20the%20way%20to%20power%20was%20debasing%20humanity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61bbec83c8c29869241a1167f5966cdfa9c9721%2F0_95_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
 It’s almost a decade since Zaltzman (right) launched his satirical podcast The 
Bugle alongside co-host John Oliver, now the host of HBO’s Last Week Tonight. 
Photograph: MediaPunch/Rex/Shutterstock 
As to whether the president-elect will manage to implement his more extreme 
campaign pledges – a multibillion-dollar wall along the Mexican border and a 
freeze on Muslim immigration – Zaltzman is uncertain.

“I have no idea whether he’ll do it, and neither, I’d imagine, does Mr Trump. 
He riffed his election campaign, now he’ll have to riff his presidency. And 
improv politics is a risky road, as David Cameron discovered.

“Fundamentally, I think Trump’s a pragmatist. He decided the pragmatic way to 
power was by debasing humanity. Politically, doing crazy things is less 
pragmatic than saying crazy things. I hope.”

If Zaltzman is troubled by Trump’s win, he’s also concerned by the fractious 
state of the US political discourse, as illustrated by the vitriol directed 
towards Hillary Clinton.

Article 50 could be reversed, government may argue in Brexit case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/brexit-could-be-reversed-government-lawyers-may-argue>
“She seemed to be unpopular in a way that we don’t really understand in 
Britain,” he says. “It could have been momentous, the first female president of 
the US. I think men have probably had a fair crack at running the planet. It 
feels like it’s time for women to have a go. Maybe give them the next five or 
10,000 years and see how they get on.

“But Clinton has been in the public eye for decades, and I guess people took 
against her because of that. There are some glitches on her CV, but I really 
don’t understand the depth of the dislike for her, and maybe we’re heading that 
way over here as well. We could have similar levels of hatred towards our 
political figures.”

The rising discord in the UK is a worry for Zaltzman, one amplified by the 
political climate after June’s Brexit vote. “If you look at theattacks on the 
judges over article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
, the people who are doing their job and allowing democracy to function are 
being decried as the enemies of democracy,” he says.

“I could understand the result of the referendum. I voted to remain and I feel 
European as much as I feel British, but I could see that there were good 
arguments on both sides, it’s just that the bad arguments seemed to completely 
drown them out. The whole tone of the leave campaign was negative and 
xenophobic, and a lot of the remain campaign was just selfish. It seemed to 
focus on people’s personal finances rather than any idea of what we should be 
aspiring to as a nation and a continent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbae339b966206e384b402f53068d4eb0198e4e3e%2F0_367_2633_1579%2F2633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Zaltzman%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20decided%20the%20way%20to%20power%20was%20debasing%20humanity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Zaltzman%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20decided%20the%20way%20to%20power%20was%20debasing%20humanity%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fandy-zaltzman-trump-decided-the-way-to-power-was-debasing-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbae339b966206e384b402f53068d4eb0198e4e3e%2F0_367_2633_1579%2F2633.jpg>
 Donald Trump enters the White House flanked by his wife Melania and Senate 
majority leader Mitch McConnell. Photograph: Shawn Thew/EPA 
“I think the EU has to take a share of the blame, too. There’s clearly a lot 
that it’s ballsed up over the years, but it’s an amazing achievement that it’s 
managed to bring so many benefits to the people of the continent while 
simultaneously making itself massively unpopular.”

While the result of the referendum may have stung, Zaltzman discusses it with 
a wry detachment. That changes when he turns to the events that followed, and 
he grows more animated as he discusses the scramble for power that ended with 
Theresa May as prime minister.

“You have Boris Johnson as foreign secretary, which frankly seems like a 
simultaneous prank on Boris Johnson himself and on the rest of the world,” he 
says. “But the strangest thing is that in this country, where we supposedly 
love democracy to an almost erotic degree, and fight wars for democracy, and 
kill people just to give them the right to vote, we have an unelected prime 
minister putting through policies that we didn’t have a chance to vote on, and 
no one seems to want a general election. It’s like we just cannot face another 
three weeks of concentrated political campaigning.

“And our media isn’t covering itself in glory at the moment. It’s hard to see 
what the purpose of having a lot of these newspapers is really. They appear to 
be almost Soviet-level propaganda rags, encouraging people to think that the 
government exists solely to work for them and not in the interest of the entire 
population. The middle ground doesn’t seem to shift units, you have to foster 
anger and disagreement to make things function.”

It is in this febrile atmosphere that The Bugle makes its return, with Oliver 
replaced by a revolving lineup of co-hosts including American stand-upWyatt 
Cenac <http://www.wyattcenac.com/>, Radio 4 comedy presenter Nish Kumar 
<http://www.nishkumar.co.uk/> and Zaltzman’s sister, Helen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/guardian-masterclass-blog/2015/oct/28/what-we-learned-about-podcasting-course>
, who fronts the lexicological podcastThe Allusionist 
<http://www.theallusionist.org/>.

“John and I didn’t have a big showbiz bust-up with guitars and TVs being 
thrown out of hotel windows,” Zaltzman says. “It just became increasingly clear 
that it wasn’t logistically possible any more.

Richard Ford: Blame me. I voted for Hillary, and I got America all wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/blame-me-i-voted-for-hillary-clinton-us-elections-richard-ford>
“He’s been very successful in the States. They have a tradition of TV satire 
that combines real journalistic rigour with comedy, and if you’re asking people 
to watch a half-hour programme about business tax rates, it’s much easier if 
it’s a funny half-hour. We’ve had some similar attempts in the UK; Rory Bremner 
and Mark Thomas have done some strong stuff, but they haven’t become a fixture 
of the media discussion in the way that things like The Daily Show have.

“But for The Bugle, I’ve lined up people I like and whose stuff I enjoy. It’s 
been fun to do, and I’m looking forward to hearing some different views from 
different bits of the planet.”

The show returns as part of the Radiotopia  <https://www.radiotopia.fm/>
network, a collection of podcasts that includes cult-hit design programme99% 
Invisible <http://99percentinvisible.org/>, true crime series Criminal 
<http://thisiscriminal.com/> and Song Exploder <http://songexploder.net/>, in 
which musicians discuss their work and dissect tracks with a forensic level of 
detail. Zaltzman says the network exemplifies the growth of podcasting as a 
medium.

“When we first began it was a far less competitive arena, you had people 
essentially making shows for the love of it,” he said. “Now it’s increasingly 
professional, but it still has a level of creativity and flexibility that 
traditional radio hasn’t had. You get a real sense of enthusiasm from the 
people who are producing the shows, and it gives the opportunity for niches to 
evolve, whereas broadcast media has to go for the widest possible audience.

“I feel lucky to be part of that in a loose way. I mean, we basically just get 
in the studio and bullshit every week.”

 * The Bugle is available to download now on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/the-bugle/id265799883?mt=2> or your 
preferred podcatcher <http://feeds.feedburner.com/thebuglefeed>.  