
What luxury item would Andy Kershaw 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/g2/story/0,,1668825,00.html> most want to take with 
him to a desert island? A shortwave radio, so he could keep abreast of world 
music? A motorbike, to relive his dream of being the fastest man on two wheels? 
A snapshot of his partner and two kids?

Nope. "An endless supply of bogroll" is what the DJ and journalist asked for on
Desert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/factual/desertislanddiscs.shtml> on 11 March. "I 
can't think of anything more undignified than not being able to wipe me bottom."

There, you felt, spoke a man who has found himself in too many third-world 
outhouses with nothing more absorbent than a Lonely Planet guidebook. It was a 
fitting end to a programme that seemed to take in half the world, either 
musically or anecdotally. In between tracks from Zimbabwe'sBhundu Boys 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendid=31413989>
, America'sLoudon Wainwright III 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendid=154503999>
, Britain'sThe Clash 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendID=30248735>
 and Mali'sTinariwen 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendID=107017994>
, Kershaw had remembered his youth in Rochdale, his failed attempt to get a 
politics degree at Leeds, the time he almost became a Lib Dem MP, and his 
award-winning reports from troublespots like Haiti and Angola.

He sounded lucky to have escaped with all his limbs. During the Rwandan 
genocide he found himself walking 11 miles down a road full of anti-personnel 
mines in the dark, unable to use a torch in case he was shot at. "I have never 
been so frightened in my life," he said, convincingly.

So why doesn't he just stay in Britain and play records for a living? 
"Injustice makes me angry," he told Kirsty Young.

The way Desert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs> butchers 
records, meanwhile, merely makes him peevish. After delighting his host by 
actually singing along to his chosen discs, Kershaw had no hesitation in booing 
Young when she cut them short.

A Desert Island Discs with a guest who actually cares about music? How 
refreshing.

Andy Kershaw's Desert Island Discs will be repeated on Friday 16 March at 9am. 
Listenhere <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/live_feed.shtml?fm>.

Andy Kershaw's discs:

1. Hupenyu Hwangu (R Kagona/B. Tembo), performed by Bhundu Boys.

2. Like a Rolling Stone (Bob Dylan), performed by Bob Dylan.

3. White Man in Hammersmith Palais (Stummer/Jones), performed by The Clash.

4. Lawyers, Guns and Money (Zevon, Zevon Music, BMI), performed by Warren 
Zevon.

5. One Man Guy (Loudon Wainwright III), performed by Loudon Wainwright III.

6. Carey (Joni Mitchell), performed by Joni Mitchell.

7. Return of the Grievous Angel (Gram Parsons), performed by Gram Parsons and 
Emmylou Harris.

8. Matadjem Yinmixan (Tinariwen), performed by Tinariwen.

Chosen record: Bhundu Boys Book: Collected works of Richard Kapuchinski 
Luxury: Lots of toilet paper
 