
Angela Eagle has delivered a stark warning to Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, saying she is prepared to 
break the impasse at the top of Labour by directly challenging him for the 
party leadership.

The party has been divided over how and when to tackle Corbyn’s insistence he 
would not resign following the vote of no confidence, and his resolve to stand 
against any challenger in a leadership contest.

Allies of the deputy leader, Tom Watson, say he still hopes to persuade Corbyn 
to stand down voluntarily under a compromise agreement, but Eagle gave the 
clearest signal on Monday that many others are losing patience.

The former shadow business secretary told Sky News as she left her home that 
she had enough support to challenge Corbyn directly.

“There are many people, MPs, party members up and down the country, asking me 
to resolve the impasse and I will if something isn’t done soon,” she said. “I 
have the support to run and resolve this impasse and I will do so if Jeremy 
doesn’t take action soon.”

Earlier, John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> 
said he had no intention of replacing Corbyn and called for talks with those 
Labour MPs hoping to topple his ally.
Brexit explained: Labour leadership 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=labour_leadership>
The shadow chancellor appealed for calm, saying there had been “mass hysteria” 
since Britain voted to leave the EU.

McDonnell told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “Now is the time to sort of calm 
down, everyone calm down. Since the referendum there’s been mass hysteria in 
virtually all our political parties and I can’t completely understand it. I’ve 
never seen anything like it, allegations being made, claims being made. 
Untruths being said.”

McDonnell denied claims made in a tweet by a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP on Sunday night that a deal 
was being struck for Corbyn to stand down in return for the shadow chancellor 
being put on the ballot paper in the subsequent leadership contest. He said: 
“That has never been discussed. Last week I was accused of a coup against 
Jeremy myself. This week I was accused of forcing him to stay in. It gets 
ridiculous.”

Corbyn remains as party leader despite opposition from the vast majority of 
his MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
 following last month’s referendum vote. As well as Eagle, another former 
shadow cabinet minister, Owen Smith, is believed to be considering staging a 
leadership challenge butunion leaders have insisted they can broker a peace 
deal between the warring sides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/trade-unions-can-broker-a-peace-for-labour-says-len-mccluskey>
.

Brexit live: Boris Johnson says lack of government leave plan led to 'hysteria'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/04/brexit-live-plan-leave-vote-hysteria-boris-johnson>
Len McCluskey, boss of Unite, said on Sunday Corbyn was the victim of a 
“political lynching” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/trade-unions-can-broker-a-peace-for-labour-says-len-mccluskey>
 but insisted the Labour leader would not quit. “The coup has failed,” he told 
the BBC. “Jeremy Corbyn is made of stronger stuff. He is a man of steel and he 
has made it clear that he will not stand down.”

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, McDonnell backed the “McCluskey 
initiative”, saying: “We are asking people to stand back, let’s have a proper 
rational conversation about a way forward. Compromises need to be found.”

One compromise not on the table was Corbyn’s leadership itself, with McDonnell 
saying that claims that the Labour leader was “unelectable” were simply wrong. 
“Objectively, looking at his electoral record, they are wrong so let’s overcome 
that,” he said.

McDonnell also denied reports that Labour rebels were being kept away from 
their leader, and rubbished claims that the Labour rebellion was wearing Corbyn 
down. He said: “Jeremy’s had an open-door policy for the last nine months, and 
that continues.”

On Monday afternoon, a committee of MPs will question Corbyn over antisemitism 
in the Labour party after there wascontroversy at the launch of a report into 
the issue last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/jeremy-corbyn-appears-compare-israeli-government-islamic-state-labour-antisemitism-review>
.

Corbyn was forced to deny drawing a parallel between Israel and Isis after 
saying at the launch that Jews were “no more responsible for the actions of 
Israel” than Muslims were for the “various self-styled Islamic states or 
organisations”.

The Labour leader’s comment was branded “offensive” by Britain’s most 
prominent Jewish leader, Chief Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis.

Shami Chakrabarti, who led the antisemitism inquiry, said in the report that 
the party was “not overrun by antisemitism, Islamophobia or other forms of 
racism”.

Corbyn will appear before the House of Commons’ home affairs committee to 
discuss the findings of the review.

The committee’s chairman, Keith Vaz, said: “We have seen a deeply troubling 
upsurge in antisemitic incidents and speech across Britain and Europe in recent 
times, including within our political discourse. It is one of our fundamental 
British values to stand together and speak out against intolerance and 
extremism in any and every form, and we particularly expect this from our 
political parties.

“We are grateful to Jeremy Corbyn for coming to give evidence on his and the 
Labour party’s position following the publication of the independent report on 
antisemitism in the party.”
 