
Angus Young has admitted AC/DC’s future is uncertain. In an interview with 
Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/acdcs-angus-young-talks-retirement-malcolm-young-w432078>
, Young – who formed the band in 1973 with his brother Malcolm – said he didn’t 
know how he would feel about playing with AC/DC once their current Rock or Bust 
tour finishes.

“At this point, I don’t know,” he said, when asked about his future. “We were 
committed to finishing the tour. Who knows what I’ll feel after? When you sign 
on and say, ‘I’m gonna do this and that,’ it’s always good to say at the end of 
it, ‘I’ve done all I said I would do.’”

AC/DC review – Axl Rose brings menace as rock legends pull off a triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
AC/DC have been stricken by departing members over the past two years. In 
September 2014, it was announced that rhythm guitarist Malcolm Young had 
departed the group,owing to the onset of dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/01/acdc-guitarist-malcolm-young-has-dementia>
. In November 2014,Angus told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
 that Malcolm had begun to show symptoms when the group recorded the Black Ice 
album in 2008, and that he had to relearn songs between shows on the subsequent 
tour: “It was hard work for him. He was relearning a lot of those songs that he 
knew backwards; the ones we were playing that night he’d be relearning,” Young 
said.

That was followed, in November 2014, by the loss of drummer Phil Rudd, when he 
was charged in New Zealand with attempting to procure a murder, threatening to 
kill and possession of illegal drugs. He later pleaded guilty to drugs charges 
and threatening to kill, and wassentenced to home detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/phil-rudd-acdc-drummer-sentenced-to-home-detention-for-threat-to-kill>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fangus-young-admits-he-doesnt-know-whether-acdc-will-continue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cbb8a8871aeed0b9624a95a8b9b51828497a6a%2F0_0_3349_2800%2F3349.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angus%20Young%20admits%20he%20doesn't%20know%20whether%20AC%2FDC%20will%20continue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fangus-young-admits-he-doesnt-know-whether-acdc-will-continue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angus%20Young%20admits%20he%20doesn%27t%20know%20whether%20AC%2FDC%20will%20continue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fangus-young-admits-he-doesnt-know-whether-acdc-will-continue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cbb8a8871aeed0b9624a95a8b9b51828497a6a%2F0_0_3349_2800%2F3349.jpg>
 AC/DC at Manchester’s Etihad Stadium in June … Angus Young, with Axl Rose on 
vocals. Photograph: Shirlaine Forrest/WireImage 
In March this year the group announced that singer Brian Johnson was to stop 
touring immediately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/acdc-singer-brian-johnson-to-stop-touring-to-save-his-hearing>
, on medical advice, for fear he would further irreparably damage his hearing. 
He was controversially replaced for the rest of the Rock or Bust tour byAxl Rose
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
, of Guns N’ Roses.

Finally, in July, Cliff Williams – who has played bass with the group since 
1977 – said he was “backing off of touring and recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/08/acdc-bassist-cliff-williams-retiring>
” after the current tour was complete. Williams, who lives in Florida, as does 
Johnson, is the singer’s closest friend within the band.

AC/DC have 10 more dates of the Rock or Bust tour <http://www.acdc.com/tour> 
to play, starting on 27 August in Greenboro, North Carolina, and finishing on 
20 September in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Time will tell if that turns out to 
be the last ever AC/DC show.
 