
Anita Sarkeesian <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anita_Sarkeesian> doesn’t give 
me the address of her San Francisco apartment over email. Instead, she texts it 
to me a few hours before we’re set to meet. After thousands of rape and death 
threats, abomb scare 
<http://kotaku.com/bomb-threat-targeted-anita-sarkeesian-gaming-awards-la-1636032301>
 andan email promising a mass shooting 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/16/technology/gamergate-women-video-game-threats-anita-sarkeesian.html?_r=4>
 at one of her speaking events, a woman can’t be too careful.

Sarkeesian, media critic and executive director of the nonprofit and video web 
seriesFeminist Frequency <http://feministfrequency.com>, has spent the past few 
years of her life at the centre of a firestorm in the gaming community – one 
that brings together misogyny, technology and a cultural shift in an industry 
so huge it nowoutperforms Hollywood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2009/sep/27/videogames-hollywood>
. In videos that discuss misogyny in video games and widespread tropes that 
diminish women, Sarkeesian – named one ofthe 100 most influential people of 
2015 by Time magazine <http://time.com/3822727/anita-sarkeesian-2015-time-100/> 
– talks to the camera, with a commentary that runs the gamut from feminist 
theory to historical analysis. Her videos are smart, incisive and much needed 
in an industry in which women are often treated as little more thanbackground 
decoration 
<http://feministfrequency.com/2014/08/25/women-as-background-decoration-part-2/>
 ordamsels in distress 
<http://feministfrequency.com/2013/05/28/damsel-in-distress-part-2-tropes-vs-women/>
.

For some male gaming aficionados, the most frightening enemy isn’t an animated 
foe but this 31-year-old feminist with a penchant for hoop earrings, sitting 
across from me. They’ve called Sarkeesian a con artist, and raised thousands of 
dollars to film an exposé-style documentary about her (which exposes nothing). 
Some even created a game in which users can punch an image of her face until it 
is bloodied.

Sarkeesian, who wears red glasses that match her dye-tipped hair, is 
extraordinarily friendly and upbeat, considering the level of vitriol directed 
at her. “It has less to do with the actual content of the work than with ‘How 
dare a woman say anything about our toys’ – especially a feminist,” she tells 
me. We sit in her living room, whose walls are covered in whiteboards that 
neatly outline ideas for future videos and projects.

Some male gamers call her a con artist. Some created a game for users to punch 
an image of her face until it is bloodied

Sarkeesian started Feminist Frequency in 2009, while at graduate school, 
studying social and political thought. She found academia somewhat alienating: 
“The texts are impossible to read if you’re not trained, and I wondered why we 
would lock away this information for just a privileged group of people.” The 
feminist theory she read seemed more approachable: “bell hooks 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bell_hooks> used media in the classroom to 
engage with her students; that idea of pop culture being a common language 
really resonated with me.”

Sarkeesian began making videos that took on pop culture, from television shows 
tothe Twilight series <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight>. In 2012, 
she decided to dedicate a series of videos to the topic of computer games. She 
launched a Kickstarter project to fund herTropes vs Women In Video Games 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6p5AZp7r_Q> web series, with a modest goal of 
$6,000. The target was met in 24 hours, and within two weeks she had raised 
nearly four times that much. That’s when the harassment started: people
vandalised her Wikipedia page 
<http://feministfrequency.com/2012/06/10/harassment-and-misogyny-via-wikipedia/>
 with gender-based slurs, and herYouTube videos 
<http://feministfrequency.com/2012/06/07/harassment-misogyny-and-silencing-on-youtube/>
 were hit with a barrage of abuse. Sarkeesian had been harassed online before – 
“I’m a woman on the internet!” she says – but she had never been attacked by a 
mob.

It wasn’t just the open hatred: there were multiple attempts to hack into her 
accounts and expose her. “They tried to get my Kickstarter cancelled and 
reported me to the FBI and the IRS. They tried to post my home address and my 
parents’ information,” she says.

But the vitriol sparked more interest and support, and by the time her 
Kickstarter ended, Sarkeesian had raised almost $160,000. The attacks haven’t 
stopped since: some detractors have manipulated images of Sarkeesian to make 
them appear pornographic, or depicted images of her being raped by video game 
characters. All because a woman wanted to make a YouTube series about video 
games.

While Sarkeesian admits the harassment has taken its toll – how could it not? 
– she brings the conversation back to the bigger picture. “There are a lot of 
people who are being targeted who don’t get the attention I do. Women of colour 
and trans women, in particular, are not getting media attention and not getting 
the support they need.”

Sarkeesian also points out that explicit abuse is just one way women are 
harassed online: some are targeted with conspiracy theories, or social media 
accounts that impersonate the victim. One personfabricated a tweet 
<http://www.dailydot.com/society/anita-sarkeesian-gamers-photoshop-shoe/> from 
Sarkeesian claiming she had spent her Kickstarter funds on designer shoes (with 
a picture of Gucci flats alongside a caption reading, “Buying 1,000-dollar 
shoes”).

Women are much more likely to be severely harassed 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/22/online-harassment/pi_2014-10-22__online-harassment-08/>
 in online spaces than men, and the harassment is much more likely to be 
sexually violent. A 2006 study by theUniversity of Maryland 
<http://www.enme.umd.edu/news/news_story.php?id=1729> found that when the 
gender of a username appears to be female, the user is 25 times more likely to 
experience harassment. That same study found that those female-sounding 
usernames averaged 163 threatening or sexually explicit messages a day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6p5AZp7r_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6p5AZp7r_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX6p5AZp7r_Q&media=>
 A video from Feminist Frequency, tackling the idea of the damsel in distress 
in folklore. 
So the abuse directed at Sarkeesian struck a nerve, and in 2012, she was 
invited to givea TED talk on the topic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GZAxwsg9J9Q>. Since then, she’s been on the 
cover ofBloomberg Businessweek 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-11-26/businessweeks-anita-sarkeesian-cover-how-we-made-it>
 magazine and has appearedon the satirical TV show The Colbert Report 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9L_Wmeg7OTU>. “The media tends to pull 
individuals out to be icons,” Sarkeesian says, “but there are a lot of people 
involved in ending online harassment.”

***

Before Sarkeesian became the face of online abuse and sexism in gaming, she 
says, “I was definitely a person who said, ‘I’m not a feminist, but I believe 
in equal rights.’” Raised by Armenian parents from Iraq who later moved to 
Canada, she was brought up in a household open to new ideas; politics was 
always a backdrop to her life. She recalls watching news stories about the Gulf 
war and worrying with her parents about what was going to happen to family 
there.

Feminism, however, wasn’t on her radar. She tells me it was reading Ariel 
Levy’s bookFemale Chauvinist Pigs 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/female-chauvinist-pigs.html> that opened her 
eyes. “I realised I was trying to be one of the guys and obtain this false 
sense of power,” she says. “I had more male friends, and would say things like, 
‘Oh, women are annoying.’ I would speak in objectifying terms about other 
women.”

Around the time she was discovering feminism, as a student in southern 
California, Sarkeesian became a campus activist. “I read a lot of bell hooks,” 
she says. “And I was learning about systems of privilege and oppression – and 
feminism was just one piece of that. You learn about white supremacy, and 
heteronormativity, and I found that to be really liberating. I realised: now I 
know how the world works, and now I understand how to change it. And it’s 
really hard.”

A 2006 study found that when a username appears to be female, the person is 25 
times more likely to be harassed

It got even harder once GamerGate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamergate_controversy> happened. For the 
uninitiated, GamerGate is a Twitter hashtag, which became an online movement 
that purported to be about journalistic ethics, but which actually focuses on 
attacking and harassing women such as Sarkeesian.

She is frustrated by the way GamerGate has been covered in the media. “All the 
stories kept decentring the fact that it was domestic violence,” she says. 
Indeed, the movement was born when a 25-year-old software developer namedEron 
Gjoni <https://wiki.gamergate.me/index.php?title=Eron_Gjoni> posted a 
10,000-word blog about his ex-girlfriend, video game designerZoe Quinn 
<https://wiki.gamergate.me/index.php?title=Zoe_Quinn>. In the blog, he 
recounted the minutiae of their relationship and outlined her supposed 
wrongdoings and infidelities. Quinn has said, “It is domestic abuse that went 
viral <http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/article/2015/04/28/gamergate/>, and 
it was designed to go viral.” (Gjoni linked to the blogpost in forums such as 
4chan, well known for vicious online harassment.)

And it did go viral. Quinn was inundated with rape and death threats, her 
accounts were hacked, her address, phone number and even some nude photographs 
were made public. She subsequently went into hiding. What horrible truth did 
Gjoni’s post reveal to make Quinn one of the most hated women in gaming? It 
depends who you ask.

To GamerGaters, Gjoni’s post laid bare how female game designers get 
preferential treatment from the media – leading to the movement’smuch-mocked 
mantra <http://www.themarysue.com/actually-its-about-ethics/>, “It’s about 
ethics in journalism.” (Quinn allegedly had a relationship with a journalist 
who wrote aboutone of her games 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/zoe-quinns-depression-quest>; in fact, 
the journalist wrote about its existence, never offering a review.) But to 
others, it was a natural extension of sexist harassment and the fear of female 
encroachment on a traditionally male space.

Besides, as Sarkeesian points out, if this “movement” was about journalism, 
why wasn’t it journalists who had to deal with a barrage of rape and death 
threats?

The truth, Sarkeesian says, is that GamerGate existed for years before it had 
a name: the same core players, the same harassment, the same abuse. The hashtag 
just put a name on this “loosely organised mob” that attacked women in gaming, 
she tells me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440512057360%2F1e61e355-e033-4b2b-8817-e8bdf1d43060-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anita%20Sarkeesian%20interview%3A%20'The%20word%20%22troll%22%20feels%20too%20childish.%20This%20is%20abuse'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anita%20Sarkeesian%20interview%3A%20%27The%20word%20%22troll%22%20feels%20too%20childish.%20This%20is%20abuse%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440512057360%2F1e61e355-e033-4b2b-8817-e8bdf1d43060-2060x1236.jpeg>
 At Time magazine’s 100 Gala for the most influential people of 2015. ‘The 
media tends to pull individuals out to be icons,’ Sarkeesian says. Photograph: 
Taylor Hill/Getty Images 
Sarkeesian is also fond of calling GamerGate a “sexist temper tantrum”, 
because “it does have that feeling of the kid screaming and you don’t know 
why”. When I point out that temper tantrums are generally thought of as 
harmless rages, and that the abuse she and other women have faced is much more 
serious, she agrees.

“That’s the reason I don’t like the words ‘troll’ and ‘bully’ – it feels too 
childish. This is harassment and abuse,” she says. But still, she says, 
GamerGate is a temper tantrum: “It’s just a scary, violent, abusive, temper 
tantrum. It’s an attack and an assault on women in the gaming industry. Its 
purpose is to silence women, and if they can’t, they attempt to discredit them.

“These dudes fling shit. They’re throwing things out there and trying to get 
something to stick. This worked,” she says of the Quinn incident. “It stuck 
because it sounds good – there are actual issues with the way the games press 
works. So that idea resonated with a lot of people. And it swelled their ranks.”

I mention that I’ve noticed an uptick of younger online abusers. Ten years 
ago, the harassment I received (not uncommon for feminist writers) was mostly 
from middle-aged men. Today, I get comments calling me a “cunt” on Instagram 
from boys too young to grow facial hair.

While Sarkeesian is careful to point out that the stereotype of teenagers in 
their parents’ basement is a dangerous one (much of the most dangerous 
harassment is perpetrated by grown men) she shares my concern that a younger 
generation is growing up with harassment of women not just as the norm, but as 
a way to impress your peers.

“There’s a boys’-locker-room feel to the internet, where men feel they can 
show off for one another,” she says. “A lot of the harassment is tied to this 
toxic masculine culture of ‘Look how cool I can be.’” Someone will send a woman 
a death threat and screencap it, posting it on a forum, which in turn inspires 
another man to do something even worse in a horrifying game of misogynist 
oneupmanship.

Sarkeesian’s strategy for dealing with her most persistent harassers is 
largely to block and ignore them. “There are men who make videos about me 
regularly. Some are just screaming; some hold guns while they talk about hating 
me. I don’t engage with them, as I don’t want to amplify their voices.”

Many of these men will insist it’s all for fun, or just a joke, but whether 
the intent is to harm, or simply to do some chest-puffing for friends, “it 
still perpetuates all of the harmful myths attached to that language and those 
words,” Sarkeesian says. Besides, it’s not as if this harassment ends online. 
She can’t just shut her laptop and get on with her life; the threats have made 
an indelible impact on who she is and how she lives.

The day before a planned speech at Utah State University last year, the 
university’s administration received an email threatening a mass shooting: 
“This will be the deadliest school shooting in American history, and I’m giving 
you a chance to stop it,” it read. The sender used the name of a man who killed 
more than a dozen women in Montreal in 1989 after calling them “a bunch of 
feminists”.Sarkeesian cancelled the speech after event organisers refused to 
install metal detectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/15/anita-sarkeesian-feminist-games-critic-cancels-talk>
.

“I’ve been threatened before, and done events, but they were not going to stop 
people from bringing guns into the audience,” she says. (Utah has “open carry” 
laws, meaning it is legal openly to carry a gun in public.) “This isn’t just 
about me, but the students’ safety as well.”

At a speaking engagement last year, a man came up with his hands in his 
pockets. 'I'm thinking, "Does he have a knife?"'

Also in 2014, when Sarkeesian was due to be honoured with a gaming award in 
San Francisco,an anonymous email was sent promising to detonate a bomb unless 
the award was revoked 
<http://kotaku.com/bomb-threat-targeted-anita-sarkeesian-gaming-awards-la-1636032301>
. This time, Sarkeesian says the event organisers worked with her to ensure 
everyone’s safety. The police bomb unit found nothing and the awards ceremony 
went ahead as planned.

“Yeah, it’s really weird that I try to sit at the back of restaurants, or have 
my back to windows so no one recognises me,” Sarkeesian says. “Or if someone 
stops me on the street to ask for directions, I feel as if I’m going to have a 
panic attack. I’ve had to learn not to trust people, not to be friendly with 
strangers, because you never know if it’s going to be a threat.”

After a recent talk she gave at New York University, a young man came up to 
talk to her, with his hands in the pockets of his hoodie. “The whole time I’m 
thinking, ‘Does he have a knife in there?’ and he’s oblivious because he 
doesn’t have to think about it.” It turned out the young man was just extremely 
nervous, but after all that’s happened, you can’t blame Sarkeesian for being 
fearful.

“It sucks,” she says. “It really sucks, and I don’t want to think too much 
about it, because I can’t do anything about it. It’s my new normal.”

Part of the problem, as Sarkeesian sees it, is a historical one. “I’ve talked 
to mentors and older feminists and they say, ‘We were dealing with that, but 
they were throwing rocks at us.’”

When the internet began, Sarkeesian says, the idea was that it was going to be 
the “ultimate democracy”. WhenI wrote about online harassment for the Guardian 
in 2007 <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/apr/06/valenti>, 
postgraduate student Alice Marwick – now a professor at Fordham University in 
New York – told me, “The promise of the early internet was that it would 
liberate us from our bodies, and all the oppressions associated with prejudice. 
We’d communicate soul to soul, and get to know each other as people, rather 
than judging each other based on gender or race.” But because the default, 
assumed identity was white and male, anyone who brought up their race or gender 
– or dared to complain about bias – was seen as disturbing that dream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440511770997%2F4401df9b-1b81-4f7b-bcf2-bda2484ac1f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anita%20Sarkeesian%20interview%3A%20'The%20word%20%22troll%22%20feels%20too%20childish.%20This%20is%20abuse'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anita%20Sarkeesian%20interview%3A%20%27The%20word%20%22troll%22%20feels%20too%20childish.%20This%20is%20abuse%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fanita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440511770997%2F4401df9b-1b81-4f7b-bcf2-bda2484ac1f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 At a Women in the World summit in April. A recent speaking engagement in San 
Francisco prompted a bomb hoax. Photograph: Andrew Toth/Getty Images 
“We didn’t build up this technology [while] understanding the power dynamics 
and the very real systems of oppression that were just going to follow us 
online,” Sarkeesian says. “One of the profound things the feminist movement and 
the civil rights movement did was to change the systems we live in. They didn’t 
stop every individual being sexist or racist, but they changed the systems that 
we participated in, so you couldn’t be that way in certain environments.”

So, while it’s no longer acceptable for a boss to smack a female employee’s 
behind at work – and we can thank feminism for that – men are still getting 
rewarded with social status online for abusing women. We haven’t figured out 
how to change that system. At least, not yet.

Sarkeesian has been meeting social media and technology companies, talking to 
them about how they can help stop gender-based abuse in gaming. Because, 
ultimately, this is a problem that needs solutions from the top as well as the 
bottom. “Where was the gaming industry in all this?” she asks. “GamerGate was a 
silver platter for them to say they don’t condone the harassment of women and 
they didn’t do it. GamerGate is the monster that the industry created.”

Independent developers tell Sarkeesian her work makes them want to create 
better games. “People come up to me at events and tell me how much my work has 
meant to them and that it has helped them to speak up,” she says. At 
conferences, she can’t get from one end of the room to the other without people 
in the industry telling her how much they like what she’s doing.

That’s wonderful, Sarkeesian acknowledges, but she wants to know: “What are 
you doing? Because what is my work if you’re not going to do something about 
it, too?”

Sarkeesian is exhausted – she hasn’t taken a break since 2012 – but she’s not 
willing to give up. Even with the death threats, the obsessive abusers, the 
fear and the enormous personal cost, she asks a question asked by so many 
change-makers: “How can I give up now? I’m not going anywhere.”

• This article was amended on 2 September 2015 to clarify that women are much 
more likely to be severely harassed in online spaces than men.

 