
A debut novel narrated by a space ship has won Ann Leckie 
<http://www.annleckie.com/> the UK's top science fiction prize, the Arthur C 
Clarke award.

The American author's Ancillary Justice has already jointly won the British 
Science Fiction Association prize and is nominated for the Hugo best novel 
award. On Thursday, the first novel was also named winner of the prestigious 
Arthur C Clarke – this year worth £2,014 – ahead of titles from established 
authors Christopher Priest and Phillip Mann, two other debuts, from Kameron 
Hurley and Ramez Naam, and British author James Smythe's dystopian The Machine.

Ancillary Justice is narrated by what used to be the military space ship 
Justice of Toren, which now animates one possessed soldier. "The judges all 
loved it," said prize director Tom Hunter. "It takes on some of the classic 
tropes of science fiction, and redoes them in contemporary ways."

Leckie pulls her ambitious concept off "brilliantly", said Hunter. "It's a 
book whose major character and narrator is a space ship – you can't be more 
science fictional than that. And it has broad space-opera themes – it's been 
compared to the beginning of Iain M Banks's Culture series, and it could be as 
epic as that by the time she gets to parts two and three."

He said the novel also contains "interesting ideas around language and gender 
politics – issues which are coming to the fore of science fiction conversation 
at the moment". And "it's a great action read – one of those books which I'd 
give to people who say they don't like science fiction,."

The Guardian's reviewer Eric Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/20/science-fiction-round-up-reviews>
 called Ancillary Justice a "hugely ambitious ... fast-paced, moving and 
intellectually satisfying story of love and vengeance".

"Breq," wrote Brown, "is a hive-mind AI running a starship who finds herself 
downloaded into the reanimated corpse of a soldier, with only partial knowledge 
of how she ended up there. What follows is the meticulous piecing together of 
subsequent events and Breq's quest to kill the Lord of the Radch Empire, 
a near-immortal in control of multiple bodies. It's by turns thrilling, moving 
and awe-inspiring."

In Strange Horizons, reviewer Lila Garrott 
<http://www.strangehorizons.com/reviews/2014/04/ancillary_justi.shtml> said the 
novel was "astoundingly assured and graceful ... wedding a complicated 
structure to three-dimensional characters and multiple interesting SFnal ideas".

"There's been a lot of award buzz surrounding it, all of which is entirely 
deserved. The novel's core questions, such as the meaning of personhood in a 
world containing artificial intelligences and the meaning of individual 
identity in a world containing multi-bodied minds, are not new to speculative 
fiction, but they are combined in ways which shed new light on them, and Leckie 
never allows anything to resolve into a simple answer," wrote Garrott.

The Arthur C Clarke counts among its winners Margaret Atwood, Priest and China 
Miéville. This year's award was judged by Ian Whates and Duncan Lawie from the
British Science Fiction Association <http://www.bsfa.co.uk/>, Sarah Brown and 
Lesley Hall from theScience Fiction Foundation <http://www.sf-foundation.org/> 
and Georgie Knight from theSci-Fi-London film festival 
<http://www.sci-fi-london.com/>.
 