
1820-1849

"When I feel it my duty to speak an unpalatable truth, with the help of God, I 
WILL speak it, though it be to the prejudice of my name and to the detriment of 
my reader's immediate pleasure as well as my own."

Birthplace

Yorkshire, England

Education

Anne studied at home until she was 15, when, she was sent to Roe Head school. 
Two years later she underwent a "religious crisis" and was sent home to recover.

Other jobs

She worked as a governess, though abruptly resigned from one post, probably 
upon becoming aware of a relationship between Branwell and her employer.

Did you know?

Charlotte had little time for her sister's writing; in 1850, when discussing 
the possibility of republishing The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, she wrote: 
"Wildfell Hall, it hardly appears to me desirable to preserve.

Critical verdict

Anne's work has been generally considered inferior to that of her sisters, 
although this view is undergoing reevaluation. Charlotte, her literary 
executor, tended to see Anne as a minor talent whose work was of little value. 
(She held a similar view of Jane Austen, whose work Anne's resembles.) Agnes 
Grey is a quiet but sharply observed critique of the life of a governess and 
the instruction of children at the time; her major work, The Tenant of Wildfell 
Hall, is seen as Anne's realistic response to the romanticisation of violence 
in her sisters' writings, emphasising its degradation - and also, many have 
thought, drawing on Branwell for its central drunken character. Charlotte 
remarked that "The choice of subject was an entire mistake." The novel was an 
immediate success (although the Spectator criticised "a morbid love for the 
coarse, not to say the brutal") and its challenges to the legal and social 
constraints applied to women at the time were said to have reverberated across 
Victorian England.

Recommended works

Agnes Grey; The Tenant of Wildfell Hall

Influences

Jane Austen; Charlotte and Emily Brontë.

Now read on

The Brontë juvenilia, Anne's letters

Adaptations

The Tenant of Wildfell Hall made a successful TV miniseries in 1996 starring 
Tara Fitzgerald and Rupert Graves.

Recommended biography

A Life of Anne Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annebronte> by Edward 
Chitham

Criticism

Anne Brontë: The Other One by Elizabeth Langland

Useful links and work online

Work online
· Poems by Charlotte, Emily and Anne Brontë 
<http://www.selfknowledge.com/brntp10.htm>
· The Tenant of Wildfell Hall 
<http://www.bibliomania.com/b/org.paneris.bibliomania.OldUrlRedirect/Fiction/Bronte/Tenant/>
· Agnes Grey <http://lang.nagoya-u.ac.jp/~matsuoka/Bronte-Agnes.html>

Background
· A Chronology of Anne Brontë 
<http://www.shef.ac.uk/misc/personal/cs1ma/anne/chronolg.html>
· William Weightman (thought to be object of Anne's love poems) 
<http://www.shef.ac.uk/misc/personal/cs1ma/anne/weightmn.html>
· Five portraits of Anne 
<http://www.mick-armitage.staff.shef.ac.uk/anne/ann5face.html>
· Brontë Parsonage Museum & Brontë Society <http://www.bronte.org.uk/>
 