
Is Anne-Marie Duff <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff> walking 
out on our interview? Technically she has already put on her coat. She was 
leaving anyway… right? But no… hang on. Yep, she’s definitely storming out. 
“Well, thanks very much,” she says. “You’ve made me feel like shit.”

And with that she starts running down the stairs. The front door bangs. Gone. 
What an exit.

I sit and stare for a while. After few moments her publicist returns from her 
trip to fetch Duff some lunch. (I am in the sparse attic of a location house – 
an ex-pub – where Duff had completed a photo shoot that morning.) “Hello?” she 
calls up the stairwell. “Are you OK? Jesus, what happened?”

It’s a very good question. I’m slightly baffled. I have an inkling things 
started to go wrong from the beginning. I had begun our interview with what I 
thought could be some fun small talk: the fact that Duff was from my hometown 
of Hayes in west London. Although we weren’t there together, Duff also went to 
my high school. Initially Duff was enthusiastic. “Put it there, lady!” she had 
figuratively high-fived me. “I have never met anybody who went to my school 
since I left happy Hayes,” she said, rolling her eyes, smiling. But further 
questions (Does she ever go back to Hayes? Are her parents still there?) were 
met with caution, even suspicion. Asking about the council estate she lived on 
is a step too far. “This isn’t me and you having a cup of tea,” she will later 
snap. “This is an interview. This isn’t us connecting.”

All actors love the National. It must be to do with being beside that great 
vein of a river…

In person, Duff looked softer than I imagined: more glowy, less pallid than 
some of the characters she has so memorably played on stage and screen. For the 
photo shoot the publicist said it had been nice to do “something glamorous”; 
the thing about the new projects was that they were so dark. So far, by way of 
promotion, Duff had participated in a poster shoot for her new play at the
National Theatre <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk>, Husbands & Sons 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/husbands-sons> – an adaptation of 
three different DH Lawrence novels set in a mining town. On that poster, eyes 
starkly staring out, she is completely covered in soot. Her latest movie,
Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/suffragette-review-historical-drama-tub-thumps-hard-despite-having-your-vote>
, is a weighty film about the women’s rights movement in which she plays an 
exhausted mother and factory worker who helps to lead a surge of violent 
attacks on the government. And her latest TV drama for the BBC,From Darkness 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06h7j15>, is no brighter. Duff plays an 
ex-copper who she says is repressed: “She’s burying things deep down but, of 
course, they come scratching back at the window, likeWuthering Heights.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsuffragette-telluride-abi-morgan-sarah-gavron-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette%20at%20Telluride%3A%20'You%20don't%20often%20see%20women%20blowing%20up%20buildings'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsuffragette-telluride-abi-morgan-sarah-gavron-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%20at%20Telluride%3A%20%27You%20don%27t%20often%20see%20women%20blowing%20up%20buildings%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsuffragette-telluride-abi-morgan-sarah-gavron-video-interview&media=>
 The Guardian’s Nigel Smith interviews Sarah Gavron and Abi Morgan 
The fact that the parts aren’t wrapped up in pretty bows is nothing new: 
Duff’s breakthrough came playing the rough-and-ready Fiona in C4’sShameless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shameless>. Her interpretation of 
Joan of Arc as an androgynous Irish girl (Duff’s vision) inSaint Joan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jul/12/theatre2> at the National 
Theatre in 2007 made her the critics’ darling, someone who could explore even 
the shadowiest corners of a character; a heavyweight actor who could turn her 
hand to anything.

Except, perhaps, an interview. Duff is now fixing me with a fierce glare. 
Straightforward questions about her work don’t settle her: when I refer to a 
quote she gave in a news piece about her character inFrom Darkness – a “strong 
woman” 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/Arts/article1528594.ece> – 
she tells me briskly she “hates… that expression” and shuts me down. Asking 
about her other work proves just as tricky. Talking aboutSuffragette, she says 
she feels “despondent” for modern women – “what’s going on internationally, 
especially” – but resists explaining what she means.

Our chat quickly descends into loaded stares and passive-aggressive silences. 
while Talking about growing up in the 80s, she says the impact of Thatcherism 
on our school was that kids “weren’t encouraged to do things which were 
intangible”. I ask her to elaborate and she audibly sighs: “This is stuff that 
everybody knows.” At one point we discuss class. I say it’s interesting that 
some actors seem to carry their class around on their backs forever, while 
others shed that image – Duff strikes me as the former. “Yes, people want to 
talk to me about that all the time, curiously,” she says with a hint of 
sarcasm. Why does she think that is? “Sometimes I think it’s because I don’t 
blather on about my private life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230526759%2F6b0ce2b2-a48a-4a6b-b1af-29c87c849a96-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230526759%2F6b0ce2b2-a48a-4a6b-b1af-29c87c849a96-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beating the system: as Fiona in Channel 4’s Shameless. Photograph: Channel 4 
I sympathise that she must get the same things asked of her a lot, but she 
looks irked. “Well, I guess so but, like I say, interviews are a curious thing. 
You meet a stranger and you have to talk a lot to each other. What an odd thing 
to do!” She gives a hollow laugh. A distrust of the press might explain why she 
is so defensive: quite often she will dismiss a question, only to later decide 
it’s valid. “I mean, funnily enough it is a conversation now,” she says of the 
working-class observation, “because we live in this weird old time in which… 
what’s happened to aspiration? So now I would see a point in talking about 
that.”

Where she does appear charmed, it’s when talking about what acting means to 
her. We discuss working at the National: “All actors love the National,” she 
says, wistfully. “I think there must be something about being beside that great 
vein of a river…” She explains her acting process – how her inspiration for a 
character can be something “as lateral as a smell, a flower, a piece of music” 
– with verve. “It’s just a huge amount of… foreplay,” she exhales.

Duff was the youngest child of Irish immigrants who met in England, her father 
a painter and decorator and her mother a shoe-shop assistant. Growing up, she 
remembers not quite fitting in. School, she says, was “a place where I knew I 
shouldn’t park my car. It was like a waiting room… a period of life to get 
through.” A shy youngster (“I wasn’t a tap-dancing five-year-old”), in her 
mid-teens she became set on acting. “And I was just so bloody-minded. It must 
sound ridiculous to anyone else, but I think, if you are creative things become 
necessary to you.” She remembers classmates thinking she was “a freak for 
reading [Soviet writer Maxim] Gorky”. But she doesn’t think she was wholly 
unpopular – and the elder sister of a schoolfriend of mine would concur. “I 
just remember her being a really nice girl,” she tells me. “Remember the girls 
who would smoke in the toilets who were a bit scary and would threaten to flush 
your head down the loo? Well, she was the opposite of that. So I was shocked 
when I saw her inShameless. Yeah, alright, I knew she acted, but you just 
wouldn’t have thought she had it in her!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230698118%2F39208cd6-39fe-4623-a2ec-dc37f90bf3ee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230698118%2F39208cd6-39fe-4623-a2ec-dc37f90bf3ee-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The critics’ darling: in Saint Joan at the National Theatre. 
Preparing for a part can be as ‘lateral as a smell, a flower, a piece of 
music. It’s just a huge amount of… foreplay’

In fact, everybody I speak to has only nice things to say about her. Marianne 
Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/03/marianne-elliott-theatre-curious-incident-dog>
, who directed her inSaint Joan and now Husbands & Sons, says: “Remarkably, she 
has very little ego. She’s so conscientious that sometimes it’s like working 
with a youngster straight out of drama school.”Sarah Gavron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/27/sexism-film-industry-stories>, 
director ofSuffragette, adds: “She’s pragmatic, and a real laugh.”

But still, we struggle to hit it off and eventually our interview reaches its 
nadir – I make the major error of asking which shoe shop her mother worked in, 
and this is where Duff delivers the line about us not “connecting”. I try to 
return to safe territory and ask her if she would like to direct or write one 
day, but all she can do is stare at the floor blankly.

“Anne-Marie, I don’t feel like this is going very well,” I say.

“Oh, please, don’t make it seem like we’re having a terrible interview, 
darling,” she says.

I explain I’m just feeling thrown and she suddenly looks thunderous. “Are you 
trying to make this interview go badly?” she asks. “So you can have a story?”

No, I protest. She seems satisfied. “OK, mate, good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230896369%2Fe1f6fa1d-47fa-4d77-b7e7-c4464a733c75-734x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anne-Marie%20Duff%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20so%20bloody-minded...%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Fanne-marie-duff-i-was-just-so-bloody-minded%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444230896369%2Fe1f6fa1d-47fa-4d77-b7e7-c4464a733c75-734x2040.jpeg>
 Romantic leads: Duff with partner James McAvoy. They met on the set of 
Shameless. Photograph: David Fisher/REX Shutterstock 
After we’ve settled that, the interview goes more smoothly. Up until now we 
haven’t discussed her marriage to the actorJames McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesmcavoy> – it is well-known that the 
couple have apact to keep this side of things entirely private 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/17/james-mcavoy-anne-marie-duff> – 
but to my surprise she starts to segue into anecdotes about him.Playing Lady 
Macbeth on Broadway in 2013 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/macbeth-theater-review-658859> leads 
us neatly intoMcAvoy’s own production of Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/24/macbeth-review-michael-billington>
 in London the same year and why Duff rates him as an actor: “He was just 
unrecognisable to me inFilth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/03/filth-review>.” In response to a 
question about what she’d like to do next in terms of acting projects she 
brings him into the equation voluntarily: “Oh, I don’t mind really [about which 
scripts she’s offered next]. Because it’s like falling in love: you have an 
idea and come up with a list, and then somebody comes along who’s Glaswegian 
and nine years younger than you, and you go: ‘Whaaaa! I just fell in love with 
someone!’” Duff laughs. “That’s the just way it is.”

We talk more about Husbands & Sons, which Duff is excited about because it 
will take place in the round and see the audience switching seats halfway 
through. “It feels a bit special,” she says. “Jesus, God, I’m so excited about 
it I can’t tell you.” We talk about why she won’t read reviews (“Because it’s 
like reading someone’s diary – you won’t stop until you find something 
negative. Ah, we are a weird, fucked-up species…”) and about readingJudi 
Dench’s autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/17/and-furthermore-judi-dench-review>
: “She said she’d been working on a play and everyone came backstage and said 
it was fabulous and she was like: ‘Really?’ And it made me laugh, because as an 
actor you can feel that – you don’t always have a connection to what you’re 
doing.”

If Dench is an idol, I think to myself, then if only Duff could take a leaf 
out of Dench’s book when it comes to giving interviews. Because Dench gets it 
where Duff doesn’t: When we finish and Duff puts her coat on, she turns to me 
and extends her hand. “So, mate,” she says, “are we friends? I’m sorry if you 
thought I was trying to be resistant.” “Oh no, no!” I say, in the way that 
British people apologise to each other. I shake her hand. “I just had to tell 
you I felt uncomfortable, because I did.” And that’s what does it. She’s 
thunderous again. “Well, thanks very much. You’ve made me feel like shit.”

Let’s hope we don’t run into each other at a school reunion.

Suffragette <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette> is released on 12 
October.Husbands & Sons previews from 19 October (nationaltheatre.org.uk 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk>)
 