
She's part of a literary dynasty that has dominated English literature for 
nearly 200 years, her sisters' books are on the national curriculum and hardly 
a Christmas goes by without a Brontë adaption. So why has Anne Brontë been 
forgotten? I know, I know, you haven't forgotten her, you read her all the 
time, you've gotAgnes Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780007449453/agnes-grey> 
in your hand right now. But in comparison to her sisters, Anne is not read. Her 
books aren't on the curriculum, she only shows up in must-read lists in 
combination with her famous siblings and most people would struggle to name her 
other book (The Tenant of Wildfell Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780007449903/the-tenant-of-wildfell-hall>
).

The problem with Anne was that she refused to glamorise violent, oppressive 
men. While Charlotte and Emily were embracing the concept of the brooding, 
abusive byronic hero, Anne preferred quiet, supportive men. Her heroes are 
curates and farmers, men who look after their mothers and resist the temptation 
to imprison or exile unwanted wives.

The contrast between Anne and her sisters is perfectly summarised by comics 
artist Kate Beaton ofHark! A Vagrant <http://www.harkavagrant.com> fame. In 
Dude Watchin' With the Brontës <http://www.harkavagrant.com/index.php?id=202> 
Charlotte Brontë and Emily Brontë are checking out some hunks as their younger 
sister, Anne, watches with growing frustration. "What about that one?" purrs 
the author ofJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre>, as a 
Mr Rochester figure skulks past. "The guy was an asshole," observes Anne. "What 
about that one?" simpers the author ofWuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/16/emily-bronte-wuthering-heights-100-best>
, as a Heathcliff lookalike lurches into view. "If you like alcoholic 
dickbags," Anne retorts. "You are so inappropriate … no wonder nobody buys your 
books," snap her sisters.

The comic will elicit sniggers of recognition from anyone who's suffered 
through the vitriolic alcoholics in Charlotte and Emily Brontë's novels. The 
hero in The Tenant of Wildfell Hall sits in sharp contrast to Heathcliff from 
Wuthering Heights: Gilbert Markham helps Helen flee from her abusive husband, 
while Heathcliff abuses his pregnant wife to the point that she runs away. 
Markham reluctantly accepts Helen's decision not to marry him; Heathcliff takes 
out a 20-year-long revenge policy when Cathy does them same.

Charlotte and Emily were undoubtedly feminist in their views and the way they 
felt about their writing; Charlotte frequently had to be restrained by her 
publishers from writing to critics who reviewed her gender rather than her 
books. But for the most part they kept their feminism off the page, focusing 
upon brutal male characters whose main appeal tended to be their potential for 
redemption. Anne, however, was far more explicit about her feminism, and she 
wrote about men who expressed their love in words, rather than by dominating 
the women in their lives.

Charlotte and Emily's fascination with violent men, and Anne's aversion to 
them, can be traced back to their brother, Branwell Brontë. Whenever anyone 
scratches their head over how three daughters of a country parson managed to 
write with such passion and insight about human nature, my eyes start rolling. 
With a brother like Branwell – handsome, charming, alcoholic – the sisters were 
provided with more than enough inspiration. The different ways in which they 
interpreted Branwell's behaviour is where it gets interesting.

The seductive nature of a happy ending can't be disputed, and the two older 
Brontës provide it in spades. In Wuthering Heights, Heathcliff and Cathy are 
never united, but their children fall in love: Heathcliff's behaviour is almost 
justified, as it has brought Linton and Cathy mark II together. Likewise in 
Jane Eyre, Mr Rochester falls in love with Plain Jane, attempts to commit 
bigamy, is thwarted, his wife luckily burns to death and they live happily ever 
after. Charlotte and Emily offered their fictional Branwells a form of 
redemption that in reality he failed to achieve.

Anne, the sister who spent the most time nursing Branwell, either refused or 
was unable to romanticise what happened to her brother. In The Tenant of 
Wildfell Hall an abused wife, Helen Graham, runs away from her alcoholic 
husband, Arthur Huntingdon. She meets Gilbert Markham and falls in love with 
him but is unable to marry him. Anne's depiction of Arthur Huntingdon's decline 
drew heavily on Branwell's death and still stands out today as an unflinching 
depiction of alcoholism.

By romanticising their alcoholic, violent brother, Charlotte and Emily Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte> were presenting an optimistic 
view of the byronic hero. Anne Brontë, however, refused to wear rose-tinted 
glasses. As a novelist she is more honest than Emily and more unflinching than 
Charlotte, but that doesn't make for great romance or cosy TV adaptations. It's 
easy to say that because Anne refused to give us a brooding hero, her books are 
less widely read. But I would suggest that she was in fact just too honest 
about the nature of violence and addiction.
 