
Hello, Annie. You’re running some “all-day raves” 
<https://www.residentadvisor.net/event.aspx?859427> at the moment. That sounds 
quite tiring. Is there anywhere to sit down?

 I did have a conversation with my manager about this. I said: “We need to 
make sure there’s somewhere to sit.” The words “all” and “day” are crucial: 
there’s not a lot of night, and that suits me for my current state(1) because 
it means I won’t be up until four in the morning. Club shows are pretty brutal 
when you’ve got kids.

The good news is that all the clubs are shutting down!


 That’s good and bad, let’s be honest. 

Well quite. Of those that remain, which is best?


 XOYO in London in terms of good nights and having resident DJs, which has 
been pretty unheard of in London for a while. I really love Motion in Bristol, 
too, which is quite warehousey.

Fabric: a nightclub that thrived by taking dance music seriously
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-dance-music-london-nightlife>
Was Fabric’s closure really about drugs, or secretly about property 
development?


 Drugs, I think. Radio 1 did a documentary on it and interviewed Cameron 
Leslie, who’s the co-founder of Fabric, and for once, he said, this was not to 
do with property. Which is fair enough – I mean if you’re a policeman and you 
havedead bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/london-nightclub-fabric-close-permanently-licence-revoked-drugs>
, you can’t let these things go. But I think there’s a much bigger conversation 
to be had about how drug use is not going to wane, and how drug strength is 
also increasing. There’s a big argument for what they do in some European 
countries: they try their best at prevention, but they also look at harm 
reduction. So they’ll let you test your drugs to see if they’re lethal, or even 
drugs at all. They did it at two festivals this year in England, and a quarter 
of the people handed their drugs back once they knew what was in them.

You’ve also got a new compilation out (2). Did you set yourself a brief, or 
just think of some songs you liked and chuck them on an album?

 It’s always just that really. Obviously there’s a label involved so they 
always have their say and want you to put on the biggest tracks of the year, 
and I don’t always like the biggest tracks of the year.

There’s no Chainsmokers on the album is there?


 Er, no [chortles]. A couple of DJ Snake tracks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IvPT2QuCIOA> haven’t made it on either.

Here’s a recent quote for you from Spotify’s head of dance and electronic 
music: “Radio is a thing of the past, it’s not relevant.” 
<http://musically.com/2016/09/23/spotify-exec-radio-past-not-relevant/> Any 
thoughts?


Well of course he’s going to say that. Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> definitely isn’t a thing of the 
past but it’s in a state of flux and the concept is changing. The traditional 
medium of having it there in the background as an old friend? That’s still 
there. The one thing we have, not that it’s a competition, is the human 
element. You can have the best playlists and algorithms in the world, but 
there’s nothing better than a person you like talking to you about music.

You say it’s not a competition, but: Zane Lowe’s World Record vs Annie Mac’s 
Hottest Record <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0182w8t>. Who’s getting 
offered the best songs? (3)


[Extended guffawing]. I do genuinely think Radio 1 gets the biggest, best 
exclusives because people know how many people listen to it(4). If you’re a 
manager or label you want your song to make the biggest impact, so you go to
Radio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>, still. Equally I’d rather 
make a two-week-old song Hottest Record than give something that’s “just 
alright”. Hottest Record simply because it’s been handed our way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fannie-mac-radio-definitely-isnt-a-thing-of-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3bc017960ea07471609c469243bc896e8413460%2F0_167_5127_3076%2F5127.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Mac%3A%20'Radio%20definitely%20isn't%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fannie-mac-radio-definitely-isnt-a-thing-of-the-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Mac%3A%20%27Radio%20definitely%20isn%27t%20a%20thing%20of%20the%20past%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fannie-mac-radio-definitely-isnt-a-thing-of-the-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3bc017960ea07471609c469243bc896e8413460%2F0_167_5127_3076%2F5127.jpg>
 Annie Mac at the Arcadia Spectacular at Queen’s park, Bristol, on 6 September 
2015. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Let’s move on to the Annie Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac> macaroni cheese that’s 
been touring the country’s festivals. (5) Did they ask you for permission? Do 
you get money? What’s happening?


 Do you know what, there’s no money. All I get is people Instagramming me from 
festivals going: “Oooooh you’re on a macaroni cheese stall.” The people who do 
it sent me a book.

A book about macaroni cheese?


 Yes. Actually, macaroni cheese is my favourite food of all time. I’m really 
into the new one from Pret. Have you had that one? It’s got butternut squash 
and goat’s cheese. It’s quite middle class.

You ask your Friday night listeners to tell you whether they’re raving or 
behaving.Isn’t raving or behaving a false dichotomy?


 Explain.

Zane Lowe: ‘Beats 1 is the common room for the future pop rebels’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/zane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music> 
Well, you can go out raving, but not get carried away. Equally, you can stay 
at home but get up to all sorts. It’s not black and white.


 I agree. If you want to make a nice spaghetti bolognese on a Friday while 
also raving, that’s fine. I don’t want people to think they have to be on a 
dancefloor or on the way to a nightclub. Itis a false dichotomy. You’re right. 
You’re pedantic, but you’re right.

It’s just journalism Annie.


 And I appreciate it. Bye!

 * Annie Mac’s AMP 2016 compilation is out now. Listen to Annie Mac on Radio 1 
Monday–Friday from 7pm

 Footnotes

(1) Annie’s quite literally pregnant! 

 (2) Annie Mac Presents 2016 contains 39 tracks. The best ones are KDA and 
Tinashe’s Just Say and the DJ Koze mix of Låpsley’s Operator.

(3) Annie took over Zane Lowe’s Radio 1 show when he went to Beats 1. Each day 
they get very excited about one new song: Zane calls his World Record, and 
Annie’s is Hottest Record.


 (4) Beats 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/30/apple-musics-beats-1-zane-lowe>
 has been on air for 14 months. Curiously, Apple – often so keen to trumpet 
impressive statistics – are yet to release any listening figures.

 (5) Established in 2010, Anna Mac’s Mac & Cheese van offers dishes such as 
The Kanye Western (it’s got BBQ sauce in it) and The Annie Mac, which boasts 
three different cheeses.
 