
What's the mood in Germany following the recent attacks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/whats-the-mood-in-germany-following-the-recent-attacks>
A Syrian man has killed himself and injured 12 others after setting off an 
explosive device outside a music festival in the German town of Ansbach.


Authorities said the 27-year-old had been denied asylum a year ago and had a 
history of making attempts on his own life. Three of those injured are in a 
serious condition.

It is believed a device he was carrying exploded although it is not clear 
whether it was a suicide bombing or whether the man intended to plant it and 
harm others.


The Bavarian interior minister, Joachim Herrmann, said his personal view was 
that the attack was likely the work of an “Islamist” suicide bomber, but this 
theory was played down by authorities.

Herrmann told Deutsche Presse-Agentur 
<http://www.focus.de/finanzen/news/wirtschaftsticker/bombenanschlag-in-ansbach-wohl-islamistischer-hintergrund_id_5759255.html>
: “My personal view is that I unfortunately think it is very likely this really 
was an Islamist suicide attack. The obvious intent to kill more people at least 
indicates an Islamist background.”

A spokeswoman for Bavaria’s police force told Reuters it was unclear what the 
attacker’s motivations were. A spokesman for the prosecutor’s office in Ansbach 
also said the motive was unclear. “If there is an Islamist link or not is 
purely speculation at this point,” said the spokesman, Michael Schrotberger.

More than 2,000 people had been in the crowd in the small town of 40,000 
people south-west of Nuremberg that is also home to a US army base.


Speaking at a press conference early on Monday morning, Herrmann said the man 
was carrying a backpack at the time of the blast, at about 10pm on Sunday, but 
was turned away at the entrance to the festival because he didn’t have a ticket.

The backpack contained metal items used in “wood manufacturing” and could have 
killed many more people, he said. Hermann did not specify whether these items 
were nails or screws

Ansbach explosion: one dead and 11 injured in German town after 'deliberate' 
blast - latest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/25/ansbach-explosion-german-town-deliberate-blast-latest>
Hermann said the man’s request for asylum was rejected a year ago, but he was 
allowed to remain inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> on 
account of the situation in Syria. “It’s terrible ... that someone who came 
into our country to seek shelter has now committed such a heinous act and 
injured a large number of people who are at home here, some seriously,” he said.


“It’s a further, horrific attack that will increase the already growing 
security concerns of our citizens. We must do everything possible to prevent 
the spread of such violence in our country by people who came here to ask for 
asylum.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbomb-attack-southern-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42743ee047b2dc2e57b427eca3be587689e7583%2F61_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ansbach%20blast%3A%20Syrian%20asylum%20seeker%20kills%20himself%20and%20injures%2012%20in%20Germany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbomb-attack-southern-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ansbach%20blast%3A%20Syrian%20asylum%20seeker%20kills%20himself%20and%20injures%2012%20in%20Germany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbomb-attack-southern-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42743ee047b2dc2e57b427eca3be587689e7583%2F61_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
 Emergency workers and vehicles in Ansbach town centre after the explosion. 
Photograph: Reuters Tv/Reuters 
After the explosion the area was evacuated and the music festival cancelled. 
Ian Anderson, frontman of defunct prog-rock bandJethro Tull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/15/ian-anderson-end-of-jethro-tull>
, had been scheduled to perform.

Thomas Debinski, who was interviewed by Sky News, described a “disturbing” 
scene as people in the small city realised a violent act had taken place.

“People were definitely panicking, the rumour we were hearing immediately was 
that there had been a gas explosion,” he said. “But then people came past and 
said it was a rucksack that had exploded. Someone blew themselves up. After 
what just happened in Munich it’s very disturbing to think what can happen so 
close to you in such a small town.”

Police sealed off the town centre and emergency services attended the scene. 
Bomb experts were sent to determine the cause of the explosion.
Ansbach map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/ansbach/giv-12515JHVOBi5nH7WZ/>
The explosion, which followed the killing on Friday of nine people by an 
18-year-old gunman in Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/world/munich-shooting>
, occurred at a wine bar called Eugene’s, the Nürnberger Nachrichten newspaper 
reported.

Germany, and Bavaria in particular, has been on edge after a deadly rampage at 
a Munich shopping mall on Friday in which nine people were killed, and an axe 
attack on a train near Würzburg last Monday in which five people were wounded.


Both came shortly after a Tunisian man in a truck killed 84 people when he 
ploughed through a crowd celebrating Bastille Day in the French city of Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/lorry-rams-bastille-day-crowd-in-nice-killing-at-least-70>
, on the French Riviera.

Bavarian public broadcaster Bayerische Rundfunk reported that about 200 police 
officers and 350 rescue personnel were brought in following the explosion in 
Ansbach.
 