
Bah humbug to traditional Christmas movies. At the tail end of December, the 
last thing you want as small-screen respite from the festivities is another 
heart-warming story of a magicalChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. Or anything involving 
baubles. Here is a selection of films handily airing on TV over the holiday 
season to help you through this most magical time of the year.

Jaws, chosen by Stuart Heritage


(10.25pm, ITV, 28 December)

Everyone gets sick of Christmas sometimes. At some point during the festive 
season, the onslaught of lights and food and sincerity will pile up into an 
enormous drift and suffocate you alive. But there is an antidote to all this 
cloying sweetness. That antidote isJaws <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jaws>.

Forget about human kindness. Jaws reminds us that goodwill to all men only 
stretches as far as the beach, and after that you’re on your own. The sea is 
dark and deep, and crawling with leviathans that exist exclusively to murder 
you, legs first. The world is a scary place, and you had better be ready with 
your strychnine harpoons and exploding scuba tanks, or else it will take you 
out. If you look really hard, you will find flashes of Christmas spirit – the 
scene with Brody and his son at dinner is practically Christmas incarnate – but 
that’s all window dressing for a story about a shark that would kill you in a 
second if you let it.

Now that all blockbusters are legally mandated to culminate in scenes in which 
men with inflatable muscles save a large metropolitan area from a giant 
space-laser, Jaws is refreshingly simple. There’s a shark. It eats people. Some 
people go out to kill it. They do. The end. Stripped-down and taut, it is the 
perfect palate cleanser. In fact, the only thing that could make a Christmas 
Jaws broadcast any better is if everyone who watched it received a freeMayor 
Larry Vaughn anchor suit 
<http://static.deathandtaxesmag.com/uploads/2013/09/6-585x246.jpg>.

The Remains of the Day, chosen by Hadley Freeman


(Sony Channel and Amazon Video)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn_ap4Czeo4Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn_ap4Czeo4Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn_ap4Czeo4Y&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Remains of the Day 
In my house, Christmas movies come in two flavours: 80s comedies and period 
dramas, andThe Remains of the Day <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n_ap4Czeo4Y> 
is the finest modern-day example of the latter. (Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters> is obviously the finest example 
of the former category, but that’s another issue.) The richest and most moving 
film from the Merchant Ivory stable, perfectly adapted fromKazuo Ishiguro’s 
novel <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/remains-of-the-day.html>, this is the 
film I want to curl up with on a dark, melancholy winter’s afternoon; its mood 
matches the darkness outside, but the brilliance of the storytelling and acting 
thrills me into most unwinterly optimism.

So if you’re the kind of person who bangs on about the Emma Thompson scene in 
Love, Actually <https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-actually>, please – 
please – watch this instead to see Thompson at her heartbroken best. 
(Seriously, don’t watch Love, Actually. It is genuinely one of the worst movies 
ever made.) It’s bittersweet to watch Christopher Reeves now, vibrant and 
healthy, but how cheering to see him be so good in the kind of dramatic role he 
so rarely got to play. I can’t watch James Fox enough in this, especially when 
he, as the foolish Lord Darlington, realises his mistake too late. But this is, 
of course, really Anthony Hopkins’s movie: he has never been better than he is 
here as Stevens the butler, Hannibal Schmannibal.

The Remains of the Day is about Britain during the second world war, but it is 
also about love and missed chances. So Nazi uniformsand longing looks, all in 
one of the finest British movies made. This is what holiday movie perfection 
looks like, folks.

Oliver! Chosen by Xan Brooks


(7pm, W, Christmas Day, and Amazon Video)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43203ddc038200cd3dd92ef254bdb4c0cb2328f4%2F714_0_1806_1806%2F1806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43203ddc038200cd3dd92ef254bdb4c0cb2328f4%2F714_0_1806_1806%2F1806.jpg>
 The Artful Dodger (Jack Wild), Fagin (Ron Moody) and Oliver Twist (Mark 
Lister) in Oliver! Photograph: Allstar/Romulus 
When citing the best Charles Dickens film adaptation, some opt for David Lean’s
Great Expectations <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eXyo68s-f1E>, others for 
1951’sChristmas Carol <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0044008/reference>. But I’m 
sticking withOliver! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QSTQ8isun68>, Carol 
Reed’s boisterous presentation of the Lionel Bart musical, which has been 
synonymous with Dickens ever since I first watched it as a kid and assumed he 
must have written all the songs as well. Then, as now, I accept it as an 
accurate representation of an 1830s London where constables and cutpurses 
temporarily set aside their differences in order to congregate for a knees-up 
beside some tavern or other.

In fact, the last time I visited, the film looked just as good as it ever did. 
I love Oliver! for its rollicking gait and insouciant air and for the robust 
playing from Ron Moody (as Fagin), Jack Wild (Dodger) and Oliver Reed (a 
brooding, beautiful Bill Sikes, right before the rot set in). I suspect it 
might even be a more appropriate seasonal film than A Christmas Carol, in that 
its world of surging crowds, violent avarice and random kindness speaks more to 
the reality of Christmas than some pious tale of a miser who winds up buying a 
turkey.

And maybe the musical is the perfect vessel for Oliver Twist. This takes what 
might otherwise be seen as the novel’s weak points (the pantomime villainy; the 
cloying sentimentality; the facile, bouncing-ball plot) and makes a bonus of 
them. Amplified to a theatrical pitch, the tale casts off its social-realist 
clogs and begins dancing around the stage-flats like some festive carouser; 
merry one moment, maudlin the next.

I’ve reviewed the situation; arrived right back where I started. Oliver! (big 
as life and twice as noisy) remains the perfect Christmas Dickens.

22 Jump Street, chosen by Catherine Shoard


(Amazon Video)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrbZk_3KbRlg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrbZk_3KbRlg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrbZk_3KbRlg&media=>
 Watch the trailer for 22 Jump Street 
’Tis the season for shameless repackaging and gleeful repetition. So what more 
fitting late-night, eggnogged-out cheerer-upper than this deliriously silly, 
but also remarkably smart, comedy sequel? It, too, delights in ostentatious 
tradition for its own sake; knowing yet affectionate cribbing from the recent 
past. The plot isexactly the same as the original, 2012’s 21 Jump Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/15/21-jump-street-review>, a belated 
big-screen transfer for the 80s TV show,this time round 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v9S_dYuq0vE> starring Channing Tatum and Jonah 
Hill.

The undercover cops must infiltrate a place of education (first time round, a 
high-school; this time, a college) to try to identify the dealer trading in a 
new drug popular with the students. They must battle youngsters suspicious of 
their crows’ feet, a tough-talking boss (Ice Cube), and their conflicted 
feelings about each other. What 22 Jump Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/05/22-jump-street-review-channing-tatum-jonah-hill-peter-bradshaw>
 manages, however, is to be a yet-crisper facsimile of the original’s script, 
its set pieces funnier, its jokes more creative, and its two stars now 
ebulliently confident of their own skills, and of our love.

But the chief reason it feels fitting for the time of year at which your sense 
of benevolence might be under strain is that it’s just so damn nice. Rarely has 
a multiplex bro-romp proved that comedy doesn’t need to be cruel more 
effectively than this film. It advocates kindness and consideration above all 
else, in every relationship. It continually wrongfoots the audience with an 
admirable and very funny gay rights thread, which sees chief jock Tatum 
rebuking bullies, and himself, for their homophobic language. And its standout 
gag is a malapropism involving Cate Blanchett. Fun for all the family, almost.

Bee Movie, chosen by Peter Bradshaw


(10.20pm, BBC2, Christmas Day, and Netflix and Amazon Video)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12921e2a84bdea0e49b54c20936206b98d7fa324%2F943_0_1569_1961%2F1569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12921e2a84bdea0e49b54c20936206b98d7fa324%2F943_0_1569_1961%2F1569.jpg>
 Barry in Bee Movie Photograph: Allstar/Dreamworks 
Most Hollywood animations, even the best of them, are put together by teams of 
laser-eyed professionals who know what works and don’t want to reinvent the 
wheel. The adorable lead character goes on a journey with songs in the company 
of quirky animal friends who do quickfire gags. That’s it.

Jerry Seinfeld’s Bee Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/14/animation.family> isn’t like 
that: it feels almost organic, natural, a hand-crafted comedy that follows the 
meandering, freewheeling train-of-thought typical of this observational comic. 
InBee Movie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VONRQMx78YI>, as in Seinfeld’s TV 
show, there is no hugging, no learning. Well: a minimum anyway. Seinfeld voices 
Barry, an idealistic young Everybee who falls in love with a human florist 
(voiced by Renée Zellweger) but then realises that he and his comrades are 
being systematically exploited for their delicious honey by their human 
oppressors.

The romantic storyline is supplanted by a hilarious, but weirdly inspiring 
courtroom saga in which Barry takes on the big human battalions and people such 
as Sting, who is guilty of cultural appropriation with his contemptible 
“prance-about stage name”. It is a comedy that starts funny, is funny in the 
middle, and ends up funny, unlike the usual Hollywood model in which the movie 
is frontloaded with humour – the laughs are only in the premise, the opening 
act, before it winds down into sentimentality. Bee Movie is a rare treat and 
one of Seinfeld’s unsung achievements.

The Naked Gun: from the Files of Police Squad! Chosen by Steve Rose


(10pm, ITV4, Boxing Day, and Amazon Video)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d1c10eb832baf2fca630c2724651e0f10e9938%2F0_37_1224_1530%2F1224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d1c10eb832baf2fca630c2724651e0f10e9938%2F0_37_1224_1530%2F1224.jpg>
 Leslie Nielsen in The Naked Gun. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Para 
Christmas holiday? Work is a holiday compared with Christmas. Which is why my 
kind of film at this time of year is one that a) requires minimal brainpower, 
b) makes me laugh, c) I haven’t seen for a while, and d) has nothing to do with 
Christmas.The Naked Gun <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iB0pGLsdeJ4> ticks 
those boxes. Most people remember Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker’s earlier hits, 
Airplane! and Top Secret! The Naked Gun is more of the same: a spoof of the 
hard-boiled detective thriller packed with nonsense dialogue, corny puns, movie 
parodies and inspired slapstick, all carried by the zen master of deadpan, 
Leslie Nielsen.

I still find it difficult to keep a straight face thinking of, say, Nielsen’s 
“casing the joint” outing, which ends with him inadvertently destroying Ricardo 
Montalbán’s office, fellating a gargoyle, then threatening a woman with a stone 
dildo. Or his mangling of the national anthem while posing as an opera singer 
at the baseball match. It’s all funnier because it’s him doing it.

There’s an added nostalgia element seeing The Naked Gun now. It was a time 
when Weird Al Yankovic could be a celebrity cameo, when the US’s enemies 
included Idi Amin, Ayatollah Khomeini and, er,, er, Mikhail Gorbachev, and when 
OJ Simpson was a lovable former sporting hero (in a karmic running gag, he is 
accidentally clobbered every time he appears).

Yes, The Naked Gun is dated, occasionally dodgy, and very silly, but the 
carpet-bombing of comedy will satisfy the sternest of critics, the shortest of 
attention spans and the weariest of festive souls. At this time of year, I’m 
all three.

Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, chosen by Ryan Gilbey


(11am, ITV, 30 December, and Netflix and Amazon Video)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0ke-v0e3Cd4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0ke-v0e3Cd4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0ke-v0e3Cd4&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Dirty Rotten Scoundrels 
There are only three main performers in Dirty Rotten Scoundrels 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ke-v0e3Cd4>: Michael Caine as a debonair 
conman living high on the hog in the Côte D’Azur; Steve Martin as the uncouth 
pretender who becomes Caine’s own Eliza Doolittle; and Glenne Headly as the 
out-of-towner whom the tricksters compete to swindle. But the list of aliases 
distributed among the cast (including Dr Emil Shaffhausen, Lady Fanny of Omaha, 
Chips O’Toole and Ruprecht the Monkey Boy) suggests a far larger ensemble.

This 1988 romp is a celebration of performance and play-acting, of putting on 
daft voices and spinning tall tales. The scoundrels have transformed their 
lives into playgrounds where they do nothing but lark around in pursuit of 
money. For once, women get to play too: Headly is a hoot, and watch out also 
for Barbara Harris, from Nashville and Family Plot, as a credulous holidaymaker 
with more riches than sense.

Frank Oz directs briskly on sets and locations that would make a department 
store lighting section look murky. This may not be great cinema, but it is 
great comedy, with no end of delirious set-pieces, from Martin trying and 
failing repeatedly to remember Caine’s name while stuck in prison, to the 
torture Caine puts him through during one ruse when he is feigning paralysis. 
Such casual venality may not sound so funny when the world is staring down the 
barrel of the next US administration. The film is a good way, though, to forget 
for a few hours about any real-life dirty rotten scoundrels out there.

The Terminator 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2dh0ok_the-terminator-1984-full-movie-watch-online_shortfilms>
, chosen by Andrew Pulver


(9pm, Spike, 27 December, and Amazon Video)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210cfd5e4a41dfc9cd0a19f43139207da614a27a%2F0_43_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-Santa%3A%20the%20best%20alternative%20Christmas%20films%20on%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fanti-santa-best-alternative-christmas-films-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210cfd5e4a41dfc9cd0a19f43139207da614a27a%2F0_43_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
 Arnold Schwarzenegger in The Terminator. Photograph: Allstar/Orion Pictures 
There is a special category of films that don’t get much acclaim: The Ones You 
Always Watch When They’re On. You know: you turn on the TV, tired and/or bored, 
can’t be doing with anything that takes effort. There’s this thing, it’s on, 
you think about flipping channel but for some reason, you keep going, and 
going, and going …

The king of TOYAWWTO used to be Bond, or the Carry Ons – but who, seriously, 
can be doing with them nowadays? For me, the archetypal TOYAWWTO is Starship 
Troopers: I must have seen it 50 times. Close second: The Matrix. But neither 
of them is on over Christmas as far as I can see, so it’s down to No 3 on the 
list: The Terminator.

More than 30 years on, The Terminator looks distinctly odd in parts: Linda 
Hamilton’s fuzz-brush haircut for one, the slavering worship of naked Arnie for 
another. It’s also strange to dwell on James Cameron’s idea of an early 80s 
nightclub for punks and hipsters, as well as his not-far-beneath-the-surface 
homicidal hatred of those selfsame punks and hipsters. But The Terminator 
remains as fantastically watchable as ever, in the purest sense of the word: 
it’s like gobbling down a whole tube of glucose tablets in one go, without the 
long-term medical consequences.

When you are punchdrunk from festivity, Christmas is a great time for 
TOYAWWTO. (It’s not just about action or sci-fi; Room with a View, for me, is a 
big one, and I don’t think it’s possible to watch End of the Century, the 
Ramones doc, too many times.) The only downside that I can see is that The 
Terminator doesn’t seem to have been double-billed with Terminator 2. So 
perhaps all our Christmases haven’t come at once.
 