
Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> remain hopeful that the 
34 players facing the World Anti-Doping Agency’s appeal will know their fates 
by Christmas with the hearing to start on Monday at the Court of Arbitration 
for Sport in Sydney.

The world body is challenging the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
anti-doping tribunal’s March verdict that cleared the 34 current and past 
players. The three-man CAS panel’s verdict is final, meaning it is the last 
stage of the anti-doping process that started in February two years ago.

Essendon supplements saga: AFL club charged over health and safety breaches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/essendon-supplements-saga-afl-club-charged-over-health-and-safety-breaches>
Essendon dropped a bombshell then when they announced they would be the 
subjects of a joint AFL andAsada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> 
investigation. The saga relates to the club’s controversial 2011-12 supplements 
regime.

“While there are no guarantees, all indications from the CAS and players 
lawyers suggest that it is likely a decision will be handed down prior to 
Christmas,” Essendon chief executive Xavier Campbell said.

“Our players have been incredibly resilient throughout this process and we ask 
that our members and fans continue to support them in this final stage of the 
process.”

Former Asada chief executive Richard Ings was sceptical last week about CAS 
handing down a verdict by Christmas. He noted that unless there was a time 
imperative – such as a selection appeal ahead of an Olympics – the verdict 
could take about three months.

If the players lose the appeal, their actual punishment could well be token. 
They have already served provisional suspensions before the original AFL 
anti-doping tribunal hearing and those would count towards any sanction. Also, 
Cronulla players had their suspensions backdated last year, meaning most of 
them only missed a small number of games.

The Essendon players remain adamant they did nothing wrong. “We remain 
confident in the players position and will continue to support the players, 
both past and present, and their families during this time,” Campbell said.

The hearing, expected to last for five days, will be closed and even Essendon 
cannot have a representative in the room. While the CAS verdict will be final, 
there is ongoing speculation about various legal actions that could be launched 
afterwards as a result of the supplements saga.
 