
AO World <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ao-world> and Ikea have 
reported booming online Christmas trading as the internet continued to divide 
winners and losers in retailers’ most important trading period.

In a trading update, AO, the online electrical goods specialist, said its 
internet sales rose 38% in the three months to the end of December. Total 
revenues, including sales for other retailers, were up 26%. Ikea’s revenues at 
stores open a year or more rose 8.8% in the last four months of 2015 but online 
sales increased 33.5%.

Traditional Christmas spending patterns were thrown into disarray  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/08/christmas-shopping-surge-online-puts-retailers-under-strain>
by unexpected online demand on Black Friday, the final Friday in November, when 
retailers slashed prices to draw in early festive trade.

John Roberts, AO’s chief executive, told analysts the company had record 
business onBlack Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, 
when it offered a 50in LED TV for £249, but that he doubted whether the event 
increased customers’ total spending.

Roberts said: “Our brand recognition continues to grow and over this key peak 
period, including the unprecedented demand seen on Black Friday, we continued 
to deliver for our customers.”

Ikea said sales of bedroom items were particularly strong in the runup to 
Christmas after itswitched its mattresses and beds from European dimensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/12/ikea-booms-britain-uk-size-smaller-beds-sales>
 to slightly smaller UK sizes last April. Mattress sales at the Swedish chain 
rose 41%.

Established retailers such as Marks & Spencer and Debenhams, as well as 
internet fashion specialist Boohoo.com, were caught out by the spike in demand 
for online offers on the US-inspired day. Boohoo was forced to issue a profit 
warning last week after pre-Christmas sales failed to materialise as hoped.

Next emerged as one of retail’s Christmas success stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/30/next-emerges-christmas-winner>
 as the fashion chain’s home shopping arm, including online, helped it combat 
widespread discounting on the high street. John Lewis’s internet business also 
performed wellbut the department store chain warned that Black Friday distorted 
trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/05/john-lewis-boss-says-rein-in-black-friday>
.

Clive Black, an analyst at stockbroker Shore Capital, said: “AO is one of the 
demonstrable winners over the festive period. We liked the way John Roberts 
talked about taking Black Friday in his stride and that, although it’s a bit of 
a hiatus, it encourages people to shop online, which is what they need in the 
long run.”

AO was listed on the stock exchange last February amid a frenzy over prospects 
for online retailers but shortly after the float the stock dipped below its 
285p offer price. The price rose 6.2% to 262.5p on news of trading figures, the 
biggest gainers in the FTSE 350 index of leading shares.

Boohoo’s online fashion rival Asos is scheduled to report its Christmas 
trading on Tuesday. Ocado, the online grocer, and Home Retail, which owns 
Argos, revamped as a click-and-collect retailer, post figures on Wednesday.
 