
Millions of South Africans suffer from debilitating hearing loss. Early 
screening is vital, but represents a challenge in a vast country where rural 
populations lack access to medical experts.

A new smartphone app is attempting to address these problems by detecting 
hearing loss and connecting patients with experts.

The hearScreen <http://www.hearscreen.com/> app, developed at the University 
of Pretoria in 2013, uses a smartphone and a pair of headphones to test for 
hearing loss. The results are captured and can be shared with hearing loss 
experts.

'My job is to make children hopeful': inside Liberia's deaf school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/10/liberia-school-deaf-marginalised-my-job-is-to-make-children-hopeful>
The idea for the app was born when chief executive Nic Klopper served on a 
Department of Health committee implementing a policy aimed at screening 3.5 
million children for hearing loss annually.

“Realising that the prohibitive costs of current test equipment and technical 
expertise required meant that less than 5% of children were receiving these 
services made me look into exploring alternative solutions,” he says. 
“Capitalising on the rapid growth in smartphone technology and connectivity 
just made sense.”

Klopper got in touch with Dr Herman Myburgh at the University of Pretoria to 
develop hearScreen. “It provides the first smartphone-based hearing test that 
allows acoustic calibration of test stimuli according to prescribed national 
and international standards,” says Klopper.

The intention has always been to provide a solution for decentralised 
community-based access to hearing healthcare. More than 80% of the app’s usage 
is in underserved and rural areas.

“Hearing screening is the first access point for the identification of hearing 
loss to initiate appropriate interventions that minimise and negate the 
negative impact of hearing loss,” says Klopper. “At present, hearing test 
equipment is prohibitively expensive and inaccessible to the vast majority of 
South Africans.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fapp-designed-to-detect-hearing-loss-makes-a-big-noise-in-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4302d8b08e32db3390d13134a5911d61640477a%2F0_376_2173_1304%2F2173.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=App%20designed%20to%20detect%20hearing%20loss%20makes%20a%20big%20noise%20in%20South%20Africa%20%7C%20Tom%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fapp-designed-to-detect-hearing-loss-makes-a-big-noise-in-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=App%20designed%20to%20detect%20hearing%20loss%20makes%20a%20big%20noise%20in%20South%20Africa%20%7C%20Tom%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fapp-designed-to-detect-hearing-loss-makes-a-big-noise-in-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4302d8b08e32db3390d13134a5911d61640477a%2F0_376_2173_1304%2F2173.jpg>
 A user gets to grips with the hearScreen app 
The response has been positive in South Africa, where hearScreen has partnered 
a number of NGOs to ensure quick and efficient rollout. The Topsy Foundation, 
which supports orphaned and vulnerable children inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, plans to use the tool in its 
early childhood development programme.

Klopper says the app was deliberately designed to enable a layperson with 
minimal training to use a test accurately. “In fact, the iconography was 
planned so that even someone illiterate could facilitate an accurate test,” he 
says. “Automated test sequences and quality control measures like environmental 
noise monitoring ensure reliable testing with cloud-based data management and 
surveillance for tracking and referral purposes.”

It is not just in South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> that 
hearScreen is making its presence felt.

More than 360 million people globally 
<http://www.who.int/pbd/deafness/estimates/en/> suffer from hearing loss. The 
app is now being used in 25 countries, and the company is working with the 
World Health Organisation and the US aid agency USAid.
 