
Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> with disabilities or 
special educational needs should not be afraid to follow their dream of a 
university degree. Disabled students are entitled to be judged on academic 
merit in the same way as others, and given extra support.

No one says it is easy to live independently, study and take a part in student 
life if you need walking aids, breathing equipment or machines to help you 
decipher the material. But each year in the UK, hundreds of disabled students 
attend graduation ceremonies and are planning the next step in their lives.

Having a disability does not make you less clever, though not everyone 
acknowledges it. “I get annoyed when people speak to my parents and not to me, 
as if people in a wheelchair are incapable of understanding,” says Lucy Neat, 
who is studying modern languages at the University of Manchester and achieving 
first-class grades.

We advise applicants to attend an open day to see the terrain, because there's 
a big difference between universities
Lou Miller, head of disability services, University of Bristol 
On top of the usual loans for fees and living costs, disabled students can 
claim grants for specialist equipment, non-medical help and travel. Care 
packages can be transferred and under theEquality Act 2010 
<http://www.ecu.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/external/equality-act-2010-briefing-revised-08-12.pdf>
, universities have a duty to help meet disabled students’ needs.

“If you are disabled and want to go to university then 100% go for it, because 
it can transform your life,” says Neat, who suffers from fibromyalgia. “I was 
homesick at first, like most students, but I soon made friends – people thought 
my scooter was cool!”

There’s lots of information on university websites, but it’s best if you 
visit, says Neat. “I loved the look of the course at Durham, but it was only 
when I got there that I realised about all the hills. I have to use sticks or a 
mobility scooter and that would have been very difficult.”

Neat receives a Snowdon grant to bridge the gap between the normal cost of 
university accommodation and the flat with kitchenette she needs to keep safe 
from chemicals and food that spark an attack. TheSnowdon Trust 
<https://www.snowdontrust.org/> awards grants for things that cannot be funded 
through other channels.

The disabled students’ allowances 
<https://www.gov.uk/disabled-students-allowances-dsas/overview> (DSAs) are 
sufficient for most undergraduates but not all, says Paul Alexander, the 
Snowdon Trust’s chief executive. “Deaf students may need sign language 
interpreters that cost up to £50 an hour or a student may need a mobility 
scooter to get around the campus or an adapted bed like the one they have at 
home,” he says. “In theory, universities should all be able to offer similar 
support. In practice, we find that there are some very good and supportive ones 
and others that are less so. You need to contact them and ask what sort of help 
they will offer.”

The question is particularly important for the academic year 2016-17 because 
thegovernment is cutting £24.5m from the funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/02/government-to-cut-funding-disabled-university-students-jo-johnson>
 it gives to universities to support disabled students, expecting them to use 
their student fee income to cover items such as extra IT equipment, study 
support and campus adaptations.

Don’t be hesitant about stating your special needs on the Ucas form. “Students 
are admitted on academic merit and it won’t make any difference to whether you 
receive an offer,” says Lou Miller, head of disability services at the 
University of Bristol. “We will direct the applicant to a portal to complete a 
short questionnaire and then talk to them about the support they will need. We 
welcome queries from applicants and their parents at an early stage and we 
strongly advise them to attend an open day or arrange a visit so they can see 
the terrain, because there is a big difference between universities.”

Case study: Sean Doherty, studying for a master’s in engineering at Cardiff 
University
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdisabled-special-needs-students-application-to-university-allowances-dsa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd2069dbc82d38c64616298f85814f56495cbfe1%2F0_0_2368_1421%2F2368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Applications%20welcome%20from%20disabled%20and%20special%20needs%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdisabled-special-needs-students-application-to-university-allowances-dsa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Applications%20welcome%20from%20disabled%20and%20special%20needs%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdisabled-special-needs-students-application-to-university-allowances-dsa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd2069dbc82d38c64616298f85814f56495cbfe1%2F0_0_2368_1421%2F2368.jpg>
 Sean Doherty: ‘I always wanted to be an inventor and was keen to explore ways 
of helping wheelchair users. Photograph: Clare Hewitt for the Guardian 
Sean Doherty was planning to go to university when a terrible mountain-bike 
accident left him paralysed from the chest down. He was 16 and had just 
finished GCSEs at Marling school in Stroud. Instead of putting him off going to 
university, his injury made him all the more determined.


“If you want to give yourself a better chance to contribute and be independent 
in life then education is probably the best way. My view was that if I wanted 
to do a good job without the same use of my body as most other people, then I 
would have to maximise what I can contribute with my mind,” says Doherty, who 
uses a wheelchair and relies on a 24-hour personal assistant.

If you want to give yourself a better chance and be independent in life then 
education is probably the best way
Sean Doherty 
“I always wanted to be an inventor from a young age and was keen to explore 
ways of helping wheelchair users, so I chose to study medical engineering.” But 
first he had to begin studying for his A-levels at Stoke Mandeville hospital 
before returning to the sixth form at his school to complete them.

“After looking around several universities, I chose Cardiff and Nottingham, 
largely because they had wheelchair rugby teams nearby but also because of 
their positive attitude to supporting disabled students,” Doherty says.

He finally decided on Cardiff – mainly because the terrain was flatter – and 
following four years of study, graduated with a 2:1 master’s in engineering. 
Now 24, he is doing a PhD at University College London, exploring the use of 
electrical stimulation to artificially restore bladder control.

“I qualified for the disabled student allowances but I couldn’t get funding 
towards accommodation for my personal assistant because it fell through the 
gaps in the different funding streams. I had to pursue loads of dead ends 
until, by chance, I found out about a great charity called the Snowdon Trust 
that will step in and help,” he says.

“I would say to anyone in my position that they should consider university,” 
Doherty says. “What you need to do is work out exactly what you want to study 
regardless of your disability. You can sort out the practical bits later. Then 
talk to the universities as early as you can and make sure you visit to get a 
feel for how manageable it will be.

“When you choose a university, it’s important to look at the accessibility, 
not just of the accommodation you will be offered but at other halls and flats 
where your friends will be, because you don’t want to miss the party.

Looking back at the time he spent at Cardiff university, Doherty adds: “I had 
a good social life, and while aspects of getting out are often harder, I made 
great friends and didn’t encounter much negative attitude from other students. 
I met my girlfriend at university and we have been together five years now.”

Disabled students: what to expect

 * Tuition fee loan of up to £9,000 

 * Living cost loan of up to £8,200, based on family income 

 * An extra non-means-tested living cost loan of around £1,000 

 * Disabled students’ allowances (DSA) which are not repaid, provide up to: 
 £5,212 per course for specialist equipment
 £20,725 a year for non-medical help 
 £1,741 a year for general expenditure 
 * Disability travel costs that have no ceiling 

 * University-funded support, such as IT equipment, study support and 
accessibility adaptations  