
Chip designer and Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> supplier
Imagination Technologies is in demand after better than expected results and 
news that its restructuring is on track.

The company said royalty revenues rose 6% and licensing revenues 7% in the 
first half, with earnings before interest and tax up 65% to £12.2m.

It has sold its Pure radio business and most of IMGsystems, with design and 
software group IMGworks near disposal, and it has achieved £27.5m of annual 
cost savings. It plans to concentrate on three core businesses, graphics, 
processing and connectivity (wi-fi and Bluetooth).

Chief executive Andrew Heath said:

We have successfully executed the restructuring programme initiated last 
February, on time and in line with our expectations. The £27.5m of cost 
savings...have been delivered - this has enabled the business to return to 
profitability...

We are now in a much better position to exploit our leading technologies, 
across a range of increasing opportunities and execute our refreshed strategy.

From our continuing operations we remain on course to deliver an underlying 
trading performance for the year in line with our expectations and anticipate 
that we will continue to see an additional benefit from the strong US dollar.

The company also announced that chairman Bert Nordberg will leave in February 
2017 after just two years, to be replaced by Peter Hill, non-executive chairman 
of Keller and Volution Group.

The company’s shares have climbed 17p or nearly 8% to 237p, and analysts at 
Liberum said:

Imagination’s first half results are ahead of our forecasts, aided by currency 
moves and a 260% year on year jump in Ensigma [connectivity] licensing revenue. 
We expect a sequentially stronger second half based on higher Apple royalties, 
healthy licensing, and further currency benefits. We have raised both our 
adjusted operating income and adjusted earnings per share forecast for 2017 by 
14% each. We believe all three of Imagination’s businesses are well positioned 
to see growing licensing and royalty revenue due to the increasing importance 
of graphics processing, Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, automated driving 
and Internet of Things. Valuations are attractive. Buy.

At Investec, analyst Roger Phillips said:

Interims are strong on a headline basis with a beat to revenue – both licence 
and royalty - and EBIT, and guidance retained for 2017 with the rider of a 
possible foreign exchange benefit. The fly in the ointment is that the positive 
bits of the interims come from the less valuable parts of the business, while 
the core PowerVR franchise is weak. The Chairman has also announced his 
departure. We retain our Buy; this set of results should represent trough 
financials, with a stronger second half in store and potential upside in 2018 
from regained market share.

We think the GPU IP business is worth at least 260p on the current trough 
financials, with potential upside in 2018 through regained Asian System on a 
Chip market share (particularly Mediatek).
 