
While the giants of the streaming world duke it out over Ashton Kutcher 
sitcoms and Top Gear rehashes, Mubi is singlehandedly realising the potential 
that subscription services have to push viewers beyond their comfort zones. 
Alongside its usual roster of arthouse favourites and Hollywood oddities, the 
platform has had exclusive online premieres for a Paul Thomas Anderson 
documentary, a key work of the contemporary Canadian avant garde (88.88), and 
nowArabian Nights, the acclaimed three-volume opus from Portugal’s Miguel Gomes.

Arabian Nights Vol 1: The Restless One review – resistance through filmic 
poetry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/arabian-nights-vol-1-the-restless-one-review-miguel-gomes>
This 382-minute epic opens with Gomes in a creative slump, bemoaning in a 
theatrical cameo his inability to do cinematic justice to Portugal’s fraught 
sociopolitical landscape. Threatened with execution by a mutinying crew, a 
desperate Gomes calls upon Scheherazade – the legendary storyteller of the 
Middle Eastern tome from which Arabian Nights takes its title – to give voice 
to his ruminations on Portugal’s woes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_aJgLXhdUgQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_aJgLXhdUgQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_aJgLXhdUgQ&media=>
Over the course of the next six hours, Gomes has Scheherazade recount a bevy 
of stories – some bluntly realist, some elaborately far-fetched – addressing 
the impact of the Portuguese government’s devastating austerity regime. The 
film’s tone varies wildly across its mammoth runtime, though the titles affixed 
to each of Arabian Nights’ three volumes (The Restless One, The Desolate One 
and The Enchanted One) give some indication of their overall character, even if 
the final volume might equally be called The One With The Unbearably Long Bit 
About Chaffinch Trappers.

As evidenced by a sequence in which representatives of the European troika are 
cured of erectile dysfunction by a nomadic wizard, the satire of Arabian Nights 
is often broad and unapologetically juvenile, of the kind you might see 
delivered by Keith Chegwin in a touring Christmas panto. Still, if plotlines 
sometimes feel as if they’d make more sense on stage at the Milton Keynes 
Theatre, Gomes orchestrates each narrative with a verve and confidence that 
places this film firmly in the realm of high art – albeit high art with a 
penchant for dick jokes.

Overall, though, Arabian Nights has the unashamedly messy feel of an artist’s 
sketchbook, filled with abandoned ideas, erratic stylistic choices and lengthy 
streams of consciousness. Personally, I couldn’t help but admire Gomes for 
standing against the fussy perfectionism of so much European art cinema, even 
as I resented him for inflicting this wilfully unsatisfying saga upon the world.

 