
The architect of the BBC’s new governance structure is among six candidates to 
head up the new unitary board he proposed, according to reports.

In March Sir David Clementi, a former deputy governor of the Bank of England, 
recommended that the currentBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> system be scrapped and regulation 
of the corporation be handed to Ofcom.

According to Sky 
<http://news.sky.com/story/architect-of-bbc-reforms-clementi-in-frame-to-chair-broadcaster-10695807>
, he is now one of six people who are being considered to chair a board that 
will oversee the BBC as it wrestles with huge budget cuts and radical changes 
to its structure under a new royal charter starting next year.

Other candidates named by Sky include John Makinson, the Penguin Random House 
chair who was also shortlisted for chair of Guardian owner the Scott Trust, and 
Roger Parry, a formerBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> journalist who 
is chair of pollsters YouGov.

The Charities Commission chair, William Shawcross, and Sir David Arculus, the 
former Emap boss and current chair of lobbying group Energy UK, were also 
named, while there is thought to be at least one other unidentified candidate.

Interviews carried out by a selection panel have been taking place and once 
the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, has met the candidates she will propose 
an appointment to the government.

The new board is due to take over from April next year when Ofcom will also be 
handed responsibility for regulating the BBC.

The current chair of the BBC Trust, Rona Fairhead, had been in line to lead 
the new unitary board for an interim period. However, after the installation of 
Theresa May’s new government, she was told she would have to reapply for the 
new job and ruled herself out of the race.

The unitary board will operate like those found on a publicly listed company 
and will include members of the BBC’s executive team led by the director 
general, Tony Hall.


The Guardian reported in November that the government was struggling to create 
a shortlist for the position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/bbc-struggles-with-chair-shortlist-dearth-top-candidates>
 with a number of potential candidates ruling themselves out of what has been 
described as a “a double-edged sword” and “quite heavy work” by BBC insiders.

The chair position has also been advertised with a salary of £100,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/26/bbc-chair-trust-rona-fairhead>, 
£10,000 less than Fairhead earned and far below what most qualified applicants 
could find in other roles.

However, speaking to the Lords communications committee on Tuesday, Bradley 
said she did not expect applicants for BBC chair to be motivated by money.

She said: “I would hope that candidates were not coming forward simply for the 
money. This is a very prestigious role. It is a great honour to be chair of the 
BBC and first chair of the unitary board.

“I hope that in a similar vein candidates have applied because they want to be 
involved in a a great British institution.”
 