
The Natural History Museum's original Archaeopteryx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/archaeopteryx> skeleton is known as the 
"London specimen", and a replica is on public display there.

In all, 10 Archaeopteryx skeletons have been discovered, all in quarries in 
Bavaria, south-east Germany, within a radius of about 15 miles. The fossils 
were buried in very fine-grained limestone near the village of Solnhofen 
(during the Jurassic period, this part of Germany was covered by a warm, 
shallow lagoon with a soft mud bottom that has proved ideal for preserving 
ancient fossils).

While nothing like Archaeopteryx has been discovered anywhere else in the 
world, it is clear there must have been a line of earlier "protobirds" from 
which it evolved - these just haven't been found yet.

Archaeopteryx was small, growing up to half a metre long (and half of that was 
tail). It shared key skeletal features with small, carnivorous theropod 
dinosaurs such as Deinonychus and Velociraptor. But in addition to carefully 
preserving these ancient fossils, the limestone also revealed a clear 
impression of Archaeopteryx's flight and contour wing feathers (the actual 
feathers had disintegrated long ago). The structure of these feathers was 
almost exactly like those found on birds today, leading scientists to infer 
that Archaeopteryx must have had some ability to fly.

Much more recently, use of modern CT ("computed tomography") scanning 
equipment on the London Archaeopteryx's skull has enabled scientists to 
reconstruct the whole of its bony brain case - and so model the structure of 
the brain itself. The research showed that Archaeopteryx's brain was built and 
organised like a modern bird's brain - a fundamental evolutionary shift away 
from dinosaurs.
 