
If Godfrey Bloom's use of the phrase 'bongo bongo land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/07/ukip-godfrey-bloom-bongo-bongo-land>
' seems like it belongs to the past, then that's because it does. Anyone 
familiar with British politics from the last 30 years will recall the furore 
Alan Clark, an outspoken minister in the Thatcher government, caused when he 
was exposed in 1985 for using the same insult.

Clark, who was commenting on black groups feeling uneasy about the compiling 
of data on ethnic minorities, reportedly said, "They are afraid we'll be going 
to hand them over to the immigration services so that they can send them all 
back to Bongo Bongo land."
 Published in the Guardian on 7 February 1985. Click on image to read in full 
 As a junior employment minister with some responsibility for race relations, 
Clark's initial decision to keep silent following the publication of his 
comments in Searchlight magazine was met with incredulity. When the minister 
did speak, he only inflamed the situation by dismissing his 'off the record' 
comments as being a'storm in a teacup.' 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/8/7/1375880942934/Alan-Clark-2-001.jpg>

His critics called for him to be sacked, but within a year Clark had been 
promoted to Minister of State at the Department of Trade and Industry. At 
around the same time, reports were emerging that the National Front were using 
the same language as Alan Clark to target their opponents 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/8/7/1375881177709/Alan-Clark-3-001.jpg>
.

Although widely understood to be a traditionally racial slur with strong links 
to colonial supremacy, Clark later claimed that he didn't recall the bongo 
bongo comment, saying that it was probably said in a private meeting, but when 
pressed he said "it sounds uncomfortably familiar."

Much admired by Margaret Thatcher - who plucked him from the back benches to 
become a leading figure in her administration - Clark survived the race storm, 
almost playing on his straight talking reputation into the twilight of his 
political career.
 Published in the Observer on 1 March 1992. Click on image to read in full  