
The upholding by the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) of 
complaints by the Duchess of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/duchess-of-cambridge-kate-middleton-privacy-breach-complaints-upheld-prince-george>
about intrusion into her son’s privacy was interesting on several counts.

She had complained that photographs of her son, Prince George, published on 
the websites of the Daily Express and OK! magazine, breachedthe editors’ code 
of practice. <https://www.ipso.co.uk/editors-code-of-practice/>

They showed the duchess watching as the two-year-old prince clambered aboard a 
motorbike in the grounds of Kensington Palace.

Ipso’s ruling in her favour reinforced decisions by the previous watchdog, the 
Press Complaints Commission <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> (PCC), that 
people “with a reasonable expectation of privacy” deserve protection from 
photographers.

Indeed, it takes us further back still, to a ruling by the PCC’s predecessor, 
the Press Council, that Princess Margaret’s privacy has been compromised by 
photographs in The People and theSunday Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundayexpress> of her water-skiing in a 
swimsuit.

As with this latest Prince George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/prince-george> example, papers sought to 
make a case about the pictures having been taken from a public place, so no 
trespass was involved. Such a defence didn’t persuade any of the watchdogs, 
however.

The duchess’s complaint contained a new twist: in its ruling 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/rulings-and-resolution-statements/ruling/?id=03153-16>, 
Ipso said she had “expressed particular concern” that the photographs “had been 
taken for commercial gain.”

She also pointed out that she and her son “were on private, protected land 
where commercial photography is prohibited.”

This stress on the royal family’s opposition to photographers and their 
publications profiting from photographs of their number has not previously been 
as explicit.


The complaint also confirms a zero tolerance policy by the duchess and her 
husband,Prince William <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william>, about 
the private life of their family. Despite their privileged status and their 
public roles, they are determined not to allow any intrusion into their private 
time.

Ipso’s complaints committee acknowledged that they are public figures but 
concluded that “they were not carrying out any official duties and they were 
unaware that they were being photographed.” So, in essence, they should be let 
alone.

Rightly, Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> could not see any 
public interest justification for using the pictures and it required both sites 
to publish its rulings.

Fair enough. I think Ipso’s decision was correct. Nevertheless, I think it 
reasonable in the circumstances to question the strategy employed by the 
Duchess and her husband. Media management by royalty, controlling what is and 
is not published, could prove to be a double-edged sword.

Yes, there is a thin-end-of-the-wedge argument. To allow inoffensive pictures 
of a little boy at play to be published without complaint may potentially lead 
to yet greater intrusion by encouraging the reformation of a royal photographic 
rat pack.

Even so, I am beginning to wonder whether the Cambridges, who so rarely appear 
in public, are seeking to enjoy rather more privacy than is warranted by their 
very special status.

 