
Are superheroes really champions of right-wing individualism, the Donald 
Trumps of the movie theatre? Die Hard director John McTiernan seems to think 
so, and has come out swingingin an interview with French movie magazine Premiere
 
<http://theplaylist.net/john-mctiernan-dismisses-mad-max-fury-road-corporate-product-says-comic-book-movies-made-fascists-20160712/>
, declaring “These are films made by fascists”, and pointing the finger of 
accusation firmly in the direction of recent Marvel smashCaptain America: Civil 
War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>
. (Yes, I’m aware John McTiernan is the guy who directed one of the most macho 
Hollywood action movies of all time. We’ll get to that later.)

“Captain America,” McTiernan says, presumably spitting out the syllables like 
a sour grape. “The cult of American hyper-masculinity is one of the worst 
things that has happened in the world during the last 50 years. Hundreds of 
thousands of people died because of this stupid illusion. So how is it possible 
to watch a movie called Captain America?”

America’s need for superheroes has led to the rise of Donald Trump | Annika 
Hagley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/america-superheroes-donald-trump-brutal-comic-book-ideal>
McTiernan has a point. As political sciences professor Annika Hagley wrote so 
eloquently for The Guardian back in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/america-superheroes-donald-trump-brutal-comic-book-ideal>
, the vigilantism that runs through many comic book movies often looks a lot 
like the authoritarian rhetoric of knuckleheaded rightwing politics. Both stem 
from a distrust of democratic authorities, a sense that it is better for the 
individual to stand up and be counted, especially if he or she is gifted with 
godlike powers (or in Trump’s case, believes he is).

It’s fascinating to read comic book movies in this way. There’s no doubt that 
unearthing real-life politics in popcorn material adds salt to the cultural 
soup and has helped elevate a genre that once knew only black and white – good 
and evil – to new heights of colourful complexity. But we should also bear in 
mind that an action movie without any individual acts of heroism would often be 
a very dull thing indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1e9e7dd3a932656616300a973383ccbf718874e%2F0_464_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20comic%20book%20movies%20actually%20fascist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20comic%20book%20movies%20actually%20fascist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1e9e7dd3a932656616300a973383ccbf718874e%2F0_464_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 McTiernan’s chief gift to Hollywood … Die Hard’s John McClane, played by Bruce 
Willis. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
It therefore benefits comic book movies, and indeed all action flicks, to set 
up dynamics whereby individual heroes are forced into action by the failure of 
the powers that be to get their act together. Take the new Ghostbusters movie, 
featuring a New York mayoral office that comically buries its head in the sand 
when confronted by an army of the undead marching along Fifth Avenue. Or the 
most recent James Bond instalment, Spectre, which imagined the rather less 
hilarious infiltration of Britain’s secret services by an evil, ruthless 
pseudo-corporate cabal. In both instances it was incumbent on the heroes to 
save the day by operating outside the usual democratically enforced systems for 
keeping the peace.

The irony here is that McTiernan’s chief gift to Hollywood, white 
vest-sporting blue-collar cop John McClane, is a key example of the trope. In
Die Hard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/die-hard>, our hero is forced to 
mount a one-man battle against the evil Hans Gruber and his team of armed 
robbers because of the ineptitude of the authorities. The FBI wants to settle 
the siege of Nakatomi corporation HQ by sending in helicopter gunships, even 
though this would lead to the deaths of hostages. McClane, a New York cop who 
has no legal jurisdiction in Los Angeles, manages to defuse the situation all 
by himself without any collateral damage. Even the media are portrayed as 
scumbags: a TV report reveals the identity of our hero’s wife to Gruber and his 
crew, which almost results in her death. If Donald Trump has a favourite movie 
character, it is probably McClane, not Captain America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6166ec210de7a1695daaff49314cee09e199c99%2F0_25_3384_2030%2F3384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20comic%20book%20movies%20actually%20fascist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20comic%20book%20movies%20actually%20fascist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fjohn-mctiernan-captain-america-comic-book-movies-fascist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6166ec210de7a1695daaff49314cee09e199c99%2F0_25_3384_2030%2F3384.jpg>
 US defence secretary Donald Rumsfeld stands alongside Spiderman and Captain 
America at the Pentagon, during the promotion of a special military-themed 
custom comic in 2005. Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
Which brings us to Steve Rogers. Clearly McTiernan doesn’t know his comic book 
history very well, because while numerous American foreign policy interventions 
over the past century may have been shameful in nature, the Captain America has 
remained largely blameless.

In the McCarthyite 1950s, he battled communist scum in the pages of Marvel 
precursor Atlas Comics. But later writers were so mortified by their industry’s 
complicity in one of America’s more shameful periods of history that they
retconned this version as a psychotic, reactionary impostor 
<http://marvel.wikia.com/wiki/William_Burnside_(Earth-616)>.

Man of Steel: does Hollywood need saving from superheroes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/11/man-steel-hollywood-break-superheroes>
Neither is the Captain America we see in Marvel’s movies ever presented as a 
Comedian-style patriotic brute <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LhKp72c6xCY>, 
fighting battles against foreign scumbags in the name of American might. The 
only time we’ve seen Rogers engaged in war was in his first adventure, Captain 
America: The First Avenger, which smartly drew on the superhero’s roots as a 
symbol of second world war resistance to the Nazis. Surely McTiernan can’t have 
a problem with that?

Rogers has stood up to the authorities, of course, and pursued his own course 
of action outside of official sanction. This is the key plot device ofCaptain 
America: Civil War <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war>
. But his anti-establishment fervour has been fostered by the discovery that 
the government organisation he’s been working for since emerging from 65 years 
of hibernation was taken over by the very Nazi scum Rogers once fought so hard 
to take down.

Maybe McTiernan should try actually watching some of this superhero stuff. He 
might learn a thing or two, not to mention spot a little of his own work 
holding up the architecture.
 