
Want to fly, run your own business or climb Everest? Anything is possible with 
a virtual reality simulator. Immersive experiences have never been such fun. 
So, who’s up for experiencing a migraine? Cue Excedrin’s migraine trip, your 
chance to feel as debilitated, disorientated and distressed as someone who 
really has the condition. Excedrin makes painkillers (hence its interest in 
this area) and its representation of the flashing lights and blurry, shifting 
landscape looks accurate. If only they could bang you on the head and give you 
the painful throbbing that migraine sufferers feel. At two points in the 
company’sshort online video 
<http://www.digitaltrends.com/health-fitness/excedrin-migraine-experience/>, a 
friend or lover turns to a person with migraine and says: “I’m so sorry I 
doubted you.” So what is it about migraine that makes people feel it’s not 
real, that its an excuse to bunk off work?

This week, the New York Times covered migraines in its weekly misconception 
series by stating: “Women’s emotions do not cause their migraines 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/health/debunking-migraine-misconceptions.html?_r=0>
.”

Migraines, argued the writer, Joanna Klein, were due to abnormal brain 
activity and not to emotional disturbances. Yet, as recently as 2012,research 
linked migraine to neuroticism (a medical term for emotional instability) 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22856357>. People with migraine (myself 
included) will themselves link attacks to stress or emotional upset. So are 
emotions really unrelated? And if you could live stress-free, would you be 
migraine-free, too?

The solution

The Mayo Clinic in the US is a centre of excellence and D Todd Schwedt is a 
professor of neurology 
<http://www.mayo.edu/research/faculty/schwedt-todd-j-m-d/bio-20091053> there 
who thinks neuroticism is an outdated and unhelpful term. “Migraine,” he says, 
“is a neurological disorder and not a maladaptive response to stress.” There is 
a strong genetic predisposition: up to 70% of sufferers have family members who 
are also affected. The mechanism is not fully understood but includes 
electrical changes in nerve cells spread over the brain: the brain functions 
abnormally during an attack.

Migraine: the alternative solutions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/17/migraine-alternative-solution-painkillers>
There are books devoted to discussing the pathology of migraine. Triggers for 
attacks include hormonal changes (during menstruation), lack of sleep, red 
wine, missing meals, bright lights and – yes – stress. But as Schwedt says: “If 
someone without migraine is exposed to high stress levels, they don’t develop a 
migraine.” Don’t get triggers confused with causation. People who have 
migraines have different thresholds for triggering the electrical changes and 
the release of chemicals that cause symptoms such as flashing lights, nausea or 
throbbing pain.

There are medical treatments, such as Triptans, that can stop migraines 
progressing if taken quickly. It’s hard to avoid triggers: who leads a 
stress-free life or gets enough sleep? But remember that someone without the 
brain abnormality can have a load of stress and never get a migraine – except 
through virtual reality.
 