
Spoiler alert: this article, out of necessity, refers to the plot of I, Daniel 
Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/i--daniel-blake> frequently.

Ken Loach’s brilliant film, I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
, is a highly realistic portrayal of many of the problems with the UK benefits 
system. We at theZacchaeus 2000 Trust (Z2K) <http://z2k.org/> – a charity 
addressing poverty issues caused by unfairness in the law, legal and benefits 
system – were deeply moved by how it showed the day-to-day reality of poverty 
and trying to access welfare benefit.

Both of the main characters, Daniel and Katie, are typical of the kind of 
clients we help with welfare benefits and housing issues. The benefits system 
is complicated and, to borrow a line from the film, “a monumental farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/23/i-daniel-blake-ken-loach-review-mark-kermode>
”, so it’s no wonder people can feel reluctant to seek advice.

This is an attempt to show the kind of guidance we would give them, if they 
were experiencing any of the issues that arise in the film.

Daniel’s ESA claim and requesting a reconsideration

We, Daniel Blake: readers on the UK benefits system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/welfare-sanctions-ken-loach-uk-benefit-system>
We first meet Daniel attending a work capability assessment 
<http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/work-capability-assessment>. It is quickly 
established that he suffered a heart attack at work and has recently claimed
employment and support allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/employment-support-allowance/overview> (ESA), which is an 
income replacement benefit for those too unwell or disabled to work, or look 
for work.

If you are facing a work capability assessment, if at all possible, take 
someone with you (which you are allowed to do), and get them to take notes. If 
nothing else, having someone you know there will make the ordeal less 
stressful; in our experience this can make a huge difference to the quality of 
the assessment and the outcome.

If you are deemed fit for work, and you think this decision is wrong for 
whatever reason, we would advise you not to feel too discouraged and not to 
give up. There is anenormous discrepancy 
<http://z2k.org/2015/05/an-esa-case-study/> between the quality of the initial 
decision and the final outcome of an appeal. The statistics show that roughly
60% of appeals 
<https://www.benefitsandwork.co.uk/news/3151-pip-appeals-now-outnumber-esa-appeals-and-success-rates-keep-climbing>
 against a “fit to work” decision are successful.

Daniel’s JSA claim
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ece339aa2f88b91229bc6cd68dce6e27b47c180%2F0_43_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20you%20Daniel%20Blake%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20a%20guide%20to%20using%20our%20nightmarish%20benefits%20system%20%7C%20Matthew%20Ahluwalia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20you%20Daniel%20Blake%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20a%20guide%20to%20using%20our%20nightmarish%20benefits%20system%20%7C%20Matthew%20Ahluwalia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ece339aa2f88b91229bc6cd68dce6e27b47c180%2F0_43_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
 ‘Katie spent two years in a homeless hostel before being offered accommodation 
in Newcastle.’ Photograph: PR 
In need of money and unable to work, Daniel claims jobseeker’s allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/jobseekers-allowance/overview> (JSA) while he is waiting 
for the mandatory reconsideration notice about his ESA claim. The 
“reconsideration stage” is an internal review whereby the Department for Work 
and Pensions will look at a decision again, but the system is undermined by the 
incrediblypoor quality of decisions 
<http://z2k.org/2016/09/case-study-how-not-to-do-a-mandatory-reconsideration/> 
made at the reconsideration stage. One cannot help but suspect that the process 
is just adelaying tactic 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/first-figures-on-esa-mandatory-reconsideration-show-it-is-just-a-delaying-tactic/>
 designed to put claimants off appealing.

The jobcentre should be making reasonable adjustments 
<http://z2k.org/2016/10/jsa-sanctions-reasonable-adjustments/> for anyone with 
medical needs claiming JSA, but in our experience it is a luck-of-the-draw 
system. If your jobcentre has failed to take into account your needs and make 
reasonable adjustments for you, or has mistreated you, you should consider
making a complaint 
<http://z2k.org/2016/07/right-first-time-z2ks-new-complaint-project/>.

While claiming JSA, Daniel is told by his work coach that he has to attend a 
CV workshop, and that if he doesn’t, he will be sanctioned. Daniel is warned 
that he could face a reduction or nil payment of his benefits for anything 
between four and 13 weeks. It is possible to apply forhardship payments 
<https://www.turn2us.org.uk/Benefit-guides/Hardship-Payment/How-do-I-claim-a-JSA-hardship-payment>
 during the sanction period to make up for the reduction in your income. 
Sanctions can, and should be, appealed against (following a reconsideration).

Daniel’s housing

Daniel mentions that he is having to deal with bedroom tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bedroom-tax>. From this we can infer that 
he receiveshousing benefit <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing-benefit>
. This is paid by local authorities, and it is not uncommon for them to suspend 
or even terminate housing benefit payments when someone who had previously been 
receiving ESA has their benefit has stopped. It is therefore crucial that you 
keep your local authority informed if something happens with your ESA or JSA 
claim.

As for the bedroom tax, it is not made clear in the film why Daniel would have 
had a spare room; it is possible that he could have needed it for his late 
wife, who had medical issues of her own. If this was the case, Daniel would 
have had a one-year grace period following her death. After that Daniel could 
consider applying to his local authority for adiscretionary housing payment 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/housing_benefit_and_local_housing_allowance/changes_to_housing_benefit/discretionary_housing_payments>
 (commonly referred to as DHPs). This is essentially a grant paid by your local 
authority that tops up your housing benefit.

Daniel’s ESA appeal
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20real%20Daniel%20Blakes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20real%20Daniel%20Blakes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video&media=>
Meet the real Daniel Blakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/21/meet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video>
On the day of Daniel’s appeal he is shown attending a tribunal where he meets 
his representative. The representative tells Daniel how confident he is of 
having the decision finding him fit for work overturned. None of our 
caseworkers could guess how Daniel would have even scored 12 points after his 
initial assessment. In our experience, for someone like Daniel, the most likely 
outcome following his medical would have been 0 points. This is because the way 
the ESA points system works is very inflexible and generally fails to account 
for conditions like Daniel’s.

Daniel would therefore have been relying on regulation 29 of the ESA 
regulations. This regulation can be used whenever a claimant has not scored the 
requisite points, but there would be a substantial risk to someone’s health if 
they were found fit for work and is commonly applied to people with Daniel’s 
health problems. Auseful summary 
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/making-exception> of this rule is provided by 
the Child Poverty Action Group.

Daniel might have also sought to rely on regulation 35 in order to argue that 
he should be awarded ESA with the support group component. This is about a 
claimant’s ability to undertake “work-related activity” at their local 
jobcentre, which is not nearly as difficult as claiming JSA, but there is still 
a risk of being sanctioned. It is therefore worthtrying to make this argument 
<https://www.benefitsandwork.co.uk/news/2955-regulation-35-2-b-is-now-the-main-route-into-esa-support-group>
, particularly given theupcoming cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/employment-and-support-allowance-the-disability-benefit-cuts-you-have-not-heard-about>
 in ESA for those in the work-related activity group. The support group 
component also exempts ESA claimants from the benefit cap.

Katie
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ce1e0af3f68685c3de577452bd4fcba2d2072fe%2F0_57_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20you%20Daniel%20Blake%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20a%20guide%20to%20using%20our%20nightmarish%20benefits%20system%20%7C%20Matthew%20Ahluwalia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20you%20Daniel%20Blake%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20a%20guide%20to%20using%20our%20nightmarish%20benefits%20system%20%7C%20Matthew%20Ahluwalia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaniel-blake-guide-benefits-system-welfare-claimants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ce1e0af3f68685c3de577452bd4fcba2d2072fe%2F0_57_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
 ‘Katie is told that she is likely to be sanctioned for turning up.’ 
Photograph: PR 
We first encounter Katie at the jobcentre. Katie is also claiming JSA, and is 
told that she is likely to be sanctioned for turning up late to an appointment 
with a work coach.

Katie has recently arrived in Newcastle. It transpires that her son’s room in 
their home in London had a leak that made him unwell. When she complained to 
the landlord, he evicted her. Unfortunately, disrepair or not, if Katie was 
renting from a private landlord she was likely to have had anassured shorthold 
tenancy 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/eviction/eviction_of_private_tenants/eviction_of_assured_shorthold_tenants>
, and therefore no security of tenure. This means that provided the landlord 
followed all the correct procedures, Katie could have been lawfully evicted 
without the landlord having to provide any reason.Recent changes in the law 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/repairs_and_bad_conditions/repairs_in_private_lets/risk_of_eviction>
 have made it slightly harder for landlords to lawfully evict a tenant 
following complaints about serious disrepair.Unlawful or illegal evictions 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/eviction/harassment_and_illegal_eviction_by_landlord>
 should be reported to the local council immediately.

Katie spent two years in a homeless hostel before being offered accommodation 
in Newcastle. It is essential that, if you are not sure what to do, ask your 
local authority about an offer of accommodation. Local authorities have a duty 
to ensure that any offers made are foraccommodation that is suitable 
<http://z2k.org/2016/03/unsuitable-accommodation/>, and the location of the 
accommodation has to be taken into account.

Seeking advice

The main message for anyone in Daniel or Katie’s situation is to get advice as 
soon as possible – and know that there is no shame in doing this. Advice 
agencies like ours are here to help and will treat you with respect, without 
passing judgment.

For further advice, contact:

• z2k.org <http://z2k.org/free-help-advice/>

• citizensadvice.org.uk <https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/>

• trusselltrust.org <https://www.trusselltrust.org/get-help/>

• shelter.org.uk 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/housing_benefit_and_local_housing_allowance/changes_to_housing_benefit/housing_benefit_changes_2013>
 