
Tourists in Argentina are suddenly finding their money will go a lot further 
than it did just a few days ago. Thepeso has gone into freefall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/24/argentinian-peso-freefall-economic-crisis-deepens>
, plummeting just over 17% against the dollar in two days.

As an example, a seven-course tasting menu at HG Restaurant at the Fierro 
Hotel in Palermo, named as one of the50 best restaurants in Latin America in 
2013 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/latinamerica/en/the-list/41-50/Hernan-Gipponi.html>
, now costs £27 compared with £36 a month ago.

Hotelier Martin Rosberg, who runs the Fierro Hotel where the restaurant is 
based, explains: "Argentina has suddenly got cheaper – and that's with the 
official rate, not the blue rate."

Since the country's government introduced tough currency change restrictions 
on its people, a black market has emerged. In short, you can change your money 
at an official outlet for one price; or you can go to an unofficial trader and 
get it changed at the "blue" rate – which will put many more pesos in your 
pocket. Taking plenty of hard cash contradicts the usual advice to tourists 
travelling abroad, but many visitors to Argentina have been doing just that to 
take advantage of the black market rates.

Numerous websites and Twitter accounts have emerged to keep visitors and 
locals up-to-date on the two parallel rates, such as@DolarBlue 
<https://twitter.com/DolarBlue>. Even newspapers 
<http://www.lanacion.com.ar/dolar-hoy-t1369> report on the two, side by side. 
"I've stood behind tourists in the bank, watching them hand over dollars to 
change them at official rate, and wanted to scream, Noooooo!" says one expat, 
who has been working in Buenos Aires for over 10 years.

So how do you track down the more favourable blue rate? Many foreign visitors 
set up a local contact who can make the change, or ask their hotel to recommend 
a "cueva" (literally meaning cave; in reality, more like fully functioning 
businesses, accepting dollars, euros and pounds). Other tourists simply head to 
central shopping streets and respond to not-so-subtle calls of "Cambio! Cambio!
" (exchange); the wise ones having checked the current rate first, so they can 
barter.

"It was a pretty surreal experience," says one British tourist, who just 
returned from a trip to Buenos Aires. "An acquaintance recommended a place was 
given an address, on the upper floors of an office building. I had to explain 
myself in very limited Spanish, but they knew what I was there for. It was a 
fully organised operation. It's not something you expect to do on holiday, but 
not really a problem, as it turned out."

Dan Clarke, the director of RealWorld 
<http://www.realworldholidays.co.uk/argentina/>, a tour operator specialising 
in South American travel, offers this advice: "Although changing money through 
non-official channels is illegal, it is a fact of daily life in Argentina at 
the moment. You can run the risk of ending up with some forged notes, but 
you'll also exchange at sometimes 30% better than the official rate. If 
possible, ask someone you trust – like a good local rep – for recommendations."

If you want to stick to using US dollars in your day-to-day transactions, 
that's common too. The Argentinian market, which experienced a complete 
economic meltdown in 2001/02, has quickly adapted. Many businesses, including 
hotels and restaurants, will accept US dollars. Some will work to the blue 
rate, even though that is illegal, or they will come close to it. When a 
shopkeeper recognises you are a tourist, you are likely to be offered an 
upfront deal: "We accept dollars at 12 pesos", or something similar.

The dual rate began after the government initiated a number of restrictions on 
currency exchange in an attempt to prop up the fledging peso and reduce capital 
flight (ie investors taking their fortunes out of the country). Argentinians 
have, of course, been hit much worse than any visitor. There has been a 
prohibitive amount of red tape they have to get through if they wanted to 
exchange pesos to dollars. If they wanted to use credit cards abroad, the
government taxed them a whopping 35 per cent 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-12-03/argentina-raises-tax-on-foreign-credit-card-purchases-to-35-.html>
on each transaction. Online shopping has also been curbed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-25836208> (Want a parcel from 
eBay delivered to your door? Forget about it). After thepeso has gone into 
freefall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/24/argentinian-peso-freefall-economic-crisis-deepens>
, falling just over 17 per cent against the dollar in the last two days, the 
government is now scrabbling to relax some restrictions (those credit card 
taxes will fall to 20% from Monday).

After a tough few years battling the effects of high inflation (believed to 
run at almost 30%), the tourist industry could experience a boom, as it did in 
the mid-2000s, when tourists were able to get more for their money and new 
boutique hotels seemed to open every five minutes.

Meanwhile, Argentinians face the grim reality of yet another financial crisis.
 