
Several other provinces in Argentina, such as Salta, Córdoba and San Juan, 
produce wine, but Mendoza is the star of the show due to the incredible 
diversity of its production. Its wines range between world-famous, 
award-winning malbecs, and simplevino patero (foot-pressed wine). That 
diversity is also evident in Mendoza’s terroir. The eastern department of Maipú 
– home to big-name wineries such asTrapiche <http://www.trapiche.com.ar/>, 
Zuccardi <http://www.familiazuccardi.com/home_en.php> and López 
<http://www.bodegaslopez.com.ar/paginas/index.php?idioma=en&menuP=home&seccion=home>
 – reaches 700 metres above sea level, while hotspot Uco Valley, a more 
southerly region in the shadow of the the Andes, tips 1,100 metres. These areas 
have distinctive microclimates that hold the key to Mendoza’s extensive and 
exciting portfolio.

Provence wine route: top 10 guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/17/provence-wine-route-top-10-guide>
Malbec clearly rules the roost in Mendoza (it is World Malbec Day on 17 April) 
and has made its home in Luján de Cuyo – Argentina’s first denomination of 
origin (DOC) – and sub-districts such as Chacras de Coria, Vistalba and Agrelo. 
Bordeaux reds such as cabernet sauvignon, merlot and cabernet franc also fare 
well, while native grape torrontés riojano, chardonnay, sauvignon blanc and 
viognier are waving the flag for the whites.

Thanks to the boom over the past two decades since top-quality malbec hit the 
world stage, substantial investment has seen elaborate architectural gems 
spring up, complete with tasting menus, state-of-the-art technology and luxury 
accommodation. Sounds sterile? Far from it. Mendoza’s vast landscape means 
there’s room for everyone: from rural, lunchtime-only, family-run eateries to 
celebrity chef-owned restaurants to winery-based B&Bs and five-star luxury 
hotels, and fromgaragistas (garage winemakers) to the industry’s most renowned 
winemakers. Here’s our pick of some of the best.

WINEMAKERS TO VISIT


Familia Zuccardi, Maipú

Wine-making goes back to the early 1960s for this family concern, now in the 
hands of third-generation oenologist Sebastián. His grandfather Alberto 
designed a vine-training system known as the Zuccardi parral, but it was father 
José Alberto who took the family business to new heights in the 1980s and 
1990s, creating accessible as well as high-end wine for export. And the winery 
– a functional affair located in Maipú’s (relative) lowlands sheathed in the 
prolific pergola vines – very much remains a family concern. Sebastián’s sister 
Julia – after whom the Santa Julia line is named – oversees tourism at the 
winery; brother Miguel has cornered the extra virgin olive oil market, while 
grandmother Emma manages art exhibitions and a label design competition. As one 
of Argentina’s most successful wineries domestically and abroad, visiting is a 
slick yet welcoming affair that takes in the Zuccardi empire. After a 
three-wine Santa Julia tasting surrounded by the latest art exhibit, stop by
Casa del Visitante <http://www.casadelvisitante.com/> for chef Matías 
Aldasoro’s seasonal tasting menu or at Pan & Oliva, where Miguel’s olive oils 
take the spotlight. In November, the family is set to open its second winery, 
Piedra Infinita, in Uco Valley.
• Santa Julia tasting 40 pesos (about £3), +54 261 441 0000 familiazuccardi.com
 <http://www.familiazuccardi.com/the_family.php>

Bodega Carmelo Patti, Luján de Cuyo
 Making wine is a family affair for Carmelo Patti. 
If ever there was a man to buck winemaking etiquette, it’s Carmelo Patti. 
Mendoza’s pioneering garagista started out picking grapes as a 10-year-old for 
his Sicilian winemaker dad, then studied oenology before working at what is 
today the Nieto Senetiner winery. Selling his car 26 years ago to finance his 
solo project, one-man-winemaking-band Carmelo purchases grapes before working 
his magic in his garage: this is wine warehouse chic at its finest. Aged for a 
year in French oak, the secret to the famous four that have reached cult status 
– malbec and cabernet sauvignon varietals, a Bordeaux-style blend and a blanc 
de noir, traditional methodespumoso – is to then bottle-age them for at least 
four years, or as long as he sees fit. Celebrated for his “my way” attitude, 
Carmelo welcomes visitors with a beaming smile, touring his cement tanks and 
barrels before cracking open whatever he pleases in his cosy office. It’s not 
just a question of sampling the goods, however. Aware that he makes premium, 
well-aged products while most consumers drink young, easy-to-open bottles, 
Carmelo might even throw in a lesson on how to successfully open older vintages 
(holding the bottle at a 45-degree angle helps, he says).
• Free tasting, +54 261 498 1379, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Bodega-Carmelo-Patti/106530372720099>

The Vines of Mendoza, Uco Valley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193009104%2F87991205-79dc-4406-8c90-d5ae37ebdea5-1020x426.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193009104%2F87991205-79dc-4406-8c90-d5ae37ebdea5-1020x426.jpeg>
One of the Uco Valley pioneers, Vines of Mendoza started life as a vineyard 
ownership project allowing wannabe oenologists to purchase a small piece of 
terroir in a spectacular Andes-dominated setting. Eleven years on, a whopping 
500 hectares is divvied up between more than 130 private estates, a 28-villa 
resort and spa, and a winery. There’s also Siete Fuegos restaurant led by one 
of Argentina’s most renowned chefs and grill specialists, Francis Mallmann. If 
staying at The Vines is beyond your budget, sample a classic tasting led by 
wine director Mariana Onofri. It’s quite an operation dealing with 300 
different labels, but a tour starts in the winery under the painted sign “Nada 
es imposible” (Nothing is impossible). Back in the tasting room, try out 
varietals, blends or something ageing in a barrel. The pièce de résistance is 
Recuerdo, a signature malbec that draws on grapes pooled from collective 
estates and whose Gran Corte 2011 picked up 93Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wine> Advocate points. Blending 
sessions and a winemaking camp (March and April only) also form part of The 
Vines’ elaborate offering.

• Tasting about £11.50 per person, +54 261 632-1768 vinesofmendoza.com 
<http://www.vinesofmendoza.com/visit-us/uco-valley-winery/> 

Bodegas López, Maipú
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429185251910%2F060d31a8-5da5-404f-b4f3-d23db420166f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429185251910%2F060d31a8-5da5-404f-b4f3-d23db420166f-1020x612.jpeg>
If any proof was needed that Argentina has been making wine long before the 
current malbec boom, look no further than Bodegas López. Founded in 1898 by 
Spanish immigrant José López Rivas, the bodega is now in the hands of the 
fourth generation and is one of just two Argentine wineries to still use 
enormous 10,000-litre French oak casks. This is a time warp tour: the 
well-preserved museum houses impeccable trucks dating back to the 1920s, wooden 
presses and a host of sepia-coloured memorabilia. A five-minute walk, with the 
Andes making for a stupendous backdrop, returns visitors to the 21st century at 
the thoroughly modernchampañera (champagne plant), where both champenoise 
(traditional) andcharmat (second fermentation in tank) method espumosos come to 
life. While a general tour is free, take advantage of López’s well-stocked 
cellar and opt for a vertical tasting with the 20-, 15- and 10-year-old 
montchenot blends (about £26).
• Free tasting and tours in English Mon-Fri 11.30am and 3.30pm, Sat 11.30am. 
+54 261 497 2406bodegaslopez.com.ar 
<http://www.bodegaslopez.com.ar/paginas/index.php?idioma=en&menuP=home&seccion=home>

WHERE TO EAT
Casa de Contratista, Luján de Cuyo

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429185338841%2F7c4b02d3-296a-4a6e-81e7-4fb384f2d6de-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429185338841%2F7c4b02d3-296a-4a6e-81e7-4fb384f2d6de-1020x612.jpeg>
When doctor and artist José Ianardi breathed new life into a century-old finca 
in Chacras de Coria, just 20 minutes’ drive from Mendoza city, his project had 
one aim: to pay tribute to the farm managers orcontratistas of old (including 
his grandfather Enrique) who had put Mendoza on the wine map. Once José and 
family had carefully restored the original abode, it opened five years ago as a 
rural restaurant and arts space. Although it’s located on a busy thoroughfare, 
tranquillity reigns among its malbec vines and on the verandahs of this walk 
pale pink construction. The historical homage continues on the menu, reviving 
family recipes such aslasaña campestre (rural-style lasagna with Swiss chard, 
ricotta, cooked ham and cheese) andmatambre de cerdo (pork flank steak) with 
blue cheese and grilled veg plucked from the garden. No converted vineyard farm 
house would be complete without a cellar, stocked with local wine from the 
likes of Bodega Aleanna, Familia Durigutti, Doña Paula and Las Perdices.
• Two courses from £13.50, +54 261 496 5967 casadecontratista.com.ar 
<http://www.casadecontratista.com.ar/> 

Fuente y Fonda, Mendoza city

Following on from the success of his highly acclaimed Siete Cocinas 
restaurant, Pablo Del Río, from Buenos Aires, has taken a more casual approach 
with his latest offering, Fuente y Fonda. Set in a spruced-up mansion 
overlooking Plaza Italia that’s stayed faithful to the original construction 
(retaining features such as vitraux windows and beautiful tile floors), Pablo 
takes utmost care when it comes to sourcing ingredients for his Argentine 
comfort food. The Serrano-stylejamón crudo from Córdoba is excellent while 
other fare such as pasta is made in-house; the pickled beef tongue is a sure 
fire way to get over any offal-eating phobia. Dishes are designed for sharing 
(solo travellers might find themselves with an ample doggy bag at the end of a 
evening), but diners could do a lot worse than gorging on a vat of sweet corn 
and ricotta-filled cannelloni or amilanesa completa (beef escalope topped with 
ham and cheese). Desserts are on the house. With a palate so impeccable he 
takes charge of his restaurants’ wine lists, Pablo is also the face of national 
cuisine for Wines of Argentina.
• Two courses for two to share £23, +54 261 429 8833 fuenteyfonda.com.ar 
<http://www.fuenteyfonda.com.ar/> 

Don Mario, Godoy Cruz
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429202883763%2F4b315a50-ed36-4f1f-8721-f8d99fa5c28c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429202883763%2F4b315a50-ed36-4f1f-8721-f8d99fa5c28c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Don Mario parilla, Mendoza, Argentina Photograph: Sorrel Moseley-Williams 
Look beyond Don Mario’s slightly odd location in Palmares shopping mall, 
because this joint is a meaty must on the Mendoza foodie circuit, serving up 
some of the finest classic cuts – rib-eye,lomo and asado de tira – in town. 
Friendly service and fine steaks are just two of the attractions, but also try 
thechivito (kid) or lechoncito (suckling pig). Most starters, such as a picada 
(charcuterie selection) and salads are for sharing, as are theparrillada mains 
– these individual grills with a smoking coal base to keep meat warm are served 
at the table. The extensive wine list also plays an important role at Don 
Mario, with more than 200 labels running from cheaper wines to vintages from 
Catena Zapata’s Angélica Zapata Alto Malbec and Vistalba’s Corta A, a blend 
whose grape composition changes year on year.
• Two courses for two to share £24, +54 261 439 4838, donmario.com.ar 
<http://www.donmario.com.ar/>

WHERE TO STAY
Domaine Bousquet, Uco Valley


It’s not every day a trader jacks in international markets for agriculture, 
but that’s exactly what Kuwait-born Labid Ameri did. Besides making 
organic-certified wine with his French wife Anne at Domaine Bousquet – a winery 
he proudly says is Argentina’s 20th-largest – the Tupungato-situated bodega 
also has four cute terraced cottages to its name. A tree-trunk pergola covers 
the shared stone verandah whose eastern panorama looks out onto the gently 
sloping valley and malbec vines, and waking up to the snow-capped Andes is also 
part of the attraction. Each one- or two-bedroom cottage has its own 
kitchenette and a shower-only en suite bathroom; sleeping quarters are spacious 
if simple. With the great Mendoza outdoors for company and no TV or Wi-Fi to 
speak of, crack open a bottle of something complimentary and watch the sun set 
over the mountains.
• Double room, breakfast included £64, domainebousquet.com 
<http://www.domainebousquet.com/home/> +54 9 (0) 262 248 0011

Finca Adalgisa, Luján de Cuyo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193101352%2Fca674d5b-2199-425e-a7e5-d0fa77d0b4df-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Mendoza%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fwine-route-mendoza-argentina-vineyards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193101352%2Fca674d5b-2199-425e-a7e5-d0fa77d0b4df-1020x612.jpeg>
 Finca Adalgisa 
When your Italian great-grandfather is known as the King of the Vineyard, it’s 
quite a reputation to live up to. Gabriela Furlotti, however, is rising to the 
challenge, managing both Bodega Furlotti winery and Finca Adalgisa, the family 
summer house turned 11-room lodge in the heart of leafy Chacras de Coria. 
Nestled among a hectare of 99-year-old malbec vines and olive trees, Gabriela 
restored the Old House and constructed the Stone House, ensuring the vineyards 
weren’t ripped up to create gated settlements like many other fincas in the 
area. Original features such as ceramic floors and stained glass windows, 
family portraits and contemporary comforts fuse seamlessly in the former, while 
the latter’s self-contained cabins offer more independence; king-size beds are 
the norm in both categories. Adalgisa produces 5,000 bottles of its own name 
malbec made by garagista Carmelo Patti (see above) onsite, which guests can 
sample with tapas each evening overlooking the vines, quince trees and swimming 
pool. Staying in the same area and close to the river Mendoza, is the Luján de 
Cuyo B&B, whose four spacious rooms include a simple double, deluxe triple and 
even a quintuple. Its central Luján location means it’s a short drive from many 
wineries such as Lagarde, Vistalba and Alta Vista. Guests can make full use of 
the garden, swimming-pool and shared lounge after a hard day’s sipping.
• Double room (breakfast included in low season) from £156, +54 (0)261 496 0713
fincaadalgisa.com.ar 
<http://www.fincaadalgisa.com.ar/finca-adalgisa-dup/finca-adalgisa-hotel.htm>
• Luján de Cuyo B&B, double room from £49, +54 9 (0)261 640 9153 
lujandecuyobyb.com.ar <http://www.lujandecuyobyb.com.ar/> 

Finca Blousson, Uco Valley
 Photograph: 
https://www.facebook.com/pages/Finca-Blousson-Vins-Bistr%C3%B3/109659352490660?sk=photos_stream
When Victoria Jones and Patrick Blousson jacked in Buenos Aires six years ago, 
they headed west for the ultimate lifestyle change. Based in Vista Flores in 
the Uco Valley, the couple initially planted three hectares of vines before 
opening the bistro. Demand dictated a B&B came next in the pecking order before 
unveiling their first malbec, Finca Blousson Vista Flores Malbec 2013. While 
Patrick mans the restaurant’s kitchen, serving up Argentine dishes with French 
flair, front of house is led by Victoria. With three double rooms sporting a 
rural elegant look, each offers up either a view of the Andes or the finca’s 
own malbec vines. Guests can treat the dining room and its cosy fireplace as an 
extended lounge. Stop by for lunch and give the fillet mignon in a malbec sauce 
a whirl (about £16.70).
• Double room from £128 B&B, or £195 with four-course paired tasting menu for 
two people and breakfast, +54 261 655 3382,fincablousson.com 
<http://www.fincablousson.com/> 

 