
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> will make 
wholesale changes to his regular lineup for the EFL Cup quarter-final at home 
to Southampton on Wednesday night while he has been reassured that Olivier 
Giroud’s muscular injury is nothing serious.

Giroud came on as a substitute in the 3-1 win against Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 at the Emirates Stadium on Sunday and he felt something pull after what was 
his first involvement. Wenger thought, immediately afterwards, that Giroud had 
hurt his hamstring but it is the groin that has sustained the damage.

Wenger, however, has described the problem as only “slight” and, although 
Giroud will not play againstSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>, he has not yet been ruled 
out of the Premier League fixture at West Ham United on Saturday.

Dangerous Alexis Sánchez the driving force of Arsenal’s attack | Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/dangerous-alexis-sanchez-driving-force-arsenal>
Lucas Pérez has recovered quicker than expected from the ankle injury he 
sustained in the previous round of the EFL Cup –the 2-0 home win against Reading
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/arsenal-reading-efl-cup-match-report>
on 25 October – and the striker is in line to feature against Southampton.

Wenger has used his squad players in both rounds of the competition so far – 
against Nottingham Forest, when the teamwon 4-0 away from home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/nottingham-forest-arsenal-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
, and Reading – and he will not deviate from the policy for Southampton’s visit.

Emi Martínez will once again start in goal while Wenger will change the entire 
back four from the Bournemouth game. Mathieu Debuchy is still awaiting the 
results of a scan on the hamstring injury he sustained against Bournemouth – 
the fear is that the damage is serious – while Laurent Koscielny, Shkodran 
Mustafi and Nacho Monreal will be rested.

Wenger is expected to start with Carl Jenkinson, Gabriel Paulista, Rob Holding 
and Kieran Gibbs in defence. The manager will also rest his three most potent 
attacking players, on current form – Mesut Özil, Theo Walcott and Alexis 
Sánchez. He has decisions to make across midfield, where he will chose from 
Mohamed Elneny, Francis Coquelin, Alex Oxlade‑Chamberlain, Alex Iwobi, Aaron 
Ramsey, Granit Xhaka, Jeff Reine‑Adélaïde and Ainsley Maitland-Niles.

“We will have a mixture of youth and experience but still 90% of a first-team 
squad,” Wenger said. “Debuchy is out and Giroud has a slight problem – he’s 
out, too. Pérez is in the squad and Jenkinson will play. I rested Carl 
completely against Bournemouth because he had played in two big games [against 
Manchester United and Paris St-Germain] and I felt he needed a breather [having 
only recently returned from a nine-month injury lay-off]. Sometimes, mentally, 
three games in a week demands a lot. Carl’s back in and we’ll put Gabriel in 
the centre.”

Arsenal v Southampton EFL Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> 
quarter-final, 7.45pm
 