
British author Adrian Tchaikovsky has won the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction for 
a novel that judges have compared to the eponymous author’s own work.

Tchaikovsky won the UK’s most prestigious science fiction prize on Wednesday 
evening for Children of Time, in which the remnants of humanity leave a dying 
Earth for a terraformed new planet, only to discover that the world is now 
occupied by a new species. Tom Hunter, director of the award which was set up 
with a grant from science fiction giant Sir Arthur C Clarke in 1987, said the 
winning novel “has a universal scale and sense of wonder reminiscent of Clarke 
himself, combined with one of the best science fictional extrapolations of a 
not-so-alien species and their evolving society [that] I’ve ever read”. 
Previous winners of the Clarke award include Margaret Atwood, China Miéville 
and Lauren Beukes.

Andrew M Butler, who chaired the judging panel that picked Tchaikovsky’s novel 
ahead of works by authors including Nnedi Okorafor, Iain Pears and Becky 
Chambers, said that it had been tough to choose just one winner, with judges 
“passionate about all six shortlisted titles”.

“Children of Time tells two parallel stories of the last survivors of Earth 
and the inhabitants of a terraformed planet,” said Butler. “It takes the 
reader’s sympathies and phobias, and plays with them masterfully on an epic and 
yet human scale.”

Tchaikovsky is also the author of the fantasy series Shadows of the Apt, and 
has worked as a lawyer. In a review in the Financial Times, James Lovegrove 
called Children of Time “superior stuff, tackling big themes – gods, messiahs, 
artificial intelligence, alienness – with brio”.

Hugo awards see off rightwing protests to celebrate diverse authors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/hugo-awards-winners-nk-jemisin-sad-rabid-puppies>
The announcement of the juried Clarke awards follows the weekend’s Hugo awards 
in the US. Voted for by those attending the World ScienceFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> Convention, this year NK Jemisin’s 
The Fifth Season won best novel at the Kansas City prize ceremony, while 
Okorafor’s Binti took the best novella gong.
 