
The cabinet secretary, Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, has committed 
the government to take the superannuation policy back to the party room after 
confusion around the details of the package within the Coalition.

Sinodinos said the Coalition was open to changes to superannuation measures 
after the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/superannuation-transition-to-retirement-julie-bishop-gotcha-moment>
, while claiming the government would have a clear mandate to implement the 
changes if they win the election.

“The superannuation changes were part of the budget so they were presented to 
the party room before the budget was handed down to the parliament,” he said.


Explainer: what Julie Bishop didn't know about superannuation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/superannuation-transition-to-retirement-julie-bishop-gotcha-moment>
“The next process will be if we win the election there will be consultations 
on various changes and then legislation presented to the party room.”

In a Sky interview  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/01/australian-election-2016-bill-shorten-malcolm-turnbull-campaign-politics-live>
including Labor’s Joel Fitzgibbon, Sinodinos said no fellow MPs had rung to 
urge the government to change the superannuation measures.
Sky News Australia (@SkyNewsAust) 
.@A_Sinodinos <https://twitter.com/A_Sinodinos> plays down reports of a 
backbench revolt over the coalition's super changes#ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> https://t.co/R4R7MPRrcs 
<https://t.co/R4R7MPRrcs>
 <https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/737894245693034497> June 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/737894245693034497> 
He confirmed the “transition to retirement” policy was not presented to the 
party room specifically – it was part of the whole budget package.

“If we win the election, we would have a mandate to implement our 
superannuation changes and that’s what we’ll put up to the parliament,” 
Sinodinos said.

“So you’ll have a mandate to implement the thing you are going to consult on 
after the election Arthur?” asked Fitzgibbon.


Sinodinos said there would be consultations on “subsidiary matters” but denied 
it was around the start date of the superannuation measures.

As finance minister Mathias Cormann admitted that superannuation was 
“complex”, the issue dominated the campaign day on Wednesday as Labor released 
an ad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ywCRTG7LbU> accusing the Coalition of 
dipping into the savings of superannuants.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ywCRTG7LbU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ywCRTG7LbU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ywCRTG7LbU&media=>
The Coalition has been under pressure over the changes after two senior 
ministers – Julie Bishop and Josh Frydenberg –could not explain the 
superannuation policy measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/31/turnbull-backs-bishop-after-gotcha-moment-on-superannuation>
 in the first Turnbull budget.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> policy 
places a $500,000 lifetime cap for nonconcessional superannuation contributions 
backdated to 2007, increases the concessional tax rate on asset earnings from 0 
to 15% for people aged 56-65 in the “transition to retirement” (TTR) and taxes 
accounts over $1.6m at 15%.


Concern has been growing within the Coalition over explaining the changes as 
Peta Credlin urged the government to either defend or drop the policy. But the 
government has been playing down the number of people affected by the policy as 
only 4% of superannuants.

The assistant treasurer, Kelly O’Dwyer, estimated 115,000 people were affected 
by the TTR changes but the Association ofSuperannuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/superannuation-australia> Funds of 
Australia (ASFA) estimated on Wednesday there were 550,000 people holding TTR 
accounts.


The Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young struggled to explain the Greens 
superannuation policy in a radio interview while Labor refused to state a 
position on the “transition to retirement” policy.

As the election was called immediately after the budget, the government 
changes to superannuation have yet to pass the parliament. Labor has previously 
raised concerns over the backdating of the $500,000 lifetime cap.


Malcolm Turnbull has defended his changes, describing them as “fair” and “long 
overdue”.


“We’re proud of these changes,” Turnbull said. “They’re important. They’re 
overdue. Governments have been called on to do them for many years. They’ve 
been kicked into the long grass for a long time and we’ve taken them out. We’re 
a reforming government.”

Coalition MPs who spoke to Guardian Australia said constituents were concerned 
about superannuation but once the policy was properly explained, fears were 
allayed.


The Liberal backbencher Craig Kelly said people were raising superannuation 
changes in his electorate ofHughes 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/nsw/hughes.htm>, south of Sydney. 


“It is one of the issues that people are raising and have concern about,” he 
said.

“It’s not as generous as it otherwise was and under some of the changes we are 
making, some people have to pay more tax. But in financial situation we are in, 
these are the tough decisions government have to take.”

Guardian Live election special event with Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
Kelly said he took a constituent call from a man very concerned over the 
changes, however once he explained the changes, he realised he was not effected.

Fellow Liberal backbencher Ian Goodenough told the ABC it was a significant 
issue in the election campaign.

“I have received a volume of correspondence from constituents objecting to the 
changes it is a significant issue in this election, however the dilemma is to 
identify another area of revenue to target,” Goodenough said.

Labor’s Jim Chalmers said Labor’s concern with the policy changes was the 
effect on middle income earners.


“There’s a difference of opinion about how many people these changes will 
impact between the Productivity Commission, which said about 115,000, to some 
of the stakeholders, who say the number is closer to half a million Australians 
impacted,” Chalmers said.

“We said all along that we are concerned that while the government claims that 
these changes only impact high income earners, we think that the impact is felt 
right throughout middle Australia, up and down the income levels in this 
country.”
 