
Cabinet secretary Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> has justified not 
appearing before a Senate committee into political donations on the grounds 
that former Labor minister Mark Arbib refused to front a Senate inquiry into 
the home insulation program.

Sinodinos, who informed the committee last night that he would not appear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/arthur-sinodinos-says-he-wont-attend-senate-inquiry-into-political-donations>
, told ABC radio that the request for a minister to appear before an estimates 
committee was “unprecedented”.


He then said Arbib did not appear 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2010-05-05/pm-refuses-to-front-insulation-inquiry/423468>
 before an inquiry into the Rudd government’s home insulation program.

Arthur Sinodinos under attack over NSW Liberals' donations scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/25/arthur-sinodinos-under-attack-over-nsw-liberals-donations-scandal>
Sinodinos said the inquiry’s terms of reference on associated entities and 
disclosure obligations were too broad as it was a four-hour inquiry which had 
to report within two days.

“As a minister, I am questioned in the Senate, there is questions with notice, 
there is questions without notice, I turn up to estimates committees, I’ve been 
through two inquiries,” he said.


“I’ve answered all these questions on all of these subjects that Labor 
potentially want to raise. It is essentially just a political stunt. It is 
unprecedented to ask a minister to appear before an estimates committee.


“Mark Arbib did not do it when he was requested to do so by the environment 
references committee. I don’t see why I should follow a different practice to 
the practice of the Labor party in government.”


As revealed by Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/labor-tries-to-set-up-snap-senate-inquiry-into-nsw-liberals-fundraising-scandal>
, Labor used the special sittings of parliament this month to set up the snap 
Senate committee to investigate the oversight of associated entities, such as 
the federal Liberal party’s Free Enterprise Foundation, which the New South 
Wales electoral commission says was used to “wash” property developer donations 
which had been outlawed in that state.


Sinodinos was the NSW party’s finance director at the time. 

He told the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac) that he 
accepted no responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/arthur-sinodinos-says-donation-laundering-scheme-didnt-pass-pub-test>
 for the events. Earlier this year Icacreportedly advised Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/21/arthur-sinodinos-reportedly-cleared-by-icac-over-corruption-claims>
 that no corruption findings have been made against him. Icac has yet to bring 
down its final report.


But Labor was also targeting the minister for his time as deputy chairman at 
Australian Water Holdings,which donated $74,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/03/arthur-sinodinos-denies-knowledge-of-74000-awh-donation-to-nsw-libs>
 to the NSW Liberal party when he was treasurer. In Icac, Sinodinos denied 
knowing the company donated to the party.


After refusing to appear at the Senate committee hearing set down for Thursday 
morning, Sinodinos appeared on a regular pre-election appearance on Radio 
National with Labor’s Chris Bowen.


“The situation was that Arthur was chairman of a company and treasurer of a 
political organisation,” said Bowen.


“The company he was chairman of was making donations to the political 
organisation he was treasurer of and he says ‘I know nothing’.

“He said last week in the Senate he was not given enough time to answer 
Labor’s questions. The Senate then resolved to give him enough time by 
requiring his appearance.

“If he’s got nothing to hide here it appears that Arthur – with due respect – 
is putting much more energy into avoiding appearing than would be required by 
appearing, and that means the Australian people are entitled to draw their own 
conclusions.”

 