
The much-garlanded science fiction writer Christopher Priest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/christopher-priest> has launched 
an extraordinary broadside against the authors nominated forthis year's Arthur 
C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/26/arthur-c-clarke-award-china-mieville?INTCMP=SRCH>
, describing the shortlist as "dreadful" and calling for the resignation of an 
"incompetent" panel of judgesin a post on his website 
<http://www.christopher-priest.co.uk/journal/1077/hull-0-scunthorpe-3/>.

The six titles chosen for the shortlist were announced earlier this week, 
ranging fromChina Miéville's deep-space exploration of the fall myth, 
Embassytown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/08/embassytown-china-mieville-review>
, to Jane Rogers's Booker-longlisted dystopian novel The Testament of Jessie 
Lamb. According to Priest, author ofThe Prestige 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780575099418/the-prestige>
, only Rogers' novel deserves to be on the shortlist, with the remaining titles 
all unworthy and four novels "outstandingly ignored" by judges: Ian R MacLeod's
Wake Up and Dream 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/books/data/book/science-fiction/9781848631946/wake-up-and-dream>
, Simon Ings'sDead Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/06/dead-water-simon-ings-review>, 
Adam Roberts'sBy Light Alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575083653/by-light-alone>
 and Lavie Tidhar'sOsama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9781848631939/osama>.

"It is indefensible that a novel like Charles Stross's Rule 34 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/charles-stross> should be given 
apparent credibility by an appearance in the Clarke shortlist,"writes Priest 
<http://www.christopher-priest.co.uk/journal/1077/hull-0-scunthorpe-3/>, who 
has won both genre and literary prizes for his novels but whose latest outing, 
The Islanders, failed to make the Arthur C Clarke shortlist. "Stross writes 
like an internet puppy: energetically, egotistically, sometimes amusingly, 
sometimes affectingly, but always irritatingly, and goes on being energetic and 
egotistical and amusing for far too long," he continued. "You wait nervously 
for the unattractive exhaustion which will lead to a piss-soaked carpet."

Greg Bear's Hull Zero Three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575100930/hull-zero-three>
? "The paragraphs are short, to suit the expected attention-span of the reader. 
The important words are in italics. Have we lived and fought in vain?" Sheri S 
Tepper'sThe Waters Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575094932/the-waters-rising>
? "For fuck's sake, it is a quest saga and it has a talking horse. There are 
puns on the word 'neigh'." Drew Magary'sThe End Specialist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780007429080/the-end-specialist>
? "Speculative fiction is for the present, on the cutting edge, looking 
forward, not back."

And as for Miéville, according to Priest "Embassytown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780230750760/embassytown>
 contains many careless solecisms", as well as "lazy writing" and a "lack of 
characterisation". Unless, says Priest, the three-time winner of the Arthur C 
Clarke "is told in clear terms that he is underachieving, that he is 
restricting his art by depending too heavily on genre commonplaces, he will 
never write the great novels that many people say he is capable of".

Having read almost all of the books tipped for the prize, Priest concludes 
that 2011 was "a poor year" for science fiction, and that judges decided to 
play it safe. "We have a dreadful shortlist put together by a set of judges who 
were not fit for purpose. They were incompetent. Their incompetence was made 
more problematical because the overall quality of the fiction in the year in 
question was poor. They did not know how to resolve this. They played what they 
saw as safe," he wrote. "They failed themselves, they failed the Clarke award, 
and they failed anyone who takes a serious interest in speculative fiction."

The judges – Juliet E McKenna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/juliet-e-mckenna>, Martin Lewis, 
Phil Nanson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/phil-nanson>, 
Nickianne Moody <http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/cws/gsp/moodybio.html>, Rob Grant 
<http://www.sci-fi-london.com> and chair Andrew M Butler 
<http://www.andrewmbutler.co.uk/> – should be fired or forced to resign, says 
Priest, and the 2012 award suspended. If his "modest suggestion" is taken up, 
the author says, and enough people believe the proposal was made in his own 
interests, he would withdraw his own novel The Islanders from the running.

But Tom Hunter, director of the prize, brushed aside Priest's calls. "Nobody 
is going to be resigning," he said. "We've put forward our shortlist. It's the 
award judges' list of the best six science fiction novels of the year. They've 
done their job entirely well, and produced a fascinating shortlist, which we 
stand by. Please feel free to discuss it, but we would never retract it."

Jon Courtenay Grimwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/jon-courtenay-grimwood>, an 
award-winning science fiction and fantasy author who has judged the Arthur C 
Clarke in the past, said that "the beauty of the Clarke shortlist is that it's 
always going to offend someone". Although he felt there were some "obvious 
omissions" from this year's shortlist – Priest's own novelThe Islanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780575070042/the-islanders>
,Haruki Murakami's 1Q84 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846554056/q-book-book>
, and, like Priest, the Tidhar and the Roberts – Grimwood nonetheless thought 
Priest had been too hasty in his rebuttal of the shortlist.

"If you're going to make Leavisian statements from Olympian heights, you need 
to bring Leavisian levels of intelligence to the table, and Chris Priest's 
piece strikes me as too hastily written, and just plain wrong in places (in 
particular the references to Miéville and vocabulary)," he said. "Should the 
judges resign? Of course not. Their job is to judge what they consider to be 
the best books and that's what they've done. Do I agree those are the best six 
books? No. But that is the point of the Clarkes. It's a snapshot that makes 
readers go, 'Yeah, but what about …'"

Stross, meanwhile, has taken the remarks in good spirit. "I want 'Stross 
writes like an internet puppy – Christopher Priest' on my next book cover," he 
tweeted. He has now changed his Twitter picture toa grinning puppy 
<https://twitter.com/#!/cstross>.
 