
Labor has continued its attack on the cabinet secretary, Arthur Sinodinos, 
over the New South Wales Liberals’political donations scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/nsw-electoral-commission-withholds-44m-from-liberals-over-donations-scandal>
.

The NSW Electoral Commission is refusing to pay the Liberal party’s NSW branch 
more than $4.4m until the party reveals the secret donors who poured about 
$700,000 into its coffers before the 2011 state election, when Sinodinos was 
its treasurer and finance director.

Arthur Sinodinos threatens legal action against NSW Electoral Commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/arthur-sinodinos-threatens-legal-action-against-nsw-electoral-commission>
“It beggars belief that the treasurer and finance director of the Liberal 
party of NSW didn’t know about an elaborate arrangement to channel hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of illegal donations to theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>,” the deputy 
opposition leader, Tanya Plibersek, told reporters in Sydney on Friday.

Plibersek claimed it was extraordinary that the prime minister, Malcolm 
Turnbull, had not sacked or stood aside Sinodinos, his “numbers man”, over the 
scandal.

“It is very clear that there is a substantial cover-up of the secret identity 
of prohibited donors in NSW,” she said.

“You really have to ask yourself why won’t the prime minister act. Why is he 
protecting his numbers man and what secret is the Liberal party of NSW keeping 
that’s worth $4m to them?”

On Thursday Sinodinos threatened to take legal action against the Electoral 
Commission over what he called its “flawed” report.

“I had no role in the NSW division’s decision to decline to update information 
disclosed in that declaration, as was requested by the commission,” he said.

“For my part, my lawyers have written to the commission to draw its attention 
to errors of fact in its statement in relation to me. I was not given the 
opportunity by the commission to comment on its statement before its 
publication and I was not aware of the publication until shortly prior to its 
release.”

Coalition says Senate voting changes can survive legal challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/20/coalition-says-senate-voting-changes-can-survive-legal-challenge>
Sinodinos said the statement had already been extensively cited by media. 

“In a number of instances, there has been erroneous commentary to the effect 
that I ‘concealed’ illegal donations and that my actions were somehow corrupt 
or illegal,” he said. “That media commentary is a direct consequence of the NSW 
Electoral Commission’s flawed publication.

“In light of these matters, my lawyers on my behalf have invited the 
commission to immediately retract all references to me in the publication. The 
commission has been invited to publish a correction to that effect on its 
website.”

• Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 