
Labor’s criticism of profits from company tax cuts going offshore creates 
“sovereign risk”, the cabinet secretary,Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, has said.

Sinodinos made the claim to suggest Labor was hypocritical for releasing a 
policy designed to encourage foreign investment in agriculture.

Speaking about the need to attract foreign investment on Sky with Joel 
Fitzgibbon on Wednesday, Sinodinos said: “If Labor’s so worried about foreign 
investment, why do they keep lambasting foreign investors and saying they will 
be the beneficiaries of our company tax cut, as if there’s something wrong with 
that?

“[This] walking both sides of the street by Labor in so many policy areas is 
actually in itself something which creates sovereign risk about our country.”

Labor releases $3bn childcare plan aimed at families on less than $150,000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/05/labor-3bn-childcare-election-2016-families-less-than-150000>
In its strict sense, sovereign risk describes governments defaulting on 
obligations butis used by some to mean any change in taxes, subsidies or 
regulations 
<https://theconversation.com/what-is-and-isnt-a-sovereign-risk-30612> that are 
less favourable for businesses.

Asked why Labor criticised the company tax cut if it wanted to attract foreign 
investors, Fitzgibbon said: “We want to attract them but we don’t want to 
repatriate all our hard-earned money”.

Sinodinos said: “But that’s why foreign investors come here ... Otherwise, why 
do they come?”

Sinodinos said the government would legislate its 10-year $48bn company tax 
cut because “that’s what provides the growth impetus”.

“Companies need certainty about the direction, because it takes time to draw 
up their investment plans, to change their capital equipment, they think 
forward.”

Fitzgibbon said tax cuts to multinationals and attracting foreign investment 
were separate questions.

Under Labor’s policy, it would increase the threshold at which the Foreign 
Investment Review Board reviews investment in agricultural land to $50m. The 
threshold is currently $15m, meaning Labor would relax oversight of foreign 
takeovers of agricultural land.

Fitzgibbon said Labor wanted an “enormous investment in agriculture to meet 
our future aspirations” and did not want to scare foreign investors away with 
red tape.

He said the government’s decision to lower the threshold to $15m at the 
Nationals’ behest was a “dog-whistle”.

Sinodinos said checking foreign investment was in the national interest and 
encouraged confidence, which increased foreign investment.

Labor has not backflipped on corporate tax cuts. Here are the facts | Kristina 
Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/labor-has-not-backflipped-on-corporate-tax-cuts-here-are-the-facts>
Host David Speers also asked Sinodinos about reports that Liberal MPs used 
their taxpayer-funded office allowance to purchase data registry services from 
Parakeelia Pty Ltd 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-mps-directing-taxpayer-funds-towards-liberal-partylinked-company-and-donor-20160608-gpe87q.html>
, a company that donated significant sums to the Liberal party.

Sinodinos said it was a legitimate office expense and he “thinks he would 
have” paid Parakeelia out of his office allowance.

“That would be used to provide information that we gather on electors ... we 
use it to try and do our electorate business.”

Sinodinos said he believed it was a legitimate use of taxpayer funds.
 