
Cabinet secretary Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> won’t be 
attending a special parliamentary inquiry into political donations on Thursday, 
despite a “demand” from the Senate that he show up to give evidence.


Sinodinos wrote to the committee late Wednesday saying he wouldn’t be 
attending during the two hours scheduled for him to give evidence on Thursday 
morning and that the “direction” was “objectionable”.

“It would be inappropriate for me or any minister to appear ... the purported 
direction ... is without precedent, and violates well established Senate 
practice,” Sinodinos wrote.

He said the inquiry had a “ludicrously” short time frame and the public could 
be forgiven for concluding that it was a “stunt”.

As revealed by Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/labor-tries-to-set-up-snap-senate-inquiry-into-nsw-liberals-fundraising-scandal>
, Labor used the special sittings of parliament this month to set up the snap 
Senate committee to investigate the oversight of associated entities, like the 
federal Liberal party’s Free Enterprise Foundation, which the New South Wales 
electoral commission says was used to “wash” property developer donations 
illegal in that state, at a time when cabinet secretary and senator Arthur 
Sinodinos was the NSW party’s finance director.

A tale of two charitable foundations, and a flood of donations to the Liberals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/02/a-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals>
The government said the “demand” set a dangerous precedent and labelled the 
inquiry, by the Finance and Public Administration References Committee, as a 
“stunt”.

It then also requested that the inquiry hear from the opposition leader, Bill 
Shorten, and six other figures involved with a $40,000 political donation 
Shorten failed to declare for eight years before revealing it in evidence to 
the royal commission into trade unions.

The committee, on which Labor and the Greens have the numbers, declined.

Other NSW officials have also reportedly declined to give evidence and the 
chair of the NSW electoral commission, Keith Mason, has written to the 
committee saying it cannot provide a submission because the issues being 
discussed are still under investigation by the commission.

That leaves the Australian Electoral Commission as the only organisation 
actually providing evidence on Thursday.

Labor tries to set up snap Senate inquiry into NSW Liberals' fundraising 
scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/labor-tries-to-set-up-snap-senate-inquiry-into-nsw-liberals-fundraising-scandal>
The federal director of the Liberal Party, Tony Nutt, wrote to the committee 
saying in the Liberal Party’s view “the current arrangements set out in the 
electoral act for the funding and disclosure regime in general and for annual 
returns by parties and other entities ... works adequately” and that it helped 
to encourage “engagement with the democratic political system by a wide cross 
section of our society.”

Sinodinos has always said he did not know about the banned donations.

The committee will now report his failure to attend to the Senate, which may 
vote to refer the issue to the privileges committee.

The royal commission did not make any adverse findings against Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/07/bill-shorten-cleared-of-any-unlawful-conduct-by-unions-royal-commission>
. In evidence to the commission he revealed he had failed to declare a 
political donation of about $40,000 from a labour hire company that he received 
for the 2007 election campaign. The labour hire company, Unibuilt, had donated 
money through the AWU that was used to pay $40,000 of the $52,000 salary of 
Shorten’s campaign director Lance Wilson in February 2007. He declared the 
donation only a few days before he gave evidence to the royal commission last 
year when it came to his attention. The donation came at a time when the AWU 
was negotiating an enterprise agreement with Unibuilt. Shorten said he didn’t 
believe Unibuilt was seeking something in return for the donation.

The committee has three Labor members, two Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> members and one Green.
 