
Station Eleven, Emily St John Mandel’s haunting tale of a global pandemic that 
wipes out civilisation, has won this year’sArthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction.


The novel interweaves a story set in Year Twenty after the “Georgia Flu” has 
killed almost all humanity with flashbacks to the final days of civilisation. 
By focusing on a troupe of travelling actors and musicians bringing Shakespeare 
to America’s isolated survivors in the aftermath of disaster, Mandel explores 
the power of memory and the human need for art and culture.

Chair of the judges, Andrew M Butler, said: “While many post-apocalypse novels 
focus on the survival of humanity, Station Eleven focuses instead on the 
survival of our culture, with the novel becoming an elegy for the 
hyper-globalised present.”

Station Eleven review – Emily St John Mandel's gripping apocalypse drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/station-eleven-review-emily-st-john-mandel>
Praise has been building for the Canadian author’s fourth novel, which was 
longlisted for the Baileys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/10/baileys-womens-prize-for-fiction-longlist-in-pictures>
 women’s prize in the UK as well as being afinalist for the National Book Awards
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/15/national-book-awards-shortlist-cartoonist-roz-chast>
 in the US. After the NBA announcement, Mandeltold the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/style-blog/wp/2014/10/15/sorry-emily-st-john-mandel-resistance-is-futile/>
 that she has seen her novel categorised as literary fiction, speculative 
fiction, dystopian fiction and sci-fi. “If you write literary fiction that’s 
set partly in the future, you’re apparently a sci-fi writer … I think of it as 
being more of a story about what remains after we lose everything and the 
importance of art in our lives.”

The book also found a high-profile fan in George RR Martin, who backed it for 
America’s top SF prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/mar/11/george-rr-martin-game-of-thrones-emily-st-john-mandel-station-eleven-hugo-award>
, the Hugos, saying: “One could, I suppose, call it a post-apocalypse novel, 
and it is that, but all the usual tropes of that sub-genre are missing here … 
It’s a deeply melancholy novel, but beautifully written, and wonderfully 
elegiac.”


The post-apocalypse genre is well-trodden ground, as Mandel playfully signals 
early in the novel when she notes that “Jeevan’s understanding of disaster 
preparedness was based entirely on action movies, but on the other hand, he’d 
seen a lot of action movies.” Her travelling actors are SF fans too, borrowing 
their motto from Star Trek: “Because survival is insufficient.”

Award director Tom Hunter told the Guardian: “Diversity in genre is the big 
topic right now. For us diversity means starting with as broad a range of 
voices and books as possible so we can pick a shortlist that we think really is 
the best science fiction literature of the year.

“This year, we received over 100 submissions from 36 publishing imprints, our 
second-highest ever. One of the reasons for this continuing growth is the rise 
in submissions, and recognition of the award from more mainstream publishing 
houses – and of course the attraction of science fiction and fantasy stories to 
an ever-growing fanbase. Publishers know that the barriers between genres are 
coming down. The Geek Pound will seek out great new books, no matter where they 
happen to be shelved.”

Past winners of the award, which this year comes with a cheque for £2,015, 
include Margaret Atwood, China Miéville, Neal Stephenson and most recently Ann 
Leckie. The judging panel was made up of Duncan Lawie and Nicholas Whyte of the 
British Science Fiction Association, Sarah Brown and Lesley Hall of the Science
Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> Foundation, and Leila Abu 
El Hawa from Sci-Fi London film festival.




 