
Adam Dant's hyper-detailed drawings are like objects magicked out of a 
fictional realm. With their ornate borders and trompe l'oeil crinkled edges, 
his fantastic maps, books and charts navigate worlds whose strange territory 
seems to depend on figures of speech or even hallucinations. HisBureau for the 
Investigation of the Subliminal Image 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/walker/johnmoores/23/exhibitors/adam_dant.aspx>
 included studies of self-portraits supposedly hidden in paintings in the 
Louvre. Dant meticulously documented these concealed images, apparently 
rendered subconsciously by artists, as if they were part of orthodox art 
history. Elsewhere, he has turned categorisation itself on its head with 
"underneathism", painstakingly depicting from below everything from 
supermarkets to beach life.

His peculiarly British wit extends to social satire: the Princesses Beatrice 
and Eugenie are among the tabloid favourites whose public personas Dant has 
imaginatively unpicked, earning him comparisons withHogarth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hogarth>. Furthermore, his works – 
especiallyDonald Parsnips Daily Journal 
<http://www.artnet.com/Magazine/reviews/robinson/robinson1-22-13.asp>, one of 
his first projects – frequently resemble the output of an 18th-century press. 
They're more like pamphlets to be pored over in coffee shops, not galleries.

Trained as a graphic designer, Dant is an adept practitioner of traditional 
printing methods, a skill he acquired almost by chance when he took a student 
exchange place at an Indian university in the 1980s, and was surprised to find 
himself presented with wood and chisel, unaware that graphic design in India 
then meant print-making.

In the late 1990s, he handed out 100 copies daily of the Parsnips journal to 
an unsuspecting readership in London, Paris, Cairo and beyond. His latest works 
go back further, to Renaissance analogies between the body and cities and 
architecture. Meanwhile,From the Library of Dr London 
<http://www.halesgallery.com/exhibitions/_48/> consists of huge drawings 
depicting maps in antique books. They chart the world's major metropolises not 
as grids of streets, but in terms of what they make us think of.

In one work conflating art history with recent news stories, nude figures 
recalling traditional Japanese erotic prints stretch their limbs around a map 
of Tokyo's subway – a place notorious for sexual harassment. In another, the 
main thoroughfares of Paris, a city whose guidebook splendour belies 
revolution-era France's socialist ideals, are mapped on to the bones of Liberty.

Why we like him: For British Drinking, depicting revelry on Shoreditch's 
Redchurch Street. Dant has witnessed this little road around the corner from 
his studio grow into a hub for East End nightlife, and here he packs it with 
characters who each embody slang for getting drunk, including badgered, 
mullahed and Dot Cotton (rhyming slang for rotten). A dishevelledBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> is "drunk as a lord".

Weird science: Dant is a member of the London Institute of 'Pataphysics 
<http://www.atlaspress.co.uk/theLIP/>, a continuation of Alfred Jarry 
<http://www.evergreenreview.com/102/fiction/duo.html>'s "science of imaginary 
solutions". Members of its European equivalents have includedUmberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/umbertoeco> and one of Dant's big 
influences, the literary group Oulipo.

Where can I see him? At Hales Gallery <http://www.halesgallery.com/>, London, 
to 6 October. Dant's monumentalillustrated chronology of 'pataphysics 
<http://www.atlaspress.co.uk/theLIP/?action=departmental> is published by Atlas 
Press.
 