
I have had many studios since my first in London, in 1968, designed by Thomas 
Telford at St Katherine's Dock, but my present one is unquestionably the best. 
I have had it for about five years. Except for eating and sleeping I virtually 
live here. I come to the studio between nine and 10 in the morning, and I 
usually stay until seven or eight in the evening. When I have a lot to do I 
often work seven days a week.

The picture shows the big free-standing studio counter, which is really used 
like a palette. All of the painting is done using small rollers in individual 
paint trays so I need a lot of space. The sink is built into the counter 
because I use a water-based acrylic paint so I'm constantly washing the 
rollers. It is never usually this tidy. This photo was taken in between 
paintings and my assistant has tidied everything up. The floor was painted only 
the week before because it had become such a mess. Although the work that I do 
is very precise and looks very carefully done, it is, in fact, a very physical 
and messy process to make the paintings.

I'm currently making a tiled wall painting for the new DLR station in 
Woolwich, Arsenal and those are the colour samples of the ceramic tiles on the 
floor. I just laid them out so I could see them in relation to the colours of 
the paintings.

It is my bicycle but you don't often see me on it. It's a nice idea.

The studio has very high ceilings and very good light, the room is almost 
square, so you can stand way back and look at things. I had the opportunity to 
design it exactly to suit the needs of the kind of work I have been doing over 
recent years. This was a pleasure but also a risk. I have found in the past 
that by the time one finally manages to create ideal working circumstances, the 
work itself can change and all one's carefully realised specifications can 
become instantly redundant. Fortunately that wasn't the case this time.
 