
A modest agricultural building badly damaged in the north of England by Storm 
Desmond is in fact anenigmatic artwork <https://merzbarnlangdale.wordpress.com/>
 left unfinished by the German artistKurt Schwitters  
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/kurt-schwitters-1912>when he died in 1948. 
Now it has been offered a £25,000 lifeline by a Swiss art gallery.

The grant was suggested to Galerie Gmurzynska <http://www.gmurzynska.com/> by 
the architect Zaha Hadid, who had worked closely with the Swiss gallery, 
curating and designing exhibitions there before her death in March.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cad25648317fce0fec02852350da359acc1376b%2F0_0_1789_1800%2F1789.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist's%20barn%20damaged%20in%20Storm%20Desmond%20given%20%C2%A325%2C000%20lifeline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%27s%20barn%20damaged%20in%20Storm%20Desmond%20given%20%C2%A325%2C000%20lifeline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cad25648317fce0fec02852350da359acc1376b%2F0_0_1789_1800%2F1789.jpg>
 Merz Barn artwork by Kurt Schwitters, dating from 1950. Photograph: Sprengel 
Museum Hanover 
A pioneer in breaking down the wall between architecture and installation art, 
Schwitters’s work is equally admired by artists and architects. The writer and 
broadcaster Melvyn Bragg called it “an outstanding contribution to the 
understanding of contemporary art” not only in the UK, but across the art world.

The “Merz barn” at Elterwater in Cumbria was the last of several such 
buildings – christenedMerzbau – the artist worked on. The earliest, in his 
parents’ garden in Hanover, was destroyed in a second world war bombing raid, 
while the structure he created while living as a refugee from the Nazis in 
Norway was lost in a fire in the 1950s.

Schwitters escaped to Britain when the German army invaded Norway in 1940, but 
was initially interned as an enemy alien on the Isle of Man. There he held Dada 
performance evenings in his makeshift studio before being freed in 1941 to live 
and work, first in London and later in the Lake District. He intended to 
complete his thirdMerzbau in the old shed he acquired at Elterwater, but died 
before he could finish the work.

In the 1960s, the one wall Schwitters had all but completed, bearing the 
elaborate swirling sculptural decoration with which he intended to cover the 
entire interior, was cut out of the building and moved across the Penninesto 
the Hatton Gallery 
<https://hattongallery.org.uk/collections/kurt-schwitters-merz-barn-wall> at 
Newcastle University, to preserve it.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F080c1f5573a81f29f86a0b69cab26b435e03abc8%2F0_76_1498_692%2F1498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist's%20barn%20damaged%20in%20Storm%20Desmond%20given%20%C2%A325%2C000%20lifeline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%27s%20barn%20damaged%20in%20Storm%20Desmond%20given%20%C2%A325%2C000%20lifeline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fartists-barn-storm-desmond-kurt-schwitters-zaha-hadid-merz-bau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F080c1f5573a81f29f86a0b69cab26b435e03abc8%2F0_76_1498_692%2F1498.jpg>
 The Merz Barn from the rear, showing damage to the building and surrounding 
trees. Photograph: Photo Littoral 
The Littoral Arts Trust <http://www.littoral.org.uk/>, a small charity with no 
public funding, has continued to care for the building itself, opening it to 
the public and making it into a retreat for artists, but could not afford the 
reconstruction costs after flooding and storm damage left the end wall in a 
state of collapse.

The University of Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofcumbria> has also agreed to 
help with the work, and the trust hopes to complete emergency repairs and open 
the site again by the end of July.

Meanwhile, Galerie Gmurzynska will be marking the 100th anniversary of Dadaism 
withan exhibition of 60 works by Schwitters 
<http://www.gmurzynska.com/exhibitions>, opening on 12 June and housed within 
an installation by Zaha Hadid inspired by the artist’s originalMerzbau in 
Hanover.
 