
Sean Landers <http://seanlanders.net/> has built his artistic career on 
oversharing. In the 1990s, he splurged his innermost thoughts about art, money, 
sex, friends, family and business associates, first in ballpoint pen on yellow 
legal notepads and later in painted slanting script on giant canvases. His 
stream-of-consciousness digressions-cum-confessions typically veer between 
painfully honest stuff about his art dealer, critics, popularity and market 
value to even more painful assertions of his own brilliance, often both at once 
("I represent the ass-end of the artworld, at least I hope I do", reads a 
cheeky line from 1993's Patches).

The writing meanders through philosophy, rock music, masturbatory musings and 
hilarious waffle ("I just caught myself talking to an electrical chord", he 
admits in that same early work).Landers's novel [Sic] 
<http://www.amazon.com/Sic-Sean-Landers/dp/157322507X> , a 400-plus-page comic 
epic traversing the artist's sense of self, might be theGen-X answer to 
Tristram Shandy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/aug/29/tristram-shandy-sterne-audio-review>
. He's also made ad hoc videos of himself dancing like a rubber giraffe. Once, 
he set a chimp loose in his studio and filmed it. Then there are his more 
traditional works, bronze busts and figurative paintings. These include his own 
interpretations of famous works likeHogarth's A Modern Midnight Conversation 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:A_Midnight_Modern_Conversation.jpg>, and 
paintings featuring aliens, disembodied breasts and his recurring alter egos, a 
clown and a monkey.

Alongside John Currin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2003/sep/03/art.pulp> and Lisa Yuskavage
 <http://www.davidzwirner.com/artists/lisa-yuskavage/>, Landers studied art at 
Yale in the 1980s at the height of over-inflated art market madness. Though a 
feted young gun, he hit the New York art world just as the bubble burst. As 
such, his early works flaunted authenticity, including a heartfelt letter 
written to his student loan officer about just how little he was actually 
selling. Yet as with the angsty self-aware/self-deluded screen persona of Woody 
Allen, Landers's routine is a carefully crafted composite of truth and fiction.
 Signature screeds ... Detail of Binoculars (2012). Photograph: Jason 
Mandella/Sean Landers/Greengrassi, London 
His latest series of paintings depict shelves stacked with books whose titles 
spell out his signature screeds, including the line "I am a painting not a man 
I exist in paint only." These accompany a selection of terracotta busts of 
famous authors with silver and gold skins, Beckett, Poe, Melville, Joyce and 
one woman, Dickinson, among them.

In place of the heroic genius those greats are celebrated for, Landers shows 
us the misshapen dance between dreams of greatness and human foibles that goes 
on behind the scenes. While his target is the old-fashioned notion of artistic 
genius, his overblown ego, false starts and plummeting doubt are something we 
can surely all relate to.
 Dreams of greatness and human foibles ... James Joyce (2012). Photograph: 
Jason Mandella/Sean Landers/Greengrassi, London 
Why we like him: If anyone embodied the maverick, macho painter fantasy it was 
Picasso. Just as Picasso aligned his own work to that ofVel√°zquez 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Las_Meninas>, Landers claimed kinship with the 
modern master in a 2001 series of paintings reinterpreting his iconic forms. 
"Sean Landers" and "Genius" are among the words his Picasso-esque shapes spell.

Word up: Landers used to write a column for Spin Magazine called Genius 
Lessons.

Where can I see him: At Greengrassi <http://www.greengrassi.com/>, London to 
16 June.
 