
Lynette Yiadom-Boakye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/lynette-yiadom-boakye> is one of 
life's great manipulators – at least when it comes to paint. She nudges the 
gooey stuff into shape, coaxing figures from gestural strokes. The people she 
depicts are often doing some unremarkable everyday act, like lying down or 
removing a sock. Some recall old-fashioned portraiture, painted full length, or 
from the waist up against plain backdrops lively with brushwork. But their 
psychological complexity hits deep. The delicate mystery of an unreadable lip 
curl, a curiously game smile or an awkward stance has a subtle, if insistent, 
pull on our imagination.

They're so compelling 
<http://www.studiomuseum.org/sites/default/files/imagecache/slideshows/exhibition/lynette_1_web.jpg>
 it's hard to believe Yiadom-Boakye's subjects aren't portrayals of real 
people: they're fictions born from scrapbooks, drawings and intuition. These 
characters are also mostly dark-skinned, something that seems to matter both 
very much and very little. A British artist of Ghanaian descent, Yiadom-Boakye 
is putting black subjects at the heart of a European painting tradition from 
which they have largely been left out. Yet there are no capital "C" cultural 
references and features often aren't racially distinct. The most you can say is 
that hair, wardrobe and body language are gently bourgeois. The neutrality is 
striking.

Connections are hinted at between many of her works, though she never makes 
clear what the underlying story might be, preferring to leave things teasingly 
open.Within her latest paintings, men in jumpsuits 
<http://www.frieze.com/issue/article/a-life-in-a-day/> with stocking feet or a 
lithe manner recall the dancer's studio. InGreenfinch 
<http://ex-chamber-memo3.up.seesaa.net/image/1-5d3ae.jpg>, a teenager in a 
black catsuit and a feathery ruff about the neck sits casually, as if taking a 
break from rehearsals. With his dark silhouette set against a shadowy ground, 
there's a sense that his form is literally emerging from the paint. You can see 
what Yiadom-Boakye is getting at when she says she wants "to drag people out of 
the canvas".

Meanwhile the moustachioed guy with a ballerina's slight frame, in Bound Over 
to Keep the Peace 
<http://www.frieze.com/uploads/images/middle/Bound_Over_To_Keep_The_Peace_Boakye-Yiadom.jpg>
, plays with his necklace and gives us a riveting smile, full of the promise of 
secrets about to be spilled. Then again, that's just one way of looking at it. 
Yiadom-Boakye's paintings refuse to be pinned down to a single story; her 
characters keep their options open.

Why we like her: For the dreamy 6pm Cadiz, where a man in a faded blue denim 
two-piece reclines languidly on a sand dunes.

Rip it up and start again: Yiadom-Boakye works at a prolific rate – a painting 
a day. Yet much of it is never shown. If something isn't working, she destroys 
it and moves on.

Where can I see her? At Chisenhale Gallery <http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/>, 
London E3, to 13 May.
 