
Sung Hwan Kim has a gift for getting under the skin. The stories he and his 
friends spin in his beguiling videos and performances are delivered in the 
hushed tones you might use to soothe a child or an invalid. His restrained 
bedside manner is pitch-perfect, casually launching into parables with an 
ominous psychosexual charge and mysterious symbolism, which builds to fever 
point on unsuspecting ears.

In one of the Korean-born, New York-based artist's most haunting film works, 
From the Commanding Heights, a woman finds a family of snakes set up home in 
her throat. She manages to bite off their heads but their bodies remain lodged 
in her slender neck.

Kim brings the tale to life with a green marker pen, sketching phallic snakes 
on to a transparency, 
<http://www.queensmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/1sunghwankim.jpg> 
placed over a camera lens that he talks into, so that the felt-tip snakes seem 
to grow in his own gullet.

This flair for quick-thinking low-fi effects, coupled with the gang of chums 
who act in Kim's videos, might call to mind current Turner-nomineeSpartacus 
Chetwynd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/dec/10/spartacus-chetwynd-art>'s 
dishevelled performance troupe and their DIY wardrobes. Typical costumes for 
Kim's works include hand-drawn paper masks which call to mind both children's 
fancy dress and S&M gear, or bedsheets used to conceal crouching bodies so they 
become volcanoes with human heads. Simple camera tricks make everyday things 
hallucinogenic: see Manahatas Dance, where footage of a woman dancing in a 
Native American top is projected upside down in slow motion, so that her 
leather tassels and hair start to look more and more like the tendrils of a 
jellyfish.

Kim's approach always flits between reality and fiction and draws on different 
mediums and cultures. A single work might mesh elements from sci-fi, folk 
tales, personal memories and human history, as in the unsettling Summer Days in 
Keijo. The Dutch traveller who narrates this story of Keijo, the formerly 
Japanese-ruled city that is now Korea's capital Seoul, starts out like a dull 
tour guide. Soon enough, though, things take a sinister turn.

We're told that the little kids innocently dancing and playing have been 
wheeled out creepily for her amusement, having been rescued from sewers to 
become industrial workers. Nothing is to be believed, it seems,in a city whose 
name is always changing <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Names_of_Seoul>. Even the 
architecture in the film is subject to reinvention, with buildings pushed 
around, their landmark status revoked. It seems that in both life and art, you 
cannot trust what you see or hear.

Why we like him: For the delirious soundtracks Kim creates with New York-based 
musician David Michael DiGregorio AKAdogr <http://www.dogr.org/>: intense 
orchestrations of experimental acoustics, found sounds and eerie vocals.

One plus one: Kim originally studied maths and engineering. He was on the way 
to becoming an architect before he attended a class taught byperformance and 
video art legend Joan Jonas 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=2930>.

Where can I see him? At Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern-tanks/exhibition/sung-hwan-kim> to 
28 October.
 