
Damián Ortega has a little kid's urge to take things apart and figure out how 
they tick. ForCosmic Thing 
<http://www.universes-in-universe.de/car/venezia/bien50/cotidiano/e-ortega.htm>
, the work that made the Mexican artist's name when it dazzled visitors to the 
2003 Venice Biennale, he simply dismantled a VW Beetle – from the tongue-like 
curve of its bonnet to the liquorice Os of its wheels. Hanging from the 
ceiling, as if the entire thing had spontaneously leapt apart into a 
nuts-and-bolts constellation, the "people's car" became a thing of wonder.

Items you find around the house and on the street – piles of bricks, 
tortillas, oil drums, rotting fruit – are among his favourite materials. His 
workClassified Cob <http://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_kswjh1U5xH1qzaqfb.jpg>, 
where each shrivelled kernel on a cob of sweetcorn has been numbered, makes an 
old vegetable seem quite marvellous.120 Days 
<http://beachpackagingdesign.typepad.com/.a/6a00e54f0014bd88340120a69fdb5e970c-800wi>
, created with the aid of Venetian glassblowers, transforms Coke bottles into 
curvaceous stems that look like sex toys worthy of the Marquis de Sade, whose 
120 Days of Sodom is referenced in the title.

Born in 1967, Ortega is a frontrunner of the generation that's emerged in the 
wake of Mexican artists like his former teacher,Gabriel Orozco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2004/jul/06/1>, or Francis Alys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/14/francis-alys-story-of-deception>
. As with his forebears, he makes playful use of everyday finds, while opening 
a window on to political and economic subtexts. In Mexico – where theGerman VW 
Beetle <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volkswagen_Beetle_in_Mexico> has been 
made, marketed and a major hit – the car is a charged icon of western cultural 
imposition.

Secret histories of materials course through Ortega's current London show, 
Traces of Gravity, where salt is the connecting thread. A thin line of it runs 
like a coke hit across Congo River, a landscape of black tyres that calls to 
mind the infamous rubber trade that quickened the pace of colonial atrocities 
in theCongo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congo_Free_State>, and which inspired 
Joseph Conrad's novel Heart of Darkness. Elsewhere, it pours like an hourglass 
from a huge submarine made out of industrial food sacks, suspended from the 
ceiling in a darkened space. The appearance of salt in photography is more 
gentle: invoked by the shadow of a prone bicycle on a bed of salt, where the 
bike's spinning wheel creates a lo-fi moving image that looks back to the magic 
lantern shows that predated cinema.

As always, Ortega's raw materials suggest much more than the sum of their 
parts.

Why we like him: For his film series 9 Types of Terrain, where children's 
games align with war games.Rows of standing bricks fall like dominoes 
<http://www.frieze.com/uploads/images/back/damian-ortega.jpg>, arranged in 
formations that echo the nine types of battlefield Sun Tzu outlined inThe Art 
of War <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_War>. The bricks might be 
people, homes, or civilisations, falling and springing back to life as the 
films begin again and again.

Power of the pen: Ortega started out as a political cartoonist.

Where can I see him? At White Cube <http://whitecube.com/> to 8 September.
 