
First impressions are deceptive in Roger Hiorns's art. His sculptures pull you 
in with their mysterious good looks, like the naked youth he perched at one end 
of a public bench while flames licked its metal seat. They can seem both 
delicate and powerful, as with the thistles, model cathedrals or BMW engines 
he's dunked in copper sulphate solution so their surfaces grow glittering skins 
of blue crystal. His abstract steel sculptures, meanwhile, have clean and 
elegant forms, weighted with the might of industry and enterprise.

Yet something toxic hangs in the air. The crystal landscapes Hiorns sets in 
motion are corrosive, eating up whatever they embrace in an alien crust. Other 
works have been impregnated with actual bovine brain matter, the root ofmad cow 
disease <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bovine_spongiform_encephalopathy> 
paranoia that gripped Britain in the 1980s when the artist was a boy. They 
worry and nag, pitting our desire for order – whether in the guise of science, 
religion or clear-cut sexuality – against the threat of creeping chaos posed by 
disease, madness, or whatever flaunts the norm. Even his series of self-assured 
hard-edged slabs of steel,a la Richard Serra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2008/may/13/art.culture>, have their 
macho presumptions undercut: they lean nonchalantly against a wall stained with 
French perfume.
 Untitled, 2012, by Roger Hiorns. Plastic, brain matter. Photograph: Courtesy: 
Corvi-Mora, London 
Born in 1975 in Birmingham, Hiorns studied at Goldsmiths college, a decade 
after the YBAs made their mark there. In the wake of Damien Hirst, he's one of 
the few artists of his generation to ask the big questions about mortality, 
belief and meaning. In 2008, he was put squarely in the public eye while 
earning a Turner prize nomination with hisArt Angel project Seizure 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2008/seizure>. Working on a scale to rival 
Rachel Whiteread's famed House <http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/1993/house>
, Hiorns flooded an abandoned flat in a condemned South London housing block 
with copper sulphate solution.Everything from the light fittings to the bathtub 
was slowly, irresistibly taken over 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2008/sep/04/art>, metamorphosing into a 
crepuscular blue crystal cave.

Hiorns has put the chemicals aside since this radical work and his current 
London show presents a stark contrast to his crystal creations. It features a 
series of pale sheets circling the gallery like minimal paintings. Get up close 
enough to sniff them, however, and you can make out a light golden streak of 
liquid cow brain, tainting the snowy surface.

Why we like him: Untitled, the centrepiece of Hiorns's Turner prize 
presentation, is a landscape of dust spreading quietly over the floor like a 
parched grey desert. The dust is in fact the remains of a pulverised passenger 
jet plane and its hush, that which follows terrible, ear-splitting destruction: 
the total quiet of the end.

Classic: For the 2007 Athens Biennale, Hiorns smeared the lights of the 
Parthenon with his own sperm.

Where can I see him? At Corvi Mora <http://www.corvi-mora.com/current.php>, 
London to 21 April.
 