
Steven Claydon's art almost comes from another dimension: one that must be a 
lot like Earth, but where history's out of sync and culture's all jumbled up. 
His arrangements of objects on sack cloth-covered screens and boxy stands 
recall the musty exhibition style of old museums. But the artefacts they 
display seem out of step with time. Take his resin heads: they recall classical 
marble busts, but what's with the retro space-age bobbed wig, gold bouffant or 
Bart Simpson complexion?

What would future societies make of Claydon's meticulously presented skeins of 
yellow electric cable, or lovingly fashioned wood offcut sculptures, if they 
came across them buried in the sand? They would surely have a job deciphering 
the elusive references at play in his sculptures, photos, paintings and videos. 
You'll be as likely to find modernist architecture meeting ancient myth as the 
Smurfs getting cosy with thesimilarly stocking-capped philosopher, Heidegger 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Heidegger>. Claydon's allusions are 
deliberately teasing and hard to pin down, born of his rewriting of history as 
marvellous "what ifs". They nod to the infinite complexity of how art and 
culture comes to be.
 London Pixels Array, 2012, by Steven Claydon. Photograph: Andy Keate 
Culpable Earth, Claydon's current show, explores the journey right through 
from base matter to artefact. He uses primary colours and cubes that recall 
atomic models and pixels, suggesting the point where it all begins, both in the 
real and virtual world. A bust of the Victorian evolutionistAlfred Russel 
Wallace <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Russel_Wallace> underlines a sense 
of growth and transformation.

Claydon's mysterious fusions of old and new, raw and manmade, include a large 
plastic industrial oil drum presented like a ceremonial urn beside a rough clay 
idol with teat-like studs and a foil mandala made from Mylar, the material of
astronauts' space blankets <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_blanket>, and 
embossed with cartoon characters. Atoms and pixels might be the literal origins 
of the things we see, but an object's cultural resonances are far harder to pin 
down.

Why we like him: For Trom Bell 
<http://www.phaidon.com/resource/steven-claydon-untitled-trom-bell-2011-part-of-british-art-show-7.jpg>
. Made in the Whitechapel Foundry where Big Ben was cast and modelled on a 
local bell, Claydon's hybrid instrument has an aluminium brick for a clapper 
and a stripey rope. It's rung to a timetable that corresponds with the East 
London bell in Celine's experimental, first world war-set novelGuignol's Band 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780811200189>
.

No Logo: Claydon's 2007 series New Valkonia was a collection of artefacts from 
an imagined eastern European nation. He named his fictional country after a 
T-shirt he picked up in Warsaw, which pictured a man whipping a horse beneath 
the slogan Nie Val Konia, which means stop masturbating.

Where can I see him? At First Site <http://www.firstsite.uk.net/>, Colchester 
until 7 May.
 