
With their elaborate settings, sensual appeal and surreal symbols, Eloise 
Fornieles <http://eloisefornieles.com/>' sperformances could be mistaken for 
out-takes from aPeter Greenaway <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000425/> film. 
They can be as magical and beguiling as Prospero's island – for one work, she 
lay knocked out by sleeping pills on a four-poster bed, overshadowed by a 
willow tree, with a giant gramophone horn to her ear, through which 
gallery-goers could whisper messages to infect her dreams. Meanwhile, her 
approach to violent sexual imagery has something of Greenaway's taste for 
old-school baroque: witness Carrion, where the half-naked artist presses 
messages of apology into knife cuts in a dramatically lit, strung-up animal 
carcass.

For The Oyster Bar, Fornieles's graduation show from London's Slade School of 
Art in 2006, she turned Manet's painting,A Bar at the Folies-Bergère 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Bar_at_the_Folies-Berg%C3%A8re>, into a 
performance, sipping champagne and sharing secrets with passers-by. Her work 
since has continued to evoke the heightened worlds of cinema, old-master 
painting and theatre. Yet her exploration of light-hearted relationships and 
casual intimacy has evolved into a darker study of human interaction. It moves 
in a direct line from performance iconMarina Abramovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/interview-marina-abramovic-performance-artist>
, another artist for whom picture-perfect staging and documentation have been 
as important as the act itself.

Like Abramovic, Fornieles's performances often take feats of physical and 
psychological endurance to the limit. In one work, an old lifeboat with a 
tattered sail was cast adrift on an ocean of salt that filled the gallery to 
knee height. Lying inside the hull, she forced herself to stay awake for days 
in homage to artistBas Jan Ader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/apr/30/art1?INTCMP=SRCH>, who 
was lost at sea. Carrion, the skinned carcass number, was her comment on 
fashion industry body fascism and involved her hunger-striking and being 
circled by cameramen for 72 hours.

The Message, Fornieles' forthcoming performance at the live art Fierce 
festival this week, will see her address last year's riots, exploring the gaps 
between the motivation, act and message. She'll be turning a Birmingham 
canalside into a parched white chalky landscape, delivering people's notes of 
hope and fear to a large crate at the water's edge and finally setting it 
alight to reveal a marble sculpture. As with her 1970s forebear Abramovic, the 
striking imagery and setting becomes a way of turning these ordeals into 
symbolic acts.

Why we like her: For her surreal satire on the pursuit of the perfect, gym-fit 
body, Wanderlust III. The artist works furiously at a rowing machine to which 
two rocking horses have been harnessed. These bobbing steeds are then set 
ablaze, sending the balloons cascading from their backs, popping pathetically.

Enjoy the silence? Fornieles says the most mentally challenging work she has 
ever done was A Grammar of Love and Violence, where she sat in a domestic lair 
of hair and lace without speaking for a month.

Where can I see her? At Fierce festival 
<http://www.wearefierce.org/fierce-festival>, Birmingham, Saturday until 7 
April.
 