
Words fall like raindrops in Anna Barham's animation Proteus. True to the 
work's title, they are shape-shifters, morphing from one phrase to the next: 
"strange outline"; "up rears tail"; "el transmutation". Barham's poetry is one 
made entirely of anagrams. It's always surreal, packed with nonsensical asides 
as well as lines that are unexpected delights. "Tasting lemon rapture; purring 
at lemon taste" is one of the gems from her artist's book, Return to Leptis 
Magna.

These four words (and the ancient Roman city they refer to) are at the heart 
of the young London-based artist's work. She's revisited them over and over in 
her videos, drawings and performances, where they have yielded a staggering 
number of anagrams. For Barham, Leptis Magna is very much a city of the 
imagination.

The "real" site on the Libyan coast is now a ruin. She has never been there: 
her only physical encounter with it was in Windsor, where a number of its 
stones were transplanted from their arid home during the 19th century and 
resurrected as a folly in the lush surrounds ofVirginia Water 
<http://www.theroyallandscape.co.uk/landscape/virginiawater/index.cfm>. Leptis 
Magna is also the place where the modern alphabet originated. For Barham, who 
studied sculpture at the Slade School of Fine Art, letters become the building 
blocks for refashioning those ruins into something new.

Slick Flection, currently included in the delectably titled Eye Music for 
Dancing (a show that celebrates concrete poet Bob Cobbing), pushes the rhythms 
that govern language into the realm of dance. This new sound piece pushes 
language out of the realm of text into the physical world, with a tap dancer 
improvising to the beat of Barham's voice reciting. Meanwhile, her older video 
Iris abandons language altogether, as images of everything from flowers to eyes 
flit by to the thrum of fingers typing.

Like Leptis Magna's stones, words lose their original intention in her work 
and take on a strange new life.

Why we like her: For White City 
<http://art.tfl.gov.uk/projects/detail/4340/map>, her current Art on the 
Underground commission. It's art that travels: a series of posters bearing 
Quick Response codes (like barcodes for smartphones) provide the gateway to 
videos that can be accessed on your mobile, including roundel poetry by Charles 
Swinburne and an animation of the many depictions of Tyche, the Greek goddess 
of chance who rules over the project.

Upping your game: Barham has a heavyweight interest in games and rules. It all 
stems from the theories of language and metaphysics she got into as a maths and 
philosophy student at Cambridge, before she turned to art.

Where can I see her? Eye Music for Dancing, Flat Time House 
<http://www.flattimeho.org.uk/project/74/>, London, until 28 October; White 
City underground station <http://www.art.tfl.gov.uk>, London; Revolver, Matt's 
Gallery <http://www.mattsgallery.org/revolver/revolver.php>, London, until 21 
Oct;Arcade Gallery, Frieze Frame <http://friezelondon.com/>, London, 11 to 14 
Oct.
 