
This is my drawing studio near the Eurostar track as it snakes into the new 
London terminal. It is part of the studio that David Chipperfield designed for 
us four years ago. I still cannot believe that we have such a good place to 
work: silent, light, solid. You reach it up its own staircase next to the big 
studio. I can hear things going on next door when the assistants are in, and 
even open some double doors to see, but on the whole this is a separate space. 
It is my thinking space where I have my books, my music and lots of plan 
chests, now rather overfull with drawings going back to some made in India in 
the mid-70s. The studio is somewhere between a kitchen and a laboratory, but it 
has to be empty, clean and warm; white walls, underfloor heating, clear of old 
stuff.

You cross the open front yard and go up the stairs, then bang, you close the 
big steel door and you are in a place that is its own world; no windows. A 
place apart where anything can happen: great.

Mario from Arte Continua has asked me to make a design for a plate for the 
Orta project that gets water to the north-west regions of China through art. I 
didn't know what to do, so I dripped some puddles on some acetate sheets and 
this man appears who is running, dancing or hanging down from them. I hope one 
will be used for the plate.

The brushes are what I use. They have to dry hanging up. You can see that I 
have not used the big one that I bought in Singapore three years ago. Probably 
waiting for the right moment. Like the acetate sheets.

The table was given to me by the Serpentine Gallery. It was made to show 
Blinky Palermo drawings. I have left the void top empty in tribute to him, 
hoping that something of his style and clarity will be transferred. The little 
white box is full of lovely chocolate biscuits from Thaddeus Ropac, from 
Ratzka's Salzburg, great with green tea if you are feeling peckish. The apron 
is what I wear when I draw, I have ruined so many trousers.
 