
For me all studios hark back to my father's shed, where the workbench strewn 
with tools became the cockpit of a fantasy aircraft journeying to imagined 
lands. This is the cosy dream of my creative nest, the reality is a crumbling 
old printer's shop in east London's outer reaches.

I was in a hurry when I bought this studio. My old studio block, now under the 
Olympic park, was being torn down. I needed somewhere to set up my kilns. This 
was the first place I saw that had a concrete floor, a large door and 
three-phase power. It does the job. Its only real downside is that it is a 
10-mile commute from my house.

This picture was taken just before my largest exhibition at the Museum of 21st 
Century ContemporaryArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in 
Kanazawa, Japan. The circular plan of this beautiful museum is pinned to the 
wall on the far right. The photocopies of the Japanese screen were given to me 
by the director because he thought, rightly, that I would love them. Next to 
the plan is a postcard of the cathedral in Santiago de Compostela and a 
clipping of El Greco's view of Toledo, two places I have cycled to.

The photograph of the two women in blue is the centrefold of a Japanese 
transvestite magazine that I find curiously touching.

I nearly always have music or Radio 4 on when I am working. Next to my CD 
shelf is an old photo of my daughter Flo.

The pot in the foreground, which I called Memories, turned out rather well. 
This was partly due to the fact that it was the last work I made for the 
Kanazawa show and I was probably more relaxed, having come to the end of nearly 
two years of preparation. I was in the middle of drawing into the leather-hard 
clay with a knife - a process called sgraffito. I was adapting an illustration 
from a Victorian fashion catalogue. My studio has many books - my imagination 
is fine for sweeping generalities, but the details need researching.
 