
There may be strings of lights, bunting and music in Amalia Pica's first UK 
show, but the festive mood comes with a pang. The bright garlands of rainbow 
bulbs that illuminate the front door and lobby turn plain inside the gallery. 
In a gigantic poster made from collaged Xeroxes of a blown-up photo, bunting 
stretched between two people in a lonely field is the only hit of colour in an 
otherwise black and white landscape. Somewhere out back, the1990s tune Fiesta 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tdMP5i3Cj0> is playing. Perhaps you arrived 
too late, or maybe the party always seems to be happening elsewhere.

For the London-based Argentine, art and life are characterised by gaps and 
missed signals. What interests Pica is the distance between sender and 
receiver, the ways we misunderstand or misremember. She addresses the problem 
of art speaking to people – like the time she used Semaphore flag code to 
broadcast gobbledygook in the middle of nowhere. And she questions whether art 
can possibly measure up to what's already out there in the world – as when she 
faced-off a mountain, holding up a white sheet of paper to its craggy mass. Was 
she attempting to channel the landscape's power, or offering a white flag of 
artistic surrender?

Switchboard, a screen-like wall in the middle of her current show that's 
studded with tin-can telephones, turns a children's game into an allegory of 
our attempts to communicate. The cans are randomly connected by a cat's cradle 
of strings hidden inside the wall, so finding the corresponding mouth and 
earpiece is a halting hit-and-miss process, with most messages going nowhere.

Pica frequently alludes to communal experience, be that a schoolroom or a 
party. In her recent twist on public art,I am Tower of Hamlets … 
<http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/offsite/amalia_pica.php>, a pink marble sculpture 
of the popularSouth American Echevaria houseplant 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echeveria> has spent the last year travelling 
through the homes of East End locals. When it returns to the gallery in July, 
the hardy little statue will conjure fantasies of unknown encounters. Like the 
lights outside the show, what we remember or imagine is always more colourful 
than the here and now.

Why we like her: Childhood is important for Pica. In a key early work, Hora 
Catedra (School Period) from 2002, she drew attention to a cultural confusion 
rooted in infancy. Most Argentinians believeThe House of Tucuman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_of_Tucum%C3%A1n>, the site of the 
declaration of the country's independence, to be yellow, as it's depicted in 
children's books, when it's actually white. Making the most of this, she 
flooded the real house with yellow light, for 40 minutes, the duration of a 
lesson.

School's out: Teaching art classes at primary school sparked Pica's interest 
in what shapes our preconceptions and limits our imagination. Why, she 
wondered, did children always draw a house the same way?

Where can I see her? At Chisenhale Gallery <http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/>, 
London to 15 July.
 