
Sara VanDerBeek's photos capture things that weren't meant to last. She first 
made her mark as an artist a few years ago, building spindly assemblages strung 
with images from art books or magazines as well as beads, twigs and feathers. 
Once she'd captured the precarious little sculptures with her camera, she broke 
them up again. Her airy constructions may recallAlexander Calder's mobiles 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Alexander+Calder%E2%80%99s+mobiles&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&prmd=imvnso&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=BmbQT5uMHtK48gPlz9WqDA&ved=0CHcQsAQ&biw=1493&bih=872>
, but they were also inspired by the makeshift roadside memorials that dotted 
New York in the wake of 9/11. Photographed in her studio against a dark 
backdrop, her images seem like memories, floating through our heads.

These early works create a surreal art-history pick'n'mix, from illustrations 
of classical sculpture to old black-and-white photography, and similar forms 
are echoed from work to work. VanDerBeek's instinct for creating suggestive 
arrangements of images and objects is often put down to her time spent 
co-running theNew York gallery Guild & Greyshkul 
<http://www.guildgreyshkul.com/> from 2003 to 2009. Significant, too, is the 
influence of her father, the experimental film-makerStan VanDerBeek 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stan_Vanderbeek>, who died when she was seven. An 
active figure in the 1960s New York art scene, he collaborated with the likes of
Claes Oldenburg 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-full/bio/?artist_name=Claes%20Oldenburg>
 andYvonne Rainer <http://sensesofcinema.com/2003/great-directors/rainer/>. He 
must have been a potent absence for his then Baltimore-based daughter, and his 
collagist approach to films has certainly influenced her.

VanDerBeek's repertoire of elusive subjects has grown in distinct new 
directions since she became a full-time artist three years ago, picking up 
shows at some of America's most prestigious museums, such as New York's Whitney 
and the Hammer in LA. Her most recent works (on show now in London) are crisp 
black-and-white photographs of dancers from her hometown. They strike exacting 
poses, with muscular limbs arcing to form lines as sharp and clean as modernist 
architecture. But they're accompanied by skinny, angular sculptures that expose 
the dancers' precision as an utter illusion: beyond the frozen moment of the 
image, these pulsing, ageing bodies have long moved on with the dance.

Why we like her: For A Composition for Detroit, her 2009 elegy to the 
beleaguered one-time giant of the car industry, created for New York's MoMA's 
New Photography show 
<http://www.moma.org/explore/inside_out/2009/12/02/sara-vanderbeek-in-new-photography-2009/>
. Inspired by broken windows from the city's factories, her images hang against 
the dark like panes of glass. A photographic journey through economic decline 
moves fromWalker Evans's depression-era photos 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Let_Us_Now_Praise_Famous_Men> to VanDerBeek's own 
images of the city's destitute industrial spaces.

Rolling with it: After graduating, VanDerBeek spent a few years cutting her 
teeth as a commercial photographer in London and photographing such exciting 
subjects as loo paper for supermarket chains â€“ "table-top work" that 
nonetheless influenced her studio photography.

Where can I see her? At the Approach <http://www.theapproach.co.uk/>, London 
to 24 June.Stan VanDerBeek's work is included in The Historical Box 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/1361/the-historical-box-curated-by-mara-mccarthy/view/>
, Hauser & Wirth, London to 28 July.
 