
Twenty years after Arundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> won the 1997 Booker prize for 
her debut novel The God of Small Things, the Indian novelist’s second, The 
Ministry of Utmost Happiness, is set to be published in 2017, her publisher has 
announced.

Roy has published a wide range of nonfiction, covering topics from the US 
invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan to a condemnation of India’s nuclear tests, 
since she won the Booker in 1997 for her story of twins Rahel and Estha growing 
up in Kerala. But The Ministry of Utmost Happiness, which publisher Hamish 
Hamilton announced on Monday, will be only her second novel.

“I am glad to report that the mad souls (even the wicked ones) in The Ministry 
of Utmost Happiness have found a way into the world, and that I have found my 
publishers,” said Roy.

“Only Arundhati could have written this novel,” added her literary agent David 
Godwin. “Utterly original. It has been 20 years in the making. And well worth 
the wait.”

In 2011, Roy told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/features/arundhati-roy-the-next-novel-will-just-have-to-wait-2371609.html>
 of how her friend John Berger, a fellow Booker prize winner, had urged her to 
continue writing her second novel, but that she was distracted from it byher 
investigation into the Maoists in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/27/arundhati-roy-india-tribal-maoists-1>
.

Arundhati Roy: India's bold and brilliant daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/jan/29/arundhati-roy-interview-india-activism-novel>
“About a year and a half ago, I was with John at his home, and he said: ‘You 
open your computer now and you read to me whatever fiction you are writing.’ He 
is perhaps the only person in the world that could have the guts to say that to 
me. And I read a bit to him and he said: ‘You just go back to Delhi and you 
finish that book.’ So I said ‘OK’,” Roy told the Independent in 2011. “I went 
back to Delhi, and in a few weeks, this note was pushed under my door: just an 
anonymous typewritten note asking me to visit the Maoists in the jungles of 
centralIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.”

Roy’s publishers called her new novel “one of the finest we have read in 
recent times”, and “an incredible book … on multiple levels”.

“The writing is extraordinary, and so too are the characters – brought to life 
with such generosity and empathy, in language of the utmost freshness, joyfully 
reminding us that words are alive too, that they can wake us up and lend us new 
ways of seeing, feeling, hearing, engaging. It makes the novel new – in the 
original meaning of novel,” said Simon Prosser, of Penguin imprint Hamish 
Hamilton in the UK, and Meru Gokhale, of Penguin Random House India, in a joint 
statement.

“The God of Small Things was a formative book for me. The freshness of Roy’s 
writing and the power of the story marked her out immediately as a major 
novelistic talent, and it always seemed a pity that she had chosen to move away 
from fiction,” said Waterstones fiction buyer Chris White. “Consequently, I’m 
delighted that a new novel has been announced two decades after the first... I 
can’t wait to read it.”
 