
Asada will delay making a decision on whether to appeal the AFL’s anti-doping 
tribunal verdict on theEssendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> 
players at the centre of the supplement program scandal.

But Australia’s anti-doping body confirmed they are considering an appeal, to 
be lodged within 21 days of Tuesday’s verdict which cleared all 34 past and 
presentEssendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> players of using 
banned substances in what was a massive blow to the credibility of the national 
anti-doping body.

“An appeal option is a very live option for Asada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada>,” the organisation’s chief executive 
Ben McDevitt told a press conference on Wednesday.

McDevitt defended Asada’s handling of such a complex investigation and pointed 
out much of the delay involved in reaching the findings was due to the actions 
of others. And he remained scathing in his criticism of Essendon’s 
controversial supplements program in 2012 which involved “hundreds if not 
thousands” of injections to players.


Essendon verdict: AFL anti-doping tribunal clears past and present players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/31/afl-essendon-players-cleared-anti-doping-tribunal>
“The absolutely deplorable and disgraceful lack of records of these injections 
means we still have young men not knowing what was injected into them,” he said.


McDevitt said the penalties the AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> 
had previously imposed on the Essendon club over the matter had no bearing on 
Asada’s pending decision.

“I acknowledge the strong actions taken by the AFL in dealing with the 
governance issues. We have two sets of issues here, we have governance issues 
and we have anti-doping arrangements.”

McDevitt admitted the fact that it had been more than two years since the 
investigation began, meant Asada’s process needed to be looked at. “It is clear 
thatAsada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada>, when we talk about the 
time frames and everything else, needs to reassess its own processes.”

But he also pointed to court action taken by the club which delayed the 
findings. “Asada has been subjected to considerable criticism about the length 
of time it took for this investigation, and the way in which the investigation 
was conducted,” he said.

This was a complex investigation involving thousands of hours of examination 
of records and hundreds of interviews. “These investigations take time,” 
McDevitt said. “Many of the delays were about the decisions of others.

“There are always lessons learned ... after an investigation it’s a normal 
process to do an internal review of the investigation, we’ll do exactly that. 
We will look for opportunities for improvement and everything else.”

McDevitt said it would ultimately be his decision whether Asada appealed the 
not guilty findings. That decision would only be taken after Asada had 
carefully scrutinised the detailed findings of the AFL’s independent 
anti-doping tribunal which found there was insufficient evidence to prove an 
illegal substance was administered to the players.

Essendon doping verdict: Stephen Dank hints at legal action against Asada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/31/essendon-doping-verdict-stephen-dank-hints-at-legal-action-against-asada>
The not guilty findings did not clear up what actually happened in Essendon’s 
2012 supplements program. “You can’t on the one hand say nothing illegal or 
harmful was given when on the other hand you can’t actually state what was 
given,” said McDevitt.

“And that’s part of the problem here ... that’s the [Essendon captain] Jobe 
Watson comment from yesterday. We don’t know what these players administered. 
What’s that going to mean as far as health repercussions for these players? 
They’ve been used as pin cushions and we don’t know what was injected into 
them.”

The Asada case was hampered by the refusal of controversial sports scientist 
Stephen Dank – “the alleged architect” of the injection regime – to give 
evidence.


“I call once again upon Stephen Dank - if you’ve got records [of the 
injections], produce them,” said McDevitt. Asked whether Asada had any new 
evidence to present to a possible appeal, McDevitt said: “That depends. I asked 
Stephen Dank to produce his records. If he does, what might that involve? I 
don’t know. Somebody may know something, somebody may come forward.”
 