
Ascential, the events and publishing business once known as Emap, is to sell 
more than a dozen “heritage” titles including the fashion bible Drapers, 
Architects’ Journal and Nursing Times.

The sell-off will leave Ascential with just one print title, Retail Week, 
which it is keeping due to its strategic fit with the digital brands Planet 
Retail and One Click Retail.


The publisher, which made an £800m stock market flotation in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/09/guardian-and-apax-share-80m-from-ascential-flotation>
 last year, said it was selling off the 13 titles to focus on its “largest 
brands and those with the highest growth potential”.


The titles, which are being hived off into a separate business while buyers 
are sought, include Construction News, Health Service Journal, Local Government 
Chronicle and Middle Eastern Economic Digest (MEED).


“Ascential’s growth strategy continues to be to focus its resources and 
investment on its largest brands and those with the highest growth potential,” 
said Duncan Painter, chief executive of Ascential. “This move will further 
focus our portfolio on our largest market leading products. The heritage 
brands, with large, loyal audience communities, provide an exciting opportunity 
for new owners.”


The 13 titles made revenue of £63m last year, and about £10m in operating 
profits, with just under £9m in revenue coming from print advertising.


Ascential is understood to have been attempting to find a buyer for various 
packages of the 13 titles over the last few months.

In 2013, Pearson considered buying MEED, which is thought to account for as 
much as £5m of the total operating profits of the group of titles, which was 
then priced at about £35m.

However, when John Fallon took over as chief executive from Marjorie Scardino 
hescrapped the deal 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/new-pearson-chief-pulls-out-of-mid-east-bid-8439483.html>
 and has since sold the Financial Times and Pearson’s 50% stake in the 
publisher of the Economist.

In 2015, Ascential announced it was “retiring” the venerable Emap brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/05/emap-brand-print-top-right-drapers-retail-week>
, which had been a publishing institution for almost 70 years. In the 1980s and 
1990s Emap expanded via a series of launches and acquisitions to become a major 
UK media company encompassing local newspapers, trade and consumer magazines 
and radio.

At the time Ascential said it intended to close the print editions of its 
titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/05/emap-brand-print-top-right-drapers-retail-week>
 over a two-year period as part of a focus on digital publishing and events 
associated with the magazine brands.


In 2015, Ascential sold Media Business Insight, a subsidiary which publishes 
industry magazines Broadcast and Screen International and also owns brands 
Shots, ALF and BRAD, to management in a£10m-plus deal backed by private equity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/03/broadcast-and-screen-international-publisher-sold-by-top-right-group>
.

Ascential continues to own a large array of businesses including the Cannes 
Lions advertising festival, fashion information business WGSN, environmental 
data business Groundsure and Glenigan.

Painter said Ascential’s top five brands accounted for 56% of total group 
revenues and 71% of adjusted profits.

Guardian Media Group, the publisher of the Guardian and Observer, owns a 8.7% 
stake in Ascential.
 