
The destiny of the King George VI Chase is up for grabs and the race may not 
make the switch to Sandown that was widely expected after Tuesday’s shock news 
that its traditional home,Kempton Park racecourse, is facing closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
 under plans made by the Jockey Club.

Kempton the victim as Jockey Club puts a price on ‘priceless’ heritage | Greg 
Wood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/10/kempton-jockey-club-greg-wood>
Although the club is determined to keep the race at one of its own tracks if 
at all possible, racing professionals will be given a say on the subject and 
the sport’s ruling body must give its consent to any change of venue.

The King George, held each year on Boxing Day and made famous by its 
association with steeplechasers such as Arkle and Desert Orchid, has been run 
at Sandown twice in the past 21 years, when bad weather and a redevelopment of 
the course prevented Kempton staging it. AlthoughSandown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sandown> worked well as a temporary home for 
the race, a permanent move would not have universal support for several 
reasons, with the independently run Ascot being a more attractive option for 
some.

“The suitability of Sandown is certainly something that has been raised,” said 
Rupert Arnold, chief executive of the National Trainers Federation, which was 
not consulted by the Jockey Club before Tuesday’s announcement but has now 
asked for discussions over its plans.

Arnold recalled a meeting of his members in Lambourn more than a decade ago, 
at a time when Kempton’s proposed all-weather track was expected to mean the 
end of its jumps circuit. There was concern then about whether Sandown’s ground 
would be able to cope with additional fixtures, concern that has been expressed 
once more this week by Tony McCoy and the high-profile trainer Nicky Henderson.

Whereas Kempton was able to absorb 21,000 spectators for the latest running of 
the King George, Sandown’s capacity is lower and the crowd forits most recent 
King George, in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/dec/27/horseracing.gdnsport3>, was 
16,526. Road and rail access to Sandown, sited next to Esher High Street, is 
notoriously difficult on the course’s most busy days. Ascot, by contrast, would 
have no problem soaking up a much larger crowd and has been mooted by some as 
an alternative site for the King George for many years.

“We want to involve all stakeholders for their views on how best we can 
benefit the sport in the future,” said Simon Bazalgette, group chief executive 
of the Jockey Club, which has been consulting with some trainers informally 
this week. Bazalgette promises that some of the £100m to be raised from the 
sale ofKempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> would be spent on 
improving facilities at Sandown, though he stopped short of committing to a 
replacement for the site’s ageing grandstand.

“Our plans would be transformational for the racecourse facilities,” 
Bazalgette said of Sandown, “and include significant investment in the track 
itself. This would be a major investment as part of a long-term focus on 
unlocking its true potential as a thriving racecourse for London and the 
south-east in the years ahead.”

A spokesman for the British Horseracing Authority said of the proposal to move 
the King George: “The transfer of any Group, Graded or Listed races must be 
considered by the appropriate pattern committee and requires the subsequent 
approval of the BHA board. It’s too early to speculate on what will happen with 
specific fixtures, as no decisions have or indeed can be taken at this stage, 
particularly where the need to reallocate any of Kempton’s fixtures is entirely 
conditional upon the necessary planning permissions being obtained and any sale 
generating sufficient revenues for the Jockey Club.”
 