
As the producer of The Office and The IT Crowd, Ash Atalla is familiar with 
awkward situations and how to get a laugh out of them. That was what he did on 
Newsnight in 2014 when he likenedthe decision to make BBC3 online only 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/16/credits-roll-final-time-bbc3-television-online-only>
 to “a 60-year-old man wearing a golf jumper has just walked into a really good 
nightclub and turned the music off”.

Yet although his company Roughcut TV is still making shows for BBC3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3>, time has only made Atalla angrier 
about the TV channel closure.

“Now you’ve got all these BBC3 shows trying to repeat on BBC2 and that’s a 
jam,” he says. “You’ve taken away somewhere that young people knew there was 
stuff for them … and it was the BBC’s most ethnically diverse channel.

“Also the financial saving wasn’t huge in the end. It was easy for the white 
middle class to sweep that decision away, and they did.”

It’s not the only issue he has been outspoken about. In TV, he is renowned for 
his comedic candour and eloquence when shining a light on industry issues.

On diversity he says: “From my point of view you’re pushing on an open door.” 
Roughcut has taken on trainees from diverse backgrounds and in its new Sky 
comedy Carters Get Rich, featuring Dawson’s Creek’s James Van der Beek, he 
“deliberately” chose a more multicultural family.

TV industry could face 'harder diversity targets', says Ofcom chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/27/tv-industry-diversity-ofcom-sharon-white-bbc>
He adds: “I wouldn’t be more opposed to more rigorous quotas, behind and in 
front of the camera, if we as a production company were forced by some kind of 
statute. Regionality [quotas] is a case in point…we makeTrollied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/aug/04/tv-review-trollied-rick-stein>
 [a Sky 1 supermarket sitcom] in Bristol. Our forthcoming first BBC1 sitcom 
Hospital People is a regional commission from the north.”

It is ten years since Atalla set up Roughcut, which makes hits such as the 
Greg Davies comedy Cuckoo, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/12/greg-davies-adam-sandberg-bbc3-sitcom>
People Just Do Nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/22/how-people-just-do-nothing-made-sitcoms-funny-again>
, the mockumentary about Brentford garage-dedicated pirate radio station Kurupt 
FM and A Brief History of Tim, starring Tim Renkow, who has cerebral palsy, all 
of which are on BBC3.

The company had, Atalla says, a painful start. Its first BBC3 show, Clone, 
sank (“I saved my first failure for my own company”) and another went on the 
back burner due to the 2007 financial crisis. Atalla and his team locked the 
doors (“Nobody wanted to come in anyway”) did lots of development and came up 
with Cuckoo and Trollied.

That set the bedrock for success, which he hopes he has achieved “without 
being a dick”, and now Roughcut is on a high, picking up Bafta nominations. It 
has also, with its former comedy head Dan Hine, set up a film and drama company 
called Who’s On First, which is making a film called & Mrs – backed by Jeffrey 
Soros’ Los Angeles Media Fund – plus a high concept show written byFleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
 director Vicky Jones.

“We wanted to set up Who’s On First with scale,” says Atalla. “I don’t want to 
make a British comedy set in Camden. I want to make a big romcom … Brits do it 
too small and too apologetically too often.

“You only realise how shy we are here when you go to America. It brings it 
into sharp focus how apologetic we are about our work. I try and go about my 
work with a genuine humility but I don’t mind saying that I work hard to 
succeed.”

He is surprised there is not a big British comedy studio: “The closest we got 
to it was Richard Curtis then you go back to Ealing Studios and Nira Park and 
Hot Fuzz etc. Where is that kind of DNA of early Judd Apatow in this country?”

Egyptian-born Atalla provided the kind of laughs Apatow does when he took part 
in a TV executivesversion of Big Brother for the Edinburgh Television Festival 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/aug/26/big-brother-and-the-great-tv-exec-extravaganza>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fash-atalla-white-middle-class-swept-away-close-bbc3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9df8a39147c6d552d78c3638f3cfaaa45e874553%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ash%20Atalla%3A%20white%20middle%20class%20'swept%20away'%20decision%20to%20close%20BBC3&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fash-atalla-white-middle-class-swept-away-close-bbc3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ash%20Atalla%3A%20white%20middle%20class%20%27swept%20away%27%20decision%20to%20close%20BBC3&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fash-atalla-white-middle-class-swept-away-close-bbc3%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9df8a39147c6d552d78c3638f3cfaaa45e874553%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Atalla (centre) won a Bafta in 2004 for his work on The Office. Photograph: 
Gareth Davies/Getty Images 
He purposely got quiz answers wrong so colleagues were given electric shocks 
and brought the house done after Celebrity Juice executive producer Dan Baldwin 
helped Atalla out of his wheelchair (he contracted polio as a child) into bed 
and told him not to creep into his bed during the night. Atalla responded: 
“Mate, if I come over to you, you should let me fuck you cos that would be a 
miracle.”

Although the BBC has begun tendering out some of its own shows to the 
independent sector, such as Songs of Praise, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/20/bbc-songs-of-praise-holby-city-tender-independent-producers>
 Atalla says he feels “uncomfortable at the thought of commercial companies 
like ours raiding successful BBC shows. I’d much prefer us to create our own 
shows and IPs.”

They include new Channel 4 sitcom, Stath, a comedy about a lettings agent 
starringJamie Demetriou. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/03/jamie-demetriou-the-funniest-word-toilet>
 Atalla acknowledges the channel has less money than the BBC – saving it “for 
baking powder” for Great British Bake Off – but says the threat of 
privatisation “feels like solving a problem that doesn’t exist … there is no 
sense that [Channel 4] is wasteful or inefficient. There are other problems in 
this world that need looking at first.”

One of these is comedy funding. Drama and comedy were level-pegging, 
money-wise, a few years ago he says, but now drama has “got in a big red sports 
car and the world of comedy is on a unicycle.”

Despite The Inbetweeners proving comedy can make money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/11/the-inbetweeners-2-tops-uk-box-office>
 he says: “You need some funding and it’s just falling away. It’s a real 
danger. British broadcasters have to look at how they allocate their funds 
internally. It’s easy to get into a downward spiral of comedy being more and 
more poorly-funded. Maybe fund less but better.

“I know it’s all connected with the international market and how much comedy 
travels [but] comedy can travel… you can build that.”

He also finds it frustrating that mainstream comedies “generally don’t get 
recognition”. He is as proud of Trollied as cult hit PJDN but “so many people 
don’t want to” make sitcoms, as “it’s just easier to be cool.”

“You get more high fives in The Groucho [a London club whose members come from 
media and entertainment backgrounds] if you make PJDN than if you make Mrs 
Brown’s Boys” even though the latter getshuge ratings. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/02/tv-ratings-mrs-browns-boys-dethrones-queen>
 He has always wanted a company “that can do both”.

A PJDN film “is something we talk about” admits Atalla. “We’re making series 
four, writing it as we speak. We hope to make another series and then [we’re] 
thinking about finishing our story with a film. There are different ways to 
structure a film these days it needn’t be a huge cinema release; there’s video 
on demand - some kind of feature length ending to the show feels like the right 
thing to do.”

Atalla is not the kind of person who just does nothing: “I’m still very driven 
and it’s exhausting to feel driven and sometimes I wish I wasn’t.” But he 
attributes a lot of Roughcut’s rise to co-founder Tim Sealey and their team and 
recently gave some of them a stake in the company.

“If I went under a bus tomorrow Roughcut would be OK because of the team. In 
fact they’d probably have fewer lunch and taxi bills to deal with.”

CV

Age 44

Education Business at Bath University 

Career 

1996 joined BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> as work experience on 
‘Watchdog’

1998 Researcher for Carol Vorderman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vorderman> 

2000 joined BBC Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy>

2001 produced pilot for The Office, and subsequent two series and specials 

2003 Head of Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> at 
TalkbackTHAMES. Produced two series of ‘Man Stroke Woman’, three Series of ‘IT 
CROWD’. Exec Produced ‘Look Around You’, ‘Bo Selecta’

2006 Founded Roughcut TV 
 