
Asian shares stumbled and the US dollar was on the defensive on Wednesday amid 
signs investors were becoming spooked by polls narrowing the gap between US 
presidential nominees Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton.

 Market anxiety has deepened over a possible Trump victory given uncertainty 
on the Republican candidate’s stance on issues including foreign policy, trade 
relations and immigration, while Clinton is viewed as a candidate of the status 
quo.

Stocks across Asia Pacific <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> 
saw a broad selloff on Wednesday with the Nikkei in Japan down by 1.8% at 4am 
GMT. There were also steep falls in Australia where the ASX/S&P 200 benchmark 
index was down almost 1.5%, with falls of 1.3% in South Korea and Hong Kong as 
markets took a lead from a sharp drop on Wall Street overnight.

The main European markets were also expected to begin the day in the red when 
they open later, according to futures trading.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
 The tumultuous presidential race appeared to tighten after news that the FBI 
was reviewing more emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-latest-emails-explained>
 as part of a probe into Clinton’s use of a private email server.

 While Clinton held a five-percentage-point lead over Trump, according to a 
Reuters/Ipsos opinion poll released on Monday, other polls showed Trump ahead 
by 1-2 percentage points.

 That pushed the US S&P500 Index down to a four-month closing low on Tuesday. 
The CBOE volatility index, often seen as an investors’ fear gauge, briefly rose 
to a two-month high, above 20%.

 In the currency market, traders sold the dollar partly as they suspect Trump 
would prefer a weaker dollar given his protectionist stance on international 
trade.

 The euro rose to a three-week high of $1.1069, up about 2% from its 
seven-and-a-half-month low of $1.0851 hit just over a week ago. Against the 
yen, the dollar slipped to 104.03 yen from three-month high of 105.54 yen set 
on Friday.

Koichi Yoshikawa, executive director of financial markets at Standard 
Chartered Bank, said: “If you had a long dollar position on the view that the 
dollar would gain because Clinton would win, you would surely close that 
position because her victory is less certain.”

 “And people were buying back the euro because that is the currency that had 
been being shorted the most against the dollar,” he added.

 Other haven assets were also favoured, with the Swiss franc rising to 1.0782 
francs per euro, its highest level since late June. Gold hit a four-week high 
of $1,291.6 per ounce on Tuesday and last stood at $1,288.5.

Clinton campaign dismisses polls putting Donald Trump in the lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/01/donald-trump-polls-lead-hillary-clinton-campaign>
 In contrast, the Mexican peso, seen as the most vulnerable to a Trump 
presidency due to his proposal to build a border wall, posted its biggest fall 
in two months. The peso slid to 19.265 to the dollar, its lowest level since 
early October.

 It provides a tense backdrop for the Federal Reserve’s two-day policy 
meeting. It is due to issue a statement later on Wednesday.

 While traders do not expect the central bank to raise interest rates just a 
week before the presidential election, they are looking for signs the Fed is 
set to raise rates in December.

 US interest rate futures are pricing in about a 70% chance of a rate rise in 
December but virtually no likelihood of a rise on Wednesday.

 Oil prices tumbled to one-month lows as a trade group’s report of 
larger-than-expected US crude inventory added to growing doubts over whether 
oil-producing countries could agree on output cut later this month.

 Brent crude futures fell to $47.90 per barrel, having hit a low of $47.72 on 
Tuesday.

 However, even as investors were moving out of riskier assets, copper bucked 
the trend, rising to a three-month high of $4,922 a tonne.
 