
3.45pm: Hello and welcome to live coverage of what promises to be a feisty 
encounter with plenty of history to it. Yes, it's the Shatt Al Arab River Derby 
between Iraq and Iran in Group D of the Asian Cup, a group that also includes 
North Korea. A group they're already calling the Group of Death - with some 
justification too.Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iraq> are the 
Asian champions. Iran are a regional superpower. And North Korea are North 
Korea.

These are, of course, two nations with so much more in common than simply the 
letters "Ira", mainly their long shared cultural history. If no one's 
mentioning the 1980-88 war this is because happily relations have warmed up 
considerably since the fall of Sadam Hussain.

There is still plenty of feeling when it comes to sport and this is a massive 
game for both teams.

Here's what Iran's general manager, Waleed Tabra, had to say about this 
fixture:

"Iran and Iraq are friendly neighbours. We have a shared border, a deep 
history and relationship that goes back centuries.

"But football is something different, it's competitive. We are playing to win, 
they are playing to win. It has nothing to do with what happened in the 1980s."

Quite right. Synth-pop, large mobile phones, Wham! Let it go. What's that? Oh.

I should say at this point that in the spirit of common global citizenry it is 
often best to come to these kind of clashes free of baggage, preconceptions and 
in-depth knowledge of the subject. With this in mind, and in the spirit of 
clean slates and fresh starts, I promise to appear not to know too much about 
the players involved in the course of this commentary. I think it's for the 
best.

3.52pm: No teams as yet, but I'll be pasting them in as soon as we get 
something. I'd imagineIran <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iran> will be 
heavily staffed by Zob, currently the Iranian league leaders. I can also reveal 
that Iran's nickname is "Team Melli". This mean's "the national team" in 
Persian.

3.58pm: I should mention that this game is coming to you live from the home of 
football: Qatar. In the day's early game the UAE and North Korea drew 0-0. In 
front ofthree thousand fans.  Oh yes.

4.06pm: Here are the teams: 
Iraq Kassid, Shaker, Erhaima, Saeed, Akram, Mohammed, Muneer, Kareem, 
Mohammed, Mahmood, Abdulzehra
Iran Rahmati, Nosrati, Hosseini, Haji Safi, Aghili, Rezaei, Nekounam, 
Teymourian, Mobali, Shojaei, Gholami

4.07pm: Hmmm. Teymourian, of course, we remember from his days as a 
goalscoring midfielder at Bolton.

4.08pm: The players are out. Time for the anthems, greeted by a respectful-ish 
semi-hush. Looks like a big improvement on the numbers from the last match, 
although that's frankly not saying much. In fact they're all crowded into one 
section of seating to give a brief illusion of wild cheering hordes. Oh well.

Mahmood is the man to watch in the Iraq team. Very much a talismanic figure. 
Started out in the Iraqi third division with Al Dibs. Now plays in Qatar, the 
home of football.

Declan Johnson expresses entirely his own views via email: "With Iran, Iraq, 
North Korea and Syria in the Asian Cup this year, comprimising 2/3 of the Axis 
of Evilâ„¢, is this the most anti-democratic footballing tournament ever..? World 
Cup 1934 in Fascist Italy with Nazi Germany, Franco's Spain and the dictator 
Vargas' Brazil must be up there too..." Are we still saying Western democracy 
is the answer to everything? It'd easy to lose track.

1 min Iran kick off and there's an immediate attack down the Iranian left-wing 
(never their most powerful feature) that ends up with the left-sided midfielder 
hurtling in an enormous long throw that the keeper Kassid just about catches. 
Bright start from Team Melli against the other team melli.

4 mins It's cagey stuff so far and being played mostly at walking pace. 
although, hang on there's a lovely Iraqi move, a lovely little flick through 
from Mohammed to Mahmood, he takes the ball down beautifully and hits a hard 
low shot that Rahmati saves with his legs. Top keeping, but a lovely flowing 
move from the champions. Mahmood looks very sharp.

7 mins Iraq are managed by Wolfgang Sidka, who looks a bit like a teutonic 
Sammy Lee with a better haircut and a blazer. He's up pointing at things as 
Iran have started to dominate possession. A couple of high hopeful set pieces 
but Iraq are quite tasty in the air at the back. Amir Adhamy also has some of 
his own views: "Dear Barney, Please let's not adhere to the notion of fascism 
as something being diametrically opposed to our own very enlightened Western 
rationale. One could argue that any international tournament that consists of 
the security council members and NATO allies- merits being construed as a 
similarly, if largely more successful, fascistic conglomeration of football 
nations."

8 mins Tell you what? Let's not talk about fascism any more. Instead let's 
tlak about another incredibly long throw from Iran's Safi, who hurls a 
Delap-style javelin at the Iraq goalmouth. Once again it's headed away but 
impressive depth from the young man. I thought this kind of thing only went on 
in the Premier League. Good to see the message is spreading.

11 mins Again nice build up from Iraq, who look a little more silky on the 
ball. Robin Hazlehurst has the goods on Al Dibs: "You mention the Iraqi third 
division team Al Dibs, can I hazard that they are a group of slightly dyslexic 
improvisers? Which sounds interesting to watch, even if their chalkboards would 
be a bit of a mess."

11 mins GOAL! Iraq 1-0 Iran. Mahmood scores with a tap in from ten inches 
after a lovely header back across the six yard box by Raza. Iran's defence 
looked all at sea as Iran lumped in a big diagonal that keeper cold only wave 
past. Huge moment in this derby game and Iraq have deserved the lead.

14 mins What have Iran got in their locker? Have to say so far they look very 
disappointing, a mix of long throws and upfield hoofs. You expect more from the 
Persian giants. they can't cope with the Iraqi pressing game at the moment. 
Perhaps they could bring on Reza Norozi, who is described as "lacking in speed 
and technique" in the official tournament guide. He does have "accuracy" 
however.

17 mins That was Mahmood's 34th international goal by the way. And Iraq are 
totally bossing this in midfield, some really lovely passing from right to left 
and Iran are barely on the pitch right now. Lovely skill from Akram there, 
beats three men outside his own area and calmly plays the ball away. Gholami 
has a shot from distance that flies over. Josh Reynolds writes: "Official 
tournament guide. Where can I see this online? Is it even available online?" In 
my experience the best way to get hold of a copy is for Paul Doyle to find it 
online and then very kindly print out a copy for you.

22 mins A first proper chance for Iran as Iraq fail to deal with a punted 
cross from deep and Gholami heads straight at the keeper who spills it then 
gathers and does some aggressive pointing as if trying top convey the 
impression that this was somehow someone else's fault. Stirrings from the 
Iranians.

25 mins Rezai on the Iranian right-wing looks like a tricky customer. 
Apparently he endured "a frustrating 2009". He's taking it out on the Iraq 
right back here as he nibbles his way infield and then wins a corner. It's 
cleared and Iraq continue to look the better team. There's a gulf between these 
two teams right now.

28 mins Another long throw from the left, and they're actually getting worse. 
That one saw everyone crowding into the far corner of the area and the ball not 
getting within 15 yards of them as it pootled out into a skidder. Safi has a 
shot from 35 yards that trickles embarrassingly. Iran have run out of ideas and 
they look very sluggish. Iran indeed. Past tense.

32 mins That's a bit better form the Iranians, with Teymourian showing some 
attacking craft in the insdie left channel. He's lucky not to win a free-kick 
just outside the box. And Ian Goulding knows his Norozi: "Reza Norozi is having 
a decent time of it in 2010-11 (according to his Wikipedia page at any rate). 
12 goals in 11 league outings so far this term. Accuracy indeed." Sigh. If only 
he had "speed and technique" too.

35 mins Teymourian wumps a hopeful shot miles over the bar from 20 yards, but 
at least he's showing a bit of thrust. Iran seem to have found an alternative 
source of energy from somewhere.

38 mins Oh I say, some comedy defending as Mobali whips in a free kick and one 
Iraq defender heads the ball on to another, starting a brief interlude of 
pinball football inside the Iraqi box, concluded by another shot thrashed 
mightily over the bar. A Qatari-based version of 22 hung-over plasterers 
falling over in a hail storm on Hackney Marshes there.

42 mins GOAL! Iraq 1-1 Iran . A lovely finish from Rezaei, running on to 
Teymoruian's flipped through pass, waiting an age and then hitting it low and 
hard past Kassid and into the corner.

44 mins A whiff of offside about that goal but Iran played to the whistle and 
they'll be dancing in the streets of Tehran. If that's, you know, OK.

45 mins Lovely effort from distance almost catches Rahmati off his line and 
nice to see Iraq battling back. Ahem. In so many senses. Ian Burch notes: "An 
international match where both teams are pressing each other, lumping it up the 
pitch and running around in a clueless fashion. Thank goodness they're reviving 
the Home Internationals."

45+1 mins HALF TIME Iraq 1-1 Iran. The half ends with Iran on the attack again 
and they definitely crept back into this. Iraq look the sleeker of the two 
teams and have more individual skill on the ball, but you just get the feeling 
Iran with their greater organisation and strength might just England-one-in 
from here.

Amir Adhamy writes: "I'm actually in an office of Iranians at the moment... 
None of whom are following the game, or at all interested.." They might know 
something.

Paul Szabo wonders: "Not to belabor the point, but re your statement (41) that 
'these teams would struggle to score in the CAN', can you tell us how these 
teams would stack up against England 2010?"

Probably by having a horrible, disjointed match that (at Wembley) would finish 
2-0 to England with two goals from corners, and in Qatar would end up 0-0 with 
England's players all looking sweat-soaked and knackered after about 70 minutes.

Adam Timmins writes: "My girlfriend is Iranian, and has been taking the piss 
out of WBA's losing streak for several weeks now, so I'm hoping Iraq give them 
a thumping in order to shut her up for a bit!" A wonderful image of domestic 
harmony. Lovely how football brings people together.

Iran coach Afshin Ghotbi will probably be the happier of the two right now. 
Iraq had a chance to kill this one off, but Iran are resurgent. Resurgent 
mainly with long throws and plenty of hoofed passes, but still resurgent. The 
teams are out again.

Nash Fayyad writes: "I'm an Iraqi fan, and I am stuck in the office in Slough, 
wishing the boys from Mespotamia can do it, and send the iranians back to 
Persia on their magic carpets." Er. I;'m assuming it's kind of OK to say that.

46 mins Iraq kick us off again and that's sensational wing play from Mohammed, 
who steps inside his full back after dropping his shoulder Stanley 
Matthews-style and then sees a low driven cross hacked clear. Bright stuff from 
the embattled Mesopotamians.

48 mins Oh dear, Saeed wastes an excellent chance at the back post after a 
whipped corner is flicked on expertly by a set of Iraqi "eyebrows" at the near 
post. He wnet to volley it spectacularly into the net with a kind of flying 
chest-high kung-fu volley, but shinned it wide.

51 mins Iran have a corner, nicely thumped in from the left by Mobali and it's 
headed just over by the leaping Safi in the middle. Kim Jong-Un writes: "Any 
word on the chump who missed the penalty for us Best Koreans, Hong Yong-Jo? My 
dad wants to know..." I have no word as yet on that chump.

54 mins Shojaei of Osasuna, increaingly influential here, has another go with 
a deep set piece but it ends up being volleyed horribly wide from 45 yards by 
Aghili. Shojaei looks a decent player. Iran are dominating right now. After 
that early moment no great sheikhs from Iraq so far this half.

57 mins Iraq are just playing Mahmood up front right now, with a five man 
midfield trying to swamp the Iranian pressure but it's not really giving them 
anywhere to go when they get the ball. Khalatbari is warming up for Iran. 
According to the guide "things usually happen when he's on the pitch". There's 
no mention of what kind of things.

60 mins Iraq look devoid of vim on the ball so far this half and it's all one 
way from the Persian juggernaut. Mahmood could be in trouble here, he's being 
called across by the ref, but looking at the replay it's nothing much just a 
bit of flailing arms and some ineffectual pushing. Not much in the way of bite 
in this match so far. It has all been quite well-mannered and non-furious. 
Which is obviously a good thing.

63 mins Hmm. I have to say, it's a good job Qatar's got 11 years to build 
stadiums, develop infrastructure, summon an entire footballing culture from 
scratch, pay people to pretend to be fans etc. Because if this is a taster for 
the World Cup it's going to be whatever the exact opposite of an enthralling 
hotbed of footballing fury is. Probably something like this, in fact. You can 
hear individual shouts from the crowd. It's worryingly tinny and high pitched. 
No one's singing anything. This is one of the bigger games.

66 mins This game is going through a lull. No doubt before its inevitable 
furious crescendo. Khalatbari has just come on for Shojaei for Iran, and as we 
know he tends to emerge as "an impact substitute down the flanks".

69 mins Mohammed, who's got great wheels, sprints away down the left wing and 
puts in a low cross towards Mahmood pounding in on goal, but the big man just 
can't make contact and the chance is gone. That was Iraq's best moment of the 
half. Jonah Gadsby writes: "In reply to your comments in the 63th minute, At 
least it will be the most overhyped world cup ever." Or perhaps the most 
invisible and underwhelming. But we shall see.

73 mins This game is beginning to atrophy. It's sinking into a kind of 
shapeless ooze. Bubbles are emerging from its slack lips. It's eyelids are 
drooping. It can hear distant muffled voices and a strange white light has 
appeared behind its eyes.

77 mins The official crowd is 10,478, but it looks a lot less. I doubt the 
accuracy of that figure. Iran have a one-man break-out towards goal but Mobali 
is crowded out. More long hoofed passes. It's like watching the old first 
division in 1988.

80 mins Iraq are taking Mohammed off and bringing on Saeed, so both twins on 
the pitch for them. Will it make any difference? I hope so. Next goal wins it, 
but the way this is going the next goal might be up to nine hours away. Simon 
Robinson writes: "I am watching this in Brazil where I am living right now. I 
am still learning Portuguese, but the two Brazilian commentators are really 
doing well with their enthusiastic commentary, especially when the ball gets 
near the goals : )" Yes, those bits are the best. If only there were more of 
them. A bit odd this is on the TV in Brazil, but they do like their football.

83 mins GOAL! Iraq 1-2 Iran And that is surely it. Saeed's first act is to 
give away a free kick wide on the Iran left. Mobali swings it in, various heads 
and feet attempt to make contact and the ball runs right across the face of 
goal, doesn't take a touch and leaves the keeper with no chance. Someone should 
have cleared that. Good delivery though and Iran have come from behind to lead. 
Great scenes at the Qatar Sports Club. Kind of.

87 mins  Iran are still coming forward. They have dominated this second half, 
albeit in a fairly uneventful way. On lack of buzz Rohit Negi writes: "Last 
night India played Australia and the stadium was packed with the supporters of 
the former, and lots of noise (at least until the Aussies killed it off with 
the third goal). India isn't about to qualify for a World Cup in a hundred 
years, but maybe they should be given a 'wildcard', just to get some energy 
flowing." Ha. India has got the IPL for that. The IPL - where India wins the 
World Cup every year!

89 mins It's an Iranian procession now. Kassid makes a good save from a header 
from a corner. Iraq have run out of gas.

90 mins It's still all Iran. Iraq look frazzled. Simeon Kerr writes: "If 
either iraq or iran qualify for 2022, their level of support will depend on 
many rumsfeldian "known unknowns": will Iraq be a prosperous nation or 
fragmented entity? Either way, i would imagine Doha would at least try to 
minimise the travel barriers facing their legions of faithful fans. The asian 
cup, in current circumstances, is not a test run for what may happen at the 
world cup." It is a test of whether football exists there in any meaningful 
sense. On this basis the answer is "meh".

90+3 mins FULL TIME Iraq 1-2 Iran. The Iranian fans in the stand go wild. The 
players gather in a victory line to perform a very sporting team handshake and 
on the whole Iran deserved it. Iraq started well but faded terribly. Not much 
of a game, but then derbies are often like that.

That's all from me. Thanks for your emails. Good bye.
 