
Growing uncertainty about the outcome of the US presidential election has sent 
European andAsian shares falling again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/asian-markets-jitters-us-election-polls-narrow-gap-trump-and-clinton>
 while the market’s “fear gauge” jumped for the eighth day in a row.

Stocks in Japan, Australia and South Korea saw a broad selloff as investors 
pondered the possible ramifications of aDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> presidency, overshadowing 
important market data including Friday’s US employment figures for October.

Europe followed Asia and the US markets lower. The FTSE 100 index in London 
fell more than 50 points, or 0.8%, to 6,737 in early trading. Germany’s Dax was 
off 0.4%, France’s CAC slid 0.2%, Italy’s FTSE MiB lost 0.5% and Spain’s Ibex 
was down 0.3%.

Hillary Clinton, who is seen as the status quo candidate by markets, 
maintained her narrow poll lead over Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/trump-clinton-bernie-sanders-north-carolina-polls>
, the Republican candidate regarded as a much riskier occupant of the White 
House.


Fed will have little room to cut interest rates if recession hits | Kenneth 
Rogoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/fed-cut-interest-rates-recession-negative-inflation-targets>
The pound was flat on Friday, at around $1.2466, hitting a one-month high of 
$1.2494 on Thursday, after the government lost its Brexit case at the high 
court and the Bank of England signalled that further rate cuts were unlikely. 
That is still 16% lower than the day of the EU referendum.

Following an eighth straight day of losses on Wall Street’s S&P500 index on 
Thursday – its worst losing streak since the 2008 global financial crisis – 
Asian bourses suffered the same fate on Friday.


The Nikkei in Japan dropped 1.3%. The US election jitters have pushed the 
value of the greenback down, pushing investors to the safe haven of the yen, 
which in turn punishes Japanese shares.

In Australia, the S&P/ASX 200 closed down 0.8% after earlier touching on a 
four-month low. The country’s banks, which make up a large chunk of the 
market’s value, led the losses. The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was also 
slightly in the red, down 0.18%.

The Vix volatility index <https://au.finance.yahoo.com/q/bc?s=%5EVIX&t=1m> – a 
measure of investor confidence known as the “fear gauge” – spiked for the 
eighth day in succession.

Charlie Bilello, CMT (@MktOutperform) 
First time in history: S&P 500 down 8 days in a row, Volatility Index up 8 
days in a row.$SPX <https://twitter.com/search?q=%24SPX&src=ctag> $VIX 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%24VIX&src=ctag> pic.twitter.com/pbZjIiDtUk 
<https://t.co/pbZjIiDtUk>
 <https://twitter.com/MktOutperform/status/794324532899303426> November 3, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/MktOutperform/status/794324532899303426> 
“Even if opinion polls show that Clinton is maintaining a lead, anything can 
happen at the last minute, something the Brexit outcome taught us,” said 
Norihiro Fujito, senior investment strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley 
Securities, referring to the UK’s surprising vote in June to leave the European 
Union.


 Trump, a political novice, has campaigned to clamp down on immigration, 
rethink trade relations and slap high tariffs on imported goods. Some fear his 
election would pose risks for global trade and growth.

 “There remains scope for a significant selloff if Trump wins,” wrote Ric 
Spooner at CMC Markets in Australia.

 “Markets are currently attempting to strike the right balance between the 
greater probability of a Clinton win and the possibility of a significant 
selloff on a Trump victory,” Spooner said.

 “The more the market falls in advance of the election, the greater the 
potential for volatility and a significant bounce if Clinton does get up.”

Connor Campbell, a financial analyst at Spreadex, said: “The prospect of a 
Trump presidency, however unlikely that still may be, has sent the FTSE down a 
further 50 points this morning, taking the UK index to its lowest level since 
mid-September.

“Despite the continued Brexit brouhaha muddying the waters it is hard to see 
anything challenge the election for market dominance from now until next 
Wednesday, if Clinton wins, or god knows how long, in the eventuality of a 
Trump victory.”




 The non-farm payrolls report due later on Friday is expected to show 
employers added 175,000 jobs in October, according to the median estimate of 
106 economists polled by Reuters.

 US data on Thursday showed that services industry activity cooled last month 
amid a slowdown in new orders and hiring, while planned job cuts by US-based 
employers dropped 31% to a five-month low.

Early voter turnout worries Democrats who fear 'enthusiasm gap' for Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/early-voting-results-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states>
 That underscored the labour market’s healthy fundamentals, though more 
Americans filed for unemployment benefits last week.

 The pound was a stand-out performer overnight, rising to a nearly one-month 
high of $1.2494 on Thursdayafter a British court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/theresa-may-concedes-triggering-article-50-will-need-act-of-parliament>
 that the government needs parliamentary approval to start the process of 
leaving the European Union. That could potentially delay Theresa May’s Brexit 
plans.
IGSquawk (@IGSquawk) 
FX update:#EURUSD <https://twitter.com/hashtag/EURUSD?src=hash> 1.1094 -0.11%
#GBPUSD <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GBPUSD?src=hash> 1.2470 +0.05%#USDJPY 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/USDJPY?src=hash> 103.06 +0.09%#AUDUSD 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AUDUSD?src=hash> 0.7679 -0.04%#EURGBP 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/EURGBP?src=hash> 0.8896 -0.16%
 <https://twitter.com/IGSquawk/status/794393474418098176> November 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/IGSquawk/status/794393474418098176> 
 The pound also got a boost from the Bank of England, which scrapped its plan 
to cut interest rates and ramped up its forecasts for growth.

 Sterling was up 0.1% at $1.2476, poised to gain 2.4% for the week.

 Oil prices took back some ground after settling down more than 1% on Thursday 
as investors reacted to a record weekly surge in US crude inventories and 
remained sceptical that Opec will actually implement its planned output curbs.

 US crude added 0.2% to $44.76 per barrel. Brent crude also rose 0.2% to 
$46.46.
 