
I have a very heavy clay garden, the back corner of which is under water most 
of the year, even though it gets full sun. Is there anything I can plant there 
that will survive?
This is my dream, a bog garden in full sun. There are plenty of lovely things 
you can grow: the ligularias (L. ‘Greynog Gold’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1153>, L. ‘The Rocket’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1155>, L. ‘Desdemona’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/89107/Ligularia-dentata-Desdemona/Details>, L. 
‘Othello’ <http://www.perennials.com/plants/ligularia-dentata-othello.html> and 
L. przewalskii 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/23892/Ligularia-przewalskii/Details>) are very 
tolerant of clay and boggy, marshland conditions. They have lovely brilliant, 
yolk-yellow daisies on pyramidal spikes and a strong architectural form. They’d 
work on the edge of where the water sits and would eventually form large clumps.

Ask Alys Fowler: can I replant moss from a roof under a tree?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/may/07/can-i-replant-moss-under-a-tree-alys-fowler>
Pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/13502/i-Pontederia-cordata-i/Details>) has dense 
spikes of tubular blue flowers that appear in late summer and will be happy in 
your conditions. It grows in a damp border or in a pond or stream up to 12cm 
deep. Duck potato (Sagittaria latifolia 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1736>) will grow in both moist 
ground and in shallow water, and its tubers are edible. The white flowers are 
very pretty, with a buttercup-yellow centre, and appear on tall stem in 
midsummer above the distinctive arrow-shaped leaves.

• Got a question for Alys Fowler? Email askalys@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalys@theguardian.com>
 