
Can you suggest anything I can plant at my mother’s grave? The ground is 
exposed and waterlogged.
I can quite understand that you want her grave to look loved and cared for. 
You don’t say whether the ground is waterlogged all year round, but I am going 
to assume that it remains damp all year.

Cemeteries tend to have a lot of wildlife, which means plants do get munched. 
Vinca minor, the lesser periwinkle, will survive anywhere, though you may have 
to give it an annual trim in spring. It has lovely lavender-blue flowers and 
will flower from April through to September. And it won’t be nibbled, and will 
look after itself.

Ask Alys: our pond suffers from blanket weed. Help!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/feb/06/ask-alys-pond-blanket-weed>
If there aren’t too many rabbits or deer, you could also try primulas, such as 
the giant cowslip,Primula florindae 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/13757/i-Primula-florindae-i-(Si)/Details>, which 
has scented, nodding sulphur yellow flowers. If it’s happy, it often 
self-seeds, and it’s tough enough to cope with being planted in grass, as long 
as you remove some of the grass around it so it can establish. There are a few 
other primulas – P. japonica 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/13785/i-Primula-japonica-i-(Pf)/Details>, P. 
prolifera 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/90564/i-Primula-prolifera-i-(Pf)/Details> and P. 
pulverulenta 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/13860/i-Primula-pulverulenta-i-(Pf)/Details> – 
that like damp conditions, but you may need to remove some of the grass in 
order for them to establish. And they won’t like to be in full sun all day 
long, unless the ground is very damp indeed.

• Got a question for Alys Fowler? Email askalys@theguardian.com 
<mailto:askalys@theguardian.com>
 