
US senators grilled two of the most powerful men in media on Wednesday over 
“anti-competitive harm” that might result from the controversial $85.4bn 
acquisition ofTime Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner> 
Entertainment, the owner of HBO and CNN, by AT&T.

The Time Warner chief executive, Jeff Bewkes, and his AT&T counterpart, 
Randall Stephenson, answered questions at the Senate antitrust committee 
hearing about conflicts that might arise from the merger of a major media 
producer and a major distributor.

The Connecticut senator Richard Blumenthal pressed both men to address 
President-elect Donald Trump’s threat to block the merger in retaliation for 
perceived negative coverage by CNN.


What will AT&T's acquisition of Time Warner mean for customers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/att-time-warner-acquisition-customer-service-impact>
Blumenthal asked the pair to assure the Senate antitrust subcommittee that 
CNN’s coverage would not changed based onTrump’s threat to block the merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
 in what he called an “absolutely abhorrent” use of “the blunt instrument of 
the law”.

Blumenthal said: “What troubles me deeply is that the president-elect has said 
that his justice department will enforce a different standard of law depending 
on what kind of coverage his administration receives. Will you commit that your 
coverage will in no way be influenced or impacted by what the president of the 
United States says about this transaction?”

“Yes,” said Bewkes and Stephenson.

Trump has been broadly critical of the merger, saying his administration would 
not approve itas recently as October 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/10/22/media/donald-trump-att-time-warner/>. He cited 
CNN’s coverage of his campaign among other objections, saying the network was 
“trying desperately to suppress my vote and the voice of the American people”.

Minnesota senator Al Franken pushed Bewkes on the question of whether Time 
Warner would benefit from raising prices on AT&T competitors such as Comcast 
once it was owned by one of its distributors. “It’s not like selling toothpaste 
and not taking it to [New York City convenience store chain] Duane Reade,” said 
Franken, himself a former TV and film actor. “HBO isn’t toothpaste. It’s like 
CVS making the greatest toothpaste in the world and not letting Duane Reade 
sell it.”

More to the point, Franken said, “it’s really like HBO making Game of Thrones 
and not letting Comcast sell it. Or it’s more like making Comcast pay more for 
the privilege of having Game of Thrones or Veep or the rest of the lineup.” 
Conditions had to be imposed on the merger to prevent such behavior, Franken 
told the executives, or else there would be no way to stop the new company from 
restricting access to programming in order to drive consumers to HBO or AT&T’s 
streaming services. “You’d have every reason to do this if you could,” Franken 
told Bewkes.

Bewkes disagreed: refusing to distribute through a company that paid 
handsomely for the privilege would cut off Time Warner’s nose to spite its 
face, he said. “We’ve been able to build our network only because we have broad 
distribution,” Bewkes told the subcommittee. “If we were to not offer our 
networks over any of the cable, satellite, or over the top platforms, we’d be 
cutting off meaningful revenue to our company. There’s no incentive for us to 
do that.”

Stephenson cast the proposed reconfiguration of AT&T as a force for 
consumer-friendly disruption in a market of established players. “As we begin 
to innovate with Time Warner content, giving our customers unique and different 
capabilities, other companies will follow,” Stephenson predicted.

Gene Kimmelman of the consumer advocacy group Public Knowledge said his group 
estimated that cable consumers were being overcharged by “at least $45 a month” 
already “because there are too few players”.

“AT&T and Time Warner are excellent companies that have begun to compete in 
the over-the-top market,” Kimmelman said. “That’s wonderful, as separate 
companies contracting with each other in the marketplace.” Merged together, he 
told the subcommittee, “there are enormous incentives to favor yourself”.
 