
Is the cinematic universe concept really that new? Alex Kurtzman, director of 
the forthcoming Tom Cruise-led remake ofThe Mummy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/05/five-things-learned-from-first-trailer-the-mummy-tom-cruise-russell-crowe-universal>
,pointed out recently 
<http://screencrush.com/kurtzman-monster-universe-approach/> that Universal 
Pictures were making mashup monster movies more than half a century ago. Roy 
William Neill’s film Frankenstein Meets the Wolfman, featuring Bela Lugosi as 
Frankenstein’s Monster and Lon Chaney Jr reprising his role as the cursed 
lycanthrope, kicked off the concept in 1943. Further ensemble efforts House of 
Frankenstein (1944) and House of Dracula (1945) even added the vampire count to 
the mix.

Six key questions Rogue One: A Star Wars Story must answer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/08/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-key-questions>
The problem is that none of these movies is remembered as a high point of 
Universal’s horror output, which probably peaked more than a decade earlier 
with James Whale’s masterful 1935 film Bride of Frankenstein. Critics 
complained that Lugosi, who was suffering from exhaustion linked to his age 
(60) and, most likely, addiction to painkillers, was only in Frankenstein Meets 
the Wolfman for 10 minutes. Successive films verged so far into surreal comedy 
that the studio’s next monster mashup, 1948’s Abbott and Costello Meet 
Frankenstein, dropped all pretence at chills and cheerfully transitioned to 
farcical knockabout silliness with the popular comedy duo.

Universal could easily go the same route with its 21st-century revival, except 
that the result might be closer to Adam Sandler’s lightweight animationHotel 
Transylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/11/hotel-transylvania-review> than a 
monster-movie take on the Marvel cinematic universe, which is clearly what the 
studio is hoping for. A recent trailer for The Mummy revealed that Universal 
has set up its own version of Marvel’s Shield, the CIA-like agency that keeps 
the world’s superheroes in line in the Avengers movies. It’s called Prodigium, 
and is led by Russell Crowe’s Henry Jekyll, no longer a scientist plagued by 
his chemically spawned evil alter ego, Dr Hyde, but more of a Nick Fury type. 
This brave new world of “gods and monsters” will eventually include new takes 
on The Invisible Man, The Creature from the Black Lagoon, The Wolf Man and the 
vampire hunter Van Helsing.

Warner Bros’ DC Extended Universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/aug/03/from-suicide-squad-to-batman-v-superman-why-dc-films-so-bad-zack-snyder>
 is ploughing a similar furrow, having introduced a sinister, unnamed 
government agency run by Viola Davis’s Amanda Waller inSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/suicide-squad-review-dc-comics-will-smith-margot-robbie-jared-leto>
. Like Shield, its job is to keep an eye on all the “metahumans” popping up 
around the world; unlike Fury’s agency, it took no time at all to show its 
rotten roots, which certainly must make life hard for screenwriters attempting 
a multiple-movie narrative arc.

Five things we learned from the first trailer for The Mummy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/05/five-things-learned-from-first-trailer-the-mummy-tom-cruise-russell-crowe-universal>
Michael Bay’s Transformers is also trying to brand itself as a cinematic 
universe. In practice, this could mean spinoff movies for Autobot Bumblebee, 
currently pitched for 2018, and a mooted GI Joe meets the Transformers 
crossover flick. If the definition of a cinematic universe is a series of 
movies with a common theme that has become popular enough to keep audiences 
coming back for more, even when the saga continues to introduce new characters 
and storylines, then this just about fits the template. But given how execrable 
Bay’s last few efforts have been, it’s hard to see Transformers hittingMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> levels of acclaim.

Which brings us to Star Wars. Gareth Edwards’s Rogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/rogue-one-star-wars-reaction-fans-celebrities>
 is due to hit cinemas this week, and all of a sudden hasa little bit of buzz 
around it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/rogue-one-star-wars-reaction-fans-celebrities>
. A movie that appeared to be floundering under the weight of bad publicity 
over reshoots and Disney’s decision toparachute in Bourne supremo Tony Gilroy 
to oversee the final cut 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/rogue-one-drama-writer-tony-916695>
 has been given the thumbs-up by Kevin Smith and Rainn Wilson, who attended the 
world premiere in Los Angeles on 10 December.

The Force is with Rogue One: first-night reaction from fans and celebrities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/rogue-one-star-wars-reaction-fans-celebrities>
Rogue One’s success could be vital for those hoping that the cinematic 
universe model is the answer to Hollywood’s ongoing creative dilemma: the 
commercial imperative to keep giving audiences what they want, but the 
avoidance of endless sequels and remakes. That is, to keep the creativity 
flowing while staying on top of the numbers game. Moreover, it shows that the 
template can work without a Marvel-style central agency to glue everything 
together.

Last year’s The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
, with its focus on the re-emergence of the all-encompassing mystical energy 
field, gave Disney and Lucasfilm ample opportunity to set up its own 
Shield-like taskforce. But story planners instead chose to fill in the gaps in 
the history we already know, by telling the backstory to the Empire’s 
construction of the first Death Star in 1977’s Star Wars, and how the Rebel 
Alliance got hold of the plans to destroy it.

Rogue One always seemed like a leftfield creative move for the first Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> spinoff, if not necessarily a 
daring one. But its very unorthodoxy – an absence of lightsabers, Jedi-Sith 
battles and “chosen one” types that audiences expect to see – might prove to be 
its greatest triumph.

Disney’s problem now is that it fears repeating the failures of the prequel 
trilogy, which shifted the heart of Star Wars from knockabout space adventure 
to turgid bureaucratic battles in the Galactic senate. But it did – as George 
Lucas has repeatedly said – at least venture into new territory. If Rogue One 
succeeds where its predecessors failed, it should give the studio the 
confidence to begin taking risks on entirely new stories and characters within 
the wider galaxy, just as the decanonised extended universe did across scores 
of novels, comic books and games for almost three decades following Star Wars’ 
debut in cinemas. Suddenly we might not need thatBoba Fett movie 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/heres-how-close-we-were-to-getting-a-boba-fett-movie-di-1789274929>
 after all.
 