
Star Wars creator George Lucas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> 
has criticised the “retro” tone of new episode The Force Awakens, with which he 
had no creative involvement.


Speaking to US television talk-show host and journalist Charlie Rose, Lucas 
quipped that he had sold his “kids … to the white slavers that take these 
things”.

Carrie Fisher strikes back at critic who told her to face being judged on her 
looks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/31/carrie-fisher-strikes-back-at-critic-who-told-her-to-quit-or-be-judged-on-her-looks>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8hQVlRgFlU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8hQVlRgFlU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8hQVlRgFlU&media=>
Lucas later apologised for criticising Disney, the studio behind the new film. 
In a statement issued late on Thursday, Lucas says he misspoke and used a “very 
inappropriate analogy”.

The film-maker, who oversaw both the groundbreaking original Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> trilogy, which hit cinemas between 
1977 and 1983, and the much-maligned 1999-2005 prequel trilogy, confirmed to 
Rose on his PBS show that aired on 24 December that Disney had not wanted his 
involvement in the new instalment.

“They wanted to do a retro movie. I don’t like that,” he said. “They weren’t 
that keen to have me involved anyway, but if I get in there, I’m just going to 
cause trouble, because they’re not going to do what I want them to do. And I 
don’t have the control to do that any more, and all I would do is muck 
everything up. And so I said, ‘OK, I will go my way, and I’ll let them go their 
way.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fstar-wars-theme-parks-open-us-video-report&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439809787749%2FKP_390538_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20theme%20parks%20to%20open%20in%20the%20US%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fstar-wars-theme-parks-open-us-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20theme%20parks%20to%20open%20in%20the%20US%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fstar-wars-theme-parks-open-us-video-report&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439809787749%2FKP_390538_crop_640x360.jpg>
Watch: Disney to open Star Wars theme parks in US and will include an 
interactive Millennium Falcon ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/aug/17/star-wars-theme-parks-open-us-video-report>
Lucas defended his vision for the six previous Star Wars films, which he said 
involved constant innovation. “I worked very hard to make them completely 
different, with different planets, with different spaceships – you know, to 
make it new,” he said, pointing out the failure of anumber of rival space 
movies that attempted to repeat the formula 
<http://www.denofgeek.com/movies/star-wars/17294/11-films-and-tv-shows-that-tried-to-be-star-wars>
 in the late 70s and early 80s.

Five reasons Star Wars: The Force Awakens villain Snoke probably isn't Darth 
Plagueis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/30/star-wars-the-force-awakens-villain-snoke-darth-plagueis>
“When Star Wars came out, everyone said, ‘Oh it’s just a silly movie with a 
bunch of space battles and stuff. It’s not real. There’s nothing behind it.’ 
And I said … ‘There’s more to it than that. It’s much more complicated than 
that.’ But nobody would listen,” said Lucas. “So the spaceships and that part 
of the science fantasy, whatever, got terribly abused. And of course, everybody 
went out and made spaceship movies. And they were all horrible, and they all 
lost tons of money.”

The 71-year-old film-maker said he had made his peace with walking away from 
the long-running space saga, which he sold to Disney for $4.05bn in October 
2012 along with the rest of his Lucasfilm production company.

“You do end up with this thing, which is, you know, you gotta live with it,” 
he said. “People are gonna talk about it and all that kind of stuff. It’s like 
talking about your divorce or something. It’s just awkward, but it’s not 
painful.”

Star Wars: The Force Awakens hits global all-time Top 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/30/star-wars-the-force-awakens-in-global-all-time-top-10>
Lucas’s comments surprised some as the film-maker appeared at the world and 
European premieres of The Force Awakens, in Los Angeles and London, earlier 
this month. Lucas had previously saidhe felt fans would like JJ Abrams’ movie 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/What-George-Lucas-Really-Thought-Star-Wars-Force-Awakens-98887.html>
, but stopped short of signalling his own full approval. In his apology on 
Thursday Lucas said Disney was moving the franchise in exciting directions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-world-premiere-kicks-off-in-los-angeles-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20world%20premiere%20kicks%20off%20in%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-world-premiere-kicks-off-in-los-angeles-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20world%20premiere%20kicks%20off%20in%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-world-premiere-kicks-off-in-los-angeles-video&media=>
Watch: The Force Awakens world premiere kicks in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/15/star-wars-the-force-awakens-world-premiere-kicks-off-in-los-angeles-video>
The Force Awakens remains on course to challenge Avatar’s all-time $2.78bn 
box-office world record. It is currently the ninth highest-grossing film, with 
$1.22bn, having overtaken Iron Man 3 on Wednesday.

In the US and Canada, The Force Awakens has passed The Dark Knight, Star Wars: 
The Phantom Menace and the original 1977 Star Wars to enter the all-time top 
five at the North American box office, with receipts of $600.9m. The space 
opera sequel, which is also tipped to be a part of the 2016 Oscars race, is 
expected to pass Avatar’s record $760m North American haul as early as this 
weekend.

 