
How are you today?” asks Aubrey Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aubrey-plaza> as I’m ushered in to meet 
her. She’s behind a round hotel-room dinner table. She does not rise. We don’t 
shake hands.

“Um, great. And ... uh, terrified. A little.”

“Terrified? Why?” She’s smiling like a cat with a mouse.

OK, I’m not really terrified. I’m just nervous that this experience may go off 
the rails, perhaps because of the interview I read withParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation> creator Greg 
Daniels, who hired her after what hedescribed 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/michael-schur-53574> as “an extremely 
uncomfortable hour with Aubrey Plaza”. And she needed to impress him, which 
certainly isn’t necessary with me.

Later she tells me she’s used to this, that her role as the aggressively 
deadpanApril Ludgate <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eopL9kmMhvw> on Parks and 
Recreation, which was expressly sculpted out of aspects of her own personality, 
tends to creep into people’s perceptions of her in real life.

“You know, once people see you do a character like that, and if they haven’t 
seen you in anything else, they tend to think that’s who you are and that’s all 
you can do. But the more I played that character, I realised: ‘Oh wow, people 
really think I’m just like this all the time.’ It’s strange, but I have 
actually found it useful in getting other work. I thought: ‘Anything I do 
differently from this is always going to surprise them.’ And it’s starting to 
work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed0edf7007de365a5a216a59f00cbe50f248aa5f%2F0_17_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed0edf7007de365a5a216a59f00cbe50f248aa5f%2F0_17_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Aubrey Plaza and Amy Poehler in Parks and Recreation. Photograph: Colleen 
Hayes/NBC 
It is. Her new movie, Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/05/mike-and-dave-need-wedding-dates-review-aubrey-plaza>
, showcases a high-stepping, louder-than-bombs, coarse-mouthed, hard-partying, 
bad Aubrey, alongsideAnna Kendrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anna-kendrick>. Previous roles, mainly in 
low-budget indie comedies, have given us a buttoned-down, sceptical, 
hard-to-reach Plaza and light variations on – to quote that internet meme about 
her character –“Fuck Yeah April Ludgate”.  
<http://fuckyeahaprilludgate.tumblr.com/>Here, she blasts off in another 
direction entirely.

Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates is loosely based on a real story 
<http://books.simonandschuster.com/Mike-and-Dave-Need-Wedding-Dates/Mike-Stangle/9781476760087>
 of two pain-in-the-arse brothers with a history of ruining family gatherings, 
whose parents order them to hustle up some proper young ladies to squire to 
their sister’s wedding in Hawaii. They finally find them on the net – through 
Craigslist. The boys are played byZac Efron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zac-efron> and Adam Devine, the latter in his 
first big movie role, and there is a certain four-way charisma to the group 
that gives the movie its energy.

But Plaza is the pleasant surprise. Much of what we already know of her – the 
deadpan, the detectable inner wildness, the silent-movie-actress eyes that she 
has weaponised so effectively for comic purposes – is all there. But, for the 
first time, Plaza is burning on all cylinders: sexual, cynical, robustly crude 
and amoral. This movie, as she says, giggling softly, “is so rude”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4650dda966bb34b5df81c3c503b98d21d73b279%2F0_0_3408_5099%2F3408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4650dda966bb34b5df81c3c503b98d21d73b279%2F0_0_3408_5099%2F3408.jpg>
 Photograph: Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
She’s an excellent swearer, I tell her. Where did that come from?

“I don’t know ...” She gives a little chortle. “I guess whatever my character 
has to say, I have to say. I mean, what are words anyway? They’re just words: 
‘chair’, ‘lawn’, ‘fuck’!” She titters to herself as if she just swore in church.

Plaza is at a turning point in her 10-year career. In addition to appearing 
top of the bill on Mike and Dave, she has recently taken more serious parts, 
including a knockout two-handed episode ofCriminal Minds <>, in which she 
played a murderer, and a juicy top role in Legion, a Marvel-spin-off drama 
created for FX by Fargo’s Noah Hawley. She was alsoRobert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro>’s inappropriately youthful love 
interest in the uproariously filthyDirty Grandpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dirty-grandpa>, also with Efron. The roles 
and pay cheques are growing, and she likes that.

Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates review – a smart take on dumb comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/05/mike-and-dave-need-wedding-dates-review-aubrey-plaza>
Plaza and Kendrick already knew each other from Scott Pilgrim vs the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scott-pilgrim-vs-the-world> in 2010, but she 
had not previously met Devine, the co-creator and co-star ofComedy Central’s 
Workaholics <http://www.cc.com/shows/workaholics>. It turned out they had 
experiences in common. “He reminds me of someone I grew up with. I feel like we 
might have had crazy, similar white-trash upbringings, surrounded by party 
animals, so we have a similar kind of sensibility.

“We both had really major health crises,” she says in a wonderfully 
inappropriate, upbeat tone. At 20, Plaza had a stroke that robbed her of the 
power of speech, and, aged 11, Devine was hit by a cement truck, causing 
multiple fractures and forcing him to learn to walk again.

“I’m pretty sure that has a lot to do with his approach to life, and with me 
it’s the same thing,” she says. “Things take on a different meaning when death 
comes so close. I was older but he was still growing, and his thing was much 
more directly physical.

“I had expressive aphasia, where I could understand what’s happening, but I 
couldn’t talk or communicate. Like, you could say something and I would know 
what you meant but I couldn’t express it or even write it. That was the 
weirdest part. When they gave me a piece of paper and a pen I just kept writing 
lines instead of words. But at least I could walk. When it first happened to me 
I was paralysed, but I was so young that my brain healed itself really fast. I 
was really lucky in that way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F565dbd4f7e77f9a1804a991b79fcd2d1c3ad8f8d%2F35_268_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F565dbd4f7e77f9a1804a991b79fcd2d1c3ad8f8d%2F35_268_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
 Aubrey Plaza and Anna Kendrick in Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates. 
Photograph: Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
She was at New York University at the time, and after her recovery she started 
interning atSaturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live>. I’m more 
interested in her next internship, as a page inNBC’s legendary apprenticeship 
program <http://www.nbcunitips.com/nbcuniversal-casting-apprentice-program/>me. 
The list of alumni is long and extremely rich in household names of the past 
half-century: Disney CEO Michael Eisner, Eva Marie Saint,Bruce Willis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis>, a ton of anchormen and chatshow 
hosts, andJoan Rivers <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/joan-rivers>. It is 
said, famously, that it’s harder to become an NBC page than it is to get into 
Harvard.

“Joan Rivers was a page? That’s amazing – I had no idea!” Plaza says, in an 
unusual display of animation and admiration.

Aubrey Plaza: from 'sarcastic, eye-rolling weirdo’ to lustful zombie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/aubrey-plaza-life-after-beth-interview>
“It’s actually rare – going from an intern to a page, which is the lowest of 
the low. I mean, you’re wearing those uniforms and giving studio tours. I had a 
few contacts inside the 30 Rockefeller building who put in a good word for me, 
and I was very laser-focused. But you have no idea how you’re doing or what 
they want from you. We all had to give a presentation about who we are andwhy 
we deserve to have this job. I remember that I cursed – by accident– and then I 
thought, I’m never gonna get this! But I prevailed, I guess.”

Plaza later did improv with the now-legendary comedy forcing house Upright 
Citizens Brigade <https://ucbtheatre.com/> (co-founded by Parks and Recreation’s
Amy Poehler <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler>) and some 
standup, before catching enough attention to nab web-series roles in between 
her indie comedies. She appeared in the very likable high-school sex comedyThe 
To-Do List <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/03/the-to-do-list-review>
, co-starring Bill Hader and written and directed by his wife Maggie Carey, and 
the surprisingly affecting Duplass brothers-producedSafety Not Guaranteed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/safety-not-guaranteed>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faccfbe5be1e01e7ce71b0fc0f0ad33c38cfc8885%2F0_88_3209_1926%2F3209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aubrey%20Plaza%3A%20%E2%80%98Things%20take%20on%20a%20different%20meaning%20when%20death%20comes%20so%20close%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Faubrey-plaza-mike-dave-different-meaning-death-so-close%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faccfbe5be1e01e7ce71b0fc0f0ad33c38cfc8885%2F0_88_3209_1926%2F3209.jpg>
 Will Ferrell and Aubrey Plaza during the 2013 MTV Movie Awards. Photograph: 
Kevin Mazur/WireImage 
She has also made a side career of excellent chatshow appearances and 
red-carpet and awards show outrages. There’s footage of herharshly glaring down 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rThS7xVTnac> her impudent Scott Pilgrim co-star
Michael Cera <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-cera> – not in jest, it 
would seem. At the 2013 MTV Movie Awards, she leapt on stage andwrested Will 
Ferrell’s award from his hands <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FxAYRn3AHWw>. 
Ferrell went with it as though it were a bit, but Plaza got chucked out 
afterwards. OnConan O’Brien’s show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dhGA5eQFZbw>
, she was seen smiling and laughing before she caught the camera and very 
consciously, veryslowly deadened her face into the full Ludgate, before 
silently mouthing the words “fuuuuuuuuuuuuck yooooouu,” to rather magnificent 
effect. “You gotta give ’em what they want!” she says.

“What’s next?” I ask.

“I just shot a movie in Italy where I play a nun who’s actually a witch,” she 
says, “called The Little Hours.”

Oh, I say, I thought it was called The Little Horse. She mishears me. “The 
Little Whooooooooooores? I’m gonna call the director and ask him to rename it 
because I like that title way better!”

• Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mike-and-dave-need-wedding-dates> is released 
in the UK on 10 August
 