
Willie Mullins has had his horses in remarkable form since Christmas Day with 
no fewer than 26 winners, but his bandwagon hit a couple of bumps in the road 
at Naas on Sunday when two bigCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> hopefuls ended up on the 
floor.

Augusta Kate appeared to be coming with a winning run under Ruby Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ruby-walsh> in the Grade One Lawlor’s Hotel 
Novice Hurdle only to fall at the final flight. Death Duty, trained by 
Mullins’s championship rival Gordon Elliott, looked to have a real fight on his 
hands with the daughter of Yeats looming up as they approached the last hurdle, 
but what would have been a terrific tussle to the line never materialised.

Finian’s Oscar all the rage for Cheltenham after Tolworth stroll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/finians-oscar-cheltenham-tolworth-hurdle-sandown-colin-tizzard>
Walsh had chosen to ride Augusta Kate, owned by a syndicate that numbers Alan 
Shearer, Lee Westwood as well as Ant and Dec, instead of Turcagua, and it 
looked to be a wise choice as he came from the back of the field to challenge 
for the €53,100 first prize. Thankfully both horse and jockey were none the 
worse for their exertions.

The bookmakers were impressed enough to cut the winner to 9-4 for the Albert 
Bartlett Novice Hurdle.

It was the second expensive fall of the afternoon for Walsh and Mullins after 
the heavily backed American Tom (8-15 favourite) hit the deck in the previous 
race, a two-mile novice chase. Running in the famous pink and green silks of 
Mrs Susan Ricci, the six-year-old was being talked up as a serious prospect for 
the JLT Novice Chase at Cheltenham, for which he was a 9-1 chance, but his fall 
at the fourth last fence, when looking beaten, appears to have put paid to 
those aspirations.

It was a disappointing performance as Mullins had expressed his hopes that the 
young chaser would put up a good show. To add insult to injury, Elliott 
increased his lead in the title race by an extra €36,000.

The race was won by Some Plan, trained by Henry de Bromhead, and he could be 
an interesting challenger at the Festival in March.

The Roger Brookhouse-owned chaser had looked set to have a big say last time 
out at Cheltenham, in the Arkle Trophy Trial Novice Chase, only to fall two 
out. There were no such hard luck stories this time as he took up the running 
from the third fence and never looked in trouble at any stage, jumping like a 
stag and coming away from Road To Respect for a five-and-a-half-length success. 
He is now as low as 16-1 for the Arkle in March.

David Mullins, the winning jockey, said: “He’s still a big baby for an old 
horse and when he does start to learn, and put his best foot forward over 
fences, he’ll take a fair bit of beating over two miles.”

One horse that is unlikely to be at Prestbury Park is the Mark 
Bradstock-trained Coneygree, hero of the 2015Cheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup>.

Gambling Commission warns layers: don’t risk reputation over deductions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/gambling-commission-deductions-gary-wiltshire>
His most recent appearance was a 15-length second to Cue Card in the Betfair 
Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-colin-tizzard-paddy-brennan-king-george-vi-chase-kempton>
last November, but since then connections have been concerned over his lack of 
sparkle on the gallops and are leaning towards not paying the £5,000 entry for 
the Gold Cup on Tuesday

Sara Bradstock, the trainer’s wife, said: “It is looking very tight to get him 
to the Gold Cup. If we miss that, which would be a great shame, we then have 
two Grade Ones, the Bowl at Aintree and Gold Cup at Punchestown to aim him at.

“We will talk with his owners before any final decision but it doesn’t look as 
though we will take the Cheltenham route, which would be the right thing for 
the horse.

“My husband looks on the bright side and says ‘Well, we have won the Gold Cup 
already!’”

Bradstock did throw up the intriguing possibility of sending their champion to 
Auteuil in France later in the season. She said: “One race we had thought about 
for later this year is the French Champion Hurdle. The ground is usually soft 
there and their hurdles are like mini fences and he would love it there. It 
would be an interesting challenge, wouldn’t it?”
 