
A Grattan Institute report being launched on Wednesday calls upon the federal 
government to introduce an excise tax of 40 cents per 100 grams of sugar in 
beverages as part of the fight against obesity.

The move would see the price of a two-litre bottle of soft drink rise by about 
80 cents.

The tax would apply to nonalcoholic, water-based beverages that contain added 
sugar and would raise about $500m a year, according to the report written by 
health policy expert Prof Hal Swerissen and health economist Dr Stephen Duckett.

Childhood obesity levels due in part to discipline methods of parents – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/14/childhood-obesity-levels-due-in-part-to-discipline-methods-of-parents-study>
It would also trigger a 15% drop in the consumption of sugary drinks, economic 
modelling in the report shows, as people switched to water and other drinks not 
subject to the tax.

“We recognise that a tax on sugary drinks is not a ‘silver bullet’ solution to 
the obesity epidemic – that would require numerous interventions at an 
individual and population-wide level,” the authors wrote.

“But it will address these third-party costs of obesity by reducing sugar 
intake from sugar-sweetened beverages.”

More than 15 countries and subnational governments have already introduced 
such a tax, including the United Kingdom, France and parts of the United States.

The Grattan Institute estimates that about 10% of Australia’s obesity problem 
is due to the consumption of sugary beverages.

“But it is important to reduce the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages 
because most contain no nutritional benefit, they are consumed heavily by 
children, and Australia’s added-sugar intake is already high,” the report says.

“Consumers could easily avoid the tax by switching to healthier drinks, such 
as water or artificially-sweetened beverages.”

In November the Australian Medical Association president, Dr Michael Gannon, 
strongly recommended a sugar tax be introduced as he launched the association’s 
revised position statement on obesity.

According to Pricewaterhouse Coopers, obesity was conservatively estimated in 
2011-12 to cost Australia $8.6bn in health costs and lost productivity. More 
recent studies have put the cost much higher.

Bathtub of sugary drinks a year: cancer warning over teenage intake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/bathtub-of-sugary-drinks-a-year-cancer-warning-over-teenage-intake>
The Grattan Institute report suggests that people eat more unhealthy food than 
they would if the costs of obesity were incorporated into the price of their 
food.

“This suggests foods with excessive calories and poor nutritional value are 
underpriced,” the report said.

“This results in higher health and welfare costs than otherwise and a cost 
transfer from obese people to non-obese taxpayers.”

Duckett said the introduction of a sugar tax would not take away personal 
choice.

“We are taking it from an economic point of view by looking at the costs of 
sugary beverages to government and to taxpayers,” he told Guardian Australia.

“We’re not taking a nanny-state approach, we’re saying people should face the 
cost of decisions they’re making by having to pay extra tax recouping the costs 
of obesity to the taxpayers.”


The Australian Healthcare and Hospitals Association, the national peak body 
for public and not-for-profit hospitals and primary healthcare services, said 
it supported the findings from the report.

“Our consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is among the highest in the 
world, with Australians and New Zealanders consuming an average of 76 litres of 
these drinks per person every year – that’s simply way too much,” the 
association’s chief executive, Alison Verhoeven, said.

“We therefore call on the Australian government and the state and territory 
governments, as a matter of urgency, to develop and fund evidence-based 
measures aimed at reducing consumption of these drinks”.


However, the association’s position statement on taxing sugar-sweetened 
beverages 
<http://ahha.asn.au/sites/default/files/docs/policy-issue/ahha_position_statement_-_sugar_sweetened_beverage.pdf>
 goes further, calling for restricted sales in hospitals and schools; stronger 
advertising restrictions, especially during children’s television viewing 
times; mandatory front-of-package “healthy star” labelling; and public 
awareness campaigns.

The Consumers Health <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> Forum 
of Australia CEO, Leanne Wells, said a sugar tax would send a tangible message 
to consumers alerting them to unhealthy level of sugar in their soft drink.

The sugar tax would not only generate revenue for the government, but may also 
generate a slight reduction in the prevalence of obesity.


World Health Organisation urges all countries to tax sugary drinks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/world-health-organisation-who-countries-tax-sugary-drinks>
“We know that as with tobacco, increased taxes can help reduce sales,” Wells 
said.


 “To those who might argue that a tax intrudes on people’s right to choose, we 
say they should consider the enormous personal and public costs of obesity 
borne by the community in higher healthcare and welfare expenditure and other 
costs resulting from obesity.”

A World Health Organisation report published in October  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/world-health-organisation-who-countries-tax-sugary-drinks>
called on governments to introduce a sugar tax on sugar-sweetened beverages to 
prevent type 2 diabetes, chronic diseases and to lower obesity rates.

According to the the 15th biennial health report of the Australian Institute 
of Health and Welfare, half of Australians are living with one or more chronic 
diseases and 1.2 million Australians have diabetes, 85% of whom have type 2 
diabetes.
 