
If Hollywood's knights of raucous mise-en-scene – Michael Bay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michael-bay>, Zack Snyder, Roland Emmerich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/roland-emmerich>, etc – are there to uphold the 
gleaming castle of entertainment, I like to think there's a shadowy league 
ranged against them, beyond the mountains of the Old World. No bodacious 
starlets for this cabal, no multimillion-dollar CGI sprees; no high-octane 
street racing, or talking mammoths, or cheap affirmative morality. Nope, for 
the Austrian League of Extraordinarily Pessimistic Gentlemen, it's only the 
good stuff: sex tourism, the disappointment of immigrants, care-home 
degradation, suburban paedophilia, irrational violence, industrial farming and, 
lest we forget, latent Nazism.

Who are its members? There's Ulrich Seidl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jun/13/ulrich-seidl-despise-people)>, 
dissecting modern aspirations in hisParadise 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147438/paradise> trilogy; Götz Spielmann, 
whose impassive framing of his 2008 thrillerRevanche 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126828/revanche> hinted there might be 
such a thing as an "Austrian" style; Nikolaus Geyrhalter, the monumentalist 
documentarian who cast an Olympian eye over food production in 2005'sOur Daily 
Bread <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/115672/our-daily-bread>, and 
nocturnal Europe in 2011'sAbendland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145530/abendland>. Geyrhalter's company 
also produced paedophilia dramaMichael 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144097/michael> for Markus Schleinzer, 
former casting director for and protege to none other than the eminence grise 
of this flinty brigade …Michael Haneke 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michael-haneke>.

When I watch Haneke, at the Hollywood Reporter's writers' round table last 
year,chastising Steven Spielberg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_osgrcpes4> 
for his frivolous handling of the Holocaust inSchindler's List 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/51655/schindler.s.list>, he reminds me of 
Saruman schooling Gandalf at the top of Orthanc ("I gave you the chance to aid 
me willingly, but you have elected the way of pain"). However, Haneke reminds 
us that the current Austrian cinema comes from a place diametrically opposed to 
Hollywood values – and the latter's ruthless pursuit of emotional affect. 
Seidl, to take one example, successfully flamethrowers such shamelessness in
Paradise: Love <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jun/16/paradise-love-review>
 – transforming "hakuna matata", The Lion King'ssunny motto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xB5ceAruYrI>, into the dead-eyed preamble to a 
million sex-tourist transactions. (Maybe Timon and Pumbaa were really after 
something else.)

In its keen focus on the parts of life Hollywood pushes into caricature, into 
the margins, or omits altogether, new Austrian cinema undoubtedly has a strong 
claim to be the world's most depressing. But there's something thrilling in how 
readily these directors are drawn to difficult subject matter – and how cleanly 
they draw it. There's a rectitude to their visuals. Most of the Paradise 
reviews have commented on Seidl's outstanding framing, such as hisiconic poster 
image <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Paradise_-_Love_%282012_film%29.jpg> 
of the European "sugar mammas" lined up on sun-loungers, the Kenyan beach boys 
opposite waiting, as though in battle formations. Most of the Viennese 
directors compose in this controlled way (Haneke is possibly a bit more fluid).
 Formidable technique … Paradise: Love 
The Austrian style is mainly static, intent on observing (rather than 
participating). The characters occupy the space and, within it, are subject to 
differing regimes according to the director: where Haneke often applies 
sadistic shocks to his protagonists, Seidl seems to have a taste for setting a 
kind of tender farce at play, like when Paradise: Love's Teresa initiates the 
seduction of her rent boys by criticising her own body.

But whatever the directors' proclivities, new Austrian cinema – due to this 
visual cleanliness – has the feeling of like an experiment, an attempt to 
diagrammatise reality that has no qualms about trespassing in disturbing places 
because objectivity is the goal. Schleinzer's Michael is especially innovative 
on this score. The space in which its procession of humdrum scenes – cleaning, 
eating, excursions – takes place is totally familiar; but because of who 
Michael is, this space has a different, terrible, meaning. The film becomes 
almost, as Peter Bradshawpointed out in his review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/mar/01/michael-review>, a parody of 
parenthood.

It's space, far more than time, that matters to the Austrians. They're 
interested in what the world is, not how it could be. Storyline is secondary; 
character development is less a consequence of plot (like the Hollywood 
tradition) than of the characters' restless striving to break out of the 
compartments of reality as these films define them. And new Austrian cinema 
seems restless itself, striking out in search of further spaces: the 
inter-connection between western and eastern Europe in Spielmann's Revanche, 
between developed and developing world in the first two parts of the Paradise 
trilogy. Geyrhalter's documentary work, freed completely from plot obligations, 
brings the technique to the brink of abstraction. Our Daily Bread – just stark, 
commentary-free shots of industrial farming processes, from chick sorting 
machines to cattle abattoirs – says more about global food production in 90 
minutes than a year's worth of listening to Morgan Spurlock.

Talking of time and space, I wonder if Austria's situation has put its artists 
in the right spot for this kind of inquest into the secret infrastructure of 
modern living: a 20th-century history that has made it sensitive to the 
unmentionable underlying the respectable; an affluent, multicultural country at 
the heart of the west, yet not caught up in the business of leading it, that, 
with its long memory, is adept at introspection. The rigorous approach of 
Haneke and co seems to me to follow on from theViennese psychoanalytic tradition
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychoanalysis> – what else is it their sworn 
mission to unpeel other than civilisation and its discontents? I suspect hakuna 
matata just doesn't translate very well into German.

• Paradise: Love is out now. Paradise: Faith is out on 5 July, while Paradise: 
Hope will be released on 2 August. Which global cinematic stories would you 
like to see covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 