
The Turnbull government is likely to call a double-dissolution election for 2 
July after the Senate defied it and defeated legislation establishing a 
construction industry watchdog, the Australian Building and Construction 
Commission (ABCC).

However, the Senate backed a seperate bill to abolish the tribunal which set 
minimum pay rates for truck owner-drivers, which the government had been 
strongly backing over the last week.

The defeat of the ABCC legislation marks the start of a unofficial election 
campaign and comes as Malcolm Turnbull’s own approval rating is sliding.

The government’s lead has evaporated in the major opinion polls, with Newspoll 
putting Labor ahead in two-party preferred terms (49% to 51%) and Ipsos putting 
each of the major parties at 50%.


The government had refused to countenance any of the substantive changes 
proposed by the Senate crossbench to its bill to re-establish the ABCC and 
Turnbull had prorogued parliament on the basis that if did not pass the 
industrial bills he would call an election for the House of Representatives and 
the full Senate after the 3 May budget, to be held on 2 July.

ABCC legislation rejected, giving Coalition double dissolution trigger – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/apr/18/polls-on-a-knife-edge-as-parliament-resumes-for-a-special-sitting-politics-live>
The bill to abolish the Road Safety Remuneration Tribunal passed the Senate 36 
votes to 32 with the support of seven of eight crossbench senators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/13/coalition-clinches-crossbench-support-in-battle-over-truckies-pay-rates>
.

The government had claimed independent contractors would lose jobs, and their 
businesses would collapse, due to the requirement of higher minimum rates.

Only Motoring Enthusiast senator Ricky Muir opposed the abolition of minimum 
pay rates intended to reduce road deaths by removing financial incentives to 
skip breaks or speed.

The vote came on the first day of the proposed three weeks of special sittings 
the government had allowed for its consideration and after a rancorous day in 
parliament.

Labor moved to set up a snap Senate inquiry into federal Liberal fundraising 
foundations and to force Turnbull’s cabinet secretary,Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, to give 
evidence, and the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, was forced to rebuke his deputy 
Senate leader, Stephen Conroy, over an attack he had made earlier in the day 
against the governor general, Sir Peter Cosgrove.

The Turnbull government also accused Labor of “reckless, crass populism” 
because of its pledge to hold a banking royal commission, while considering its 
own response to the string of banking scandals to counter the Labor policy, a 
response which is likely to be announced on Tuesday.

The ABCC bill was defeated 34 votes to 36, with four crossbenchers – senators 
Bob Day, Nick Xenophon, Dio Wang and David Leyonhjelm – voting with the 
government at the second reading stage and four against, after the workplace 
relations minister, Michaelia Cash, challenged the parliament to “choose if it 
stands for thuggery or fairness”. With Labor and the Greens opposed, the 
government needed six of the eight crossbench votes.

The Construction Forestry Mining Energy Union (CFMEU) welcomed the defeat of 
the ABCC bill, saying it was “a win for workers’ and basic human rights and 
freedoms”.

“We congratulate those crossbench senators who have taken a principled stance 
in rejecting this bill, which discriminates against 1 million Australians whose 
sweat and skill built this nation”, the CFMEU national construction secretary, 
Dave Noonan, said.

Labor’s employment spokesman, Brendan O’Connor, said the defeat of the ABCC 
bill showed “the prime minister and his Liberal team thought they could bluff 
and bully the parliament into passing the bill, [but] they were wrong”.

Bill Shorten rebukes Stephen Conroy over attack on governor general
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/bill-shorten-rebukes-stephen-conroy-over-attack-on-governor-general>
The Australian Industry Group’s head of workplace relations policy, Stephen 
Smith, told Guardian Australia “we’re very disappointed that that legislation 
has not been passed”.

“The government has said it intends to proceed with a double dissolution in 
those circumstances. If the government is re-elected we hope that the bill can 
be passed at the earliest possible time.”

The Senate is yet to consider another industrial relations bill that could 
form a double-dissolution trigger, as well as the abolition of a trucking 
remuneration tribunal, which the government also forced through the lower house 
on Monday night. Even after they are passed, the government will bring down its 
budget on 3 May, pass the supply bills and allow Shorten to make his budget 
speech in reply before starting the formal election campaign.

Labor and some of the crossbench are also seeking to use the final sittings 
before the budget and the election to make political points and embarrass the 
government.

Labor is likely to win the backing of the Greens to set up an inquiry into the 
powers of the Australian Electoral Commission to oversee so-called “associated 
entities” used for fundraising purposes.

In the Senate, Labor asked Sinodinos about his role as NSW finance director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/arthur-sinodinos-threatens-legal-action-against-nsw-electoral-commission>
 during the time that the NSW party is accused by the NSW Electoral Commission 
of “washing” property industry donations – prohibited at state level – through 
the federal “associated entity, the Free Enterprise Foundation”.

In evidence before the Icac, and in public statements, Sinodinos has said he 
did not know about the banned donations.

In the House of Representatives, Labor asked the treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, about donations 
possibly made to another fundraising body, the Millennium Forum, during his 
time as NSW Liberal party director.

Morrison responded furiously, saying there wasn’t “a hole dark enough that the 
NSWLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> hasn’t 
been in it”.

Lawyers back union claims that building watchdog will cut workers' legal rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/18/lawyers-back-union-claims-that-building-watchdog-will-cut-workers-legal-rights>
“This is a party in New South Wales that wrote the book on corruption in New 
South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> under 
Labor ... They have the gall to come into this place and throw this sort of 
muck around,” he said.

Labor has moved a notice of motion in the Senate to set up an inquiry by the 
Senate finance and public administration references committee to report by 4 
May – the day after the federal budget – about “commonwealth legislative 
provisions relating to oversight of associated entities of political parties, 
with particular reference to the adequacy of the funding and disclosure regime 
relating to annual returns; the powers of the Australian Electoral Commission 
with respect to supervision of the conduct of and reporting by associated 
entities of political parties; and … (that) Senator Sinodinos appear before the 
committee to answer questions”.

The NSW Electoral Commission insists the Liberal party is obliged to declare 
the donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/02/a-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals>
 it directed through the federal party at a state level also and it is 
withholding $4.38m from the NSW Liberal party – money the party needs to fight 
the imminent federal election – to focus the party’s mind on that question. And 
it is standing its ground regarding criticisms against the party and former 
party office holders,including Sinodinos, who has had his lawyers draft an 
angry letter to the commission. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/31/electoral-commission-stands-firm-despite-arthur-sinodinoss-threat-to-sue>

With all major published opinion polls showing the main parties neck and neck, 
or theLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> 
slightly ahead of the government, the final weeks of parliament are descending 
into bitter debate about the ABCC, the banking industry and the claims 
regarding electoral funding.

The parliamentary session began with acrimony on Monday when Conroy attacked 
Sir Peter Cosgrove for acceding to the prime minister’s request to prorogue 
parliament.

“What we saw is a blight on our democracy today,” he said. “We’ve seen a 
democratically elected decision overturned by the Queen’s representative ... 
We’ve seen today a governor general overturn the will of this chamber, a 
democratically elected chamber. That’s what we have seen, a tawdry political 
stunt and the governor general has demeaned his office. Never has the need for 
a republic been more evident than today.”

The government says there's no need for a federal corruption body. They would 
| John Madigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/the-government-says-theres-no-need-for-a-federal-corruption-body-they-would>
Turnbull said Conroy had disgraced himself.

“Well, not for the first time, Senator Conroy has disgraced himself and I look 
forward to the leader of the opposition publicly disassociating himself from 
those appalling remarks reflecting, as Senator Conroy did, on the integrity and 
the office of the governor general,” he told reporters on Monday.

Shorten later rebuked Conroy, saying in a written statement: “The governor 
general has one of the most important roles in our democracy and that should be 
respected by everyone. Senator Conroy should confine his remarks to the 
government.”
 