
Thought Australia fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/australia-fashion-week> was probably all 
about surfer chic, board shorts and bikinis? Well, where have you been? Since 
1995, AFW has been nurturing fashion talent in the form of Sass & Bide, Akira, 
Collette Dinnigan and Alice McCall and more, with future fashion superstars 
such as Dion Lee and Josh Goot getting floor time too. Taking place in Sydney 
each spring the event has seen more than its fair share of slightly odd PR 
stunts in the past – we're thinking Ksubi releasing rats on to the catwalk in 
2001 and a model draped in an enormous, writhing snake the same year – but with 
an increasingly talented array of designers, AFW is now poised to take a 
serious place in the fashion show calendar. Here are our top three designers to 
watch this season:
 A Karla Špetić design 
Who: Karla Špetić <http://www.karlaspetic.com/>

What: Unexpected, cartoony and playful, Špetić makes über-cool pieces with a 
fresh but feminine sensibility.

Tell me more: Croatian-born Špetić came to Sydney at the age of 10 and after 
graduating from the Sydney Fashion Design Studio, launched her eponymous label 
at Australia fashion week 2008. A genius at creating modern it-pieces that 
women really want to wear, Špetić merges a sense of nostalgia with sharp lines 
to create collections that are intrinsically cool and effortlessly laid-back. 
Previous pieces have included dungarees, relaxed suiting, lace dresses, 
floor-length tanks and silk shirting. Špetić also has a knack for poppy, 
interesting colour palettes (acid tangerine and bubblegum pink, anyone?) and 
often takes inspiration from the art world, collaborating with illustrators and 
artists to create unique prints: in autumn/winter she made use ofLichtenstein 
<http://honestlywtf.com/collections/karla-spetic-fall-2012/> comic strips; her 
most recent collection was inspired by the work ofWilliam Eggleston 
<http://www.oystermag.oysterworldwide.org/article/karla-spetic-aw12-lookbook?page=53>
. Špetic let it slip to the Guardian that her forthcoming spring/summer 2014 
show will draw on her roots with references to Croatian national costume. We 
can also expect embroidery, embellishment, beading and "an explosion of 
colours".
 Christopher Esber. Photograph: Christopher Esber 
Who: Christopher Esber  <http://www.christopheresber.com.au/>

What: Prodigious minimalism with a crisp, clinical feel. Esber loves clean 
lines and monochrome.

Tell me more: Esber is talented and, at 26, a bit of a wünderkind. This coming 
season will see his fifth collection. Another Fashion Design Studio grad, Esber 
also made his Australian fashion week debut in 2008 and last September he hit 
the runways at NYFW for the first time in a joint on-schedule show with fellow 
rising star Kym Ellery (who got rave reviews 
<http://www.vogue.com.au/fashion/news/ellery+and+christopher+esber+take+on+new+york,19725>
). Esber's aesthetic is that elusive thing – cool, contemporary femininity. 
There's a minimal, precise feel to his clean lines and deceptively simple 
tailoring, but with some thoughtful surprises thrown in. Esber's adroitness for 
all things technical comes out in experimental shapes, raw edges and dresses 
that are unexpectedly slit at the back. Known for his stark colour palette 
(strictly monochrome with a splash of blue and/or grey), Esber likes to really 
let it rip in with texture, working with textile weaving specialists to create 
futuristic fabric mash-ups (see the invisible mesh panelling on his A/W13 
collection) or mixing bonded tweed and reversible knits or silk with velvet 
devoré to thrilling effect.
 Michael Lo Sordo. Photograph: Michael Lo Sordo 
Who: Michael Lo Sordo <http://www.michaellosordo.com/>

What: Future-classic tailoring with a great grasp of construction that's just 
a little bit sexy.

Tell me more: He originally trained as a chef, but Sydney native Lo Sordo 
ditched cooking for fashion after eight months and has been showing his 
sophisticated brand of pared-down luxe at Australia fashion week for the past 
five years. In 2012 he won the Qantas Spirit of Youth award, and a year-long 
mentorship withZimmerman <http://us.zimmermannwear.com/>. Lo Sordo is good at 
the thing we like to call grown-up mysterious-sexy, mixing plush textiles in 
rich colours and creating innovative digital prints. Construction is key to 
this confident designer, who favours precision pleats and panelled skirts, 
tailored suits with a masculine cut and streamlined silhouettes that hug the 
female form. Most recently for his autumn/winter 2013 collection, Lo Sordo got 
creative in the fabric department by inventing a unique print effect by 
marble-dyeing silk and wool. For his forthcoming collection, we are instructed 
to look out for a collection "inspired by traditional tailoring and nuns". 
Excited.

• Australia fashion week <http://australia.mbfashionweek.com/> runs from 8-12 
April 2013
 