
A couple of months ago I delivered a sermon at the School of Life on the 
importance of punctuality. Boasting that I was never late for anything, taking 
my cue from Lynne Truss on punctuation, I called for a zero-tolerance approach 
to lateness. While I was preparing my sermon I realised that there was 
something else I would quite like to rant about, namely our obsession with 
saying "Sorry" and the way that, in our country, apologising has become not a 
prelude to making amends but a substitute for improvement and atonement. 
Airlines are always ready to apologise for inconvenience caused by delays or 
lost baggage but are notoriously tardy about coming up with compensation for 
that inconvenience. But I stuck with punctuality as the matter needing more 
urgent address.

On Thursday of last week I was due to speak at the Bristol Festival of Ideas 
at 7pm. Since Bristol is near Cheltenham where I grew up, I duly caught the 
10.15 train from London (with seconds to spare) and spent the afternoon with my 
parents. My dad is 89 and my mum is 84. It was a grey, drizzly day, and time 
weighed heavily as we sat in the living-room, hearing rain patter on the 
conservatory roof. I walked to the train station, and caught the 17.25 which 
would get me into Bristol at 18.13, so that I could then walk to the Watershed 
Media Centre and get there half an hour early (far earlier than was necessary 
in my view) at 6.30pm, as requested. Quite a pleasant stroll from the station.

As I crossed the footbridge to the Harbourside Complex, some people recognised 
me: members of the audience for my event who said that tickets had been 
refunded and everyone was leaving. Why, I wanted to know, fearing that demand 
for tickets had been so low that the event had been cancelled. No, it was 
because the event had started at six and I was nowhere to be seen. Ah, very 
funny. They had heard about my obsession with punctuality and had decided on 
this spontaneous practical joke as a way of greeting the overly uptight guest. 
No, they insisted, they weren't joking. I was late. So late that, after much 
agonising and uncertainty, the event had been abandoned and refunds arranged.

I went into the auditorium and found Andrew Kelly, the festival organiser, and 
Sara Davies who was to have been my interlocutor. Vacated chairs faced the 
empty stage accusingly. It was true. The event had been meant to start at 6pm. 
Andrew, obviously, had emailed the wrong time to me but no, he had his 
BlackBerry there to prove that he had sent the right time (and followed it up 
with a reminder a few days later).

There was nothing to be done. A small group of discontented but surprisingly 
courteous people were still milling about. I went out and apologised.

In my sermon on punctuality I had berated the unpunctual for the way that they 
left the good, time-keeping people of the world to sweat and stress on their 
behalf. God knows the state Andrew and Sara had been in, as the minutes ticked 
up to and past six o'clock and the crowd - for there had been quite a crowd, it 
turned out - grew restless and irritable. What could they do? They had no way 
of contacting me. Several weeks earlier Andrew had asked for my mobile number 
and I had replied, truthfully: "I don't have a mobile, but don't worry, I'm 
never late for anything."

They were as nice as could be expected in the face of wasted money, pissed-off 
punters, and a steadily mounting bill at the bar as free drinks were offered to 
calm people down as they waited for refunds. Tristram Hunt arrived, promptly, 
for his event, scheduled for 7.30pm. I walked to the station and waited for a 
train to London. Somehow I got on it rather than throwing myself under it.

When I arrived home I saw that I had written in my diary "Bristol 5.30 for 6." 
How had this happened? I had recently completed a promotional tour of America 
with a constantly changing schedule and massive potential for cock-ups, delays, 
missed connections and appointments - and was never late for anything. Whereas 
here, in the West Country, a part of the world I know as well as anywhere on 
earth ...

This incident was so out of character, so totally inexplicable, that I spent 
much of a sleepless night trying to find someone or something to blame: Andrew 
Kelly, the trains (punctual to the minute), my parents (who had instilled in me 
the necessity for being reliable and punctual), my wife ... But no. It was no 
one's fault but mine.

It was entirely my fault - but it was not my fault. Somehow the blame must lie 
with the world, with this tragi-farce called life, not with me. How did it 
happen? It is simply inexplicable. Like Robbie Turner in Ian McEwan's 
Atonement, I am familiar with Freud's idea of how, having accidentally failed 
to post a letter three times, we should begin to suspect that maybe we don't 
want to post that letter after all.

That little theory could have no relevance here unless, at some level, instead 
of the interest and appreciation of an audience I want their anger and contempt 
- which is nonsense. In the past I have been unassailable, judging sinners from 
the lofty, untainted perch of the never-late, exploding in fury when tennis 
partners have been five minutes late on court. Must I now be more understanding 
and tolerant of occasional lateness? I don't know what to think. I only know 
how I feel: like a broken man, like someone who no longer has a moral leg to 
stand on. It is horrible, and I am so sorry.

â€¢ Geoff Dyer will be appearing (on time) at the Hay festival on 29 May. 
www.hayfestival.com <http://www.hayfestival.com>
 