
It's the biggest shake-up of pensions for a generation, and will result in 
millions of workers being pushed into saving money for their retirement for the 
first time, but many are still in the dark about auto-enrolment. Here we 
outline the how, when and where …

Why is it coming in?

We are all living longer and are likely to spend more than 20 years in 
retirement, but we're not saving enough, the government says. Automatic 
enrolment is seen as the best way to overcome people's "savings inertia". As 
the Department for Work andPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>
 (DWP) puts it: "Rather than taking action to save, an employee has to take 
action not to save."

Who is affected?

Everyone in work aged between 22 and state pension age who earns more than 
£8,105 a year (this amount will be reviewed each year), and who isn't already 
in a workplace pension scheme.

What about other people?

Workers who aren't in that group can opt in, if they wish to. If you're at 
least 16 but under 75, earn more than £5,564 a year and ask to be enrolled your 
company will have to put you in the scheme and pay a minimum contribution, too.

Companies will also need to enrol any workers aged 16-74 who earn less than 
that, and who ask to be put into the scheme, but they don't need to pay 
contributions for them.

How much gets paid in?

The total minimum contribution will start at 2% of a worker's gross earnings 
(of which at least 1% must be paid in by the employer). By October 2018 this 
minimum will have risen to 8%, made up of at least 3% from the company, up to 
4% from the employee, and 1% tax relief.

These percentages don't apply to all of an individual's salary, but only to 
what they earn over a minimum (currently £5,564) up to a maximum limit 
(currently £42,475).

Does everyone join on 1 October?

No. All existing employers, including in some cases private individuals who 
employ a nanny or gardener, must have enrolled their employees by April 2017, 
but the roll-out is being staggered.

The scheme begins on 1 October for the biggest companies: those with more than 
120,000 staff. They are followed by those employing between 50,000 and 119,999, 
who will go on 1 November. Afull timetable of dates is on the Pensions 
Regulator's website 
<http://www.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/employers/staging-date-timeline.aspx>.

What if I don't want to join?

Workers are free to opt out if they want to. The government hopes that forcing 
employers to contribute plus adding tax relief will encourage people to stay, 
but it has estimated that several million people may opt out. Some will take 
the view that they can't afford it, while others will want to make their own 
arrangements.

What if my employer tries to encourage me to opt out?

Employers are prohibited from offering incentives or perks to encourage staff 
to opt out. This applies to both existing workers and new recruits and means 
that, for example, making a job offer or higher salary conditional on not 
joining the employer's auto-enrolment scheme, is not allowed.

What happens if a company refuses to enrol its workers into a scheme?

Employers who don't comply with the rules face a range of potential sanctions. 
Those who ignore the Pensions Regulator's first request could get a fixed 
penalty of £400. Employers who "willfully and persistently" fail to comply face 
tougher penalties: £50 a day fines for those with fewer than five staff, rising 
to £500 a day for those with five to 49 staff, and an impressive £10,000 a day 
for those with more than 500 workers.

Should I stay in, or opt out?

One problem for some people could be the way auto-enrolment interacts with 
means-tested benefits. Almost a quarter of those automatically enrolled will be 
in their 20s, and one pensions expert told us that if he was 25, he probably 
wouldn't be too concerned, because the benefits landscape will probably be very 
different by the time he retires. But, he said, if he was a 62-year-old being 
pushed into a pension scheme, "I would almost certainly opt out."

How do I opt out?

You will have one month to complete an "opt out notice" and submit it to your 
employer. Any contributions already made will be returned.

Where can I get more information?

In our auto-enrolment section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/auto-enrolment-pensions>. In a downloadable 
booklet from the DWP (pdf) 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/docs/auto-key-facts-enrolment-booklet.pdf>. Also Nest - 
the organisation running the scheme that many employers will enrol workers into 
- hasinformation for employees 
<http://www.nestpensions.org.uk/schemeweb/NestWeb/public/NESTforSavers/contents/join-the-conversation.html>
. It also has acalculator 
<http://www.nestpensions.org.uk/schemeweb/NestPublicWeb/faces/public/BE/pages/usingPublicPensionCalc.xhtml>
 you can use to see how much you might get back (you will need to know how much 
your employer is contributing to use it).
 