
The winner

The Avengers <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144027/avengers> was 2012's 
headline story. Its tag team of Marvel personnel stole an early lead with its 
April/May release andfinished with room to spare on $1.51bn worldwide 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2012&p=.htm>: the 
third highest grossing film of all time.Joss Whedon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/joss-whedon>'s preppy wit was lighter on its 
feet than Christopher Nolan's Kevlar-and-zeitgeist-burdenedDark Knight trilogy 
closer <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141046/dark-knight-rises>, which 
also joined the $1bn club. The first release for Marvel under Disney ownership, 
The Avengers is an ominous sign of the franchise tonnage the House of Mouse 
will wield for years, possibly decades, to come, with Pixar already under its 
belt, andLucasfilm acquired for $4bn plus small change this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/30/disney-lucasfilm-star-wars-deal>.

The franchise revolving door

The movie-brand landscape undoubtedly had a transitional year. With Harry 
Potter, Twilight and Batman all coming to a close (or at least taking a 
breather), and others making play of their own senescence (Skyfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144416/skyfall>, Men in Black 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146340/men-in-black-iii>), this year was 
notable for the number of fresh-faced startups:The Hunger Games 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142857/hunger-games>, the new Spider-Man 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140156/spider-man-reboot> and Bourne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147726/bourne-legacy>, Snow White 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147374/snow-white-and-the-hunstman>, 
Prometheus <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145506/prometheus>, The Hobbit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125622/hobbit> and Jack Reacher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/99730/jack-reacher>.

Perhaps the unfamiliarity factor – which always works against films outside 
the US – is what explainsrelatively subdued overseas grosses for the Hollywood 
studios <http://boxofficemojo.com/intl/weekend/yearly/> this year (though final 
figures aren't yet available). No one passed the $3bn mark (arecord achievement 
for Paramount in 2011 
<http://article.wn.com/view/2011/12/23/Paramount_leads_2011_studio_int_l_share_with_record_3bn/>
), and in fact only one studio – Sony – managed over $2bn from international 
territories (though The Hobbit, just heading out on its journey, might have 
some bearing on that for Warner). Sony looks like it will wind up clear winner 
among the majors this year, with three films in the global top 10 – MIB3 
($624m), The Amazing Spider-Man ($752.2m) and Skyfall ($923.8m) – and total 
grosses over $3.5bn, close to $600m ahead of its nearest competitor.

Special mention should go to mini-major Lionsgate <http://www.lionsgate.com/>, 
which with The Hunger Games, thefinal Twilight 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149066/twilight-saga> and The Expendables 
2 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148845/expendables-2> all performing 
well in 2012, is looking less "mini" with every passing year.

Bring the grit

Not only was Skyfall – despite its mixed message about our world status – a 
shot in the arm for Britain in its Olympic year, it was, along with The Dark 
Knight Rises and The Hunger Games, part of a trend of big-hitters with as much 
of an interest in character as in visual spectacle, and downbeat shading in the 
range from realistic to dystopic. Not everyone was a fan theNew Serious, as the 
Guardian dubbed it earlier this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/01/skyfall-james-bond-new-serious>, 
but perhaps it's the natural antithesis to the glut of CGI animation fantasias 
that have dominated the global charts since the turn of the millennium, and are 
still skipping merrily along:Ice Age 4 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148325/ice-age-4>, Madagascar 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147830/madagascar-3>, Brave 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146821/brave> and The Lorax 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146331/dr.-seuss-the-lorax> all feature 
in this year's top 20.

An expected journey

It became impossible to ignore Hollywood's changing priorities this year, with 
more and more blockbusters opening first on foreign soil and aiming to set up 
camp thereabouts –led by The Avengers, which opened in over 50 territories 
before the US release 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/may/03/avengers-blockbusters-america-first>
. Only two of this year's top 20 (Hunger Games, The Lorax – both strongly 
American-rooted) took more domestically than abroad. Ice Age 4,Wrath of the 
Titans <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146522/wrath-of-the-titans> and 
Skyfall all followed in the wake ofTintin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142790/adventures-of-tintin> at the end 
of 2011, and did more than 70% of business overseas. As well as deep-rooted 
franchises and animation, fantasy and sci-fi tend to do well globally, allowing 
the studios to slow-alchemise widely derided "bombs", such asBattleship 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146760/battleship> and John Carter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142787/john-carter>, into borderline 
successes: the year's 19th and 23rd biggest hits.

The rest of the world

Released at the tail end of 2011 in France, Olivier Nakache and Éric 
Toledano's banlieue-to-ballroom comedy of mannersThe Intouchables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149158/untouchable> was the one true 
non-English language breakout of the year. Under the auspices of the 
Weinsteins, it did a decent $10m in the US, putting it25th on their 
highest-grossing foreign language film chart 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/genres/chart/?id=foreign.htm>, but a storming take in 
Germany ($79m), plus strong showings in Spain, Italy, Japan, South Korea and 
beyond, took it to $419m worldwide: 148th on the all-time box-office chart, the 
highest for a film not in English, if you discountThe Passion of the Christ 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96587/passion.of.the.christ>. Audiences 
obviously didn't feel it that it dealt in the"Uncle Tom racism" it was accused 
of by some US critics 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/shadowandact/2ccad800-8ec8-11e1-bcc4-123138165f92>; 
the comedy might have been broad at times, but taking a social situation 
universal across the developed world – integration of immigrants – definitely 
qualifies as an I-can't-believe-nobody-thought-of-this-before stroke of 
inspiration.

The Artist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist> made the best 
of its five-Oscar haul to tapdance its way to $133.4m across the world. 
English-language but not Hollywood-originated,The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145794/best-exotic-marigold-hotel> – 
tapping into post-Slumdog interest in India andthe grey dollar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/may/27/baby-boomers-film> that has become 
a force with in developed-world markets – andThe Pirates! In an Adventure with 
Scientists <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142794> were $100m+ Brit hits. 
But the global box office proved not to be a case of shooting clunge in a 
barrel forThe Inbetweeners Movie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142846/inbetweeners-movie>, despite its 
mighty British take in 2011: it scraped an indifferent $17m outside of the 
country.

Most of 2012's big non-English-language hits were similar, locals-only 
affairs: lifeguard dramaUmizaru 4 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0FAvpOGzI24> 
and Roman fish-out-of-water comedyThermae Romae 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/may/29/thermae-romae-japan-cinema>
 in Japan; heist caper The Thieves andperiod drama Masquerade 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/nov/07/south-korean-cinema-politics-masquerade>
 in South Korea; Turkey's would-be Kingdom of Heaven bastion-stormerFetih 1543 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/mar/28/turkey-film-constantinople-fetih-1453>
. Of that crop, the slick and worldly South Korean films have the biggest 
potential to travel in 2013.

The $8bn-dollar question

In a recent report, Ernst & Young pinpointed the date of the apocalypse: that 
Chinese box office would pass US box office by 2020 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/29/china-biggest-film-market-2020>. 
Last year's US figure was $10.2bn; China's $2.02bn, so it's currently got an 
$8bn+ disparity to make up. That means, provided the US market remains stable, 
China will need consistent 50% growth rates for the next seven years – which 
sounds like quite a feat to me (it managed about 35% last year), even with the 
current programme of cinema construction. What seems more plausible is that 
China overtook Japan as the biggest cinema market outside the US this year. It 
was only $240m behind in 2011 – and was outperforming its neighbour in the 
first months of 2012; by mid-November, the Chinese annual total was already at 
$2.13bn, up on the same time last year.

The bigger question is whether the growing influence of Chinese filmgoers is 
going to help their commercial film-makers to rally globally. Not even the 
sight of Christian Bale covered head-to-toe in flour could save Zhang Yimou's
Flowers of War <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148531/flowers-of-war>, 
earmarked as a crossover;it did resoundingly dismal business around the world 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/aug/02/flowers-of-war-chinese-film>, yet 
another example of the stodgy textbook period drama the country seems unable to 
wean itself off. Compare that to $55.8m and $36.5m worldwide figures for 
Bollywood's top two offerings,Rowdy Rathore 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=intl&country=UK&id=rowdyrathore.htm> and 
Ek Tha Tiger 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=intl&country=UK&id=ekthatiger.htm> – 
solidly reliable business from an industry getting far less attention at the 
moment.

• What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column 
next year? Let us know in the comments below.
 