
Avram Grant says he could understand if Robert Green declines the opportunity 
to play for England again. The Israeli takes hisWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> side to Wigan Athletic 
this afternoon knowing they have to win to retain any realistic hope of 
avoiding relegation with Green, who has been one of his better players this 
season, reportedly thinking about retirement from international football.

Grant said: "Yes, I understand [this]. Rob is a very intelligent person with 
good character. Not many goalkeepers can do what he did after the World Cup and 
start the season not good [with] everybody criticising him, and now nobody is 
talking about his quality. Since then [the World Cup] he didn't get any chance 
[with England], so I understand why he is thinking of this if [he is]. My 
advice is for him to keep fighting for his place."

Ben Foster, the Birmingham City goalkeeper, announced last week that he was 
taking a break from international football. He joins Blackburn Rovers' Paul 
Robinson and Aston Villa's Luke Young, who have retired permanently from 
England in recent seasons.

Is Grant surprised that more and more players appear to be opting out from 
England? "I am very surprised because you can be angry about the coach, you can 
be angry about the kit-man, you can be angry about anyone [but] when you are 
playing for your country it is more important than anything," Grant said. "You 
need to carry on with this. I understand when a player like Rob Green says to 
himself: 'They don't use me, why do I need to be there?' But [regarding] other 
players, I do not understand."

While insisting he is not seeking excuses, Grant pointed to a number of 
factors to explain why his side have barely been out of the bottom three all 
season. "Since January we had a better squad than last year but we also need to 
remember that there is no Hull City, with respect, and no Burnley, and no team 
that was under administration [Portsmouth], so the league is more strong than 
last year – the teams at the bottom [last season] were very, very weak," he 
said. "You saw Hull, you saw Burnley and Portsmouth [all of which were 
relegated], you see where they are now: they are not even fighting to come back 
and they were in the Premier League.

"Unfortunately, we lost almost all of the midfield for the last month [Scott 
Parker, Mark Noble, Gary O'Neil] apart from Thomas [Hitzlsperger]. Last year 
Manchester United lost Wayne Rooney and they lost [in] the Champions League. We 
had injury after injury [and] there were a lot of financial problems [West Ham 
are around £80m in debt]."
 