
Axl Rose, perhaps for the first time in his career, is taking care not to 
cause offence. Ahead of the first of his showsfilling in as frontman of AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/acdc-says-guns-n-roses-singer-axl-rose-to-join-band-for-rest-of-tour>
, the Guns N’ Roses singer has said he means “no disrespect” to Brian Johnson, 
the man he is replacing, and that he is such a fan of Johnson’s singing that he 
“wants to do it justice”.

Speaking to BBC 6Music’s Matt Everitt, Rose said it had been his idea to 
approach AC/DCafter it was announced that Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/acdc-singer-brian-johnson-to-stop-touring-to-save-his-hearing>
 had been advised to stop performing to protect his hearing, and that a 
stand-in singer would be used to complete the Rock or Bust tour.

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
“I called the day I read about it in the news, that there was a situation 
going on with Brian’s hearing,” Rose said. “I called a guy who’s their 
production manager right now … So if I could help, and if I was able to do it, 
and they were interested, I’d love to help. And that’s how it started. I wasn’t 
looking at it like, ‘I’m singing forAC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>.’ I was looking at it like, ‘Y’know, 
if I can, and if they think I’m able to do it.”

Rose added that the set was a challenge for him. “A lot of the Back in Black 
stuff is really challenging. I’m not here in any way out of any disrespect to 
Brian. I can’t take anything away from his singing at all,” he said. “He’s a 
great singer and it’s really challenging to sing it. I’m just trying to do it 
justice for the fans.”

AC/DC’s initial statement on Johnson’s departure was brusque and provoked 
speculation among fans about what exactly had happened. It read, in its 
entirety: “AC/DC are forced to reschedule the 10 upcoming dates on the U. leg 
of their Rock or Bust World Tour. AC/DC’s lead singer, Brian Johnson, has been 
advised by doctors to stop touring immediately or risk total hearing loss. 
Tomorrow’s show in Atlanta through Madison Square Garden in New York, NY in 
early April will be made up later in the year, likely with a guest vocalist. 
More information regarding these rescheduled shows to come. Current ticket 
holders can hold on to their tickets for the rescheduled dates or receive a 
refund at point of purchase.”

AC/DC says Guns N' Roses singer Axl Rose to join band for rest of tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/17/acdc-says-guns-n-roses-singer-axl-rose-to-join-band-for-rest-of-tour>
Though both AC/DC and Johnson have since released fuller statements, guitarist 
Angus Young – who also spoke to Everitt – addressed the issue again. “In his 
heart he wanted to finish [the tour] but because of that hearing factor he had 
to make the decision,” he said. “It’s a hard thing to do, and he’d had the 
problem since we kicked off touring. It was his call. It was a shock to us too. 
The last thing you want to do is walk away from something, but you don’t want 
someone in a tragic situation; being deaf, or any other affliction.”

Rose is expected to still be in the throne originally made for Dave Grohl  
<http://images1.laweekly.com/imager/u/original/6837741/coachella2016weekend1_gunsnroses_mathewtucciarone.jpg>
when he takes to the stage in Lisbon with AC/DC on Saturday night, having 
recently broken a metatarsal. TheRock or Bust tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/06/ac-dc-review-wembley-stadium-essence-of-rock-and-roll>
 returns to the UK for two shows, in London on 4 June and Manchester on 9 June.
 