
CHOCK-A-BLOCK

1 P. L. Stone (7 Appleby Court, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire HG5 9LU): 
Heaving pack to secure one against the head (chock a block; ref. Rugby Union).

2 R. Perry (18 Sough Hall Crescent, Thorpe Hesley, Rotherham S61 2QN): Packed 
house transported back in time (ho. + anag. in clock).

3 V. Dixon (Department of Hispanic Studies, Arts Building, Trinity College, 
Dublin 2, Ireland): Bursting ham muscle when breaking record (hock ab in clock).

VHC

D. Appleton: Start of coup: pawn has bishop in a jam with no room to manoeuvre 
(c + hock + b in a lock).

M. Barley: Use this term for network in grip of vehicle jam? (hoc k in cab + 
lock, & lit.).

C. J. Butler: Jammed together, adapted Bach OK in hit (anag. in clock).

P. T. Crow: White wine in old measure (about 3 pints), with seal, quite full 
(hock in cab2 + lock).

C. M. Edmunds: In congested position, 3rd rank pawn advanced with check (c 
hock a + block).

Dr I. S. Fletcher: Centre’s first to stop back running forward of scrum (c ho 
+ anag. + lock; see scrum).

G. I. L. Grafton: Roughly grabbing pawn, black king seizes place, leaving us 
stuffed (hock in ca. + loc(us) in B K).

R. J. Heald: Puss stuffed with ham and tail of sea bass is full to bursting 
(hock a B in clock; puss2).

M. Lunan: Very full punch contains wine and a dash of bitters (hock a b in 
clock).

W. F. Main: In time a white wine with a drop of brandy will make you flush 
(hock a b in clock).

D. F. Manley: Champion Scot, leader emerging OK with C. and Lab. spinning 
stuffed? Ch. + (J)ock + anag; ref. N. Sturgeon, TV election debate).

P. McKenna: Cape wine with a nose of burnt jam that’s full (C hock + b lock).

C. J. Morse: Full measure of drink they had of old including wine with meal as 
a perk (hock in cab + lock2).

J. Pearce: Packed cold wine and a hamper (C hock + a block).

P. Taylor: Crowded bar supports service offering guidance about wine (hock in 
CAB + lock).

R. C. Teuton: You could get quite full stuffing face with this interminable 
Bake Off (hoc + anag. less e in clock; ref. TV series).

A. J. Wardrop: Scotch after cold wine and a nip of armagnac makes one awfy fou 
(C hock + a block).

R. J. Whale: Generously-filled cold ham sandwiches to serve mixed party group? 
(C + ka bloc in hock).

A. Whittaker: Wine in a two-litre measure put on bar once is full (hock in cab 
+ lock; see SOED for measure).

Dr E. Young: Packed all sorts of jam sandwiches (a’ in chock, block).

HC

P. B. Alldred, D. K. Arnott, D. & N. Aspland, M. Barker, C. J. Brougham, J. M. 
Brown, Mrs S. Brown, Dr J. Burscough, D. A. Campbell, Ms U. Carter, B. 
Cheesman, C. A. Clarke, S. L. Claughton, Dr P. Coles, Mrs L. Davis, E. Dawid, 
W. Drever, J. Fairclough, J. Grimes, D. V. Harry, M. Hodgkin, Mrs D. B. 
Jenkinson, G. Johnstone, J. C. Leyland, M. A. Macdonald-Cooper, P. W. Marlow, 
K. Milan, C. G. Millin, C. Ogilvie, A. Plumb, J. D. Plummer, D. Protheroe, P. 
Sant, Dr S. J. Shaw, D. P. Shenkin, N. G. Shippobotham, I. Simpson, P. A. 
Stephenson, L. Toole, J. R. Tozer, W. Ransome, S. J. J. Tiffin, A. J. Varney, 
Ms S. Wallace, L. Ward (USA), Ms B. J. Widger, K. J. Williams, J. S. Witte, A. 
J. Young.

Comments

183 entries, no mistakes. Favourite clue, of 21 receiving at least one vote: 
‘Precocious chit married first male to appear’ (MADAM), with 12 votes, followed 
by ‘Not in French, but in English or Spanish’ (HORS), with 9 votes. No special 
problems, except perhaps my reference (in the clue to GENET) to Gene Tierney, 
in her day a major Hollywood star who appeared in a number of films with Dana 
Andrews, another leading (male) star of the period. I have a soft spot for the 
glory days of the cinema (movies, if you insist) on both sides of the Atlantic, 
and have little time for most of the noisy, ultra-violent, CGI-dominated films 
of today. So stars of the silver screen from yesteryear will occasionally 
feature again in my clues.

A tricky clue word this month, though luckily one with plenty of definition 
possibilities. (That in Chambers is woefully ambiguous, but I think we all know 
that ‘quite’ here means ‘completely’, not ‘rather’.) Rugby forwards with wine 
in a taxi, a not totally convincing image, occurred predictably often, so I was 
on the look-out for more original treatments. The three prize-winners were 
commendably concise. I hesitated briefly over Mr Stone’s ‘against’ meaning ‘in 
contact with’ in the cryptic reading, CHOCK-A-BLOCK being a down word in the 
grid, before deciding that such contact could be from any direction. Another 
popular approach involved references to chess (with ‘pawn’, ‘bishop’ and ‘king’ 
all lurking there). I play chess a bit, not very well (being too impatient for 
the long game), so such treatments are fine with me, as long as they’re not too 
complex. I did have reservations over ‘lock’ being defined simply as ‘meal’. 
Chambers labels it an obsolete Scottish legal term at lock2 as ‘the perquisite 
of a mill-servant’, a strange relic from the past. CJM’s clue just squeaked 
into the list above by virtue of its reference to old-fashioned usage and 
mention of ‘a perk’.

Allan Scott has kindly written to tell me that the Everyman Crossword No. 
3,573, in March, was his last, after 21 years – a splendid innings – and that 
Colin Gumbrell has now taken over from him. He also draws my attention to a 
comment made by Ximenes in his slip No. 63 (in 1947) on the subject of what are 
now generally referred to as composite anagrams: ‘… an anagram involving added 
letters offers such wide scope, and opens up such terrifyingly tortuous 
possibilities, that it should not really rank beside first class clues which do 
not go outside the word itself …’. Given that he subsequently awarded prizes to 
comp. anags. quite often, I assume he modified his stance a bit as the years 
went by.
 