
AVANT-GARDISTE


1 R. J. Heald (10 Hollingthorpe Avenue, Hall Green, Wakefield, West Yorkshire 
WF4 3NN): Who might make devastating crack about RA retrospective, styling 
vintage art ‘sad’? (RA (rev.) in anag.; anag.; & lit.).

2 J. C. Leyland (23 Lane Ings, Marsden, Huddersfield HD7 6JP): I’d savage 
what’s central to conventional art with abandon (nt in anag., & lit.).

3 T. C. Borland (2 The Knowle, London Road, Cuckfield, West Sussex RH17 5ET): 
One that could deliver shock to e.g. staid art circles (van in anag., & lit.).

VHC

T. Anderson: Following a wandering star I’d get wagon coated, being a pioneer 
(a + van in anag.; ref. song ‘Wand’rin’ Star’ in musical ‘Paint Your Wagon’).

D. Appleton: Somehow vintage ‘trad’ art’s not right for this person (anag. 
less rt, & lit.).

M. Barley: A very innovative artist, e.g. an originator of Dada (a v + anag. 
incl. D, & lit.).

J. G. Booth: One producing new-fangled art ideas, including Van Goch 
originally – that’s about it in brief (Van ’t G in anag., & lit.).

C. A. Clarke: I could produce deviant art as Goebbels, primarily, held (G in 
anag., & lit.).

C. Daffern: A wild extravagant id’s not unknown in a fashionista (anag. less 
x).

V. Dixon (Ireland): Initiator of trend, raved against if revolutionary (anag. 
incl. t, & lit.).

Dr I. S. Fletcher: One’s very daring with taste for change (a + v + anag., & 
lit.).

M. Hodgkin: Early adopter tried satnav, losing way around outskirts of Geneva 
(G, a in anag.).

E. C. Lance: One such as Paul Gauguin, mouldering in a distant grave (anag.).

D. F. Manley: Awfully staid art a given? I must break away from that (anag. 
less I, & lit.).

T. J. Moorey: One could have slammed vintage art as beginning to date! (anag. 
incl. d, & lit.).

C. J. Morse: I get excited with V and A’s art: he prefers Saatchi’s (anag.).

S. Randall: One revolutionizing sad vintage art? (anag. & lit.).

P. A. Stephenson: One may construe vintage art ‘sad’ (anag. & lit.).

P. Taylor: She’s daringly innovative playing a vintage strad (anag.).

R. C. Teuton: Term for improv artist with agenda to stray from the norm (anag. 
incl. v, & lit.).

J. R. Tozer: ‘Gent as art diva’ could be one description of Grayson Perry? 
(anag.).

A. J. Wardrop: Devastatimg RA, potentially? (anag. & lit.).

R. J. Whale: I might be exhibited by daring Tate: V & A’s wavering (anag. 
incl. V, A’s, & lit.).

G. H.Willett: This trendy lady head of university may discover graduates very 
anti being reformed (anag. incl. v less u; ref. Louise Richardson, new Oxford 
VC).

Dr E. Young: Form of Verdi’s new tag at opening of Aida (anag. incl. n, A, & 
lit.; ref. world premiere in Cairo).

HC

P. B. Alldred, D. & N. Aspland, C. J. Brougham, Mrs S. Brown, C. J. Butler, P. 
Cargill, D. Carter, M. Coates, N. Connaughton, W. Drever, C. M. Edmunds, G. I. 
L. Grafton, J. Grimes, Dr C. P. Hales, P. Halse, A. H. Harker, D. V. Harry, R. 
Hesketh, J. R. H. Jones, M. A. Macdonald-Cooper, W. F. Main, P. W. Marlow, P. 
McKenna, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, C. Ogilvie, D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA), G. 
S. Parsons, D. Pattenden, M. L. Perkins, T. Rudd, A. Scott, Dr S. J. Shaw, D. 
P. Shenkin, Dr G. Simpson, P. L. Stone, S. J. J. Tiffin, D. H. Tompsett, J. & 
R. Vincent, L. Ward (USA), M. H. E. Watson, G. Wiley, R. Zara.

Comments

188 entries, no noticeable mistakes. Favourite clue (of 17 nominated at least 
once) was – a bit surprisingly to me – ‘One among contemporaries of Auden, W. 
H.? They’re exhausting’ for SPENDERS, well ahead of ‘Example of the blues is 
devastating to the ear’ (SAXE), and four others in equal third place (those for 
DELTAS, HUSTLER, PIN-UP and THAUMATURGIST). The clue word was predictably 
popular, with a nice set of letters and good opportunities for ‘& lit.’ clues, 
which many seized on. I haven’t enjoyed the judging process so much for a long 
time. Special mention must be made of Mr Heald’s outstanding first prizewinner. 
Double cryptic indicators must be handled with care as they tend to result in 
longer-than average clues and can be rather easy to solve. Neither of these 
criticisms can be applied to RJH’s clue. I had to read it a couple of times to 
see how it works, but when the penny dropped I was at once struck by its 
brilliant wording and construction. A real gem.

A few otherwise sound clues – and there was a marked lack of unsoundness this 
month – were weakened by too vague a definition of AVANT-GARDISTE. And while a 
person of this description could well be a woman, I suspect that some of you 
thought that it always refers to one, presumably on the basis of that final -e 
and because Chambers also gives the Anglicized AVANT-GARDIST spelling. The 
French word, with final -e, is of course non-gender-specific.

John Tozer has reminded me that 24 June (yesterday as I key this) was the 70th 
anniversary of Ximenes No. 1. Do keep an eye on John’s wonderful website 
www.andlit.org, which he is constantly adding to in order to facilitate ever 
more interesting searches in the X/AZ archive. This now, John tells me, 
contains 22,319 clues from 1,013 competitions, contributed by about 2,500 
competitors, with records for a further 3,000 or so who only received HCs.

My wife and I are much looking forward to meeting many of you at the lunch on 
18 July to mark Azed No. 2,250 at Wolfson College, Oxford, followed by a tea 
party at our home a stone’s throw away. It’s not too late to sign up for these: 
contact Will Drever for details, enclosing sae, at Azed 2,250, Shekinah, 60 
Beaks Hill Road, Kings Norton, Birmingham B38 8BY.
 