
AZED CROSSWORD 2191


PLUG

1 R. J. Heald (West Yorkshire): Quid tucked inside jowl? (L in pug2, & lit.; 
see jowl2).

2 Dr I. S. Fletcher (Gloucestershire): End in trap with pull or hook, perhaps (
p + lug; ref. golf; hook = punch).

3 C. J. Morse (London(: This I might change to get lights up (comp. anag. & 
lit.).

VHC

D. & N. Aspland: Amalgam centrally fixed in canine? (l in pug, & lit.; tooth 
filling).

M. Barley: Party languishes, unpopular at the polls, with Clegg ultimately a 
spent force (first letters + g).

D. Carter: Hack a PC, deleting account and introducing a worm (a PC less a/c + 
lug),

C. A. Clarke: Stop pack being form of tobacco promotion (4 meanings).

J. Grimes: Centrepiece of amalgam in canine? (l in pug, & lit.).

D. V. Harry: This horse would make ploughers frustrated (comp. anag. & lit.).

R. Hesketh: Good word for punch coming from left landed by boxer – a piece of 
cake for many a champ (3 meanings, & l in pug).

J. Fairclough: Els and I gulp – tricky sand lie, this (comp. anag. & lit.; 
ref. golf).

J. C. Leyland: Gas has gone up about 50 quid? (L in gup (rev.)).

D. F. Manley: This up for swill down? (gulp (rev.) & lit.).

C. G. Millin: A piece of publicity put before the listener (p + lug, & lit.).

T. J. Moorey: Term for material filling canine? (l in pug, & lit.).

D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA): Casually shoot at a swift or large swallow ascending? (
gulp (rev.)).

Dr S. J. Shaw: Piece of publicity and term for something packing lumen (lu in 
p, g, & lit.).

P. A. Stephenson: Old horse retiring from the plough? (plough less o, H (= 
heroin), & lit.).

Mrs A. Terrill: Dog holding lead in ‘Lassie’ advert (L in pug).

R. C. Teuton: Clay’s boxing Liston’s head, punch ending in lump on ear (L in 
pug2; p + lug).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Exhausted horse starts to pull up, losing ground badly (
anag. of first letters).

A. J. Wardrop: What, when put up, is quickly put down – a tent, perhaps (gulp 
(rev.); see tent2).

G. H. Willett: Symptom of constipation? You’ll find nearly all fruit good for 
that (plu(m) + g).

HC

D. Appleton, T. C. Borland, A. Brash, C. J. Brougham, Rev. Canon C. M. Broun, 
D. A. Campbell, S. L. Claughton, S. Collins, N. Connaughton, M. Davies, V. 
Dixon (Ireland), W. Drever, P. Evans, G. I. L. Grafton, D. Harris, R. J. 
Hooper, J. R. Howlett, E. W. Kelly, J. P. Lester, E. Looby, Ms R. MacGillivray, 
G. Maker, P. W. Marlow, C. Ogilvie, M. Owen, A. Plumb, S. Randall, Mrs B. 
Randell, W. Ransome, D. P. Shenkin, I. Simpson, J. A. Stuart, P. Taylor, K. 
Thomas, L. Toole, J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter, L. Ward (USA), R. J. Whale, A. 
Whittaker, Ms B. J. Widger, R. Zara.

Comments

187 entries, almost no mistakes. A few said they didn’t understand the 
reference to (Bryan) Habana in my clue to LARNEY (‘Wealthy Springbok (not 
Habana) nearly ruined’. I only included his name because the dictionary 
definition specifies a richwhite South African. For those not up on their 
international rugby union, Habana is an exceptionally talented non-white wing 
three-quarter who plays for South Africa. Eighteen clues received one or more 
votes as favourite, most going to the clue to RAHU (‘What gets Hindu trembling 
with fear –this fiend’), a good example, I think, of how satisfying a neat 
composite anagram can be while remaining reasonably simple to solve.


 <>Some of you expressed mild surprise that PLUG was the second 4-letter word 
in a row I’d given you, though none complained, unsurprising in view of the 
huge number of possibilities it offers. I was reminded that I did the same on 
one previous occasion, though it was quite some time ago and I’ve forgotten 
what the words were. Wearing his statistician’s hat, John Tozer tells me that 
the commonest competition word lengths are 8, 7, 9 and 12, in that order of 
frequency. As I’ve mentioned often before, I try with each Plain to choose what 
looks to be the most promising clue word, regardless of length, and this 
certainly determined my choice this month. (It also proved educational for me 
in a small way, in that, though I have heard of the Bash Street Kids, I did not 
know any of them by name, and now I know one!) No one seemed bothered by my 
dodgy plural ORGANONS, but Iwas taken to task by one regular for not telling 
you that ALDI is not inChambers. As I’ve said before, I merely ‘recommend’ C 
and do not feel bound to draw attention to every proper name I include in the 
grids. I only tend to do this when I judge a name to be relatively obscure, 
which ALDI is surely not.

Dr Fletcher’s prizewinning clue is an interesting one. His entry added a 
further explanatory note, not reproduced above: ‘2 meanings, one & lit.’. The 
first five words of his clue, with the possible addition of ‘perhaps’, could 
have stood as a satisfactory ‘& lit.’, but ‘or hook’ is without doubt an 
attractive addition, supplementing the golfing context while adding a quite 
separate definition of PLUG. (I was initially unsure whether in golfing 
parlance ‘plug’ is used like this intransitively, but the entry inChambers is 
unequivocal in supporting this.)

I shall be on holiday towards the end of July, so the results of next month’s 
competition will be somewhat delayed. Apologies in advance for that.
 