
SOLECISM

1 M. Barley (Rivermeade, Romsey Road, Ower, Hampshire SO51 6AF): Grammatical 
error, this, or a lapse in social mores (comp. anag.).

2 C. G. Millin (25 Angus Close, Ramleaze, Swindon, Wiltshire SN5 5PS): What 
spoils clues with promise but not pure unfortunately (comp. anag. & lit.; pure 
= free from bad grammar).

3 J. C. Leyland (23 Lane Ings, Marsden, Huddersfield HD7 6JP): Short shrift's 
first thing it's given by fussy schoolmistress? (comp. anag. incl. s, & lit.).

VHC

D. Appleton: Awkward social mess-up with fax could bring about this faux pas (
comp. anag. & lit.).

D. & N. Aspland: Awkward social mistake? One might find it aka —— (comp. anag. 
& lit.).

Dr J. Burscough: Bad form, perhaps, using moles (sic) unchecked? (anag.; 
unchecked = not restrained).

W. Drever: Blundering beginner is involved in the opening bit of Strictly Come 
Dancing(anag. incl. L is S; blundering n).

Dr I. S. Fletcher: As learner heading up M6, perhaps, it's not what's expected 
(so L + M sice (rev.)).

R. Gilbert: Fish is caught in Cam but not using a gaff (sole + is in C(a)m).

D. V. Harry: Warmed Mosel (sic)? (anag. & lit.; warm = beat).

R. J. Heald: Misuse of semicolon's not acceptable, being this? (anag. less on, 
& lit.).

L. M. Inman: How fame changes face after single faux pas! (i.e. c is m after 
sole).

D. F. Manley: Is some clue lacking proper English slammed for this? (anag. 
less U, E, & lit.).

P. W. Marlow: Bad form schoolmistress disciplined expelling rowdy hard sorts (
anag. less anag. incl.H).

P. McKenna: Nominativus pendens? Only a Latinist's so upset over the term for 
indecorum (sole + sic (rev.) + m).

Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf: Christmas mistletoe being brandished? Such 
impropriety could result with that, mister! (comp. anag.).

T. J. Moorey: Abuse in grammar school finally comes out, current Head of 
Science arrested (I S in anag. incl. l).

A. Plumb: Camisole's tight, cutting a boob (anag. less a).

D. Price Jones: Semicolons misplaced? It's not on (anag. less on, & lit.).

P. Taylor: A placement of semicolons that's not on? 

J. R. Tozer: Master Society formality with acclaim before … this upsets it 
all? (M S ice los (all rev), & lit.).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Misuse of semi-colons not acceptable – it's a 
grammatical impropriety (anag. less on).

M. Wainwright: Acts awkwardly with social 'mistake': a —— one attacks? (comp. 
anag. & lit.).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Between you and I, perhaps Miss Cole needs a new look (
anag.; ref. Lily C., model and actress).

G. H. Willett: A breach of Azed's rules, the only doctrine demanding inherent 
compliance? (c in sole ism).

HC

D. K. Arnott, Rev. Canon C. M. Broun, D. A. Campbell, M. Coates, N. 
Connaughton, M. D. Cooke, V, Dixon (Ireland), T. J. Donnelly, J. Fairclough, J. 
Glassonbury, G. I. L. Grafton, J. Grimes, R. B. Harling, R. Hesketh, R. J. 
Hooper, G. Johnstone, E. C. Lance, C. Loving, G. Macdonald, M. A. 
Macdonald-Cooper, J. R. C. Michie, C. J. Morse, D. F. Newton-Edwards, M. L. 
Perkins, Dr S. J. Shaw, N. G. Shippobotham, I. Simpson, B. Solomons, M. Taylor, 
R. C. Teuton, D. H. Tompsett, A. Vick, Ms S. Wallace, A. J. Wardrop, R. J. 
Whale, A. Whittaker, A. J. Young, Dr E. Young.

Comments

204 entries, about thirty having MOLOCH for MOLECH. It was perhaps a bit 
unkind of me to go for this spelling, especially as the E was uncheckedand the 
clue referred to a Latin word appearing only in an etymology (formole5), though 
I did warn you about this in the note onChambers below the clues. It wasn't 
mere cussedness (or 'bad form',pace Dr Burscough) that led me to opt for this 
spelling. The idea of Latin mass and church was quite enticing, plus the fact 
of having two different vowels instead of the same one twice. I was certainly a 
bit surprised that so many made the wrong choice, and I still wonder how they 
justified it to themselves. The obvious moral is that you shouldn't accept too 
readily that an answer which doesn't seem to fit the clue is the correct one. 
As to your favourite clue, of 17 receiving one or more votes (even MOLECH 
received one!) it was a close race between four, with that for IRON-CLAD 
('Warship in this is fine?'), just nudging ahead of those for À REBOURS, 
HYMENOPTERA and PHLEUM. In my ignorance, for which I was gently reproved, I 
defined E-BOOK as 'something like a tablet', which I am assured it isn't. I 
apologize accordingly; one day I hope I shall start to catch up in the headlong 
gallop of electronic progress.

As a fellow classicist I was much taken with Mr McKenna's clue above before 
deciding that it was just too specialized to be prizeworthy, especially as 
neither 'nominative pendens'nor 'hanging nominative' (a frequently-occurring 
solecism which always annoys me) is given inChambers.Is a split infinitive a 
solecism? Most commentators on English usage nowadays dismiss criticism of it 
as groundless, citing its use by many reputable writers and blaming bossy 
arbiters of style for the bad reputation it acquired in the past. It certainly 
doesn't bother me except occasionally where it needlessly destroys the 
euphonious flow of language.

One HC clue which used the attractive anagram of 'semicolons' minus 'on' (see 
above) was 'Misuse of semicolons not on, constituting this'. It failed to score 
more highly with me for two reasons: (i) it definitely needs a question mark or 
a 'perhaps' to indicate that the misuse of semicolons may be anexample of a 
solecism and is not adefinition thereof; and, more importantly, the ing-form of 
'constituting' undermines the grammatical structure of the clue, which could so 
easily be improved by rewording, e.g. 'A misuse of semicolons, not on, 
constitutes this?'

A few of you with long memories mentioned that ASPHETERISM, my 1 Across in 
this puzzle, was the clue word in Ximenes competition No. 235 in 1953, in which 
CJM won first prize with 'In which the state's end is to reorganize all 
mastership about itself'. This and other successful clues in that competition 
may be found on the andlit.org.uk website, where the entire X archive is 
steadily being recorded.
 