
SNOWMOBILE

1 C. J. Brougham (24 Launceston Place, London W8 5RN): Saint with twinkling 
humour carrying present in sleigh (now in S mo bile).

2 D. K. Arnott (50 Beech Road, Purley on Thames, Reading RG8 8DS): Wombles’ 
No. 1 hit is perfect vehicle for Tomsk? (anag.; ref. Wombles character, 
Siberian town).

3 E. C. Lance (14 Primley Park Avenue, Leeds LS17 7JA): One’s bothered about 
BMW – oil needing to be changed for transport in arctic regions (anag. in 
anag.).

VHC

M. Barley: Transport an Eskimo will be sat on (not like Santa, somehow) (anag. 
less anag., & lit.).

T. C. Borland: I pass over flakes after sprinkling some in bowl (anag.).

D. V. Harry: Near the poles, below zero, I’m versatile transport (S, N + anag. 
incl.0, & lit.).

R. J. Heald: Simoon blew off course vehicle highly unsuited to desert 
conditions (anag.).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: Nothing disrupts flourishing women’s lib drive in 
hostile climate (0 in anag.).

P. W. Marlow: Vehicle for Whistler, say – some oil applied with touches in 
beautifully wrought nocturnes (anag. incl. b, w, n; ref. Whistler, painter & 
Canadian ski resort).

E. Looby: Ice machine, perhaps, crushing some in bowl (anag.).

R. J. Palmer: What could transport be in Oslo round winter months primarily? 
(w, m in anag., & lit.).

A. Plumb: Transport some own to cross peaks of bitter Inuit land (b, I, l in 
anag., & lit.).

Dr T. G. Powell: Boon with miles left in a mush? (anag. incl. l, & lit.).

P. Sant: Remote parts of Saskatchewan below zero – I’m deployed (S, n + anag. 
incl. 0, & lit.).

Dr S. J. Shaw: Manoeuvring with skis, this may give Eskimo bliss on first sign 
of winter! (comp. anag. incl. w, & lit.).

C. Short: Both poles below zero? I’m doubtful this could get me to either (S, 
N + anag. incl. 0).

P. L. Stone: Transport eskimo will be on to be like this, perhaps (comp. anag. 
& lit.).

Ms S. Wallace: Sled that’s powered by oil – some new model with bits of Yamaha 
engine stripped out (anag. less Y, e).

A. J. Wardrop: Some bowling – not good, erratic – from which sledgers might 
get mileage (anag. less g).

R. J. Whale: Oman’s first women’s lib gathering? Form of advancement unlikely 
to catch on there (anag. incl. O).

G. H. Willett: For today’s explorer, might jumping into this set bowels in 
motion (comp. anag.).

A. J. Young: New blooms I cultivated one winter transport me in bowl so 
cleverly arranged (double anag.).

HC

J. Brown, A. & J. Calder, P. Cargill, A. G. Chamberlain, M. Clarke, P. A. 
Davies, C. M. Edmunds, J. Fairclough, Dr I. S. Fletcher, E. French, G. I. L. 
Grafton, J. Grimes, M. J. Hanley, D. Harris, C. & C. Hinton, M. Hodgkin, J. C. 
Leyland, J. Liddle, C. Loving, M. Lunan, B. Macreamoinn, D. F. Manley, K. 
Manley, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, J. R. C. Michie, K. Milan, T. J. Moorey, 
G. Perry, R. Perry, T. Rudd, I. Simpson, C. M. Steele, P. A. Stephenson, P. 
Taylor, J. R. Tozer, P. Tozer, J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter, Mrs A. M. Walden, L. 
Ward (USA), A. Whittaker, Dr E. Young.

Comments

179 entries, few mistakes, including a handful whose map-reading let them 
down, leading them to clue SNOWBOARDS. Favourite clue, of 17 mentioned, was 
‘Self-contained rubber instrument’ for U(K)ULELE. As a new special, the puzzle 
found general favour, offering about the right degree of difficulty for the 
Christmas break. The idea occurred to me months ago on a summer walk, and I 
wasn’t at all sure whether I could make it work until I started to construct 
the grid and checked on the number of suitable SNOW compounds. I didn’t really 
want the central letter to be S, so the fact that there were just enough (of 
the appropriate length) with a B in was very fortunate. The grid pattern that 
emerged was distinctly odd-looking, but it worked, with about the right 
percentage of unchecked letters. It was politely pointed out by one regular 
that snowflakes are in fact hexagonally (not octagonally) symmetrical, but even 
had I known this I doubt whether it would have affected my grand design. 
Another competitor suggested that I was being over-generous in telling you that 
SNOW was the first element in each of the compounds, but I suspect that most 
would have regarded it as a bit unfair to withhold this information, especially 
at Christmastime. It never occurred to me to do so.


I must also apologize for the mysteriously missing ‘in’ in the clue to 
BLU(R)AY(S), though few mentioned this, and also for the equally (to me) 
mysterious use of ‘cadet’ to indicate ‘c’ in the clue to SACS. I’ve simply no 
idea how I came to dream this up. Clues submitted were varied and of a 
generally high quality for a word I feared might be a bit uninspiring (though 
certainly the most promising of the eight on offer). I commend the degree of 
invention you displayed. No time for more now. The January competition demands 
my attention. I wish you all a happy and healthy new year.
 