
OUT OF ORDER

1 R. C. Teuton (Bristol): Batting four Root protects tail-enders in England 
collapse with series lost (d, e in anag.; ref. Joe Root, England cricketer).

2 I. D. McDonald (Sheffield): Tour over for gutless England bats? That's not 
cricket! (anag. incl. o, E, d).

3 R. Hesketh (Bath): Do footer and rugby union for a change, not cricket (
anag. incl. RU).

VHC

D. Appleton: Too rude for me (self-referential anag. & lit.).

M. Barley: Bust is on view for Roe when cavorting round centre of stadium (out 
+ d in anag.; ref. Erica R., Twickenham streaker).

Dr J. Burscough: This do for 'outré'? (anag. & lit.).

P. Cargill: Unseemly to-do with furore developing (anag.).

T. Crowther: It could be a sign of something not working when to-do and furore 
break out (anag. & lit.).

C. M. Edmunds: Offending propriety? This itself may engender furore and to-do (
anag.).

R. J. Heald: Slot machines being so, you might have lost cash in 'em! (anag. & 
lit.).

D. F. Manley: Root due for runs – wrongly placed in the line-up? (anag.).

T. J. Moorey: Sign of abnormal lift short of a length floored bats in rout 
abroad (anag. less l in anag.; ref. current test series in Australia).

C. J. Morse: Oxford University to make crossing through Queen's prohibited (OU 
to ford ER).

T. D. Nicholl: Root due for repositioning thus? (anag.; ref. cricket).

G. Raven: Former monk is not working as a night watchman (3 defs.).

Dr S. J. Shaw: When cashpoint's like this it could be I can't shop (anag. & 
lit.).

P. L. Stone: OR with some fortitude suffering horrific times going over the 
top (anag. less anag.).

Mrs A. M. Walden: Excessive fouls do for Touré (anag.; ref. Man. City 
footballer).

R. J. Whale: Too rude for Nuts, displaying bust? (anag.; ref. lads' mag).

M. Whitmore: True of door unhinged? (anag.).

G. H. Willett: How to describe OTT English utterance not unknown in the Gabba 
bleachers? (O(x)ford in outer (qv), & lit.).

HC

T. Anderson, D. K. Arnott, D. & N. Aspland, A. Barker, G. Borooah (USA), Rev. 
Canon C. M. Broun, C. J. Butler, A. G. Chamberlain, C. A. Clarke, A. Colston, 
V. Dixon (Ireland), W. Drever, Dr I. S. Fletcher, G. I. L. Grafton, A. H. 
Harker, D. V. Harry, G. Johnstone, B. Jones, E. C. Lance, T. Locke, C. Loving, 
M. A. Macdonald-Cooper, P. W. Marlow, J. R. C. Michie, C. Ogilvie, D. J. R. 
Ogilvie (USA), R. J. Palmer, T. Powell, Ms A. Price, A. M. Price, D. Price 
Jones, Ms L. Quee, C. Short, P. A. Stephenson, P. Taylor, J. R. Tozer, J. 
Vincent & Ms R. Porter, Ms S. Wallace, L. Ward (USA), A. J. Wardrop, A. 
Whittaker, Dr E. Young.

Comments

211 entries, no mistakes and no real problems, it seems. Favourite clue (of 18 
nominated at least once): 'Distraught over pupil's driving' (PROPULSIVE), with 
'Not a bowler's wicket? Worry about that – this team member's vicious' (DROOG) 
some way back in second place.

The clue phrase offered a wide range of possible approaches, as I thought it 
would. The opportunity to produce what might be termed 'self-referential' clues 
(with the answer itself acting as the cryptic indicator) was seized upon by 
many, the best of which are quoted above. There was also an abundance of 
cricketing clues, including all three prize-winners (again, see above). My 
fondness for the sport – indeed for many sports – is by now well known. Those 
who have no interest in cricket may be irritated by how often its special 
jargon turns up in my own clues and those of leading competitors, but there is 
no denying that this rich and rare vocabulary does often lend itself to use in 
the wording of cryptic clues. (That said, I have for some time been compiling a 
personal list of cricketing clichés done to death by radio and television 
commentators, which regularly have me hurling pointless abuse at the set or 
screen. Sad, or what?)

I must add my voice to the many that have mourned the recent passing of John 
Graham (Araucaria) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-crossword-setter-john-graham-dies>
. That he was still setting crosswords on a regular basis well into his 
nineties was a truly remarkable achievement. His distinctive style and 
seemingly limitless invention endeared him to generations of both solvers and 
setters. We met on only a handful of occasions, usually in large gatherings of 
the kind he disliked, but I always enjoyed our chats (perhaps more than those 
who regard the Ximenean and 'libertarian' approaches as irreconcilable might 
imagine). There is no doubt that he will be remembered as one of the 
pre-eminent figures in the history of crosswords.

May I thank all those who have sent seasonal greetings to me and my family, 
and wish you all in turn a very enjoyable Christmas and happy solving in 2014? 
I hope you enjoy the Christmas competition, but please note that the results 
will appear later than usual. My wife and I will be visiting India for a 
two-week holiday early in the new year.

A final apology to the Asplands for omitting an exclamation mark at the end of 
their VHC clue last month.
 