
GATES OF DEATH

1 Dr S. J. Shaw (1 Simfield Cottages, Langley Lane, Goosnargh, Lancashire PR3 
2JS): These part to reveal alternative fates, God above and devilish heat below 
(anag. + anag., & lit.).

2 M. Barley (Rivermeade, Romsey Road, Ower, Hampshire SO51 6AF): See one 
finally departing face God at these, possibly (anag. less c, e, & lit.).

3 C. J. Brougham (34 Launceston Place, London W8 5RN): Dotage’s fate, breaking 
hearts? (anag. + H, & lit.).

VHC

T. Anderson: The wretched at Hades oft get stifling temperature here (anag. 
less t, & lit.; ref Job 38, 17).

D. K. Arnott: Where the fate God’s ordained takes one? (a in anag., & lit.).

Dr M. Bullivant: A fate the gods ordered in the end (anag.).

M. Coates: End of life Fates had got ordained? (anag. incl. e, & lit.).

N. Connaighton: A fate the gods ordained (anag. & lit.).

Mrs L. Davis: Get to Hades taking Acheron ferry initially – diabolical point 
of departure! (anag. incl. A, f,).

V. Dixon (Ireland): What the aged fatso may totter to? (anag. & lit.).

J. Fairclough: Entrance to Hades? Fate, the constant presiding over all (G + 
anag.; entrance vtr).

Mrs D. B. Jenkinson: Aged foes that we must ‘dash asunder’, whereby to reach 
eternal peace (anag.; ref. hymn).

D. F. Manley: The fate God has ordained – revealed by such opening for heaven 
or hell? (comp. anag. & lit.).

P. W. Marlow: Fated stage to which finally one resorts? (anag. incl. o, h, & 
lit.).

C. G. Millin: These lead to afterlife: endless fate with God possibly (anag. 
incl. a, less e, & lit.).

C. Ogilvie: For many Spartans Thermopylae was a fate the gods ordered (anag.).

T. Rudd: Get to Hades following a rattle here? (anag. incl. f, & lit.)

J. R. Tozer: Rich man’s a pained expression about uncertain fate with God 
here? ((Bill) Gates + anag. incl. D in oh!, & lit.).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Dreadful stage characterized by start of decay and 
human body giving up last of vigour (anag. + of + d + ea(r)th, & lit.).

Ms S. Wallace: Final destination as e.g. fate doth set out (anag.).

L. Ward (USA): At these, do those kicking off finally attain glorious repose? 
(anag. incl. f, a, g, & lit.; re-pose).

A. J. Wardrop: In which God and the Fates might be found embracing one? (a in 
anag., & lit.).

D. Whisstock (Italy): Fog ahead – test flaps for final departure (anag.).

HC

G. Alderman, P. B. Alldred, D. & N. Aspland, J. G. Booth, T. C. Borland, Dr J. 
Burscough, J. A. Butler, P. Cargill, C. A. Clarke, C. Daffern, C. Eaton, P. 
Evans, Dr I. S. Fletcher, H. Freeman, M. R. Galpin, D. V. Harry, R. J. Heald, 
M. Hodgkin, J. R. H. Jones (Mexico), E. C. Lance, J. C. Leyland, M. A. 
Macdonald-Cooper, K. Manley, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, J. R. C. Michie, T. 
J. Moorey, D. F. Newton-Edwards, T. D. Nicholl, R. J. Palmer, R. Perry, A, M. 
Price, W. Ransome, P. Sant, P. L. Stone, R. C. Teuton, Mrs A. M. Walden, N. 
Warne, T. West-Taylor, G. Wiley, G. H. Willett, R. Zara.

Comments

177 entries, a handful having DATES OF DEATH, and more than a few with LOAF 
for GOAF (‘Head for the rear, taken short, wherein waste is stuffed’, i.e. go 
af(t)). 21 of my clues received one or more votes as the month’s favourite, the 
winner being ‘Like M. Antony addressing crowd?’ for TOGATE, two votes ahead of 
‘Rogue sailor on junk possibly mixing up his port and starboard?’ (RASCAL). The 
eagle-eyed among you noticed that in my clue to SPIRES (third in the poll) 
‘MI6’ appeared as ‘M16’, suggesting a motorway or a district of Manchester 
rather than a spy organization. In general you seem to have found the puzzle of 
average difficulty. I had some misgivings about asking you to clue GATES OF 
DEATH, more because of its gloomy connotations than for any other reason (and 
it was definitely not an Araucaria-style hint at my forthcoming demise). It 
certainly offered anagram fans plenty of opportunities, often with an ‘& lit.’ 
element included. I did worry a bit about clues which defined it as an event, 
including words like ‘when’, rather than as conveying something concrete, but 
concluded that since it is a metaphorical concept wording such as ‘time of 
death’ was acceptable. Examples of wording I couldn’t accept were e.g. ‘last 
breath’ to indicate ‘h’ (grammatically and semantically unjustifiable) and 
‘ill-fated hostage’ to indicate an anagram. That hyphen ties ‘ill’ to ‘fated’ 
only and cannot therefore in my view be seen as including ‘hostage’ in the 
anagram. This particular error turns up not infrequently.

I can now reveal further details to do with Azed No. 2,250, which is due to 
appear on Sunday 19 July. To mark the occasion, a special lunch is planned for 
the previous day, 18 July, in Wolfson College, Oxford, a post-graduate college 
in north Oxford by the River Cherwell, offering all-day free parking and some 
accommodation for those wanting an overnight stay. For full details please 
write, enclosing a stamped self-addressed envelope, to Will Drever, Azed 2,250, 
Shekinah, 60 Beaks Hill Road, Kings Norton, Birmingham B38 8BY, or email
will.drever@gmail.com <mailto:will.drever@gmail.com>. The cost, for three 
courses including pre-lunch drinks and wine with the meal, is likely to be £50 
a head, accommodation including breakfast £60 a head. Everyone is welcome, 
including, as I’ve mentioned before, newcomers and/or strangers to the Azed 
series. My wife Alison and I will be offering afternoon tea to all guests at 
our house, which is a very short walk from Wolfson.

The July competition puzzle will appear as usual, on 5 July, and the special 
competiton for No. 2,250 will appear on 19 July, replacing the August 
competition.
 