
SEMAN(TRA)BEATE 

('Overlaps')

1 M. Barley (Hampshire): National team run ragged in South America â€“ when they 
play, bars reverberate with cross supporters endlessly frustrated (anag. incl. 
N, r in SA; beate(n)).

2 P. L. Stone (Yorkshire): Clangers in church building? Collapse means 
constructing a better one using horizontal beams (anag.; anag. incl. a).

3 R. C. Teuton (Gloucestershire): We might replace Bell; star name's out of 
form, almost broken, having more than one flat summer (anag.; beate(n); ref. 
test cricket).

VHC

D. Appleton: In church we signal manse needs renovation. Built from horizontal 
beams, without poles, battens are warped (anag.; anag. less N, S).

D. K. Arnott: At centre, gymnasts master spinning round bars, producing sound 
floor exercises, initially using horizontal beams, but not vaulting (anag. 
incl. na; beat + e).

C. J. Butler: Developing art means bell equivalents built of horizontal beams, 
hammered? Not quite (anag.; beate(n)).

J. Grimes: Raving mates ran musical bars with straight beams from strobe at 
edge (anag.; hidden).

R. J. Heald: Recalled star Stokes substitutes for Bell, ace batter 
century-less after decline in summer form (name S (rev.); anag. less c; ref. 
Ben S., Ian B.).

J. C. Leyland: In fuzz, are men's feet finally hammered? They are pretty well 
flat with no arches (anag. incl. t; beate(n)).

E. Looby: Having horizontal timbers pulse with echo Rastamen animatedly 
sounding bars in place of worship (beat E; anag.).

M. A. Macdonald-Cooper: Constructed from beams, articles regularly used in 
better contrived means for adjusting toll bars? (a, a regularly placed in 
anag.; anag.).

D. F. Manley: Bell is alternative to one of those names bandied about as a 
better skip, no candidates ultimately having unbending support? (anag.; anag. 
less s; ref. English cricket captaincy controversy).

C. J. Morse: Revolutionary design calls for vibrant bars in churches, mostly 
topped with horizontal beams (art names (rev.); beate(n)).

N. G. Shippobotham: Rastamen broadcast church gongs, beamed as part of vibe at 
Easter (anag.; hidden).

S. J. J. Tiffin: Emin and Hirst, say, going round noisy bars, fortified by 
Carlings, possibly, but exhausted before exhibition's opening (art names 
(rev.); beat + e; see carling).

J. R. Tozer: Characters around noisy bars order a beer at 'time' with great 
booms, perhaps (names (rev.); anag. incl. t).

J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter: Bell-like instruments giving stars backing 
(comprising flat, wooden support!) can be seen in orchestra, beaten (names 
(rev.); hidden).

Ms S. Wallace: Beamed gallery houses dancing bear performing as men hammered 
instruments (anag. in Tate; anag.).

A. Whittaker: Pounding means bars struck in Orthodox churches, constructed 
with beams, are battered, smashed with no sign of stopping (anag.; anag. less 
red).

HC

T. Anderson, M. Barker, P. Bartlam, Ms K. Bolton, C. J. Brougham, J. M. Brown, 
Mrs S. Brown, D. A. Campbell, D. Carter, Ms U. Carter, B. Cheesman, W. Drever, 
C. M. Edmunds, Dr I. S. Fletcher, D. V. Harry, R. Hesketh, E. C. Lance, J. P. 
Lester, M. Lunan, W. F. Main, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, C. G. Millin, R. 
A. Norton, M. Owen, S. Randall, W. Ransome, T. Rudd, P. Taylor, K. Thomas, Mrs 
A. M. Walden, L. Ward (USA), G. H. Willett. Dr E. Young.

Annual honours list (13 competitions) 

1. C. J. Morse (3 prizes, 9 VHCs); 2. M. Barley (2, 9); 3. R. J. Heald (3, 6); 
4 (equal). Dr S. J. Shaw (1,9), R. C. Teuton (2, 7); 6 (equal). Dr I. S. 
Fletcher (3, 3), D. F. Manley (1, 7), M. Owen (2, 5), P. L. Stone (2, 5);10. J. 
R. Tozer (1, 6), A. J. Wardrop (1,6);12 (equal). D. Appleton (1,5), Mrs A. M. 
Walden (1.5), A. J. Whittaker (1, 5), G. H. Willett (0, 7);16 (equal). R. 
Hesketh (1, 4), J. C. Leyland (0, 6), T. Rudd (2, 2);19 (equal). T. C. Borland 
(1, 3), C. J. Brougham (1, 3), N. G. Shippobotham (1, 3), P. A. Stephenson (0, 
5), J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter (0, 5), R. J. Whale (0, 5);25 (equal). Dr J. 
Burscough (0, 4), N. Connaughton (1, 2), C. G. Millin (0, 4), T. J. Moorey (0, 
4), Dr E. Young (2, 0).

Consolation prizes 

G. H. Willett, J. C. Leyland, P. A. Stephenson, J. Vincent & Ms R. Porter, R. 
J. Whale, Dr J. Burscough, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey.

Comments

Only 150 entries, but no mistakes. Favourite clue (by a long way) was 'Marks & 
Spencer initially stocking alcohol-free wine, without success' for ATTENDS, 
with 'Nursing damaged lung I took food, overwhelmed, making slow progress with 
date in fruit basket' (for TRUDG(ING)ULFED) most favoured of the overlap clues. 
This type of special is tough to compose and, given the extra checking, perhaps 
less difficult than normal to solve. I've given you five 'Overlaps' puzzles so 
far, the first being No. 1,606, the length of the overlaps ranging from 2 to 4 
letters. One overlapping letter would be pretty feeble and more than four 
well-nigh impossible to construct, I guess. As it is, my having to resort to 
SCHI and IVORIEST indicated a degree of desperation. Nobody seemed to mind. And 
why, I was asked by one eagle-eyed competitor, did I recommend the 2008 edition 
ofChambers? I have no notion why.

Like any double clues, overlaps present a special challenge, and I readily 
concede that in some of mine the extra strain was all too evident. Yet despite 
a certain amount of huffing and puffing, you did pretty well with these 
unlikely bedfellows. The commonest fault, curiously, was a failure to indicate 
that SEMANTRA is a plural form. Some definitions also struck me as inadequate 
(e.g. 'bars' without qualification for SEMANTRA). But it was pleasing to be 
able to award first prize to a clue with a footballing theme, just to 
demonstrate that I am not totally impervious to that hugely popular game (often 
called 'beautiful', for reasons that escape me!).

Here's an interesting etymological morsel, submitted by a regular: TRABEATUS 
in classical Latin meant 'clad in thetrabea', a white robe with scarlet 
horizontal stripes and a purple seam, worn by kings, knights (TRABEATI) and 
augurs.

Another Azed year ends, and with it we have a new leader of the honours list, 
one who has been there before, of course. Many congratulations to Jeremy Morse 
for topping the list again. His record in these competitions is truly amazing. 
He first featured in a (Ximenes) slip as a runner-up with his clue to SHEEP-RUN 
in August 1947. The clue itself was not given and appears to be lost. Perhaps 
its author remembers it? And my sincere thanks, as always, to Martin Perkins 
for keeping the score and supplying many interesting statistics.
 