
Few multimillion-pound TV and film franchises can have accrued from a 
throwaway gag, but 11 minutes into A Close Shave, Nick Park’s third Wallace and 
Gromit short, whenWallace addresses a newly defleeced sheep as “Shaun”, 
<http://youtu.be/HI0HZOUqTxI?t=11m> a star – unknowingly, perhaps – was born. 
Twenty years, one Oscar and 130 episodes of Shaun’s own spin-off TV series 
later, a full-length feature film is about to emerge, with Shaun front and 
centre, which in all likelihood will reinforce the cultural supremacy of its 
makers, the Bristol-based animation studio Aardman.

Shaun the Sheep the Movie is Aardman’s sixth feature, and the first not to be 
produced in partnership with a major Hollywood studio. (French-based giant 
Studiocanal is the main backer this time.) With the Shaun TV show enjoying a 
vast global reach – Aardman say it has been sold to more than 170 territories 
worldwide – it would appear to be prime cinema material with transnational 
appeal: no dialogue, slapstick humour, inoffensive, family-oriented storylines.
Aardman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman>, it is clear, knows what it 
is doing, commercially as well as artistically: none of its films have grossed 
less than $100m globally, and another solid hit would appear to be on the cards.

It is fair to say, however, that Aardman – despite all its success – occupies 
a semi-detached position in the wider British film industry; its pre-eminence 
in animation doesn’t necessarily translate into similar levels of credibility 
and visibility of what you might call its live-action peers – Working Title, 
007 producers Eon, Ridley Scott’s outfit Scott Free, Harry Potter makers 
Heyday. It is perhaps a result of the modesty and self-effacement of Aardman’s 
totemic figures: founders Peter Lord and David Sproxton, Wallace and Gromit 
creator Nick Park, who joined in 1985, and early hire Richard Goleszowski – 
“employee No 1”, in Aardman lore – who developed the Shaun TV series and is 
credited as joint director on the feature. All of them are now in their late 
50s and early 60s, but given animation’s lengthy creative cycles, seem be only 
just getting started.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944205553%2Face27dee-a756-4155-a3a5-e07a2951dc0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baa-hind%20the%20scenes%20on%20the%20Shaun%20the%20Sheep%20movie%3A%20'In%20a%20good%20week%20we%20can%20shoot%20two%20minutes'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baa-hind%20the%20scenes%20on%20the%20Shaun%20the%20Sheep%20movie%3A%20%27In%20a%20good%20week%20we%20can%20shoot%20two%20minutes%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944205553%2Face27dee-a756-4155-a3a5-e07a2951dc0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Animator Grant Maisey on the set. Photograph: Chris Johnson/PR company handout 
A visit to Aardman’s Aztec West production studio, where Shaun is being shot, 
is an invaluable reminder of what an ultra-successful British film company 
looks like. A low-rise warehouse in a nondescript industrial estate on the 
northern edge of Bristol – “There’s a Spandex factory next door,” says Shaun 
producer Paul Kewley proudly – is home to what Kewley describes as “an 
extraordinary group of people”. Shaun joint director Mark Burton – in his first 
directing job after writing credits on Chicken Run, Madagascar and The Curse of 
the Were-Rabbit – likens it to “sitting in the seat of a Rolls-Royce”. 
Goleszowski – who is now rather confusingly called Richard Starzak, after 
changing his surname back to an old Polish family name, but is universally 
known as “Golly” to his Aardman confreres – is a little more blunt about the 
company’s progress. “In the past, when I’ve worked on commercials, the film 
crews sometimes treated you like you’re from out in the sticks and didn’t know 
what you were doing. But these days, Aardman’s reputation is enormous.”

In truth, the building hums with a quiet self-confidence that comes from the 
recognition that Aardman is one of the tiny handful of British film companies 
that has turned its cottage-industry beginnings into an established, successful 
and profitable enterprise – and arguably beyond that to national institution 
status. As well as the films, Aardman runs a commercials house, a CGI studio 
and takes on commissions; the company is particularly proud of therecent promo 
it completed for the Imperial War Museum 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8BE_wCEs30E>. But Shaun is the main current 
business, and has taken over the place with a multitude of miniature sets, and 
teams of animators, model-makers and production coordinators beavering away. 
Apparently there are 16 shoots going on simultaneously – down from 40 at one 
point – with each animator working on their own set and producing around two 
seconds of footage a day. “In a good week,” says friendly Aardman handler Kelly 
Lappin, “we can get two minutes.” Elsewhere, chief model-maker Nigel Leach 
explains the mysteries of armatures, moulds and “blacktack”. Art director Matt 
Perry breezes by to talk up the in-house glass-blowers, who create the tiny 
pieces of crockery. Starzak and Burton move from shoot to shoot, briefing the 
animators, approving shots, tweaking edits; their job is more hands-off than 
you might imagine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944267845%2F608eacda-dc50-4e9d-bf22-315604783cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baa-hind%20the%20scenes%20on%20the%20Shaun%20the%20Sheep%20movie%3A%20'In%20a%20good%20week%20we%20can%20shoot%20two%20minutes'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baa-hind%20the%20scenes%20on%20the%20Shaun%20the%20Sheep%20movie%3A%20%27In%20a%20good%20week%20we%20can%20shoot%20two%20minutes%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fshaun-the-sheep-movie-aardman-studio-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421944267845%2F608eacda-dc50-4e9d-bf22-315604783cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A scene from Shaun the Sheep the Movie. Photograph: Film company handout 
This, it seems, is an accommodation with the scale of activity that a feature 
film demands, and the brief company history delivered by Sproxton demonstrates 
the long haul of Aardman’s growth after the company was established in 1972. It 
took five years for Morph to get on the air, in the BBC art show Take Hart; 
another decade before making a big impact with the promo for Peter Gabriel’s 
Sledgehammer. The company’s first Oscar came in 1990 with the Nick 
Park-directed Creature Comforts, defeating Park’s first Wallace and Gromit film,
A Grand Day Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/03/how-we-made-wallace-and-gromit>
, which was also nominated. It took another decade for Aardman’s first feature,
Chicken Run <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chicken-run>, to make it to 
cinemas after the company signed a five-film deal with Dreamworks.

Even though their relationship with Dreamworks finished earlier than expected 
– though impressive, the takings for the next two features, Were-Rabbit and 
Flushed Away, were not what Dreamworks were after – Sproxton is outspoken in 
his gratitude for the leg-up. “To have Dreamworks behind us on our first 
go-round was pretty fantastic. We learned a massive amount about what it takes 
to mount a feature film; it was a much, much bigger thing to grapple with than 
the half-hour shorts we’d done before.” Aardman then went with Sony, making two 
more features,Arthur Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144411/arthur-christmas> and The 
Pirates! In an Adventure with Scientists! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-pirates-in-an-adventure-with-scientists>. 
The former, at least, was evidence that new blood was joining the old guard – 
it was directed by Sarah Smith, originally hired as Aardman’s head of 
development in 2006, with a script provided by Borat co-writer Peter Baynham.
 Mark Burton and Richard Starzak. Photograph: James Fisher/Film company handout
With its low-key determination to make things work and subtle comic 
intelligence, Aardman is likely to remain a dominant force in the British 
family-film market for the foreseeable future; you can’t see it going down the 
laser-eyed, killer-robot route thatbaffled audiences of the Postman Pat movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/11/postman-pat-the-movie-review>. 
Shaun the Sheep the Movie, I can report, is a consummate upscaling of the TV 
show, retaining all its much-admired characteristics while bulking out the 
narrative to sustain the longer running time. In its quiet way, Shaun actually 
possesses the seeds of radicalism, being to all intents and purposes a silent 
film. “Funnily enough,” says Sproxton, “when the The Artist came out, it 
reinforced the idea that we were on the right path.”

Whatever change Aardman undergoes – which, inevitably, will happen very slowly 
– it is likely the company’s special brand of gentle but sharp-witted humour 
and precisely calibrated action will endure. Sproxton tries to define the 
Aardman style. “We use the word authenticity,” he says. “It’s about being 
honest and uncynical. We strive to make the characters true; they believe the 
world they are living in, however ridiculous it is. We know how to make the 
films, but getting the story to land absolutely spot on – that’s the hardest 
bit.”

• Shaun the Sheep the Movie is released on 6 February.
 