
Lisa McInerney, who started her career as a writer with a blog about life on a 
council estate in the “Arse End of Ireland 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/#!What-Happened-To-Arse-End-Of-Ireland-Anyway/c1q8z/5548a2390cf273133516c0d1>
”, has won the Baileys women’s prize for fiction with her debut novel, beating 
Man Booker winner Anne Enright andbestseller Hanya Yanagihara 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/a-little-life-racks-up-readers-1441312965> to the 
£30,000 award.

McInerney’s winning novel The Glorious Heresies tells how an accidental murder 
– “She hadn’t gotten a look at his face before she flaked him with the Holy 
Stone and she couldn’t bring herself to turn him over” – plays out in the lives 
of a cast that includes a 15-year-old drug dealer, his alcoholic father, a 
prostitute and a gangland boss.

Sweary Lady's riot of invention is a well-deserved winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/09/swearyladys-riot-of-invention-is-a-well-deserved-winner>
Chair of judges Margaret Mountford, the former lawyer who is best known for 
her role on The Apprentice, praised the book’s “freshness and vibrancy”, 
describing it as “a superbly original, compassionate novel that delivers 
insights into the very darkest of lives through humour and skilful 
storytelling.”

Mountford added: “I come from Ireland, so I can say that the Irish do black 
humour better than anyone else … You get that rich vein of humour throughout 
this book, which stops it from being bleak.”

“We were all – and I’m going to use that ghastly Apprentice jargon - 110% 
agreed. We all thought it was the right choice,” Mountford said The Green Road 
– won the Irish novel of the year award from the Kerry Group last week. Her 
other rivals included Yanagihara’s bestselling A Little Life, which was 
shortlisted for the Booker. Frances Gertler at Foyles bookshop said McInerney’s 
win was a “brave choice ... by the least conventional and edgiest writer on the 
list, whose big, gritty and compelling novel about Ireland’s dark underbelly 
features a cast of alcoholics, drug dealers and prostitutes, leaving a trail of 
sex, violence and crime in their wake”.

We were all – and I’m going to use that ghastly Apprentice jargon - 110% agreed
Margaret Mountford 
“Her win won’t please everyone,” predicted Gertler. But Mountford said that 
the judging panel, which also included novelist Elif Shafak, journalists Naga 
Munchetty and Laurie Penny as well as writer and singer Tracey Thorn, had been 
clear that The Glorious Heresies was their unanimous choice. The prize is 
intended to celebrate “excellence, originality and accessibility”, and, won in 
the past by novels from Lionel Shriver’s We Need to Talk About Kevin to Zadie 
Smith’s On Beauty, goes to the best novel of the year by a woman writing in 
English.

McInerney wrote her debut novel at her agent’s urging. She had previously 
published just one short story, but had made a name for herself with her Arse 
End of Ireland blog. Written under the persona Sweary Lady, it detailed life on 
a Galway council estate and was written while she worked as a receptionist and 
brought up her young child. The site won McInerney the best humour prize at the 
Irish blog awards in 2009, and saw her tackling topics from her disgust with “
rural Irish pubs who smugly advertise Live Music! on Saturday nights 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/#!Country-Music/c1q8z/54d8ba370cf23137e83d7eb2>” 
topain relief in labour 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/#!How-To-Have-A-Baby/c1q8z/54d8b5520cf2a1055e3510d7>
.


In an essay written for RTÉ Radio 1’s arts show Arena, on being shortlisted 
for the Baileys,McInerney said 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/#!Thoughts-on-the-Baileys-Prize/c1q8z/574acc530cf2265bf36f08c7>
 that she was “enormously proud” to make the cut, because when her novel was 
first published, “a few people thought it necessary to tell me how ‘male’ it 
was, and that it was no wonder its jacket sported quotes from male writers”.

Lisa McInerney: 'Short fiction leaves its author nowhere to hide'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/22/lisa-mcinerney-short-fiction-leaves-its-author-nowhere-to-hide>
“I’m still not entirely sure why. Was it because it had a certain 
boisterousness, when women are best suited to gentle pursuits, like embroidery? 
Did it seem too sweary, when women’s voices are made for arias and whispered 
gossip?” she wrote. Being shortlisted for Baileys, which was set up in 1996 in 
the wake of a Booker prize that overlooked women writers entirely, meant that 
she became “the default. I am a woman writer and no one is going to waste their 
time examining my book in the context of my gender.

“In celebrating women’s writing, the Baileys prize does something great. It 
gives us a roadmap for a space where books by women writers exist as part of a 
sweeping, chaotic and beautiful literary landscape, where they are allowed to 
justbe, and so its parameters are conversely but conclusively liberating,” 
McInerney wrote.


Reviewing the novel in the Guardian, Alfred Hickling wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/01/the-glorious-heresies-lisa-mcinerney-review-sweary-lady>
 that McInerney had “talent to burn”. “You can’t fault her for lack of 
exuberance, though she has a tendency to treat paragraphs like pinball 
machines, firing off bold, extended metaphors and letting them ricochet down 
the page. Such profligacy seems unnecessary when McInerney is equally capable 
of writing with great clarity and economy.”

The prize has so far been won by two Irish writers, nine Americans, five 
British, two Canadians, one Australian, and one Nigerian. McInerney was one of 
11 debut novelists to be longlisted this year for an award that has 
increasingly become a showcase for new and emerging talent.

Previous surprise winners include Madeline Miller for her Iliad-inspired debut 
The Song of Achilles, Tea Obreht for The Tiger’s Wife and Anne Michaels for 
Fugitive Pieces, alongside more established names such as Zadie Smith, 
Marilynne Robinson and Ali Smith.
 