
Unknown Pleasures: A Cultural Biography of Roxy Music by Paul Stump 372pp, 
Quartet Books, Â£12.

 It's a neat joke to name a book about pop music's most preening metropolitans 
after an album by their dour opposites. Up until now, to people who follow such 
matters, Unknown Pleasures meant four young men in raincoats called Joy 
Division, and a collection of beautiful dirges written under Manchester 
drizzle. Now, the words introduce a volume on decadence, men in leopard-skins 
and make-up, and the profitable selling of theories learned at art school. 
Bryan Ferry, who sang for Roxy Music in permanent inverted commas, would 
appreciate the irony.

 His band have always had the cleverest of reputations. In the early 
seventies, when the rock norm was gruffness and denim, Roxy Music wore 
space-glitter and used synthesizers; in the late seventies, while punks shocked 
and overturned, they reined in their strange noises for suppleness; in the 
early eighties, when every English pop group, it seemed, was copying their 
flounces, they turned calm and transatlantic. Then, without even a press 
release, they split up.

 Yet Roxy Music's 10-year career, read another way, looks less immaculate. 
Only the first two of their dozen albums and live collections and greatest hits 
compilations are still universally praised. One by one, Ferry squeezed the most 
creative members out of the band. By the end, Roxy Music were as anonymous as 
the blandest American session musicians: proficient but flat in their playing, 
tasteful but dead in their songwriting, recycling their ideas like the cold air 
in their favoured international studios. In fact, many of the group were 
American session musicians; on their second-last album, there were three 
different drummers and three bass players. Roxy Music, for all their pioneering 
shifts of image, for all their post-modern conceits, for all their subtle 
influence at the time and since, rose and fell in the classic manner of rock 
musicians.

 Paul Stump deals fairly well with the paradox. None of the band would talk to 
him - mindful, perhaps, of staining their mystique - so he sifts 
conscientiously through the cuttings, borrows from the tiny stack of 
'sycophantic' biographies, and thinks out loud.

 The beginnings of Roxy Music, he notes, were absolutely traditional for an 
English band. Ferry, the glamorous one, was born the son of a hill-farmer in 
County Durham. At weekends, once he was old enough, he escaped to Newcastle to 
hear rhythm and blues in fugged-up nightclubs. By 1967, at 22, he was singing 
in a band called The Gas Board, and getting into 'button-down shirts, the Beach 
Boys, Jackson Pollock - this much more happening, American thing'. That year, 
for his first publicity shot, he posed in a deep blue suit, in front of sunlit 
trees, leaning on the bonnet of a Californian-style Studebaker. The car was 
actually a near-wreck; the trees hid a Tyneside railway cutting.

 While Ferry was at art school, learning about presentation and self-promotion 
- like generations of British apprentice pop stars before and after - his 
future colleagues were also fantasising. Brian Eno, the eccentric one, was down 
in Suffolk with a postman for a father, listening to the tunes the local 
American airmen brought over. Phil Manzanera, the competent one, was an 
immigrant south Londoner, learning guitar from his mother's Cuban folk records. 
Andy Mackay, the cultured one, was on the other side of the Thames, practising 
his saxophone and oboe. By 1970, they had all run into each other.

 Early on, Roxy Music were a bedlam of ideas. Ferry, who named the band after 
the cinema chain, was interested in glitz. He wrote lyrics about dance steps 
and luxury brands. Eno, who wore eyeliner and necklaces and could barely play 
anything, wanted to make new noises: he stood like a mad professor behind his 
tape machines, shrieks and burbles emanating. Meanwhile, Manzanera tried out 
his most abrasive guitar pedals. Mackay tried to sound like a one-man 
orchestra. When Island Records heard their tape, 'Just about everybody around 
the table thought it was dreadful'. Stump is more respectful. Roxy Music's 
first recordings, he writes, were 'boppy yet harmonically diffuse', and full of 
'formal transmogrifications and elisions'. Such thickets of musicology are 
revealing, despite themselves. After its fascinating initial flurry of pop 
history, the book gradually stiffens into discography: there are chapters for 
each album, chapters for side projects, almost 50 pages of appendices to finish 
with.

 The detail of this is considerable and, sometimes, telling. During 1973, 
Ferry began to stand centre-stage instead of Eno for performances. Eno 
announced plans to record earthworms; shortly afterwards, Ferry secured his 
departure. Later that year, Ferry began wearing a tuxedo onstage, and singing 
the odd conventional cover version. Then, record by record, Roxy Music's own 
tunes were tidied, backing singers were hired, bassists and drummers fired, the 
first session men brought in. 'The pop song,' writes Stump, '[became] the end 
rather than the means.' Yet a similar deadening afflicts musical studies like 
this. Until the nineties, the 'rock comics', as Stump disparages them, 
dominated writing about pop music in Britain. Melody Maker and the NME were 
messy, amateurish and over-ambitious, it is true, yet sometimes, as in early 
Roxy Music, these qualities combined excitingly and in unexpected ways. 
Nowadays, these 'comics' sell fewer copies than many local papers - newsagents 
stock up instead with rock magazines like Q and Mojo: expertly researched, 
expensively designed, exhaustively covering even the obscurest subjects in pop 
history. Such journalism can empower, of course - bored teenagers can find out 
where to track down Captain Beefheart - but it can also fossilise. Mad geniuses 
are rationalised. Influences are listed. The role of chance is minimised. And 
often, among all the documentation, an actual, enticing description of the work 
in question never quite emerges.

 Near the end of this book, after Stump has digressed at length about Roxy 
Music's album sleeves, and their effeminacy or otherwise, and their 
appropriation of Pop Art and advertising techniques, and has mentioned in 
passing that the singer sent his sons to Eton, he finally gets lost in some 
music. 'One critic called it the most dynamic live recording of the 1970s . . . 
the encore is the Clash with drop-beats . . . a furious ensemble vamp which 
would not have shamed Miles Davis's mid-1970s band . . . ' The trouble is, he 
is not describing a Roxy Music album. One of Manzanera's short-lived 
super-groups is being canonised.
 