
Banking shares are leading the way as the UK market continues its rebound from 
four month lows.

With campaigning for the EU referendum suspended in the wake of the tragic 
death of MP Jo Cox, investors are in a calmer mood.

Banks and housebuilders are two sectors thought to be most at risk in the case 
of Brexit, and the focus away from the referendum has seen them come back into 
favour.

Lloyds Banking Group is up 3.54p at 64.90p, helped by reports it had won a 
battle with bondholders. 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/lloyds-banking-bonds-court-idUSL8N1981VG> 
Barclays is 5.85p better at 164.35p while Standard Chartered is up 19.25p at 
518p. Challenger bankShawbrook is also in demand, up 20.8p at 241.8p. Meanwhile 
Taylor Wimpey has climbed 6.3p to 174.8p and Barratt Developments is 16.5p 
higher at 527.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 65.83 points at 6016.31. Lee Wild, head of equity 
strategy at Interactive Investor, said:

A late surge in share prices yesterday continued in international markets 
overnight and has spilled over into a second day here. Banks and housebuilders, 
two sectors with most to lose from a ‘Leave’ vote, are back in favour.

The cessation of referendum hostilities...may have tipped the balance back in 
favour of the ‘Remain’ campaign, but it will be hard work keeping early gains 
without a big swing in the opinion polls.


Heading into a final weekend of campaigning, and with just days to go before 
the big vote, many traders could decide that squaring off positions is the best 
way to avoid sleepless nights.

But profit taking after recent rises has hit Randgold Resources, down 220p to 
£67.05, andFresnillo, which has fallen 27p to £12.06.

National Grid is 10.2p lower at 951.7p after MPs called for an overhaul of the 
business. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/national-grid-needs-overhaul-say-energy-committee-mps>
Meanwhile Credit Suisse issued an underperform rating:

National Grid <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalgrid> carries a 
large ‘safe haven’ premium that we believe is unwarranted by bottom-up 
fundamentals. We believe the risk of lower UK asset base growth is 
underappreciated in the share price. We update our earnings per share estimates 
(+5% for 2017, -1% for 2018 and -2% for 2019) and reduce our target price to 
820p (from 825p) due to small differences in out-turn asset base valuations in 
our model update.

Lower down the market JD Sports Fashion has jumped 9p to £12.34 after a 
positive trading update ahead of its annual meeting. It said it was well 
positioned for a strong first half, with a recent boost from the current Euro 
tournament, and was on track to meet market expectations. In a buy note 
Investec said:

The positive trading seen at the beginning of the year has continued with a 
boost in recent weeks from the UEFA Euro 2016 Tournament. Market data shows 
demand for Atheleisure remains strong and while we leave forecasts unchanged at 
the moment, risk appears firmly on the upside. JD remains an undervalued (2017 
estimated PE 16.5 times), exciting European roll-out story.

Events group UBM has added 17p to 568p after it sold its press release 
distributor PR Newswire to Cision for $841m (£551m). 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/15/pr-newswire-sold-to-cision-for-841m>
Liberum analysts said:

The completion now opens the way for UBM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/unitedbusinessmedia> to consolidate its 
shares (8 for 9) and pay out £245m in special dividends. It also opens the way 
for further acquisitions in the Events space, with UBM’s leverage of 1.1 times 
net debt/EBITDA at the end of 2016 providing nearly £200m of headroom (at 2 
times leverage).
 