
On 27 January CBS aired an interview 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-18560_162-57565734/obama-and-clinton-the-60-minutes-interview/>
 with the newly inaugurated President Barack Obama and his outgoing secretary 
of state, Hillary Clinton, during which the president faced accusations that 
under his watch America had retreated from its key role in world affairs. "The 
biggest criticism of this team," said the interviewer," has been [that there 
is] an abdication of the United States on the world stage, sort of reluctance 
to become involved in another entanglement."

Obama interrupted. "Well, Muammar Gaddafi probably does not agree with that 
assessment," he said. "Or at least if he was around, he wouldn't agree with 
that assessment." Quite.Gaddafi, to whom the US authorised 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/03/23/us_libya_arms_training/> $15m worth of arms 
sales in 2009, is not around because he was murdered by a mob shortly after 
being sodomised by a bayonet following his ousting by US-led Nato bombardment. 
In the minutes between the sodomising and the summary execution there just 
wasn't time to reflect on US foreign policy.

The day after the interview was screened, Obama met with the Major Cities 
Chiefs Police Association and the Major County Sheriffs' Association. The 
president, fresh from boasting about having Gaddafi "smoked",wanted to discuss 
how to stop guns getting into the wrong hands 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/01/28/us-obama-guns-idUSBRE90Q0BA20130128>
, bolster the forces of law and order, and stem violence in US cities.

Over the last few weeks there has been a distinct incongruity – to say the 
least – between the agenda Obama is promoting at home and the one he defends 
abroad. His justification for targeted killings anddrone strikes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/06/world/middleeast/with-brennan-pick-a-light-on-drone-strikes-hazards.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 
new> in foreign parts, prompted by his nomination of a CIA director, has 
coincided with his advocacy for stiffer gun control and appeals to respect 
human life following mass shootings. The result is an administration raising 
life and death issues in its actions and pronouncements but being unable to 
talk with any moral authority or ethical consistency on either.

In short, the credibility of a president in challenging lawless social 
violence in US cities is fundamentally undermined when he has his own personal
kill list 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/29/world/obamas-leadership-in-war-on-al-qaeda.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 in violation of international law to terminate enemies elsewhere.

"The diplomatic historian traces foreign affairs as if domestic affairs were 
offstage disturbances," writes Walter Karp in his book The Politics of War. 
"The historian of domestic politics treats the explosions of war as if they 
were offstage disturbances. Were that true, we would have to believe that 
presidents who faced a mounting sea of troubles at home have nonetheless 
conducted their foreign policy without the slightest regard for those troubles 
– that individual presidents were divided into watertight compartments, one 
labelled 'domestic' and the other 'foreign'."

Yet that is precisely how the Obama administration appears to have 
compartmentalised its response to violence and its victims. One moment the 
Obamas are mourning the tragic loss of Hadiya Pendleton, the 15-year-old girl 
who attended his inauguration. She was shot less than a mile from their Chicago 
home while sheltering from the rain in a park. The first lady, Michelle Obama, 
who attended Hadiya's funeral on Saturday, said, through a spokeswoman: "Too 
many times, we've seen young people struck down with so much of their lives 
ahead of them."

The next, his administration is maintaining a stony silence over the murder of 
Abdulrahman al-Awlaki, the 16-year-old American born in Denver who was killed 
by a drone in Yemen in 2011. His father, Anwar (also American), was an Islamist 
cleric – killed by a drone a few weeks earlier. When asked about the incident 
during the election campaign, Robert Gibbs, former White House press secretary 
and senior adviser to Obama's re-election campaign, essentially blamed 
Abdulrahman for having the kind of dad the US wanted to kill. "I would suggest 
that you should havea far more responsible father 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/10/how-team-obama-justifies-the-killing-of-a-16-year-old-american/264028/>
 if they are truly concerned about the wellbeing of their children."

On the one hand, we should not be surprised. These contradictions are inherent 
in the tension between the position to which he was elected and the forces that 
elected him. For all the global investment in Obama – peaking early, 
stratospherically and ridiculously, in the Nobel peace prize just nine months 
after he was voted in – he was elected to represent the interests of the most 
powerful and well-armed nation on Earth at a time of war. Murder was in the job 
description of the office he applied for and won to great fanfare. For all the 
claims of him becoming a great role model for young black men, he was always 
going to be responsible for the deaths of more innocents thanBiggie and Tupac 
<http://www.trutv.com/library/crime/notorious_murders/celebrity/shakur_BIG/index.html>
 combined.

According to the Bureau of Investigative Journalism 
<http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/>, between 2004 
and 2013 drone strikes have killed up to 893 civilians (including 176 children) 
in Pakistan, 178 civilians (including 37 children) in Yemen, and 57 civilians 
(including three children) in Somalia (while these started under Bush they were 
accelerated under Obama). According to the New York Times, his ambassador to 
Pakistan, Cameron Munter, complained to colleagues that "he didn't realise his 
main job was to kill people", a colleague said.

But Obama was returned to office by the votes of – among others – blacks, 
Latinos, youth and the poor, the very people and communities most likely to be 
blighted by gun violence. Michelle Obama came to Hadiya's funeral after 
considerable pressure had been applied by black communities in Chicago and 
nationwide. Since the shootings of children at Sandy Hook elementary school 
Obama has led an audacious push to galvanise a majority, in the country and in 
Congress,for tougher gun controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/16/obama-show-leadership-gun-control>
.

The unfortunate timing has highlighted the discrepancy between his foreign and 
domestic policies, exposing them not only as hypocritical but deeply tragic. 
While shop windows all around Obama's Chicago home hang posters saying "Stop 
killing people", the man they sent to the White House is doing precisely the 
opposite. Having shown his ability to rally human empathy to progressive causes 
at home, he then fails to recognise the common humanity of the innocents he is 
killing abroad.

"[America can be] a moral power 
<http://www.aavw.org/special_features/speeches_speech_king02.html>," said 
Martin Luther King – on whose Bible Obama swore in as president – during the 
Vietnam war. "A power harnessed to the service of peace and human beings, not 
an inhumane power unleashed against defenceless people." That's as true on the 
streets of Chicago as it is in the border regions of Pakistan.

Twitter: @garyyounge <https://twitter.com/garyyounge>
 