
It’s a great, although slightly strange, honour to be asked to be a godparent. 
What’s it all about? What does it mean? What should you do? I was recently 
asked to be godmother for what will be my fourth godchild. But even with four, 
I am still unsure about the role modern godparents play.

Am I to take them to church and provide spiritual guidance? Do I bring them up 
if their parents are killed in a plane crash? Do I send them a card and lavish 
presents for their birthdays?

Related: Brigid Delaney's diary | Defy the 'wellness' industry: here are some 
simple ways to feel better in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/defy-the-wellness-industry-heres-some-free-ways-to-feel-better-in-2017-brigid-delaney>

In the film version of About a Boy, a lazy bachelor played by Hugh Grant was 
asked to become a godparent and declined by saying, “I couldn’t possibly think 
of a worse godfather … I’ll forget her birthdays until her 18th, when I’ll take 
her out and get her drunk and … try and shag her.”

Apart from NOT doing that, are there any rules for godparenting? What is the 
test for being a good godparent?

I think you should be a ballast – give them what they are lacking at home. Say 
your godchild has fierce helicopter parents who buy them politically correct 
toys and don’t let them eat lollies – it is your duty to provide some balance, 
and chocolate.

Consider presents including Barbie dolls for children of feminists, and 
violent video games, knives that look real and complicated plastic machine guns 
for the children of pacifists.

When they’re teenagers, buy them bottles of scotch and tickets to music 
festivals, trips to a capital-city strip club and clothes they want but their 
parents think are inappropriate.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming

If they are the child of wild, out-of-control party parents, this is when you 
should offer to accompany your godchild to weekly religious services or 
volunteer together at soup kitchens.

As long as you don’t forget their birthday and send them a card with money in 
it each year, their childhood is pretty well sorted. Older kids, however, will 
often feel safer trying on a more adult role – having a stab at being more 
sophisticated, expressing fledging opinions – with someone close to their 
parents but not their parents.

Godparents can be the bridge kids need between their childish selves and the 
adults they are becoming. Let them walk across you. Take them out to a nice 
restaurant, talk to them as though they’re adults, draw out their opinions, let 
them feel comfortable and trust you. Keep the relationship with the godchild 
open, even if the one with their parents breaks down.

There are plenty of examples of that. Does Tony Blair’s birthday card with a 
tenner in it get returned to sender, after he posts it to godchild Grace Deng, 
for example? After all,Rupert Murdoch was apparently hurt by the closeness  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rupert-murdoch-hurt-by-closeness-of-wendi-deng-and-tony-blair-editor-reveals>
of his ex-wife Wendi Deng to Blair, according to Chris Mitchell, the former 
editor-in-chief of the Murdoch-owned broadsheet, the Australian. And what of 
Mitchell, who said of Kevin Rudd:

I think my worst mistake was to persuade Rupert Murdoch – and it really was me 
persuading him – that we should back Kevin Rudd in 2007. I should have known 
that Kevin could not change his spots.

I think I alienated a lot of my readers with that decision and pretty quickly 
Kevin showed that he was just as difficult as he had ­always been.

Fair enough, Mitchell doesn’t like Rudd. Yet Rudd is the godfather of 
Mitchell’s son, Riley. Awk!

But just because your relationship with the parents may break down it doesn’t 
mean the relationship with the child should crumble. Leave the door open for 
future contact and you may end up having a great relationship with your 
godchild without their parents’ involvement. Although it will probably 
infuriate the parents.

It’s also an idea to clarify your role. If the parents die, would they expect 
you to adopt their children? Are you expected to provide religious guidance? 
Babysitting? Friendship? Does the relationship have an expiry date, for example 
when the child turns 18? Is the godparent primarily there for emotional support 
or for practical assistance?

Related: Am I a bad mother? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Rowan Davies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/am-i-a-bad-mother-you-asked-google-heres-the-answer>

Friends of my parents who assumed godparent-like roles in my life when I was 
becoming an adult helped me in some of the following ways:

 *  Gave me a bed in their house for two weeks when I was at college and 
hating it. 
 * Nursed me and drove me to doctors’ appointments when, during a university 
booze cruise, someone put out their smouldering cigarette butt in my eye which 
blinded me for several weeks, and I had to wear a patch. 
 * Visited me when I was living overseas and took me to great restaurants I 
couldn’t then afford. 
 * Debated politics with me in a way that sharpened my opinions. 
 * Went to every book launch or event I have held, buying multiple copies of 
whatever I was selling. 
 * Helped me move house. 
 * Helped me clean houses to get the bond back. 
 This week I attended the funeral of one of these spectacular godparent-like 
figures who had been in my life since I was a child. A close friend of my 
parents, Tom enriched my life in so many ways – including doing many of things 
for me that I’ve listed above. I consider myself supremely lucky to have known 
him. And maybe that is the test of a good godparent. After all, you’ve got to 
pass it on.

A spur-of-the-moment sticking point

There’s a lot about the Sussan Ley travel expenses story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-secured-property-finance-months-before-apartment-purchase>
 that stinks, but what sticks in my craw is her statement that the $795,000 
purchase of the Gold Coast apartment was a spontaneous decision. Like buying a 
dress! Or a bag of chips!

Related: Sussan Ley may lose her job over expenses. She should lose it over 
health policy | Michael Buckley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/sussan-ley-may-lose-her-job-over-expenses-she-should-lose-it-over-health-policy>

 The cost of housing – particularly in Melbourne and Sydney – has meant that 
many people on average wages will either have to move away or rent forever. 
They salt away what they can for a deposit, they despair of ever being able to 
afford anything close to their workplace or family, they spend every Saturday 
for years attending auctions where property regularly sells for $100,000 more 
than they can afford. A lack of spontaneity – and lack of opportunity – 
characterise many people’s experience of the housing market.

So when a politician describes buying her second property as a spontaneous 
decision (her partner also owns a couple of investment properties, as well as a 
bin-cleaning franchise) it betrays one of the worst things a politician can be: 
out of touch.

That alone should cause Malcolm Turnbull to shiver – and make her position on 
the frontbench untenable.
 