
The river’s criss-crossing tributaries are the colour of milky tea. Weeping 
willow branches gently stir its surface, stilted wooden houses dot the banks 
and locals are dropped off at their island homes by a long, polished-wood boat 
– a water taxi. We are only 45 minutes by train from downtown Buenos Aires and 
yet, from here on, it’s waterborne transport only.

This is the Paraná delta, a 300km network of waterways that stretches from 
central Argentina to the gaping mouth of the River Plate. It’s a vast stretch 
of lush green land chopped into hundreds of islands by veins of water running 
in all directions. The islands on the northern edge of the delta, towards the 
border with Uruguay, are mostly uninhabited but, here, near the gateway town of 
Tigre, there’s a thriving community of around 4,000 residents – and many more 
on summer weekends.

On the edge of Greater Buenos Aires, 30km north of the centre, Tigre is where 
porteños (Buenos Aires locals) come to unwind. During my four years living in 
Argentina, this was my getaway, too. Aside from the year-round blue skies, 
those Saturday morning jaunts – a train ticket costs less than £1 – are 
probably what I’ve missed the most since returning to the UK.

The Argentinian capital is famous for turning its back on the River Plate – 
most of its buildings face away from it – but Tigre is where city dwellers 
reconnect with the water. Originally a port for fruit and timber exports, the 
Tigre delta enjoyed an early-20th-centurybelle époque as an elite tourist 
destination, before being unceremoniously dumped as Argentinians shifted their 
attentions to resorts on the Atlantic coast. Over recent years, it has been 
slowly bouncing back. That’s why the renovatedTigre Art Museum 
<http://www.mat.gov.ar/>, with its stunningly ornate 1912 promenade, shares the 
riverfront with a creepy abandoned mansion that could be home to an Argentinian 
Norman Bates.

For years, I struggled to get my head around the area: it’s vast, and visitor 
information is scarce. For some time, I’d do what most visitors do: turn up at 
thefluvial (boat station), buy a ticket to an island restaurant, and while away 
most of the day eating, drinking and watching the river traffic from a 
comfortable deck. But what I wanted to know, as I watched the passing water 
taxis and occasional city-boy speedboats, was where were they all going?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424354816016%2Fc2a5c053-d1ad-49fa-900c-5f7578252f37-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424354816016%2Fc2a5c053-d1ad-49fa-900c-5f7578252f37-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Boat carrying local commuters in Tigre. Photograph: Getty Images/Panoramic 
Images 
The answer was to start exploring, and the best way to do it seemed to be by 
kayak. Friends and I would hire them from the rowing club opposite the boat 
station (puroremo.com.ar, <http://www.puroremo.com.ar/> about £10 a day) and 
we’d tentatively paddle across the main drag of the Luján River, which flows 
past Tigre towards the Plate. We always experienced a moment of mild panic when 
faced with intimidatingly large tour boats and ferries heading to Uruguay, but 
the moment we turned down a mysterious, shady side stream, all was calm. 
There’d be barely any boat traffic to negotiate – just a few fellow kayakers – 
so we could concentrate on some serious daydreaming. The backwaters of Tigre 
are the sort of place romantic types instantly want to move to. In your head, 
you abandon all practicalities and start picking out your dream home – the one 
where the family labrador comes bounding down the jetty, or the one with a 
rickety front porch that wouldn’t look out of place in the US deep south.

Come early afternoon, we’d sniff out an asado (barbecue joint) and put down 
our paddles for an hour or two. In these parts, when you want to eat, you just 
look for a sign and park your boat in a sandy landing bay. The options 
typically run from a full barbecue, with chitterlings and blood sausage, to
choripán, a no-frills steak sandwich. Vegetarians might want to bring some 
back-up snacks, but some larger places do simple pasta dishes. You will be 
given a choice of “red, white or pink” sauce. Nothing is overly complicated 
around here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424354885421%2Feb30e091-dd45-496c-a3b0-a71a6234cd6f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424354885421%2Feb30e091-dd45-496c-a3b0-a71a6234cd6f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A riverside restaurant near Tigre. Photograph: Alamy 
On my first few kayaking trips, I would barely have digested my lunch before 
my uptight British ways would kick in and I’d start thinking about how best to 
beat the crowds at the train station. (The locals didn’t care much for 
foresight; they’d enjoy the sun and go when they were ready.) “Tranquiiila,” an 
Argentinian friend would say. Chill out. And so I learned the second most 
important thing about the delta. You can’t be a clock-watching daytripper if 
you want to see it at its best; you have to stay overnight.

Top 10 restaurants in Buenos Aires
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jan/30/top-10-restaurants-in-buenos-aires-argentina>
Come evening, almost everyone leaves. This is when the city really feels a 
long way away. Darkness descends and you are left with only the sounds of the 
crickets, the occasional lone boat, and maybe the low hum of mosquitoes (hey, 
nowhere’s perfect).

One of my best finds for onda (the much-used Argentinian word for atmosphere) 
was Isla Escondida. The name – meaning hidden island – says it all. I told the 
water taxi driver that’s where I was heading and he dropped me on a wooden 
jetty. From there I walked away from the main riverfront, through an empty plot 
of land and found a white clapboard villa, built in 1892 and facing a totally 
secluded little stream.

As a guesthouse, it’s deliberately a little rough around the edges, its boho 
vibe underlined by artsy birdcages hanging from trees, Moroccan daybeds in the 
garden and a Thai-style floating cabin (available to rent). But the overall 
effect is full of charm and utterly romantic. My bedroom had an original 
bathroom, with an old claw-foot bath (a real hand-me-down, not a try-hard 
import). It also offers a day package (£44pp) which includes return boat 
transport, use of indoor and outdoor pools, yoga, fishing, canoes and a 
trouser-popping barbecue lunch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424355025949%2Ff8cbac52-0a17-45f2-843a-002404f01e5d-2060x1969.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424355025949%2Ff8cbac52-0a17-45f2-843a-002404f01e5d-2060x1969.jpeg>
 The pool at Isla Escondida. Photograph: Vicky Baker 
It was after one of those lunches that I first went exploring on foot. On many 
of the islands, small groups of houses have formed into mini-communities. A 
trail by the waters’ edge led me first to a guy in his twenties who was 
practising aerial acrobatics on a big purple ribbon hanging from a tree; 
further round the bend, I found an artist’s ramshackle house, fronted by a huge 
sculpture of a jaguar’s head made from painted sheet metal (a nod to the big 
cats that once roamed these wilds, giving them the name Tigre).

This was the delta I had always wanted to get to know, with all its characters 
and eccentricities. The area has long been a draw for artists, writers and even 
heads of state. The house lived in by President Domingo Sarmiento until his 
death in 1888 is now a museum; famed Uruguayan architect Carlos Páez Vilaró 
used the delta as his muse for 30 years until his death last year. More 
poignantly, it was also an escape for many intellectuals and activists who 
later were “disappeared” during the 1976-1983 military dictatorship. Novelist 
Haroldo Conti was one of them and his little wooden house – still as he left 
it, with a desk beside the river – has been opened as a museum. (It’s 
accessible only by boat, on the Gambado stream – people find their way around 
here by giving the names of streams and cross-sections.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424355159382%2F58435206-2afa-4dba-bc4a-d66ac274100c-1585x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbecue%20joints%20and%20a%20boho%20vibe%20in%20the%20Tigre%20delta%2C%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Ftigre-delta-argentina-buenos-aires-kayak-barbecue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424355159382%2F58435206-2afa-4dba-bc4a-d66ac274100c-1585x2040.jpeg>
 Aerial acrobatics near Isla Escondida. Photograph: Vicky Baker 
Crossing the Andes: breaking borders on a stormy mountain bus ride between 
Argentina and Chile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/19/argentina-to-chile-andes-crossing>
Today’s Tigre, however, is moving on. There are new eco-friendly businesses, 
such as the Delta Terra centre, deep in the delta, offering low-footprint 
activities such as kayaking and photo safaris (from £5 a day,deltaterra.com.ar 
<http://deltaterra.com.ar/>). And in a completely different vein, a recently 
built complex around a new marina upstream features chain hotels that wouldn’t 
look out of place in an airport. (I cannot fathom why anyone would choose to 
stay there when there is a Unesco-listed biosphere reserve just down the road.)

The delta proper, with all its wild beauty and lack of pretension, is easy to 
romanticise. I know there is more to it than meets a tourist’s eye. On my last 
visit, I found myself talking to Ramone, a maintenance man in one of the 
restaurants. “The part you see here is just the tip of it. Further up stream, 
where people still work on the land, there is no electricity and little has 
changed there in years,” he says. Before leaving, I take another look at the 
giant wall map at Tigre train station, which covers the whole labyrinth. In an 
average weekend, you’ll barely see a couple of inches of it. Despite so many 
return visits, I still feel I have barely scratched its surface.

Way to go

Getting there
Flights were provided by Journey Latin America (020-8747 8315, 
journeylatinamerica.co.uk <https://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk/>), which has 
Lufthansa returns, via Frankfurt, from £750. Trains to Tigre (four an hour) run 
from Buenos Aires’ Retiro station (timetables atcferroviarios.com.ar 
<http://www.cferroviarios.com.ar/Mitre/descargas/Horarios_Retiro-Tigre.pdf>)

Where to stay
Overnight stays at Isla Escondida (+54 11 5245 9770, islaescondidadelta.com.ar 
<http://www.islaescondidadelta.com.ar/index/es>) cost about £104pp, including 
boat transfers, all meals and activities. For a free, or cheaper stay in Tigre, 
try guesthouseLa Casona del Rio <http://casonadelrio.com/cuartosboutique/>. If 
you are willing to muck in with chores, the Dutch-Argentine owners offer 
volunteer placements via WorkAway (workaway.info 
<http://www.workaway.info/288976965137-en.html>) – or you can be as idle as you 
please and just rent one of their cute themed rooms (from £26 a night B&B for 
two)

When to go
It’s usually about 28C and sunny in Buenos Aires in February; temperatures 
stay above 20C until May

What to do
If you are unsure about kayaking solo, group trips can be arranged with Urban 
Biking(+54 11 4314 2325, urbanbiking.com 
<http://en.urbanbiking.com/Cycling-Tours/Tigre-Delta/>). A full-day guided bike 
ride from the capital plus a 90-minute kayaking trip costs about £70pp
 