
Financial shares are rallying strongly after the Bank of Japan introduced 
further stimulus measures to boost its flagging economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/21/bank-of-japan-stimulus-programme-federal-reserve-business-live?page=with:block-57e21f51e4b0603ea33c4807#block-57e21f51e4b0603ea33c4807>
.

Barclays is the biggest riser in the leading index, up 5.5p at 171.95p. It has 
also been helped by analysts atHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> moving their recommendation 
from hold to buy and raising their target price from 150p to 190p. They said 
that selling Barclays’ unwanted assets would add value to the business.

Elswhere Lloyds Banking Group has been lifted 0.96p to 57.4p while HSBC itself 
is 7.2p higher at 590.6p. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at Interactive 
Investor, said:

 European markets are following Asia higher - with banks and financial 
companies leading the charge after the Bank of Japan surprised the market. With 
the market divided on whether the Bank of Japan would increase stimulus or cut 
rates further, Governor Kuroda decided to think outside the box and scrapped 
their set monetary base goal with the intent of targeting yields of various 
maturities, thereby creating a steeper yield curve.

 The shape of the yield curve has, in the past, been a very clear predictor of 
future economic activity. A flat yield curve gives no incentive for banks to 
lend, and typically presages an imminent economic slowdown. A steeper yield 
curve provides the motivation for banks to encourage customers to borrow, and 
is typically associated with a strengthening economy. Given that financial 
companies borrow short and lend long, today’s announcement by the Bank of Japan 
has provided the rocket fuel for Japanese banks to rally strongly. The major 
question is how effective this policy will be.

But Royal Bank of Scotland is missing out, down 1.4p to 182.3p after Santander 
pulled out of talks to buy 315 branches the bank must spin off. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/rbs-suffers-fresh-setback-in-williams-glyn-spin-off-deal>

Overall the FTSE 100 is now up 31.31 points at 6862.10, but the day is likely 
to be volatile ahead of this evening’s US Federal Reserve meeting. The central 
bank is not expected to raise interest rates, but it cannot entirely be ruled 
out. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said:

Markets are expecting a hike sometime in the next few months, just not today, 
which suggests that any move by the Federal Reserve Open Markets Committee 
today would catch the markets completely unprepared.

This would have the potential to be a rather risky option for the Fed, despite 
significant enthusiasm from several members of the committee to go now, which 
means if the Fed were to move today, Janet Yellen’s press conference would then 
be an exercise in expectations management, though this would be equally true if 
they hold rate, as is widely expected, though it would be an easier task to 
manage.

Housebuilders are higher, continuing to benefit from a note this week from 
UBS, which said the UK housing market had been more resilient than expected 
after the Brexit vote.Persimmon has put on 48p to £18.14 while Barratt 
Developments is 9.8p better at 488.5p.

Mining shares were also better on hopes of stability in the Chinese economy 
and a boost from the Japanese stimulus move.Anglo American has added 25.6p to 
883.2p whileRio Tinto has risen 54.5p to 2414.5p.

Elsewhere information provider RELX is the biggest loser in the FTSE 100, down 
17p at £14.51 as analysts at Macquarie issued an underperform rating. They said 
the company would find it difficult to improve operating performance further 
and it was time for a transformational deal.

Among the mid-caps, online grocer Ocado is down 0.7p at 268.1p as Deutsche 
Bank cut from hold to sell. It said:

While the share has fallen 17% post the third quarter, we continue to have 18% 
downside to our unchanged 220p target price. On more than 80 times 2016 
estimated enterprise value/EBIT,Ocado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> continues to look expensive 
relative to Amazon on 72 times.
 