
Profits in Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> investment 
banking arm will not be as high as last year, the bank said, as it asked 
shareholders for permission to sell off its African operations.

The trading update on the investment operation was contained in a circular 
being sent to shareholders 
<https://www.home.barclays/content/dam/barclayspublic/docs/InvestorRelations/IRNewsPresentations/2016News/153542_Circular%20print%20version.pdf>
 before the bank’s annual general meeting on 28 April. It intends to call a 
general meeting immediately after the AGM to facilitate the African sell-off.

The Barclays chief executive, Jes Staley, last month told investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/barclays-cuts-dividend-as-profits-fall-8-percent>
 he intended to scale back in Africa as he cut the dividend payout by more than 
50% for the coming two years.

The bank, which admitted last month that profits in the investment banking arm 
would be down, blamed current market conditions and a particularly strong 
performance a year ago.

“In Barclays’ investment banking operations, income in January and February 
was broadly in line with the same period last year. However, in light of 
current market conditions for investment banking and on the back of a 
particularly strong March in 2015, the board of Barclays does not expect as 
strong a performance from its investment banking operations for the whole of 
[the first quarter] of this year,” Barclays said.

Staley wants to reduce the bank’s 62% stake in its African operations, which 
are listed on the Johannesburg stock exchange, over the next two to three 
years. Former Barclays boss Bob Diamondhas been mooted as a possible buyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/04/bob-diamond-barclays-african-assets-atlas-mara>
, though in the circular to shareholders Barclays said the “current intention 
of the board is to retain a meaningful stake in Barclays Africa”.

It wants to reduce its shareholding to below 20% so it can remove the 
operation from the wider group. Barclays listed a number of reasons for selling 
the business, which boasts assets of £50bn and made profits last year of 
£1.1bn, including reducing the need to hold capital against the operation.

It cited “stringent UK and US conduct and other regulatory standards which are 
required to be applied to Barclays Africa’s business in addition to those 
standards that might otherwise apply to the BarclaysAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> Group”. These include EU, UK and US 
economic sanctions and financial crime rules.

The circular refers to a number of legal matters facing the African operations 
including those at Absa, its South African operation, which has admitted it has 
“identified potentially fraudulent activity by certain of its customers using 
import advance payments to effect foreign exchange transfers from South Africa 
to beneficiary accounts located in Asia, UK, Europe and the USA”.

It disclosed that Barclays could be required to pay compensation – yet to be 
calculated – to the African business for ending services such as credit risk, 
support services, human resources and technology services. Barclays can 
renegotiate the use of its name in countries such as Botswana, Ghana and 
Mauritius, if its ownership falls below 35%.

Barclays said it had hired its own investment banking arm as well as bankers 
from Citigroup and JP Morgan Cazenove to advise on the disposal of part or all 
of the African operation.
 