
The Romantic Getaway, near Crewkerne, Somerset


Who'd have thought that a building that started life as a pump house could be 
one of the most romantic hideaways in England? Secreted away in its own meadow, 
the Pump House has stone floors, woodburner and spiral staircase up to a 
galleried bedroom. You'll soon be cooing like lovesick teenagers. Lower 
Severalls Gardens (lowerseveralls.co.uk <http://www.lowerseveralls.co.uk>, 
entrance £3) is a short stroll away along the Parrett river. Just don't spoil 
the mood with a feeble joke about rumpy-pumpy.

• The Pump House costs from £294 a week with Classic Cottages (01326 555555, 
classic.co.uk <http://www.classic.co.uk/holiday-cottage/desc-2098.html>). A 
single from London to Crewkerne is from £11 with South West Trains (0870 906 
6649,southwesttrains.co.uk <http://www.southwesttrains.co.uk>)

The City Break, Budapest, Hungary


Budapest was founded by the Celts and adorned over the centuries with more 
fine buildings than is probably good for one city. Tucked between the Danube 
and Castle Hill is the stylish four-star Art'otel, its rooms designed by 
American artist Donald Sultan. Join one of three free city walking tours (
triptobudapest.hu <http://www.triptobudapest.hu>) – a cultural one, a 
"Communist" one and one taking in "the Jewish Quarter and Best Pubs".
Egészségetekre! (that's cheers!).

• From £89pp, including flights from Luton and two nights' B&B, with 
Dreambookers (0844 482 0070,dreambookers.com 
<http://www.dreambookers.com/citybreaks/budapest/Art-hotel.php>)

The Beach Holiday, Albufeira, Portugal

 Photograph: John Harper/Corbis 
The Sol e Mar is the antidote to all those hotels that advertise themselves as 
"a stone's throw from the beach" while omitting to mention that the stone in 
question has to be hurled by a siege engine. Set into a cliff, with eye-easing 
views of the bay, the hotel has its own lift down to the sandy strand. For 
yummy food at reasonable prices head for the old town and Tequila Bistro, just 
off the main square.

• From £105pp per week B&B based on two sharing, including flights from 
Stansted, with On the Beach (0800 085 8859,onthebeach.co.uk 
<http://www.onthebeach.co.uk/hotels/portugal/algarve/albufeira/sol-e-mar?adnetwork=af>
)

The French Chateau Stay, near Pau, France


The problem with chateaux is that they can cost a king's ransom. Not so at 
Fontaines d'Escot, a former monastery in the foothills of the Pyrenees which 
has been welcoming visitors on and off since the 15th century. The thermal 
waters enjoyed here since Roman times come free, as do the mountain walks (the 
chateau is on the Santiago de Compostela pilgrimage route).

• Self-catering gîtes (sleeping four) at Fontaines d'Escot (+33 5 5934 5440, 
fontaines-escot.com <http://www.fontaines-escot.com>) from €45 a night, doubles 
from €31 a night. Returns from London to Pau from £111 with Rail Europe (08448 
484070,raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>)

The Rail Journey, New York to LA or San Francisco, US


Poor old Amtrak – all the ugly sister of American public transport has to 
offer is wonderfully swish long-distance trains and astonishing prices. Choose 
one of five 3,000-mile routes from New York to LA or San Francisco and the 
three-night trip can cost as little as 4p a mile while giving you a taste of 
Chicago, the Rockies and the Sierra Nevada, or Route 66 and the Grand Canyon. 
Choo-choo-cha-boogie.

• Rail tickets from $187 each way with Amtrak (+1 215 856 7953, amtrak.com 
<http://www.amtrak.com>). Return flight London to New York from £279 through 
Flightcentre (01254 676967,flightcentre.co.uk <http://www.flightcentre.co.uk>)

The Big Get-Together, Elterwater, Cumbria


Anyone who has ever had a significant anniversary or birthday (not you, of 
course – you're far too young) and has tried to go away with their nearest and 
dearest knows how expensive it can be. Three cheers, then, for the YHA which is 
currently offering a storming 50% discount for exclusive use of its gorgeous 
17th-century converted barn in the quiet village of Elterwater. There's 
fabulous walking, climbing and mountain biking thrown in for nowt.

• Elterwater Hostel (0800 019 1700, escape-to.co.uk 
<http://www.escape-to.co.uk/view_property.php?id=24>), which sleeps 40 in 11 
bedrooms, is £304 for a two-night midweek break (Sunday-Thursday)

The Ski Resort, Arinsal, Andorra

 Photograph: PR handout 
This attractive and buzzing village has excellent runs for beginners and 
intermediates, a superb freestyle area, and access to the Pal and Arcalis ski 
areas. The après-ski is inexpensive too, thanks to Andorra's duty-free prices, 
while the Quo Vadis bistro offers breakfast for €7.50 and dinner for €15.

• A week at the Poblado Apartments costs from £195pp (based on four sharing) 
including flights from Gatwick with Inghams (020-8780 6680,inghams.co.uk 
<http://www.inghams.co.uk/ski-holidays/hotels/item91392/poblado-apartments-i5973/?adults=4&infants=0&children=0&dateFrom=06/02/2011&departurePoint=LGW&duration=7>
)

The Family Holiday, Canna, Inner Hebrides


How about a luxurious bell tent kitted out with futons, a woodburning stove 
and solar lighting on an island you'll have almost entirely to yourselves (the 
population of Canna is a mere 21)? Throw in some sandy beaches, a range of 
exotic wildlife and an eye-popping view towards the Isle of Rum and you'll 
wonder why you ever paid more for a family holiday.

• A week in a bell tent (sleeps four – extra beds or cots provided on 
request)costs from £200 with Canna Camping Holidays (01687 460166,
cannafolk.co.uk <http://cannafolk.co.uk/#>). Tickets from London to Mallaig 
from £15.50 single, child from £7.75 with Virgin Trains (virgintrains.co.uk 
<http://www.virgintrains.co.uk>). Return ferry tickets from Mallaig to Canna 
cost from £18.60 adult, £9.30 child (five-15), under-fives free with Calmac 
(0800 066 5000,calmac.co.uk <http://www.calmac.co.uk>)

The Backpacking Adventure, Kochi, India


India has an enduring reputation as the place to go for backpackers on a 
budget, with food, accommodation and travel all as cheap as chapatis. Add an 
extraordinarily cheap flight to Kochi – the self-styled "Gateway to Kerala" – 
and let the adventure begin. Before going off to find yourself, spend some 
loose change in Kochi on a boat ride to Bolgatty Island, a visit to Fort Kochi 
and a gander around St Francis' Church, completed in 1516 and the oldest church 
in India.

• Return flights from Heathrow to Kochi costs from £322 with Tickets To India 
(020-8518 9100, ticketstoindia.co.uk <http://www.ticketstoindia.co.uk>). A 
double room with air conditioning at Daffodil Homestay (+91 484 221 8686,
cochinhomestays.org <http://www.cochinhomestays.org>) costs from £20 a night

The Rural Idyll, near Hay-on-Wye, Powys


Long gone are the days when city slickers could rent a rustic cottage for a 
few shillings to live out their bucolic fantasies. However, there are some 
pastoral bargains to be had, including the sumptuous new-kid-in-the-meadow Hay 
Bluff Cottage. Hidden below the Black Mountains, the homestead is blessed with 
glorious views across the Wye Valley and a garden with its own orchard, pond 
and stream. Indulge in further money-saving adventures by wandering down to 
Hay-on-Wye to plunder the town's secondhand bookshops.

• Hay Bluff Cottage (sleeps six) costs from £220 for four nights midweek with 
Under The Thatch (01239 851410,underthethatch.co.uk 
<http://www.underthethatch.co.uk/accommodation.php?accomid=133>)
 