
1) Cleveland Cavaliers shock the Golden State Warriors


You can be forgiven for thinking that the Cleveland Cavaliers were finished. 
After all, no team in NBA history had ever come back from a 3-1 NBA Finals lead 
and they were playing aGolden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> team that wasn’t just 
good but historically unprecedented. Having gone 73-9 in the regular season, 
the 2015-16 Warriors were arguably a single win away from being in the “best 
NBA team ever” conversation.


Plus, Cleveland was Cleveland. The city hadn’t won a championships in 52 
years. The entire history of professional sports indicated that their situation 
was hopeless. Even when the Cavaliers won the next two games to force a Game 7, 
there was a sense that it was merely setting the stage for yet another crushing 
disappointment.

It wasn’t until very late in the fourth quarter of Game 7 that the “wow” 
moment came about. With the game tied and the clock beginning to run out, 
LeBron James practically teleported to the other side of the court in order to 
block an Andre Iguodala attempt. James wasn’t just making a basketball play, he 
was sending the Warriors a message: They weren’t going to let them have this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-zd62MxKXp8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-zd62MxKXp8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-zd62MxKXp8&media=>
And they didn’t. Kyrie Irving subsequently hit one of the biggest shots 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZ8yCJgsF_4> in Finals history, the Cavaliers 
ended up winning 93-89 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/cleveland-cavaliers-win-nba-title-golden-state-warriors-game-7-nba-finals>
. The Warriors’ miracle season was dead and so was the so-called Cleveland 
sports curse.


2) Team USA sweep the Olympics


This year’s US men’s basketball team didn’t quite have the star power of past 
Dream Teams,and they even struggled on occasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/usa-beat-spain-rio-olympic-basketball-final>
, but that ultimately didn’t change the final result. Once again, Team USA went 
undefeated on their way towards aneasy final victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/usa-mens-basketball-olympics-rio-2016-serbia-durant-anthony-gold>
 against an entirely overmatched opponent (that would be Serbia, this time 
around). It was a worthy end to the Olympic careers of Carmelo Anthony, whose 
four medals established him as the most decorated basketball player in US 
Olympic history, and head coach Mike Krzyzewski.


They weren’t, however, the most dominant basketball team in Rio. The gap 
between the US women’s team and their opponents was so wide that it almost felt 
unfair that they were allowed to compete. Their101-72 win  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/20/womens-olympic-basketball-final-usa-v-spain-live>
over Spain in the final was actually one of the more competitive games they 
played.


With a murderer’s row of top players including Maya Moore, Brittney Griner, 
Sue Bird, Elena Delle Donne and Diana Taurasi, it could be argued that the 2016 
squad wasn’t just the greatest women’s basketball team of all time but one of 
the most talented basketball teams ever assembled, period.


3) Kobe Bryant, Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett retire

They were, perhaps, the best players of their generation and we said goodbye to
all three of them 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2016/10/07/kobe-bryant-tim-duncan-kevin-garnett-nba-retirement>
 in the span of a few months. Before the start of the 2015-16 season, Kobe 
Bryant announced that this would be his final NBA season, essentially 
transforming his team’s campaign into a farewell tour.


Well, Bryant nailed the encore, that’s for certain. On the last day of the 
season, Bryant scored 60 points in a win over the Utah Jazz. It took him50 shot 
attempts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/after-one-final-night-of-magic-kobe-bryant-and-los-angeles-move-on>
 to do so. It was the platonic ideal of a Bryant game, in other words.

Tim Duncan’s exit, in comparison, was more in line with his private, 
unassuming personality. The news of Duncan’s retirement, after 19 seasons in 
the league, came inthe form of a press release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/11/tim-duncan-retires-san-antonio-spurs-nba>
 posted on the San Antonio Spurs’ website during the dog days of summer. Just 
like that, he was gone.


A few months later, the word came that Kevin Garnett was retiring 
<http://www.nba.com/timberwolves/kevin-garnett-announces-retirement/>. It was 
surprising news because Garnett still had a year left on his contract with the 
Minnesota Timberwolves, the team that drafted him and the team he returned to 
after stints with the Boston Celtics and (less notably) the Brooklyn Nets. 
Throughout his 21 NBA seasons, Garnett gained a reputation as one of the game’s 
most enigmatic figures, it follows that there would be an air of mystery 
surrounding his departure.

4) The basketball world mourns Pat Summitt


The basketball world mourned the loss of a true legend this year. Pat Summitt, 
former head coach of Tennessee’s women’s basketball program,died in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/28/pat-summitt-tennessee-basketball-ncaa>
 after a battle with early onset Alzheimer’s. She was 64.


As the head coach of Tennessee’s women’s basketball team since 1974, her Lady 
Vols teams won eight championships, only UCLA’s John Wooden and UConn’s Geno 
Auriemma have won more. As impressive as those wins were, they won’t be her 
lasting legacy. Instead, people will remember Summitt for how she helped grow 
women’s basketball and how her teams helped transform it from a niche sport to 
what it is today. If she’s not the most important figure in the history of the 
sport, she’s certainly in the top two or three.


Maybe no other anecdote is more telling than her response when asked whether 
she would be interested in coaching the Tennessee men’s team. Shereplied:  
<http://www.vox.com/2016/6/28/12051584/pat-summitt-womens-sports-changed-forever>
“Why is that considered a step up?” It was a good question then. It remains a 
question now.

5) Kevin Durant joins the Warriors

There were talks about it happening, but no one really thought it was 
possible. The easy money would be to bet on free agent Kevin Durant re-signing 
with the Oklahoma City Thunder. Even if Durant wanted to go to the Warriors, 
how would they make room for him? Heck, even if they could afford to bring him 
in, the Warriors offense was already historically great, how much better could 
Durant possibly make them?


If the Warriors had won their second straight title, Durant would probably 
still be with the Thunder. Instead, their painful loss to the Cavaliers 
convinced them they needed to make a move. So, in July, Durant and the Warriors
agreed to a two-year, $54.3m contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/kevin-durant-golden-state-warriors-oklahoma-city-thunder-nba-free-agency>
.


Durant’s defection not only added a new chapter to the Warriors’ increasingly 
tense rivalry with the Cavaliers, it had the side effect of making every 
Warriors/Thunder game featuring Durant’s former team-mate Russell Westbrook a 
must-watch event.

6) NCAA Championship game comes to a crazy end

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyTThyQPoXxY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyTThyQPoXxY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyTThyQPoXxY&media=>
For all of its faults, 2016 didn’t disappoint when it came to dramatic 
endings. Take, for instance, the final minutes of the title game between North 
Carolina and Villanova which featured not one, but two of the most incredible 
shots you will ever see at any level of basketball.


It’s hard not to feel bad for North Carolina’s Marcus Paige. His improbable, 
off-balance three-pointer that tied the game with just 4.7 seconds left in 
regulation should have made him the game’s hero. It was a moment meant to be 
celebrated for years and years to come.


Instead, North Carolina had mere seconds to celebrate before fate, in the form 
of Villanova’s Kris Jenkins, stepped in. With time expiring, Jenkins hit his own
once-in-a-lifetime shot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/05/villanova-ncaa-title-winning-shot-unc-amazing-game-college-basketball>
 as the buzzer went off, to break the tie, not to mention the hearts of a 
thoroughly stunned North Carolina. Villanova won 77-74, in a manner no one is 
likely to forget any time soon, even if UNC fans might wish they could.

7) The Process comes to an end

After years off purposeful failure, the Philadelphia 76ers parted ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/philadelphia-76ers-general-manager-and-president-sam-hinkie-abruptly-quits>
 with GM Sam Hinkie the chief architect of the much-embattled “Process.” The 
Process was a controlled demolition of the team that, in theory, would allow 
them to rebuild through the draft. Under Hinkie, the 76ers shed nearly 
everything of value, fielded a deliberately noncompetitive team for several 
years and hoped to land franchise-revitalizing players come draft day.

Unfortunately, the Process went on longer than either fans or ownership were 
prepared to wait. There’s only so many seasons where you can afford to put out 
an unpalatable product and still keep your fanbase. By the time the 76ers 
brought in Jerry Colangelo as chairman of basketball operations, it was clear 
that Hinkie was on his way out.


Ironically, Hinkie was fired right before his strategy was finally starting to 
show dividends: the 76ers actually got the first overall pick in the lottery, 
which they used to select Ben Simmons. Dario Saric, who had been playing in 
Turkey, finally joined the team. Most promising of all, Joel Embiid, the 
heavily hyped center who was sidelined with injuries for his first few seasons, 
has emerged as the Rookie of the Year favorite now that he can actually play.


He’s taken up a nickname, he calls himself The Process. 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2016/10/26/joel-embiid-philadelphia-76ers-the-process>


8) The salary cap rises

For several years there’s been a discussion about how the league would change 
after the influx of money from their theirnine-year, $24bn deal 
<http://deadspin.com/what-the-nbas-insane-new-tv-deal-means-for-the-league-a-1642926274>
 with ESPN and Turner Sports started pouring in. Surprisingly enough, the first 
free-agency period under the new salary cap was almost reasonable compared to 
what some had predicted.

Oh sure, it’s still hilarious that Evan Turner received a four-year $70m 
contract from the Portland Trail Blazers. And, yes, even Mike Conley will tell 
you that Mike Conley doesn’t deserve to bethe highest paid player 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/mike-conley-and-grizzlies-agree-to-the-biggest-nba-contract-ever-014649732.html>
 in NBA history. Those deals were the exceptions rather than the rule, which 
was almost disappointing: laughing at teams handing out bad contracts is one of 
the greatest joys in being a sports fan.


9) WNBA Finals Game 5
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2wMjQXJoDc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2wMjQXJoDc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds2wMjQXJoDc&media=>
We mentioned that there were a lot of exciting endings this year right? Game 5 
of the WNBA finals, a winner-takes-all affair between the Minnesota Lynx and 
the Los Angeles Sparks was, gave usthe most dramatic 
<http://www.espn.com/wnba/story/_/id/17847259/game-5-was-instant-classic-riveting-wnba-finals>
 finish in league history as the two teams traded potential game-winners in its 
final minute.


The Sparks were up 75-74 with a little more than 19 seconds to go when Maya 
Moore hit a jumper that gave the lead back to Minnesota. With time running out, 
the Sparks flew to the other end of the court where Nneka Ogwumike was able to 
rebound a missed shot and score on the put back with just 3.1 seconds left on 
the clock. This time around, the score held up, and the Sparks won the 
championship.


The game, however, was not free from controversy 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2016/10/wnba-says-officials-missed-key-call-in-final-80-seconds-of-championship-game>
. The day after Game 5, the WNBA admitted that Ogwumike was improperly credited 
for an earlier basket that was a shot clock violation and shouldn’t have 
counted. I’m sure that makes the Lynx feel better.


10) The Golden State Warriors go 73-9


In a different universe, the biggest basketball story of the year would have 
been the Golden State Warriors surpassing the 1995-96 Chicago Bulls’ record of 
72-10 on the last day of the regular season witha win over the Memphis Grizzlies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/golden-state-warriors-record-73-wins-memphis-grizzlies-jordan-bulls>
. In this one, however, it’s becomethe NBA equivalent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/22/golden-state-warriors-cleveland-cavaliers-nba-great-losers>
 of the New England Patriots going 16-1, as impressive of an accomplishment as 
it is, it ultimately acts as a vaguely embarrassing reminder of what could have 
been had things not fallen apart right at the very, very end.

 