
Bret Easton Ellis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis> may well 
go down as one of this era’s epochal novelists, a singular essayist on the icy 
inhumanity of 20th- and 21st-century living, delivering grim librettos on the 
emptiness of privileged youth. As a film-maker, his legacy is less assured, as 
anyone who has seen The Informers will be aware. But that has not stopped Ellis 
joining the merry band of blowhards who enjoy giving Warner Bros’ DC expanded 
universe (DCEU) of superhero movies a good kicking at every available 
opportunity.

“I was having dinner with a couple of executives who know other executives who 
are working on the Batman movie, The Batman,”Ellis told The Ringer 
<https://theringer.com/movie-industry-shifts-peak-tv-arrival-moonlight-f0a5ddd85384#.jojsd8cgi>
. “And they were just telling me that there are serious problems with the 
script. And that the executives I was having dinner with were complaining about 
people who work on the Batman movie. And they just said they went to the studio 
and they said, ‘Look, the script is … Here’s 30 things that are wrong with it 
that we can fix.’

“And [the executives] said, ‘We don’t care. We don’t really care. The amount 
of money we’re going to make globally, I mean 70% of our audience is not going 
to be seeing this in English. And it doesn’t really matter, these things that 
you’re bringing up about the flaws of the script.’”

To be fair, Ellis was being interviewed for a piece on the death of movies and 
concurrent rise of television as an art form when he made his comments. It was 
probably not his intention to add to the chorus of disapproval that has greeted 
the launch of Warner’s DCEU among critics. Moreover, the novelist andnoted 
cineaste <http://podcastone.com/Bret-Easton-Ellis-Podcast> has now made an 
apology of sorts on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/BretEastonEllis/status/794676696565694464/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, clarifying that his anecdote was at best third hand, and that he has “no 
idea” personally what the screenplay is like for Ben Affleck’s debut solo 
Batman outing.
Bret Easton Ellis (@BretEastonEllis) 
https://t.co/4mHqtwTZzw <https://t.co/4mHqtwTZzw> pic.twitter.com/J6Pc4LxHKy 
<https://t.co/J6Pc4LxHKy>
 <https://twitter.com/BretEastonEllis/status/794676696565694464> November 4, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/BretEastonEllis/status/794676696565694464> 
None of this matters a jot, of course. The word is now out there in the 
blogosphere that The Batman is “struggling”, just as Patty Jenkins’s Wonder 
Woman is deemed to be experiencing difficulties thanks toan anonymous open 
letter 
<http://www.pajiba.com/think_pieces/an-open-letter-to-warner-bros-ceo-kevin-tsujihara-about-layoffs-zack-snyder-and-donuts.php>
 from a disgruntled ex-Warner employee to CEO Kevin Tsujihara in September. 
Then there’s The Flash,which recently lost its second director 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/the-flash-loses-director-rick-famuyiwa-1201905032/>
, and Justice League, which has been squeezed down into one movie because
everyone hated 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/batman_v_superman_dawn_of_justice/> Zack 
Snyder’s Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-affleck-batman-dc-warner-bros%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F179d3ea988f659260cbe68e406d3af744e02c438%2F44_0_1935_2418%2F1935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batfleck%20to%20the%20rescue!%20DC%20desperately%20needs%20a%20super%20smash%20to%20stop%20the%20bad%20buzz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-affleck-batman-dc-warner-bros%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batfleck%20to%20the%20rescue%21%20DC%20desperately%20needs%20a%20super%20smash%20to%20stop%20the%20bad%20buzz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fben-affleck-batman-dc-warner-bros%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F179d3ea988f659260cbe68e406d3af744e02c438%2F44_0_1935_2418%2F1935.jpg>
 Given free rein at DC … Zack Snyder, director of Superman vs Batman: Dawn of 
Justice. Photograph: Nick Harvey/REX/Shutterstock 
The problem for Warner Bros is that it has brought this on itself. The studio 
has a reputation as a place that allows film-makers free rein to deliver their 
own original visions, a policy that worked superbly for Christopher Nolan’s 
Batman movies but proved disastrous for Dawn of Justice. So freaked out do 
executives appear to have been at the reaction to it, the first instalment in 
an ambitious slate of 10 new films based on the DC comics back catalogue, that 
theyreportedly intervened 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/suicide-squads-secret-drama-rushed-916693>
 to try and ensure David Ayer’s Suicide Squad didn’t go the same way. Hence 
that movie emerged as a right royal mess stuck half way between two radically 
different cuts.

Jenkins has complained that talk of her own movie being in similar difficulties
couldn’t be further from the truth 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/wonder-woman-director-patty-jenkins-responds-claim-mess-1201836794/>
. And Affleck probably has a right to be irritated that The Batman is already 
getting bad press given his own film-making credentials are rather more 
polished than those of Snyder (or Ellis himself).

From Suicide Squad to Batman v Superman, why are DC’s films so bad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/aug/03/from-suicide-squad-to-batman-v-superman-why-dc-films-so-bad-zack-snyder>
The problem is that there’s a lingering reek of putrescence surrounding the 
DCEU, thanks largely to its two early effortsboth proving to be stinkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/aug/03/from-suicide-squad-to-batman-v-superman-why-dc-films-so-bad-zack-snyder>
. And until Warner puts its house in order and begins pumping out quality 
movies in the manner of rival Marvel, these kind of stories are just going to 
keep on coming. The idea that the script for The Batman is riddled with errors, 
and that executives can’t be bothered to fix them because international markets 
will make up the box office, is like something from a bad clickbait tagline. 
And yet it feeds into fears that Warner is happy to continue putting out 
substandard product while utilising huge marketing budgets to paper over the 
cracks, just as it did relatively successfully with both Dawn of Justice and 
Suicide Squad.

The reality is that far from being blase about its upcoming superhero roster, 
Warner appears terrified at the prospect of failure. That’s why Suicide Squad 
wasreportedly  
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/suicide-squads-secret-drama-rushed-916693?utm_source=twitter>
edited in part by the team who came up with the movie’s eye-popping trailers, 
rather than being left under Ayer’s full control. And it’s also whySnyder and 
his team struck such an apologetic tone 
<http://www.geek.com/tech/justice-league-set-visits-signal-zack-snyders-second-thematic-pivot-in-three-movies-1659011/>
 towards bloggers and critics at a recent Justice League set visit.

Whether Snyder really can learn from his mistakes is one thing. But those of 
us hoping the DCEU can be turned around will be hoping that at least part of 
Ellis’s anecdote – the bit about studio executives leaving the creatives to 
their own devices – is true. Whether they end up being classics of the genre or 
not, I want to see what a Ben Affleck-directed Batman movie looks like and how 
a Patty Jenkins Wonder Woman flick turns out. Like Marvel, Warner needs to have 
an overarching vision for its comic book movies – the creation of DC Films and
comics legend Geoff Johns’ elevation to head geek 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/batman-v-superman-fallout-warner-895174>
 should help in that regard. But no one wants to see these movies being 
directed by committee.
 