
Zack Snyder has debunked a fan theory about Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice,
which is that the caped crusader’s former sidekick Robin had morphed into 
supervillain the Joker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-fan-theory-joker-suicide-squad-ben-affleck>
.

Batman v Superman: can a Joker card of a fan theory save Zack Snyder's film?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-fan-theory-joker-suicide-squad-ben-affleck>
The theory had been gathering steam since the release of the superhero 
blockbuster, as a way of explaining the new Batman’s out-of-character 
behaviour: Ben Affleck’s Dark Knight targets Superman on minimal evidence and 
kills bad guys on the streets of Gotham.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20v%20Superman%20stars%20Ben%20Affleck%20and%20Henry%20Cavill%3A%20'Batman's%20like%20Hamlet'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20v%20Superman%20stars%20Ben%20Affleck%20and%20Henry%20Cavill%3A%20%27Batman%27s%20like%20Hamlet%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview&media=>
 Batman v Superman stars Ben Affleck and Henry Cavill: ‘Batman’s like Hamlet’ 
At one point in the film, Batman walks past a Robin costumethat has bullet 
holes, in his Batcave. Fans have suggested that photographs of a topless, 
tattooed Jared Leto in character as the Joker for the forthcoming filmSuicide 
Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad> show scars on his left 
and right shoulders in the same position as the holes in the Robin costume.

Batfleck begins: Ben Affleck 'has written his own Batman movie'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-ben-affleck-written-own-movie>
But Snyder told IGN 
<http://uk.ign.com/videos/2016/03/30/how-the-death-of-robin-shaped-ben-afflecks-batman>
 he has a more orthodox explanation for the scene, one that recalls the 1988 
graphic novelA Death in the Family 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batman:_A_Death_in_the_Family>. “In my mind, it 
was that Robin had died 10 years earlier, during some run in with a young 
Joker,” he said. “To me, it was a fun backstory … to play with. The whole idea 
was that there had been loss and sacrifice.”

Snyder added: “[Batman] doesn’t really have a life outside of the cave. I 
thought by including Robin – a dead Robin – it would help us understand he’s 
been on quite a little journey.”

Affleck’s agent, Patrick Whitesell, told the Hollywood Reporter this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-ben-affleck-written-own-movie>
 that the actor and Oscar-winning film-maker had written his own script for a 
Batman movie set in Warner Bros’ planned “DC Comics superhero universe”. 
However, he also said his client was currently only contracted for two more 
appearances as Batman, in two forthcoming Justice League films which are due in 
2017 and 2018.

Suicide Squad v Batman v Superman v Susan Sarandon v Debra Messing – the 
Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/apr/01/suicide-squad-v-batman-v-superman-v-susan-sarandon-v-debra-messing-the-dailies-film-podcast>
Batman v Superman has been heavily criticised for its lack of humour, notably 
by Affleck’s friend and sometime director Kevin Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/kevin-smith-batman-v-superman-criticism>
.

In related news, Birth.Movies.Death 
<http://birthmoviesdeath.com/2016/03/31/suicide-squad-reshoots-bode-well-for-the-dc-movieverse>
 reports that David Ayer’s Suicide Squad movie is having reshoots, in order to 
lighten the tone and add more comedy.

Suicide Squad, about a team of DC Comics supervillains who are allowed out of 
jail to complete an “impossible” mission, has been the subject of huge interest 
since a trailer featuring an irreverent tone and plenty of bad-guy wisecracking 
hit the web. However, the fan site reports that the promo featured most, if not 
all, of the movie’s jokes, and that new scenes are being shot to ensure it 
doesn’t misrepresent the final movie.

Starring Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn, Leto as the Joker, Will Smith as 
Deadshot, Joel Kinnaman as Rick Flag and Cara Delevingne as Enchantress, 
Suicide Squad is due in cinemas this August.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCmRih_VtVAs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCmRih_VtVAs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCmRih_VtVAs&media=> 