
Iceland, the land of fire and ice, is taking on Iceland, the purveyor of 
frozen chicken tikka lasagne, in a major trademark battle. The Icelandic 
governmentlaunched legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/government-of-iceland-to-challenge-retail-chain-iceland-over-name-use>
 against the British supermarket last week, arguing that the grocery chain, 
which owns the Europe-wide trademark registration for the word Iceland is 
preventing Icelandic companies from promoting themselves abroad.

The contest is one of many brand name legal battles offering more entertaining 
plot points than your average box set. We look back at six of the best:

Elvis Presley v BrewDog

Elvis Presley may have died (or so most of us believe) in 1977 but his name 
lives on, and sometimes not in quite the way the guardians of his estate would 
like. This year the Presley estate entered a trademark dispute with Scottish 
brewer BrewDog, demanding it drop the name of its beer brand “Elvis Juice IPA”. 
In response, BrewDog’s founders, James Watt and Martin Dickie, have changed 
their names by deed poll to Elvis so they can argue they named the beer after 
themselves. Watt and Dickie explained in apun-strewn press statement 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2016/10/07/brewdog-bosses-change-first-names-elvis-legal-dispute-uh-huh-huh>
 that they were “caught in a trap” and advised the “grey-suited hound dogs” at 
the Presley estate divert their attention to “another potential source of quick 
remuneration: a brewery that calls itself ‘The King’ of beer”.


Apple Corps v Apple Computer

When he named his company Apple, Steve Jobs must have foreseen he’d attract 
the attention of Apple Corps, the holding company founded by the Beatles in the 
late 1960s. In 1978, two years after Apple Computer launched, Apple Corps, 
owner of the Beatles’ record label Apple Records, sued it fortrademark violation
 <http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/beatles-itunes2.htm>. In 1981 they 
settled with the understanding that Apple Computer would never enter the music 
industry. Needless to say, this settlement didn’t last. The dispute came to a 
head after Apple unveiled iTunes in 2003 and it wasn’t put to rest until 2007 
when it was agreed Apple Inc, the company dropped “Computer” from its name that 
year, would own of all the trademarks related to “Apple” and would license 
certain trademarks back to Apple Corps, including Apple Corps’ granny smith 
logo. The Beatles’ back catalogue finally became available on iTunes in 2010 
after years of negotiations. Jobs, a Beatles fan, described the whole saga as a 
“long and winding road”. As the most valuable brand in the world, according to 
branding consultancyInterbrand 
<http://interbrand.com/newsroom/interbrand-releases-2016-best-global-brands-report/>
, Apple can easily afford such wrangles, but there’s a lesson here for the rest 
of us. “When creating your brand name, from the very beginning you need to look 
at where your brand might be going in the future,” advises Rebecca Robins, 
global director at Interbrand.

WWF v WWF

When wrestling company Titan Sports changed its name to the World Wrestling 
Federation it was drawn into a legal fight with another WWF, the World Wildlife 
Fund, that lasted 13 years. The conservation charity took action to protect its 
brand from what it described as an “unsavoury” connection with wrestling, and,
in 2001 a court in London ruled in its favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/aug/11/paulkelso1>. Not one to take a 
beating lying down, the World Wrestling Federation challenged the ruling, and, 
after that was dismissed, it threatened to appeal. The wrestlers eventually 
gave in and spent millions rebranding to World Wrestling Entertainment, WWE. It 
also used the line “Get The ‘F’ Out” as a marketing slogan. After the World 
Wildlife Fund’s victory, a spokesman for the charity said: “It’s been the 
wrestlers against a cute little panda bear. And the panda won.”


Victoria Beckham v Peterborough FC

In her previous incarnation as a Spice Girl, Victoria Beckham found an 
unlikely sparring partner in the form of football club Peterborough United. In 
2002,Beckham opposed Peterborough United’s attempt to register “Posh” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/nov/05/newsstory.sport9>, the club’s 
nickname, as a trademark, with her publicity company claiming that the word was 
“inexorably associated with her in the public’s mind”. The club contested that 
it had been using its Posh moniker since the 1930s and Beckham’s challenge was 
overturned. “People get very attached to a name they’ve either adopted or used 
for aeons and they feel they have a God-given right to it,” says Michael 
Johnson, founder and creative director of branding and design consultancy 
Johnson Banks. “It’s pretty ridiculous that Victoria Beckham even considered 
she owned the word ‘posh’, and Peterborough claiming they own it is also dodgy. 
Posh is a word.”

Instagram v LitterGram

Combating Britain’s litter problem was Danny Lucas’s goal when he founded 
LitterGram, an app that encourages users to share and geotag pictures of litter 
they see on the streets and report it to their local council. However, his app 
came to the attention of lawyers for Instagram and its owner Facebookwho told 
him in September to change the name or face a lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/instagram-lawyers-anti-litter-app-change-name-littergram-instagram>
. They argue the use of “gram” in the title could undermine the world’s most 
famous photo-sharing site’s brand. Lucas says: “They’ve said ‘change your name’ 
and they’ve given us deadlines which have come and gone. We make an appeal and 
they don’t respond.” He has delivered a public plea to Facebook founder Mark 
Zuckerberg claiming the “unreasonable demands that we rebrand will kill our 
momentum”, and last month it was announced thatInstagram had dropped the case 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-kent-37920291>. 

Facebook takes brand protection seriously, as evidenced by a previous wrangle 
it had with a teacher’s community website in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/aug/25/facebook-teachbook> called 
Teachbook in 2010 for using the word “book” in its name. In the end Facebook 
agreed to drop its trademark suit after the group changed its name to 
TeachQuest.

Starbucks v Sambucks

Starbucks has not been one to shy away from trademark battles with 
considerably smaller adversaries. The world’s largest coffee chain once went 
after a restaurant in British Columbia because it was called HaidaBucks and 
took a Texan bar owner to court over a beer he brewed and sold named Star Bock. 
Sam Buck Lundberg, a coffee shop owner in the small town of Astoria in Oregon, 
didn’t have long to wait for her Starbucks order when she used her name to 
brand her shop “Sambucks”. Starbucks sent her a cease and desist letter and 
reportedly offered her $500 (£400) to rebrand, but when she didn’t comply the 
case went to court. In 2005,a judge ruled in favour of the coffee giant 
<http://abcnews.go.com/2020/GiveMeABreak/story?id=1390867>, ordering her to 
drop the name “Buck” from everything in her store, including the coffee cups 
and the front window. Lundberg’s verdict? After the ruling she told ABC News: 
“People think this is a crock of crap.”

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 