
The Iraqi government has asked the UK to help its military obtain powerful 
thermobaric weapons to drive Islamic State fighters out of tunnels in their 
northern Iraqi stronghold ofMosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>.

The request is understood to have been put to the Ministry of Defence on 
Monday.

The MoD confirmed that defence minister Mike Penning met Iraqi officials but 
says the British military does not hold such weapons, adding that a formal 
written request could be put to the 67-nation coalition fighting Isis. All 
requests for weapons are supposed to be processed centrally by the coalition.

The Iraqi army has admitted it is facing fierce resistance from Isis fighters 
inside Mosul. After weeks ofdeadly street-by-street fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/kurdish-forces-mosul-peshmerga-troops-isis-iraq-fighting-every-yard>
, it says it has liberated a third of the east of the city, meaning that Isis 
has been removed from a sixth of the city’s area.

Fighting for every yard: on the ground with Kurdish troops pushing into Mosul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/kurdish-forces-mosul-peshmerga-troops-isis-iraq-fighting-every-yard>
Reports have already appeared that Iraqi troops fighting for Mosul’s outskirts 
have access to 60-tonne, Russian-made TOS-1A artillery tanks capable of firing 
thermobaric weapons.

Pictures have already appeared of the tank on the road to Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, and Shia militias, known as the 
popular mobilisation units (PMUs) or Hashd al-Shaabi have promised to use them 
against Isis fighters.

Justin Bronk, research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute defence 
thinktank, explained: “Thermobaric weapons work on the principle of finely 
powdered fuel scattered by a charge and then ignited.

“The idea is that the entire explosive weight in a warhead can be a fuel 
rather than a conventional explosive mixture which is around 30% fuel and 70% 
oxidiser.

“They kill primarily through the powerful and extremely fast blast pressure 
wave which they create on ignition, as well as the secondary effect of almost 
instantly sucking up all the oxygen in the immediate vicinity of the blast.

“Both of these effects are significantly enhanced when they occur in combined 
spaces, which is why they are particularly lethal against tunnels and bunker 
complexes.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&media=>
How important is Mosul for Isis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/25/how-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
The Iraqi ambassador to London, Salih Husain Ali al-Tamimi, briefed 
Westminster MPs this week that the Iraqi forces may need further air support to 
close all the corridors being used byIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters fleeing the city for the 
Syrian city of Raqqa, the other Isis stronghold.

He said that only 40,000 people had fled Mosul so far, but as the liberation 
battle continued, the number could rise to 500,000. He said civilians have been 
advised to stay in the city until an area is cleared.

Four refugee camps have been established and six more are in the process of 
being built. He added: “Islamic State are using civilians as human shields, and 
since the Iraqis are avoiding civilian casualties it will take time to liberate 
the city. The intense nature of the battle and the use of tunnels meant the 
liberation will take many more weeks.”

Three thousand Islamic State fighters are estimated to remain inside Mosul, 
and the Iraqi ambassador was closely cross-examined on guarantees that the PMUs 
would not seek to undertake sectarian reprisals against the Sunni population in 
Mosul.

He insisted the PMUs were working under the full control of the Iraqi 
government and should not be regarded as an unofficial militia.

Defence sources said the single greatest difficulty in the close urban warfare 
under way in Mosul was the elaborate network of hidden tunnels under the city 
from which Isis fighters mount attacks on Iraqi soldiers, including sniper fire.

Isis deploys child suicide bombers as Iraqi army advances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/paranoid-isis-executes-scores-of-spies-in-face-of-iraqi-army-advance>
Villages recaptured from Isis over the past month by Kurdish peshmerga and 
Iraqi army forces on the road to Mosul have been riddled with tunnels, many of 
them booby-trapped.

One Iraqi counter-terror expert has said that the Iraqi forces in Mosul are 
fighting a war on two fronts, one overground and another underground. One 
tunnel outside Mosul was up to six miles long. The original tunnellers 
sometimes appeared to have employed drills originally designed for mining 
operations or oil fields.

Col John Dorrian, a spokesman for the US-led coalition forces supporting the 
operation, said airstrikes had so far destroyed 59 suicide car bombs and over 
80 tunnels. Grenades are currently the most effective way of trying to destroy 
tunnels, but they have limited range.

In recent months the UK has started using Storm Shadow cruise missiles fired 
from RAF Tornados and capable of hitting huge identified Islamic State bunkers.

But such massively destructive weaponry would not be appropriate to use in the 
context of Mosul, and has anyway been criticised by the west when used by the 
Syrian airforce in east Aleppo.

A British Ministry of Defence spokesman said: “The UK does not have 
thermobaric weapons and will not provide them to third parties. All requests 
for assistance and equipment forIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> 
are coordinated through the coalition against Daesh.”
 