
BBC1’s idents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/dec/05/mondaymediasection10> – the 
images between programmes that have ranged from swimming hippos to a revolving 
globe – are getting a makeover.

The broadcaster has commissioned British documentary photographer Martin Parr  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/sep/13/martin-parr-community-spirit-in-pictures>
to “capture an evolving portrait of modern Britain in all its diversity” for 
2017, based on the theme of “oneness”.

The new campaign launched on Sunday, with the image of a group of sea swimmers 
from Clevedon, Somerset. Other images to have been shot include a Zumba class 
from Bristol and wheelchair rugby players from Wales.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> said the portraits will 
feature “different groups of people coming together across the UK, united by 
their shared passions and interests”.

The groups have been selected “to reflect the diversity of modern Britain and 
the changing mood of the nation through significant moments in the calendar 
year”.

The images, of which there are expected to be about 20, will replace the 
circle-themed idents that have aired since 2006. The BBC came under fire at the 
time for spending £1.2m on the images, which included a family of 
computer-generated hippos practising synchronised swimming, surfers, stunt 
motorbike riders and kite-fliers.

The BBC declined to say how much the new idents cost, but said they were made 
in-house. It said that the idents were designed to reflect BBC1’s “role in 
bringing the nation together, with unmissable programmes and events and 
celebrating all the things we share and have in common”.

Director of BBC content Charlotte Moore said: “I want BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>, the nation’s favourite channel, to 
continue to evolve creatively and so it’s important that the channel idents 
continue to move with the times too – and feel relevant and in touch with its 
big, broad mainstream audience.

“BBC1 is a channel with its finger on the pulse of a fast-changing modern 
Britain.

“What better way to demonstrate this than by commissioning Martin Parr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/martin-parr>, one of the most 
celebrated documentary photographers of our time, to create idents from a 
series of portraits that reflect and represent the rich diversity of 
communities living in the UK today?

“Renowned for finding the extraordinary in the ordinary, I hope that the 
series of images Parr captures across the year will document everyday Britain 
in all its glory and serve as a fascinating and lasting record of 2017.”

Parr said: “To have the chance to makes stills and film these diverse groups 
of people, but sharing the same interests or roles all over the United Kingdom, 
is a real privilege.”
 