
Former BBC Radio 1 DJ Andy Kershaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> has said he believes senior 
management were “still trying to cover their tracks” over Jimmy Savile’s sex 
abuse as late as 2012.

Kershaw, who worked with Savile for a number of years at Radio 1, said that he 
foundDame Janet Smith’s conclusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/25/serious-failings-bbc-jimmy-savile-abuse-72-woman-children-report>
 that complaints about Savile never reached BBC management impossible to 
believe.

“Dame Janet Smith is asking us to believe that people at a certain level of 
management at the BBC and above, those in the loftier positions of management, 
had not heard the persistent and consistent rumours that everybody else who 
worked in the BBC, on the shop floor, had heard for years,” he said, speaking on
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 4’s Today programme on 
Friday. “For anyone to claim they hadn’t heard those rumours at the time, it is 
a little disingenuous I think.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fjimmy-savile-abuse-what-did-the-bbc-know-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F26%2F1456497090272%2FKP_1813343_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jimmy%20Savile%20abuse%3A%20what%20did%20the%20BBC%20know%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fjimmy-savile-abuse-what-did-the-bbc-know-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jimmy%20Savile%20abuse%3A%20what%20did%20the%20BBC%20know%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fjimmy-savile-abuse-what-did-the-bbc-know-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F26%2F1456497090272%2FKP_1813343_crop_640x360.jpg>
What did the BBC know about Jimmy Savile’s abuse? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/feb/26/jimmy-savile-abuse-what-did-the-bbc-know-video>
The report concluded that factors including a culture within the BBC that made 
it difficult to complain to management, or “rock the boat”, and an atmosphere 
of fear over repercussions for whistleblowing meant official complaints were 
never made.

Kershaw, who gave evidence to Smith’s independent inquiry, said that the 
scrapping of Newsnight’s investigation into Savile’s sex abuse shows BBC 
management was aware and still trying to “cover its tracks”.


“I thought [it was] appalling that the Savile investigation by Newsnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsnight> was scrapped,” he said. “It had a 
whiff of senior management still trying to cover their tracks over Savile as 
late as 2012.”

Kershaw pointed to a claim made by Helen Boaden, the former director of BBC 
News, that she had made ex-director general Mark Thompsonaware of Newsnight’s 
allegations against Savile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/mar/20/markthompson-helenboaden>
.


Thompson denies this is the case; the BBC went on to screen two tributes to 
Savile following his death in 2011 but buried the Newsnight exposé.

“It has emerged that a conversation was had between the head of news at the 
time andMark Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>,” said 
Kershaw. “Instead of scrapping those two [tribute] programmes they scrapped the 
Newsnight programme and hung the editor out to dry.”

Meirion Jones, Newsnight’s former head of investigations, has said that those 
who tried to expose Savile were forced out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/29/bbc-savile-expose-newsnight-meirion-jones>
.

His colleague on the investigation, Liz MacKean, left in 2014 after 23 years 
and now works at Channel 4.

Neither Jones nor Mackean were interviewed as part of Smith’s inquiry.

“Of course they should have been interviewed by Dame Janet Smith,” said 
Kershaw. “So it could have been properly explained why that Savile Newsnight 
investigation wasn’t screened. Why was there still a cover-up going on as late 
as 2012. I think a lot of it probably arose out of embarrassment. They got 
themselves so far in … pretending there was nothing amiss with Savile, they had 
to keep maintaining that myth.”

Nick Pollard’s review into the scrapping of the Newsnight investigation into 
Jimmy Savilecleared the corporation of a “cover-up” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/19/bbc-report-jimmy-savile-newsnight>
.

A spokeswoman for the Dame Janet Smith review said that it did take into 
account the statements Jones and MacKean provided to Pollard, but did not 
interview them because they did not work with Savile.

“The review did not interview either Liz MacKean or Meirion Jones for two 
reasons,” said the spokeswoman. “First, Dame Janet considered both of their 
comprehensive statements given to the Pollard review and second, 
understandably, these journalists’ knowledge of Savile’s inappropriate conduct 
at the BBC was not contemporaneous.”

She added: “Dame Janet focused on first-hand accounts from individuals who had 
worked with Savile or who had worked in relevant parts of the BBC during the 
relevant period, as well as inspecting the contemporaneous evidence of Savile’s 
sexual misconduct. The Savile investigation was in contact with over 800 people 
of which over 340 were interviewed.”
 