
The culture secretary has formally started the hunt for the chair of the new 
BBC board, offering a £100,000-a-year salary, £10,000 less than was taken home 
by formerBBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> chair Rona 
Fairhead, with candidates requiring skills including “securing value for money”.

Fairhead, who was due to chair the board that will take over governing the 
corporation from the BBC Trust in April,stood down in September <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rona-fairhead-to-stand-down-as-bbc-chair>
 after Theresa May indicated she would have to apply again for the job she was 
handed by David Cameron in May.


The government has also said that it will begin the hunt to appoint the nine 
non-executive board members, of the new 14-strong new unitaryBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> board, will begin early next month.


Fairhead had been due to stay on until 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-trust-rona-fairhead-new-governing-body>
 to see through the transition to a new unitary board.


The government has now started advertising for her replacement, calling for 
candidates who must have able to demonstrate a commitment to the independence, 
mission and public purposes of the BBC”.


The government has advertised the role, which will be for four years with the 
“possibility of renewal for one additional term in exceptional circumstances”, 
with a salary of £100,000.


This is £10,000 less than the remuneration for the BBC Trust chairman.


The role is advertised as “at least” two to three days a week; Fairhead’s BBC 
Trust role was initially advertised as a“three- to four-day-a-week role” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/30/culture-secretary-advertisement-bbc-trust-chairman-lord-patten>
.


However, the government later said it would consider candidates with less time 
available, a move viewed by observers at the time as an attempt toensure that 
the government’s preferred candidate Sebastian Coe could apply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/26/bbc-trust-chair-hours-reduced-lord-coe>
.  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/29/lord-coe-bbc-trust-government>


Coe later pulled out of the process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/29/lord-coe-bbc-trust-government>. 

The government said that candidates for the new BBC board chair must have 
skills including “experience exercising excellent financial management and 
securing value for money”.


“The consultation on the future of the BBC demonstrated the importance of the 
BBC to the public and the creative industries,” said a spokesman for the BBC. 
“We are delighted the recruitment process for this vital role is underway. The 
public want a strong and independent BBC. The new chair will champion that.”


The new chairman will be appointed by the public appointments process, which 
includes a selection panel chaired by a public appointments assessor, 
co-ordinated by culture secretary Karen Bradley.


The new 14-strong BBC board will have four non-executive board members 
representing each of the devolved nations, appointed in the same way as the BBC 
chair.


There will also be five non-executive board members appointed by the BBC board 
and four executive members appointed by the BBC.

 