
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has been told to be more 
distinctive and take more risks, as its annual report revealed that more than a 
quarter of BBC2’s primetime schedule is made up of repeats.

The BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> said the 
corporation had to offer “more original and innovative content” and do more to 
appeal to younger viewers and members of the black, Asian and minority ethnic 
audience.

The weekly reach of the BBC’s two main channels has been in long term decline, 
with BBC1 watched by 72% of the nation at least once a week in 2015/16 – down 
from 78% nearly a decade ago – andBBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> 
seen by 46%, down from 57%.

Chris Evans' Top Gear 'is bigger global hit than Jeremy Clarkson version'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/chris-evans-top-gear-jeremy-clarkson-bbc>
The decline is a reflection not only of the individual channels’ performances 
but also an increasingly fragmented TV market.

More than a quarter of BBC2’s peaktime schedule – 27.4% – was made up of 
repeats last year, up from 25.8% the previous year but down from a high of 
31.1% in 2011/12.

The channel’s most often repeated show is also one of its most popular, Home 
Guard sitcom Dad’s Army, starring Arthur Lowe and John Le Mesurier, regularly 
watched by 2 million viewers on Saturday night.

It means the vast majority of BBC2’s overall schedule is made up of repeats, 
afteroriginal programming was axed from its daytime schedule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/mar/07/bbc2-daytime-rolling-news>
, outside of news and current affairs programmes, as part of BBC cost savings.

The number of repeats on BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> is much 
lower, at 5.7%, up from 4.8% the previous year.

At a time when the BBC has clashed with the government over the 
distinctiveness of its content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/07/bbc-tv-controller-charlotte-moore-fights-back-against-culture-secretary>
, the BBC Trust used its annual report on Tuesday to call on management to stop 
playing safe with what it puts on screen.

“We have consistently asked the executive to increase the distinctiveness of 
BBC television and to address perceptions among lighter viewers that it tends 
to play safe with programmes and television,” said the trust.

“We have seen some improvements [but] there is still a public appetite for the 
BBC to take more risks in its programming and offer more original and 
innovative content.”

Overall audience appreciation of the BBC’s TV output has fallen for the third 
year running, to 80.5% from 82.1% two years ago, the trust said.

It said the BBC should “increase further the distinctiveness of its offer and 
report publicly on its performance in this respect”.

However, a definition of “distinctive” acceptable to all has proved hard to 
come by, with the BBC’s controller of TV channelsCharlotte Moore rebuffed by 
culture secretary John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/10/distinctive-bbc-the-night-manager-john-whittingdale>
 earlier this year.

BBC white paper: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-white-paper-key-points-john-whittingdale>
The government’s white paper on the future of the BBC, which will be the 
cornerstone of the renewal of its royal charter, due by the end of this year, 
said the BBC should be “distinctive, high quality and impartial”.

BBC4, the TV channel with the lowest budget, scores highest for audience 
appreciation and “fresh and new” ratings, said the trust.

The trust also said that appealing to younger and BAME viewers remained a “key 
performance challenge” for the corporation.
 