
The BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> has been accused 
of allowing itself to be “steamrollered” by George Osborne over the agreement 
to take on the £750m cost of funding free TV licences for the over-75s.

Appearing before MPs on Tuesday, trust chair Rona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead> was forced to defend the 
decision to agree to pick up the bill, which was said to be tantamount to 
funding a Conservative party manifesto pledge.

During her appearance before the Commons culture, media and sport select 
committee, Fairhead said theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust’s 
lawyers had advised her that she could not simply refuse for the corporation to 
shoulder the burden.

BBC scraps BBC1 and BBC2 controller roles after more than 50 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/19/bbc-controller-bbc1-charlotte-moore-bbc2-bbc4-kim-shillinglaw>
In future, she said, decisions on BBC funding should not be taken at the same 
time as the charter renewal negotiations. Instead, Fairhead told MPs, there 
should be a fixed five- or six-year funding term and a “long charter that is 
not in any period of the election process”.

The government told the BBC last summer that it would be expected to take over 
the funding of free licence fees for the over-75s from the Department for Work 
and Pensions. Doing so will cost of almost a fifth of the corporation’s current 
annual income by 2020.

In return, the BBC was allowed to increased the licence fee in line with 
inflation and close the “iPlayer loophole” , which allows viewers who only use 
catchup TV to watch for free.

The continued provision of the free licence fees for older people had been a 
Tory manifesto pledge, Fairhead told MPs. That, however, did not place any 
responsibility on the BBC, suggested Labour’s Paul Farrelly, a member of the 
committee.

He told Fairhead: “You ... said you could not ultimately obstruct any decision 
that [the government] made, but that is not exactly true, is it? Because you 
could have said ‘Fair enough, you have taken the decision to cease the funding 
of the over-75s’ licence fee but we are not going to pick up the bill.’

“You could have said, ‘It is your Conservative manifesto promise, if you cease 
the funding, then you are left with a broken promise. It is not up to the BBC 
and the trust to fund a Conservative manifesto commitment.’”

Fairhead answered: “Our understanding was we could not, that there was no 
protection from the end of the charter and it is for the government to decide 
what the level of the funding is. Our legal advice [was] that we could not.”

Farrelly pressed Fairhead on whether she had considered following the example 
of previous trustees who – under the leadership of Sir Michael Lyons – 
threatened to resign during that last set of negotiations, rather than accept 
the cost of funding free licences for the over-75s.

“The threat last time was enough to stave it off,” Farrelly said. He quoted a 
letter from Fairhead, in which she wrote that the trust had a “specific duty to 
represent the licence fee payers”.

Farrelly told her: “But you had [one], on their behalf ... and you allowed 
yourselves – in a way that the trust and Michael Lyons did not allow themselves 
– to be steamrollered by the chancellor and you didn’t stand up for the licence 
fee payer.”

Fairhead said she had considered various options but that, in the 
circumstances, she felt it was better to stay and try to “get the best possible 
negotiation and set of mitigations for the licence fee payer. We were assured 
by the BBC executive that the settlement agreed would do just that.”


Asked if she stood by the decision, she said: “Yes. This was a set of 
mitigations that would create a strong BBC. In the circumstances, it was – in 
our judgment – the best outcome for the licence fee payer.”
 