
More people around the world will be able to listen to The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> and Moral Maze as part 
of BBC plans to launch “the Netflix of the spoken word” with its radio content.

The corporation’s director general, Tony Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall>, is expected to outline plans in 
a speech on Wednesday morning to offer all of the BBC’s audio content as well 
as World Service broadcast services to viewers and listeners outside the UK. No 
decision has yet been taken on whether to charge overseas users – who do not 
pay the licence fee – for the service.

The proposals come as the BBC is facing increased competition from streaming 
services such as Netflix, which launchedThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
 – its £100m biopic of the Queen – earlier this month.

Hall’s plans also come a week after the World Service announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/bbc-world-service-to-broadcast-news-programmes-in-north-korea>
 it would launch regular news programmes for North Korea and Russia as part of 
the biggest expansion of its journalism since the 1940s.

“The BBC makes the best radio in the world. It is one of our crown jewels, and 
we have an extraordinary wealth of audio riches at our disposal,” Hall is to 
tell attendees of theVoice of the Listener and Viewer <http://www.vlv.org.uk/> 
conference in London on Wednesday. “But, with the level of excellence we have, 
are we doing enough to push the fantastic drama, arts, comedy and entertainment 
we deliver on the world stage? With our world-class content, we could use our 
current output and the richness of our archive to create a Netflix of the 
spoken word.”

The BBC believes the expansion of its audio services, including access to 
archive footage that typically disappears after 30 days on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> iPlayer service, will allow listeners 
in China, for example, to hear content that is currently difficult to find.

Nadiya Hussain and Attenborough part of BBC radio festive feast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/nadiya-hussain-attenborough-bbc-radio-festive-feast>
Hall has earmarked enhancing the BBC’s audio “offer” as “one of the big 
challenges” facing his team. Audio sits alongside news, natural history, drama, 
education, science and the arts as areas in which the corporation believes it 
can lead the way globally.

 The BBC’s ability to broadcast around the world has formed part of the last 
two licence fee settlements. The government agreed a £289m funding boost for 
the world service in 2015, five years after forcing the corporation to take on 
the £245m annual cost of the World Service, which had previously been funded by 
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

The about-turn came after the BBC published its Future of News report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/28/bbc-world-service-cuts-uk-global-soft-power>
 in 2015, which told the government that cuts to the World Service would reduce 
the UK’s global “soft power” in the face of the growth of rivals such as RT 
(formerly Russia Today) and al-Jazeera.

In his speech, Hall is expected to say: “It’s one of the things that will help 
the BBC carry the full weight of Britain’s culture and values, knowledge and 
knowhow to the world in the years ahead. And say something really important 
about modern Britain.”

Further details of the proposals, including how the audio service would be 
funded, will be unveiled in the spring.
 