
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is struggling to put together 
a shortlist of people who could be the next chair of the corporation, as it 
emerged that two high-profile potential candidates had ruled themselves out.

BBC insiders have said that without a shortlist it could be difficult for 
ministers to appoint someone to lead the corporation’s new unitary board in 
time for the proposed April start date, because top-flight candidates who are 
interested are left with increasingly tight timelines to resign, or give up, 
other roles.

The government is also facing a potential dearth of candidates of the calibre 
desired for the role running the new 14-strong board, which will replace theBBC 
Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>.

Howard Stringer, the former Sony and CBS executive who sits on the BBC board, 
is understood to be one of those who have ruled out applying for the role.


Stringer, who had previously been widely considered a prime candidate for the 
BBC Trust chair role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/08/howard-stringer-bbc-trust-chairman-martin-sorrell-wpp>
, is understood to have been lobbied to enter the process despite the fact he 
will be 75 in February.


And Helen Alexander, the former president of the Confederation of British 
Industry, chairman of UBM and senior adviser to Bain Capital, said she was not 
interested in applying.

 Alexander, who had also been previously considered to be ideal for the BBC 
Trust chair role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/22/helen-alexander-bbc-trust>, said 
the BBC chair position did not hold an “allure” for her. “I’m concentrating on 
things that are more commercial at the moment,” she said.

At £100,000-a-year – £10,000 less than the BBC Trust chair role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/26/bbc-chair-trust-rona-fairhead> 
which is being scrapped – it is relatively low-paid but comes with heavy time 
demands and a high level of media attention.

“The role is a double-edged sword but it is also a much bigger role than the 
BBC Trust chair,” said one BBC insider. “It will in reality need to take up 
about 50% of the portfolio of whoever does it. It is going to be quite heavy 
work.”

Others who have ruled themselves out include Archie Norman, the former 
chairman of ITV, who is reportedly “very unlikely” to take part, and Roger 
Carr, chairman of BAE Systems and vice-chair of the BBC Trust.

Names linked with the role include Gail Rebuck, a Labour peer who chairs the 
UK arm of Penguin Random House, and the Tory peer and former senior BBC 
executive Tina Stowell. It is understood that Rebuck has not applied for the 
position.

BBC trustee Nick Prettejohn, a City grandee who previously ran Prudential UK, 
lost out to Rona Fairhead in the last recruitment process for the BBC Trust 
chair and may well consider himself a contender.

The BBC source said that there was not yet any sort of “runners and riders” 
list and that while “lots want to do it, the tricky bit is finding the right 
person in time for [an] April [start]”.

The new board, part of the corporation’s new charter agreement with the 
government, is expected to be up and running by April.

The government, which wants to conclude interviews for the chairman’s role by 
14 December, said it still hoped to make an appointment in early 2017.

Michael Lyons, the former BBC Trust chairman, said that despite the huge 
demands of the role, which would take up a minimum of two to three days a week, 
it was one of the most exciting up for grabs in the media industry.

“This can be a challenging role, but now more than ever the British public 
needs someone who will speak for them in ensuring the BBC remains trustworthy, 
efficient and courageous,” he said. “That’s an exciting opportunity for 
someone.”

Whoever takes on the role will face big budget cuts, with the BBC committed to 
finding £800m in savings a year to fund free licences for the over-75s. And 
they will have to deal with a new over-arching regulator, Ofcom, which is 
chaired by Patricia Hodgson,who left the BBC in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/09/patricia-hodgson-leaves-bbc-trust-for-ofcom>
 after missing out on the chairman and vice-chairman’s roles at the BBC Trust.

“Anyone who has been successful [in the business world] and made a lot of 
money doesn’t need the hassle that comes with that job,” said one senior media 
industry executive who has been involved with the BBC in the past. “It comes 
with a lot of collateral damage. You’ve got to really want it [and] have the 
hide of a rhino.”

Fairhead, the outgoing chairman of the BBC Trust, was appointed by David 
Cameron in May to head the unitary board. In September she said she would not 
be taking up the role after Theresa May asked her to reapply for it.
 