
The diaries of Alan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark>, 
the most scabrous political memoirs in recent history, are to be made into a 
BBC drama series, with John Hurt favourite to star as the late Tory MP.

Auditions are being held for parts likely to include the full cast of 
Conservative ministers in Margaret Thatcher's 80s government.

The drama is to be shown on BBC4 in the new year and may later transfer to 
BBC1 or 2.

Clark, the MP for Kensington and Chelsea at the time of his death aged 71 in 
1999, served as a junior minister under Lady Thatcher but achieved notoriety 
for his bestselling diaries first published in 1993.

His frank and often vicious dissections of colleagues and behind-closed-doors 
accounts of Machiavellian intrigue were matched by tales of his own 
mischief-making and philandering.

The drama's director, Jon Jones, who has previously worked on Cold Feet, has 
written the script, which focuses on the years of Conservative power from 1983 
to 1991.

Andrew Davies, the doyen of drama adaptations, is working as a consultant 
putting the final touches to the script before the programme goes into 
production in the autumn.

"We are making the Alan Clark diaries for BBC4 and are talking to various 
actors, John Hurt among them," aBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
spokeswoman said.

"This is a big commission for BBC4 and it's definitely a highlight of the 
winter season."

Clark was famous for his put-downs of fellow ministers, some of whom he 
disliked with a passion.

He once sneered at former deputy prime minister Michael Heseltine for being 
someone who "buys all his own furniture", although Clark's own family had made 
its money in the 19th century and his castle home at Saltwood, Kent, had been 
bought by his father in the 50s.

Former chancellor Kenneth Clarke was dismissed as "a pudgy puffball', while of 
ex-foreign secretary Douglas Hurd Clark said he "might as well have a corncob 
up his arse".

Clark had a keen eye for the opposite sex ("girls have to be succulent - and 
that means under 25") and infamously seduced the wife and two daughters of a 
South African judge, a trio he branded the "coven".

When the story was revealed in the press, his loyal wife Jane lamented: "If 
you bed people of below-stairs class, they will go to the papers."

The original volume of diaries culminates in the downfall of Mrs Thatcher, to 
whom Clark was fiercely loyal, even confessing he found her attractive.

He also hilariously described an encounter on a train journey when he fell for 
a complete stranger, leaving the reader wondering about the nature of their 
encounter.

In his diaries, Mr Clark confided: "Yesterday I travelled down by train, and a 
plump young lady came into my compartment at Waterloo. She was not wearing a 
bra, and her delightful globes bounced prominently... I gave her a huge grin; I 
couldn't help it."

In another passage he seemed to confirm readers suspicions: "Bonking on a 
train? I honestly don't think the public would mind. I don't see how it could."

Despite his wandering eye, Jane remained an absolute stalwart throughout her 
husband's life and the depth of their companionship was only matched by his 
passion for fine wines and for Saltwood Castle.

Two other volumes of diaries, covering the 70s and the 90s, have been 
published since Clark's death.

The politician's hard-right views, sometimes too outrageous to be credible, 
caused mirth and dismay in equal measure.

He once appraised the Third Reich as "the ideal system... it was a disaster 
for the Anglo-Saxon races and for the world that it was extinguished" and 
described himself as a Nazi.

Clark's proposed remedy to counteract the threat of the IRA was bluntly 
expressed: "The only solution is to kill 600 people in one night. Let the UN 
and Bill Clinton and everyone else make a scene - and it is over for 20 years."

Clark also wrote a number of works of history, including The Donkeys, a 
critique of the British efforts in the first campaigns of the first world war 
and a history of the Conservative party in the 20th century.

Â· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857
 