
The chair of the BBC, Rona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rona-fairhead>, is to step down after 
Theresa May indicated she would have to apply again for the job she was 
reappointed to by David Cameron just four months ago.

In a statement, Fairhead said that after “much thought” she had concluded it 
was appropriate not to re-enter the appointment process.

Cameron only decided in May to ask Fairhead to stay on as chair of the BBC 
Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/06/rona-fairheads-appointment-as-head-of-new-bbc-board-broke-rules-says-mp>
 during the corporation’s transition to being governed by a single, powerful 
board. But that decision was criticised by some, who thought the broadcaster’s 
governance needed a fresh start.

Fairhead’s decision to step aside follows a difficult year for the 
broadcaster, with Fairhead being criticised from within the corporation for 
failing to effectively stand up for it during the negotiations leading up to
this year’s white paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/guardian-view-on-bbc-charter-renewal>
.

She was also forced to defend her role in agreeing the last-minute financial 
settlement in July 2015 which forced the BBC to shoulder thecost of supplying 
free TV licences to the over-75s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/bbc-pay-cost-free-tv-licences-over-75s-fee-deal>
, an expense previously funded by the taxpayer.


It is understood Fairhead was told just after the parliamentary summer recess 
by both May and the culture secretary,Karen Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/14/xxxx-john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc>
, that the government wanted to reopen the appointment process, but she only 
made her decision public on Tuesday.

It is not certain when a successor will be appointed; the confirmation of 
Fairhead’s departure means the recruitment process for the chair of the new 
unitary board will have to start again.

Fairhead, the former chief executive of the Financial Times group said in her 
statement, initially given to the Financial Times: “I took on leadership of the 
trust to help stabilise, strengthen and develop the BBC following a very 
difficult period in its history and through charter review. I am proud of what 
I and my colleagues, both at the trust and theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, have accomplished during the past two 
years.

 “The prime minister strongly encouraged me to take part in the new 
appointment process, for what would be a new four-year term as BBC chairman. 
However, after much thought I have come to the conclusion that I should not do 
so. It is my belief that it will be better to have a clean break and for the 
government to appoint someone new.”

The culture, media and sport select committee criticised Cameron’s 
reappointment of Fairhead, saying there should have been an open selection 
process. Fairhead lost a personal supporter when George Osborne left the 
Treasury.

Under her agreement with the previous government, Fairhead was to stay on 
until 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-trust-rona-fairhead-new-governing-body>
 to see through the transition to a unitary board. The BBC Trust said Fairhead, 
who earned £110,000 a year in the role, would not be seeking any payments in 
lieu of notice on her four-year term.

Fairhead was a surprise choice when she was appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/31/rona-fairhead-bbc-trust-chair> 
in October 2014, having had no broadcast or political experience. A favourite, 
Sebastian Coe, had earlier ruled himself out of the race.


She used an early speech to criticise the structure of BBC governance, saying 
the dual role of regulator and champion that she inherited at theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> was a difficult one.


Tony Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall>, the BBC’s director 
general, said: “Rona has made a real contribution to the BBC and at a really 
important time for us. On behalf of all the staff, I’d like to thank her for 
that and wish her the very best for the future. We will continue to work 
together in the interests of licence fee payers until the new governance 
arrangements are in place.”

Roger Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/24/bbc-trust-vice-chair-sir-roger-carr-bae-systems>
, a BBC trustee and long-time favourite to replace Fairhead, has ruled himself 
out of the role, making it known that he has his hands full as chairman of BAE.

Fairhead will remain as chair of the trust until it is abolished and replaced 
by a new system of governance. It is unclear when this new system will come 
into place despite being outlined in the government white paper published in 
May.


More information is likely when the government publishes a draft BBC charter 
by the end of this week.

The new charter, expected to come into force by the beginning of 2017, is to 
scrap the historic system of self-regulation for the BBC and replace it with a 
new unitary board to govern the BBC. Media regulator Ofcom is to have oversight 
of the corporation.

However, Ofcom has already said it will not be ready 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/25/ofcom-bbc-watchdog-bbc-trust-charter>
 at the start of 2017 to fulfil its expanded role and the previous government 
agreed that Fairhead should stay in order to help with transition. It is 
unclear whether she will stay until this system is in place, which is unlikely 
to be until next spring.

A spokesman for the Department for Culture, Media and Sport confirmed that 
full details of the charter would be announced “shortly”. The announcement is 
expected on Thursday.

“The government thanks Rona Fairhead for her service to the BBC,” it added.

On social media and privately, few media observers mourned the loss of 
Fairhead, who has presided over the BBC during a difficult time. Even the 
manner of her appointment to the new role of chair of the unitary board, a 
surprise announcement made just before the referendum, attracted criticism as 
it took place after behind closed doors discussions.

After Carr ruled himself out, the field to become the first chair of the 
unitary board of the BBC, a role more akin to a traditional PLC board, is wide 
open.


Names put forward as possible contenders in the past include Howard Stringer, 
the former head of Sony who is on the BBC executive board, and Marjorie 
Scardino, the former head of Pearson. Although appointed by the government, the 
role is meant to be independent.

The relatively unknown Bradley was appointed culture secretary in July by 
Theresa May, and it will be her appointment to make.
 