
Beastie Boys rapper MCA is "strong and hopeful" after treatments by Tibetan 
doctors – and blessings from nuns – forhis cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/20/urban>. In a note to fans, MCA – 
real name Adam Yauch – also revealed that he attended a course with the Dalai 
Lama.

"I'm feeling healthy, strong and hopeful that I've beaten this thing, but of 
course time will tell," Yauch wrote on theBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> mailing list. "[I] just got 
back from Dharamsala, India. Went over there to see some Tibetan doctors, but 
as it worked out, the Dalai Lama was giving a three-day teaching, so I was able 
to attend that as well."

In a video message this July, Yauch explained that he had been diagnosed with 
cancer of the parotid gland. The cancer had also spread to one of his lymph 
nodes. "The good news is that it's only localised in this one area," he said, 
"and it's not in a place that effects my voice ... so it's a pain in the ass 
and a setback, but it's treatable in most cases." After hearing of Yauch's 
cancer, the Beastie Boys cancelled a run of concerts and postponed the release 
of their eighth studio album, Hot Sauce Committee Pt 1.

Yauch said: "I'm taking Tibetan medicine and at the recommendation of the 
doctors I've been eating a vegan organic diet ... We have not set a new release 
date for the record yet, but I'm hoping it'll be in the first half of next 
year."

Though he offered few details of his lessons with the Dalai Lama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dalailama>, Yauch was clearly affected by 
his experiences at the Jamyang Choeling nunnery in Dharamsala. "They did a puja 
(religious ceremony) for me to help me get well," he said. "One nun said to me, 
'We do prayers and then you are better'. So I've got that going for me, which 
is nice."

Yauch now sponsors "a few nuns" at this Buddhist centre. "When I first met 
them I think there were only 13 and they were living in some abandoned cow 
sheds," he explained. "Then they bought some land with some donations, and they 
started building rooms for housing, classrooms, a prayer hall, [two] stoopas 
[funeral mounds]. They now live on a beautiful complex in this incredibly lush, 
peaceful patch of land in lower Dharamsala. Cows walking around, birds singing, 
they are growing mangos and bananas, and they have a garden where they grow 
herbs and vegetables." B-boys, Buddhists and small-scale philanthropists can 
follow Yauch's lead and sponsor nuns for about £220 a year.

Back in the US, Yauch is "enjoying a little downtime in Massachusetts, taking 
walks in the woods and hanging out with the family ... [and] just laying low".

Since the mid 90s, Yauch and the other Beastie Boys have been active members 
of the FreeTibet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tibet> movement. Yauch 
co-founded the Milarepa Fund and helped launch the first Tibetan Freedom 
Concert in San Francisco in 1996.
 