
Beastie Boys have refused to back away from a legal clash with GoldieBlox, the 
toy company that adapted their 1987 song Girls for a viral YouTube hit. A few 
weeks after GoldieBloxtook down the song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/27/goldieblox-legal-battle-beatie-boys-parody-song-girls-advert>
, pleading, "we want to be your friends," the rap group has filed alawsuit 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/190846300/Beastie-Boys-Response-to-GoldieBlox> 
requesting all revenue that has resulted from the advert.

"The video advertisement ... featuring the Beastie Boys' song Girls 
constitutes copyright infringement and is not fair use," wrote the group's 
lawyers. "[The] lyrics [have been] modified to become a 'jingle' to sell 
GoldieBlox's products."

On 21 November, the San Francisco-based law firm representing the toy company 
filed apre-emptive lawsuit <http://www.scribd.com/doc/186402972/Beastie> asking 
the court to rule that because it is a parody, GoldieBlox's version of the song 
constitutes fair use. The ad encourages young women to code apps, build 
spaceships and become engineers. GoldieBlox's toys are aimed atinspiring girls 
to learn about science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2013/nov/21/goldieblox-ad-girls-engineers-princesses-goldberg-machine>
.

Mike D and Ad-Rock of the Beastie Boys had initially responded with an open 
letter 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/11/25/the-beastie-boys-fight-online-video-parody-of-girls/>
:
 As creative as it is, make no mistake, your video is an advertisement that is 
designed to sell a product, and long ago, we made a conscious decision not to 
permit our music and/or name to be used in product ads. 
The group is also respecting the wishes of member, Adam Yauch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-yauch>, who died in 2012. Yauch's will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/10/beastie-boys-adam-yauch-will-advertising>
 explicitly banned the use of his music in advertisements.

In its own open letter on its website 
<http://blog.goldieblox.com/2013/11/our-letter-to-the-beastie-boys/>, 
GoldieBlox agreed to take down the track:
 We don't want to fight with you â€¦ When we made our parody version of your 
song, Girls, we did it with the best intentions. We wanted to transform it into 
a powerful anthem for girls ... Although we believe our parody video falls 
under fair use, we would like to respect [Yauch's] wishes and yours. 
That move appears to have been insufficient. The Beastie Boys' new lawsuit, 
filed in a California court, claims the GoldieBlox video has caused "injury to 
[the group's] business, good will and property". The hip-hop act is claiming it 
is "entitled to recover from GoldieBlox the gains, profits and advantages [they 
have] obtained as a result of [their] wrongful conduct", or an award of 
statutory damages for the alleged wrongful conduct.

In a statement obtained by the New York Times 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/11/beastie-boys-continue-copyright-battle-with-toy-company/?ref=music&_r=0>
, GoldieBlox's lawyer, Daralyn Durie, said they were reviewing the new legal 
brief. "Although the ad has been taken down and we would prefer an amicable 
resolution, we strongly believe that the parody constitutes fair use," she said.
 