
Ad-Rock from Beastie Boys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> 
made his first public appearance since thedeath of his bandmate Adam Yauch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/05/adam-yauch>, aka MCA, in May.

Ad-Rock – real name Adam Horowitz – was due to make a DJ appearance on Tuesday 
night at Brooklyn's Death By Audio Club in support of Russian feminist band 
Pussy Riot, three of whose members remain in jail. Maria Alekhina, Nadezhda 
Tolokonnikova and Ekaterina Samucevich werearrested after staging a protest 
against president Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/06/russian-punks-pussy-riot-putin-protest>
. They were charged with hooliganism and face up to seven years in prison.

Members of Pussy Riot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot> staged an 
impromptu performance after breaking into Moscow's Christ the Saviour Cathedral 
in February, and sang the song Holy Shit in defiance against the church's 
support for Putin. They were arrested the day before Putin was elected.

Heliotropes, Shady Hawkins and TinVulva were also scheduled to appear at the 
fundraising event, which was put on by the feminist art groupPermanent Wave 
<http://www.thepermanentwave.org/> to raise money for the womens' legal fees.

Horowitz and Mike Diamond, the other surviving Beastie Boys, have kept a low 
profile since the death of their bandmate from cancer. Neverthless, there has 
already been speculation about unreleasedBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> material. Producer Mario C 
told NME this week that Yauch had been in the studio up until a few months 
before he died.

He said: "The guys told me that he wanted to record. So they hung out and did 
what they used to do – just lay it down and have fun. He would want people to 
hear it if it was good. I'm not sure what his voice was sounding like at that 
point. I'm sure the guys would be very tasteful in using anything. If it was 
supposed to be heard and it's appropriate then it will happen."
 