
1 Rhymin’ And Stealin’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7M7d8u40I4>

Beastie Boys’ debut LP, Licensed To Ill 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/licensed-to-ill-mw0000649870>, was an undeniable 
phenomenon – the first rap album to top the US album charts, ultimately selling 
more than 9m copies in the US alone. Transforming three middle-class Jewish 
kids from a crappy punk group into everyparent’s worst nightmare 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eBShN8qT4lk> – beer-smashing rappers with porn 
under their beds and misbehaviour on their minds – the LP backed the trio’s 
bratty raps with a wall-shaking production that firmly spliced hip-hop and 
heavy rock, the work of Rick Rubin, co-founder of landmark rap label Def Jam 
Records. The Beasties themselves would later disown License To Ill’s more 
chauvinist excesses, along with their frat-boy smash (You Gotta) Fight For Your 
Right (To Party); their ribald bad-boy swagger works brilliantly on this 
opening track, however, the Boys declaring “mutiny on the Bounty’s what we’re 
all about” like piratical urchins as Rubin slamsthe titanic drums of Led 
Zeppelin’s When The Levee Breaks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEKkJHSO8A0> 
into the slothful riff ofBlack Sabbath’s Sweet Leaf 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9JCZT_51GA0>. The rap/rock interface, 
perfected.

2 Shake Your Rump 
<http://www.muzu.tv/beastie-boys/shake-your-rump-music-video/139044/>

Cutting loose from Def Jam and Rick Rubin in the aftermath of Ill’s success, 
the Beasties ditched New York for the west coast and rented a house they 
rechristened ‘The G-Spot’ near Mulholland Drive. The G-Spot played host to wild 
70s-themed parties at which the Beasties donned era-appropriate garb pilfered 
from their landlords, soundtracked by a pair of DJs named the Dust Brothers, 
whose self-produced tracks wove together a blizzard of genius steals from soul, 
funk and disco. Installed as producers (alongside Delicious Vinyl founder Matt 
Dike), the Dust Brothers used these tracks as the backbone for the Beasties’ 
second album, 1989’s Paul’s Boutique, reworking their ownFull Clout 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GdUzUIvX7E> into opening salvo Shake Your 
Rump. A savvy, sample-heavy blitz (lifting from Ronnie Laws, Willie Bobo and, 
on three separate occasions, Rose Royce), it was made the Beasties’ own by 
verses that swapped the neanderthal boasts of Ill for rhymes glamourising the 
more-sophisticated mischief of their G-Spot nights, a lifestyle of Kangols, 
whip-its and finding yourself “in a lava lamp inside of my brain”, as Adam 
“MCA” Yauch rapped, adding that he “might be peakin’ or freakin’ – but I rock 
well.” And rocking well was always the best revenge.

3 Car Thief <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VbxT0LR4nRY>

Though they’d toned down their brattishness for Paul’s Boutique, the Beasties 
could still play bad-ass. Toned down from an early lyric that involved golden 
showers, pornographic misuse of car keys andMCA crowing “my dick is a 
tree-trunk” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aBG1AUYxu4Y>, Car Thief took aim 
at rhyme-stealers, politicians and Def Jam honcho Russell Simmons, while one 
verse prescribed a diet of cheeba, ecstasy and PCP of which Queens of the Stone 
Age would approve. Adam “Ad-Rock” Horovitz even fired off a potshot at hippy 
luminary Donovan Leitch, father of his girlfriend Ione Skye, his claim to be “a 
dusted old bummyHurdy Gurdy Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3lKCUuyojDI>” 
one of a shopping list of sharp pop-cultural references that included a swipe 
at James Brown’s then-recent stint in jail and a reference to snorting cocaine 
off a mirrordepicting The Thin White Duke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RxYFAElGj9U> himself.

4 B-Boy Bouillabaisse

Paul’s Boutique was audacious, described before its release by one exec at the 
Beasties’ label Capitol as “the Sgt Pepper’s of its era.” The album’s final 
track was its most avant stroke, the Beasties’ answer tothe medley that closed 
labelmates the Beatles’ Abbey Road <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXV1Fkh9D_I>
. Across its kaleidoscopic 13 minutes, B-Boy Bouillabaise segued through nine 
vignettes, fragments and experiments, with their erstwhile home of New York as 
a loose theme. At its heart layA Year And a Day 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SM32R91KMDc>, a thrilling showcase for MCA that 
saw Yauch rapping through a mic rigged to a pilot’s helmet, his verses bragging 
with a philosophical flair he’d hone on later tracks, over a furious beat 
chopping up Ernie Isley’s blistering guitar lick fromWho’s That Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jan/07/10-of-the-best-isley-brothers>
?

5 Gratitude <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZdJ5e70Q8mw&feature=kp>

Though it was later recognised as a masterpiece, Paul’s Boutique stiffed in 
the charts, certainly compared to the juggernaut that was Licensed To Ill. The 
Beasties’ response was to pick up their instruments for the first time since 
their early punk days, retreat to their new California 
studio/skate-ramp/club-house G-Son <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ge8i82GpQy4>
 and jam for months on end. These sessions yielded the raw material for 1991’s 
Check Your Head, which coined the loose coalition of punk thrash, heavy funk 
and FX-laced rap that would see the Beasties triumph through the “alternative” 
era. Gratitude blended all these flavours at once, Ad Rock’s holler to 
positivity riding a fat, slithering bassline, guitars that switch from 
heavy-riffing to chicken-scratch funk, and ground-quaking drums. Three years 
later,Sabotage <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z5rRZdiu1UE> would refine this 
fusion and take the Beasties back to the charts; but while Sabotage has the 
better music video, the mammoth Gratitude’s a better song.

6 Something’s Got To Give <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=teQqelBTw7g>

A childhood friend of producer Mario Caldato Jr, carpenter Mark Ramos Nishita 
helped the Beasties build G-Son Studios. Nishita was also a musician and 
songwriter, and soon found himself rechristened Keyboard Money Mark and 
employed as their in-house organist, helping write nine of Check Your Head’s 20 
tracks. Something’s Got To Give was finest of the bunch, a hauntedThere’s a 
Riot Goin’ On <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-YzitR0IKW4> groove that finds 
Yauch philosophising of “peace between the races”. But while the track’s hook 
was a blissful “some day we shall all be one”, the production’sBlack Ark 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y651C7aNXRc> dankness – not to mention an 
echo-laden scratch at 2:40 that sounds like the arrival of the apocalypse – 
suggest a more ominous vibe.

7 Boddhisattva Vow <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8uMHUSJDDTA>

While it might have repeated the punk-funk-hip-hop formula of its predecessor, 
1994’s Ill Communications was no mere retread of Check Your Head. The Beasties 
had, against all odds, matured, and Boddhisattva Vow rang the changes for MCA, 
whose spiritual evolution from beer-swilling vandal had seen him embrace 
Buddhism, founding theMilarepa <http://www.beastiemania.com/qa/milarepa.php> 
charity to raise funds for the Free Tibet movement. Preceded by Shambala, a 
mystical funk meditation scored by chanting monks, Boddhisattva Vow sees Yauch 
rap of his desire to “develop the awakening mind”, and pledging to “make my 
every action for the higher good” – an electrifying performance light years on 
from Licensed To Ill. The track, meanwhile, sculpts its heavy ambience from 
monk chants, Tibetan folk melodies and dissonant blasts of white noise, 
suggesting a kinship with thehip-hop avant garde 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PkgESwEQWDA> then percolating at Mo’ Wax 
Records.

8 Get It Together <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wmHLGd42UBY>

Ill Communications returned the Beasties to platinum-seller status and saw the 
trio attain an enviably influential cool among Generation X, diversifying with 
their own clothing line (X-Large), and even their own lifestyle magazine (the 
brilliant, much-missedGrand Royal 
<http://www.thewire.com/entertainment/2012/05/remembering-grand-royal-beastie-boys-brief-brilliant-magazine/51944/>
). Were they the sharpest or smoothest MCs ever to pass the mic? Questionable. 
But Get It Together proved they could hold their own against one of rap’s 
finest, teaming up with A Tribe Called Quest’s Q-Tip over an eerily Thelonious 
Monkesque moog loop and a naggingEugene McDaniels 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene_McDaniels> hook. The end result is a loose, 
hazy treat that could’ve fit on Tribe’sThe Low End Theory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZWS6CITutY>, the Beasties’ tag-team rhyming a 
perfect match for Q-Tip’s X-rated John Holmes fantasies.

9 Intergalactic <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qORYO0atB6g>

While 1998’s Hello Nasty eschewed the Blaxploitation instrumentals and punk 
rockouts, it was even more eclectic than its predecessors, the Beasties trying 
their hand at Tropicalia, psychedelia and even dub reggae (Dr Lee PhD 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUpWndT6Y1o>, featuring the Upsetter himself). 
The album’s triumph, however, pared the formula back to a few choice elements: 
an unshakeable vocoder hook, a pneumatic breakbeat and stabbing strings lifted 
from Stravinsky’sThe Rite of Spring 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J0nli2tgKdQ>. One of several choice hip-hop 
tracks on Hello Nasty – including singles likeBody Movin’ 
<http://www.muzu.tv/beastie-boys/body-movin-music-video/477417/> and the 
consciously Old SkoolThree MCs and One DJ 
<http://www.muzu.tv/beastie-boys/three-mcs-and-one-dj-music-video/477418/> – 
Intergalactic’s campy Godzilla-homage video and dumbly irresistible catchiness 
gives it the edge

10 Too Many Rappers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IMnBVYNu9Eg>

On June 12 2009, Adam Yauch took the stage at the Bonnaroo Festival for what 
would prove the Beastie Boys’ final live performance. Their new album, Hot 
Sauce Committee Pt 1, was scheduled for September, but Yauch’s cancer diagnosis 
– made public a month after Bonnaroo – delayed its release by almost two years; 
it finally surfaced in April 2011 as Hot Sauce Committee, Part Two, a return to 
the more anarchic, gleeful style of yore following their stark post 9/11 album 
To the Five Boroughs. The Beastiesdebuted Hot Sauce Committee’s highlight 
onstage at Bonnaroo that night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uH08ylBq-EI>, 
alongside guest MC Nas. And while it’s perhaps not Nas’s finest moment, Too 
Many Rappers caught the Beasties sounding sharper than they had in years, while 
hearing Ad-Rock and Nas riff on Public Enemy’sNight of the Living Bassheads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fyR09SP9qdA> – for even a bar or three – is an 
undeniable treat.
 