
It’s a bright afternoon on Cape Town’s Muizenberg beach and I’m racing down 
the sand in a wetsuit, stopping to lunge or star-jump as coach Nikita shouts 
orders. I may want to lie down and weep as I overheat and struggle to keep up, 
but the group encouragement gets me through the bootcamp-style workout before 
we jog into the waves for a two-hour surf lesson.

This is day five of a 10-week South African surfing adventure with Ticket to 
Ride, a British company that runs surf holidays and camps around the world. I’m 
here to sample its longest trip (also run in Morocco), which offers the chance 
of qualifying as an instructor at the end – and fitness training is high on the 
agenda.
South Africa surfing map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/travel_south_africa/giv-31075PPHEQuUJdtmg/>
“Some people just come for the experience, but most end up doing the 
qualifications anyway,” says Chris Bond, TTR head of operations. “We’ve had 
complete novices qualify – it’s amazing to see the mental and physical changes 
people go through in 10 weeks of being in the ocean every day. Plus it’s a 
great way to see South Africa.”

After two weeks in Cape Town, the 16-strong group will journey east along the 
coast, the water warming and scenery changing, and finish up north of Durban 
two months later. It’s a route that the company’s founders, Linley Lewis and 
Will Hayler, did independently while backpacking before university, and went on 
to recreate as a group trip, using the best local coaches and surfer-friendly 
accommodation.

Besides surfing and training, there’s plenty of time for exploring. Community 
work with NGOs and charities is another key part of the itinerary, with days 
dedicated to anything from painting classrooms to teaching English or cleaning 
beaches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86c5ca713445bfd8da0c25c1fc730100bdac479%2F0_253_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd86c5ca713445bfd8da0c25c1fc730100bdac479%2F0_253_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Muizenberg beach. with golden sand and long, gentle waves. 
“Giving something back is at the heart of what we do,” says Chris.

Muizenberg, with its surfy vibe, golden sandy beach, long, gentle waves and 
mountain backdrop is a perfect spot to begin. We’re staying at the oceanfront 
African Soul Surfer hostel, a bright, fun place with dorms and a couple of 
private rooms. After a tough afternoon in the waves, we kick back on the 
terrace with a beer, exchanging surf notes and playing pool.

You’d perhaps expect such a long trip to attract kids on a gap “yah”, funded 
by wealthy parents. But it’s a mixed bunch, aged between 18 and 30, and some 
have been doing two jobs for months to save enough to come. We’re mostly Brits, 
with a sprinkling of Canadians, Dutch women and a guy from Dubai, and of mixed 
abilities; some have been surfing for years while others, like me, have barely 
stood up on a board before. Many are travelling post- or pre-uni, but others 
just want a break from everyday life, like Taha from Buckinghamshire, a junior 
doctor who is stepping out of the real world for a bit. Some are planning a 
career change – hoping to swap the office for a life by the sea.

“It’s a brilliant mix of backpacking, volunteering and surfing – and what’s 
even better is you might get a qualification at the end of it,” says Jennifer 
Snell, 20, from Wiltshire, who combined an office job with working as a 
fishmonger in Tesco to raise the money. “There’s enough freedom, but 
everything’s organised for you – so you can really focus on surfing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18a4baa58a047cfad6e74c8f88241753d8e3744c%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18a4baa58a047cfad6e74c8f88241753d8e3744c%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Jane, on the left, heading for the waves in Muizenberg 
The next day we’re out early on the water again. As a novice, I practise 
popping up on my board on the sand before taking to the waves. The instruction 
is patient and encouraging and after many failed attempts, I briefly stand up 
and wobble towards the beach. There are tattered signs warning surfers to look 
out for sharks – and a hilltop watchtower overlooks the bay – but in the water 
I soon forget my fears. (Chris, who has surfed here for 23 years, assures me 
he’s only ever seen one – and not while surfing.) More people die taking 
selfies (falling off cliffs, being hit by trains), or from coconuts falling on 
their heads, than in shark attacks, he tells me.

The buzz from catching a wave is amazing – and I soon appreciate the others’ 
addiction to surfing.

Staying a week or longer in each of the seven destinations means there’s time 
to get out and do touristy things. We visit the penguins at Boulders Beach and 
hang out at a local market one evening. Climbing Table Mountain and hitting the 
nightlife are on the agenda too, as well as surfing Cape Town’s more 
challenging spots, from Long Beach to Kommetjie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6544a86217ad1bdf59ef7da5b5554c2d0d7a9f0f%2F0_43_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6544a86217ad1bdf59ef7da5b5554c2d0d7a9f0f%2F0_43_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Jennifer Snell with kids from the Waves For Change foundation. Photograph: no 
credit 
But a big part of the programme is working on community projects in each 
location. In Cape Town, it’s Waves for Change, a foundation started by an 
former TTR employee, Tim Conibear, which runs HIV awareness and youth 
leadership programmes in the townships, using surfing as a platform for 
education.

We join the kids for a warm-up on the beach before they jump into the ocean to 
practise their surf skills with the help of the TTR group. Part of the deal is 
that the children must go to school, and attend after-school lessons at the 
project centre.

“These kids come from the streets, from gangs and broken homes,” says Tim. “We 
help them gain confidence, find a sense of belonging and learn important life 
skills – and they get a hot meal, too. There needs to be something cool to get 
them interested – and surfing has that cool factor.”

Our group will be back next day to help paint the shipping containers used as 
classrooms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd369f348d824a1d08d39d7c0507ea061e23dc03a%2F0_271_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd369f348d824a1d08d39d7c0507ea061e23dc03a%2F0_271_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The beach at Plettenberg Bay. Photograph: Peter Unger/Getty Images 
Sadly, I don’t have the luxury of 10 weeks at my disposal, so the next morning 
I set off ahead of the group with Chris to check out a few of the other places 
on the itinerary. It’s a beautiful drive to Plettenberg Bay, the next stop, and 
en route the group will get the chance to test the world’s highest bridge 
bungee jump, at Tsitsikamma. “Plett” has a long arc of unspoiled sandy beach – 
and the accommodation, Albergo for Backpackers, is a great spot with an open
braaiin the evenings.

Further along the coast, Jeffreys Bay is a surfing mecca – a stop on the world 
tour and backdrop to Bruce Brown’s seminal 1966 surf movie The Endless Summer. 
(It was also the site where surf champ Mick Canning once got attacked by a 
shark but we won’t dwell on that.) Island Vibe, the hostel used by TTR, sits on 
a bluff overlooking Kitchen Windows, one of J-Bay’s most famous waves, and I 
can imagine the fun the group will have here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0ea22aa2e379ac6d75070dcc32831249a73fa62%2F0_60_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0ea22aa2e379ac6d75070dcc32831249a73fa62%2F0_60_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Plettenberg Bayalbergo for backpackers 
Etienne Venter, coach of the South African surf team, will be working them 
hard too. Swim training in local pools, video analysis of surfing techniques, 
lessons in surf etiquette and lifesaving skills are all taught along the way. 
“This is a turning point in their journey,” says Etienne. “They’ll really start 
to put into practice and fine tune what they’ve learnt so far.”

Time will also be spent in township schools here, helping with maintenance and 
teaching, as well as with the Supertubes Surfing Foundation, a community-run 
conservation project with a brilliant recycling initiative.

All too soon, it’s time for me to fly home from Port Elizabeth, sad not to 
have time to visit the more remote destinations on the itinerary, but keenly 
aware how just being out in the ocean every day for 10 weeks must have a 
profound affect on a person. As they venture further around the coast the 
landscape will change again, the dramatic mountainous scenery of the Western 
Cape transforming into the more tropical, lush east coast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b4a75d4fea44bf5e0941409f24442ed4f1e738%2F0_38_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boarding%20school%3A%20How%20to%20become%20a%20surf%20instructor%20in%2010%20weeks%20-%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fsouth-africa-coast-surf-intstructor-course-volunteering%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b4a75d4fea44bf5e0941409f24442ed4f1e738%2F0_38_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Island Vibe hostel, Jeffrey’s Bay 
Chintsa on the “Wild Coast” north of East London brings warmer waters (as the 
Indian Ocean heats up, wetsuits are cast aside), empty waves and the chance to 
visit game parks. Then they’ll head to Coffee Bay in the Transkei, another 
Africa altogether, with traditional settlements and rolling hills, where 
accommodation is at the Coffee Shack camp, run by Dave Malherbe, one of the 
country’s most successful competitive surfers. Durban, South Africa’s “surf 
city” and Ballito, 45 minutes to the north, where the lifesaving and instructor 
exams take place, round off the trip.

Weeks later, back in the UK, I email Jennifer to find out how the rest of the 
journey went. She qualified and is now teaching with Ticket to Ride’s Newquay 
office over the summer, hoping to eventually work for a surfing or ocean 
conservation charity.

Catching waves alongside dolphins, the beauty of the Transkei, visiting 
traditional Xosha families, surfing legendary Jordy Smith’s home break, making 
lifelong friends … she’s hard-pushed to name the highlight of the trip. “I 
simply had the time of my life,” she concludes.

How to do it

The trip was provided by Ticket to Ride 
<http://www.tickettoridegroup.com/surf-courses/South%20Africa/surf%20instructor/South%20Africa%20Surf%20Instructor%20Course?self-catered=true>
. The next 10-week South Africa surf instructor course starts on 9 September 
and costs from £5,445pp. Another course runs from 19 January 2017 at £4,995pp. 
The price includes airport transfers, accommodation, local travel, surf 
coaching, ISA level 1 surf instructor and surf lifeguard qualifications, and 
visits to tourist attractions (excludes flights). A food package, covering most 
meals, costs £500
 