
The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has given Belgium’s 
federal government until late on Monday to secure backing for an EU-Canada 
trade deal from the region of Wallonia or a planned summit to sign the pact 
will be cancelled.

European Council president Donald Tusk, who chairs the collective body of the 
EU’s 28 national leaders, will speak to Belgian prime minister Charles Michel 
by late on Monday, an EU source told Reuters, so that Canadian prime minister
Justin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> can decide 
whether to fly to Brussels for the signing on Thursday.

If Michel cannot assure Tusk that Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> will be able to let the EU sign the 
Ceta agreement, then Thursday’s EU-Canada summit will be postponed.

I hate Trump and Farage. But on free trade they have a point | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/free-trade-broken-idea-elites-deals-ceta-ttip-economic>
No new date will be set, although the source said neither the EU nor Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> was willing to give up on a free 
trade pact that has been years in the making.

But Paul Magnette, the leader of the Wallonia region, told the Belga news 
agency on Sunday that the ultimatum from the EU “is not compatible with the 
exercise of democratic rights”. Belgium’s federal government cannot agree to 
the deal without the consent of five regional authorities, including 
French-speaking Wallonia.

Magnette, a Socialist, says the deal is bad for Europe’s farmers and gives too 
much power to global corporate interests.

Magnette hit out at the EU, despite efforts by the bloc to provide 
reassurances to his government over investment protection – one of the major 
sticking points in negotiations between Brussels and Wallonia. One European 
diplomat said that the reassurances “responded to all of Mr Magnette’s 
concerns”.


Tusk was expected to call Michel on Monday, a source told Agence 
France-Presse, and ask “one simple question: will Belgium be in a position to 
sign the agreement on Thursday, yes or no?”.


Tusk will also call European Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, “to 
share an assessment of where we are,” and also Trudeau.

“Regarding Thursday, if Belgium is not in a position to say that they 
guarantee they can sign, it’s very clear for Tusk that it doesn’t make sense to 
have a summit, and there will be no summit, and there will be no date set for a 
new summit,” the source said. Any decision would be made jointly by Tusk and 
Trudeau.

Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s trade minister, flew home from Brussels on 
Saturday sayingthe ball was in the EU’s court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/eu-and-canada-in-emergency-talks-over-trade-deal-martin-schulz-wallonia>
 after talks on Friday failed to overcome the differences.

The CETA – or comprehensive economic and trade agreement – would link the EU 
market of 500 million people with the world’s tenth biggest economy.

The deal is opposed by anti-globalisation groups who say it is a test model to 
push through an even more controversial EU-US trade agreement calledTTIP, talks 
on which have also stalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/ttip-eu-and-us-trade-negotiators-seek-to-get-talks-back-on-track>
.

Sebastian Dullien, a senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign 
Relations, criticised the commission for its role in the failure of negotiators 
to secure an agreement on the deal.

“The European Commission carries part of the blame because it didn’t quickly 
seek a dialogue with doubters. And for this type of deal, you need a large 
consensus,” he said.

Think Canada is a progressive paradise? That’s mooseshit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/canada-politics-progressive-liberal-trudeau>
Wallonia has some support for its position elsewhere in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

On Saturday, 8,000 people including young people, farmers, union leaders and 
entrepreneurs joined a rally in Amsterdam in a show of solidarity, organisers 
said.

They held banners saying “Our world is not for sale” and “Stop these bad trade 
treaties”.

Wallonia has also enjoyed support from activist groups like Greenpeace which 
charged that the deal risked satisfying “corporate greed” and trampling on 
people’s rights and health standards on both sides of the Atlantic.

British prime minister Theresa May on Friday dismissed warnings that the 
EU-Canada deal raised serious questions about whether London could strike a 
similar agreement with the bloc after Brexit.

Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.
 