
In the early 1980s, two computer science students Michael Toy and Glenn 
Wichman released a program on to the University of California’s Unix mainframe 
that would eventually inspire the most important genre in independent video 
game development. Named Rogue: Exploring the Dungeons of Doom, Toy and 
Wichman’s project was a fantasy adventure, in which players crept through a 
series of visually sparse underground locations, battling monsters and 
collecting loot. The unique aspect was that these dungeons were procedurally 
generated, meaning that every time the player loaded up the program, the layout 
was different. It was like playing a new game every time.

Over three decades later and the roguelike genre has become a staple of the 
indie scene. The basic elements – exploration, looting, procedurally generated 
environments and the concept of permadeath (ie no lives: once you’re dead, the 
game is over) – can be found informing hundreds of titles, fromSpelunky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jul/22/spelunky-games-review-xbox> 
to Nuclear Throne to Don’t Starve.

Four years ago, however, roguelike games were something of a forgotten relic, 
an idiosyncratic offshoot of the role-playing game genre that would flourish 
with more forgiving, visually rich titles like Final Fantasy and Legend of 
Zelda. But it was a style of game that still intrigued a handful of designers, 
one of whom was Kris Piotrowski, creative director at Capybara Games, the 
Toronto studio responsible for gently subversive RPGSword and Sworcery. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/apr/17/sword-and-sworcery-ipad-review>
 Heavily inspired by the cult roguelike Dwarf Fortress, he saw the potential 
for a new, more visually complete take on the conventions.
 Dwarf Fortress: with its basic visuals and complex, open systems the game 
typified the roguelike feel. Photograph: Bay 12 
“I was really into what was then a forgotten genre,” he says. “I felt like 
there was a whole missing type of roguelike which didn’t look like ASCII or 
basic art. Roguelikes are generally focused on system design as opposed to 
aesthetics; I wanted to make something that had roguelike gameplay but was also 
pleasing to the eye. When we started the game, rogue-likes weren’t that popular 
- it was a super original idea.”

The resulting project was Below, a roguelike set on a mysterious island 
riddled with tunnels, caverns and, of course, monsters. With minimal narrative 
intervention, the player comes ashore from a boat and starts to explore; while 
the surface geography is always the same, the subterranean areas are 
procedurally generated to be slightly different each time you begin. Your 
character carries a backpack to store useful items, and can collect various 
plants and foodstuffs to create soups – the game’s version of classic RPG 
potions, providing a variety of health and strength bonuses.

But what first hits you about the game is its visual style. The painterly 
environments use brush-like washes of muted colour, so that it feels like 
you’re exploring an acrylic artwork. Importantly, the camera is zoomed right 
out, so your character is a tiny spec amid a dark, desolate landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46be8c1b49cb14daff8c37e99f147c32ae148dd3%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Below%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20Xbox%20One's%20biggest%20little%20indie%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Below%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20Xbox%20One%27s%20biggest%20little%20indie%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46be8c1b49cb14daff8c37e99f147c32ae148dd3%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Below draws the camera way out so that the character is almost a speck on the 
landscape, symbolising your vulnerability in the world Photograph: Capy Games 
“I was really interested in the idea of exploring small-scale aesthetics,” 
says Piotrowski. “I was a big fan of the Pixel Junk series – games like Pixel 
Junk Eden used the capacity of the new HD TVs but in a very different way, not 
to show off high detail, high res 3D graphics, but to create these whole worlds 
that you were a tiny part of.

“Modern HD televisions could capture all these beautiful little details, and I 
saw the potential for a game with a nice overhead dungeon-crawling perspective 
but with the camera zoomed out quite a bit further, so the full level you’re 
exploring is a single screen. That was the main idea with Below: we wanted to 
make a single-screen roguelike. Right now, when you zoom out to 100%, each area 
fits right into a screen – that’s how the game is broken up. It’s classic 
Zelda, in that you explore screen by screen. We just want to make something 
beautiful.”

Adding to this visual style is the use of tilt shift photography techniques – 
the screen even blurs a little at the edges, simulating a sort of peripheral 
vision effect. “We’re using a genuine tilt shift,” says Piotrowski. “It’s two 
planes and the focal plane shifts with the character. When I was researching 
what the game should look like, I thought tilt shift photography was just the 
neatest looking thing. When you apply it to a game, it makes you feel like 
you’re staring at a tiny model world, it felt really natural. Also from a 
gameplay perspective, it does focus the player a bit; it also makes you explore 
the space. You have to come close to things to have them come into focus.”


Along with exploration, combat is a key element. The player encounters a range 
of weird beasts throughout the game, and there’s crafting system that lets you 
build new weapons – but the emphasis is on keeping these intrinsic systems 
delicate and straightforward.

“We’re taking a minimal approach, we’re trying to do as little as we can with 
it,” says Piotrowski. “You can find and use materials to create helpful things 
like arrows, bandages and torches, but it’s a supportive system: the interface 
is very small and the combinations are simple. I hope it just becomes part of 
the ebb and flow of the game: you explore, fight a couple of creatures, find 
some things, take off your backpack, play this little crafting game ... and in 
between, you find fires, which are the only places you can cook soup. That’s 
how the game is bookmarked. You can craft tools anywhere, through your 
backpack, but you need to find a fire so you can sit down and prepare your 
food.”

What the game feels like then, is a quiet, almost mournful take on Don’t 
Starve, with elements of Dark Souls, especially in its use of restorative 
spaces where players can sit and contemplate the adventure. It looks cute and 
playful, but just below the surface, with its player crafting and procedural 
dungeons, it has all the clockwork systems of the genre.

“I think the philosophy behind roguelikes is very interesting to explore – and 
there’s still a lot more to draw out,” says Piotrowski. “They’re the most gamey 
of games. They’re really about meat-and-potatoes system exploration, and I 
think that’s fascinating. Roguelikes started out as things that were just about 
the mechanics, the bare minimum of visual representation and everything else 
lives in your imagination. With Dwarf Fortress, there’s so much functionality 
in that game, so many interesting things that can happen, and the reason is the 
aesthetics are completely pared down so you can focus entirely on system 
design.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01483d7b4ca6c5d5b340c4a32c44c487eb3735ea%2F128_82_1365_820%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Below%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20Xbox%20One's%20biggest%20little%20indie%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Below%3A%20the%20story%20behind%20Xbox%20One%27s%20biggest%20little%20indie%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fbelow-xbox-one-toronto-indie-developer-capy-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01483d7b4ca6c5d5b340c4a32c44c487eb3735ea%2F128_82_1365_820%2F1365.jpg>
 According to Piotrowski, Journey was a key influence on the look and feel of 
the game Photograph: Capybara Games 
Although Below adds visual beauty to the blueprint, it retains a key element: 
narrative scarcity. Like Rogue, like Dark Souls, there is little in the way of 
plot or story – players have to figure a lot out for themselves, and much of 
this will come from reading the scenery. “There’s no narrative per se, it’s 
more of a history,” says Piotrowski. “It’s about figuring out what the island 
is, what it’s purpose is. It’s a very solitary experience, it’s about exploring 
the world and finding secrets. I hope players leave the game filled with 
interesting questions rather than expecting to find the end of a narrative arc. 
I hope they find cool areas, or see this strange device and ask themselves 
what’s happening here, what’s it about? The procedurally generated areas are 
sort of the river of the game; the flow changes but there will be these ‘rocks’ 
that are always in the same spot and once you know where things are you can 
navigate through the randomness to the areas you’re looking for. Discovering 
those little hidden pockets will tell you bits of the story and the history of 
the world.

“I personally love games that are about exploration - I hope this comes 
through in Below. I hope people think, I just saw this weird rock with 
something written on it, I have to go back and find that. It’s like the classic 
Zelda games, the Dark Souls series: I love this kind of stuff. That’s why I’m 
so pumped aboutNo Mans Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/28/no-man-sky-creator-we-wanted-to-build-a-universe>
. I don’t care about anything else in that game, I just want a spaceship and 
planets.”

What’s interesting about Below is that it’s this kind of beautiful, insular 
little experience which is being projected onto a much larger stage. The game 
was unveiled as part of Microsoft’s Xbox One press conference at the 2013 E3 
event, focusing mass attention on the project. Capy has been around for a 
while, working on critically acclaimed experimental titles like Sword & 
Sworcery andSuper Time Force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/24/super-time-force-review-xbox>
, but this was a whole new level of attention.

Piotrowski and his team aren’t perturbed. “With Below, it’s a little bit 
easier for us to think about the core audience because there are some very 
traditional things about it, even though they’re being approached in a vague, 
mysterious convoluted way. The foundation of it is something that most gamers 
should be able to appreciate – you still have a sword and a shield and the 
combat is inspired by Legend of Zelda: Wind Waker. There’s a whole bunch of 
stuff that you can bring your vocabulary and knowledge to, which will help you. 
The game audience is much more intelligent and mature than most marketing folks 
give them credit for.”

The thing is, we’re living in an era where digital distribution and the easy 
availability of tools have led to a huge increase in the number of game 
releases. To Piotrowski, part of game development right now is accepting the 
idea of appealing to a niche audience. Which is why Below can be beautiful and 
lonely and difficult, and not cede to more conventional demands. “Something we 
talk a lot about in the studio is the idea of making games for smaller 
audiences,” he says, “games that aren’t for everybody – that won’t find a mass 
market but are perfect for the people who love them. You just need to accept 
the fact that if you’re making a strange game and you’re experimenting with 
mechanics or aesthetics – well, that it’s OK.

“It is liberating when you allow yourself to just work on a project knowing 
that it may not be for everyone. For the people who get it, it can be really 
special.”

 * Below is released on Xbox One and PC later this summer
 