
“Just write: ‘Goalscorer: Ben Woodburn,’ and nothing else,” said Jürgen Klopp 
following theteenager’s entry into the Liverpool record books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-ben-woodburn-record>
. The appeal issued at Anfield on Tuesday was heartfelt but in vain, and the 
manager knew it. Expectation around the gifted forward is not a media construct.

Jürgen Klopp vows to protect Liverpool record-breaker Ben Woodburn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-ben-woodburn-record>
The kid-gloves treatment was applied to Woodburn moments after he replaced 
Michael Owen as the youngest goalscorer in Liverpool’s history with his 
81st-minute finish in theEFL Cup quarter-final victory over Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/liverpool-leeds-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
. Klopp told Woodburn, 17 years and 45 days old, thathe could have converted 
the chance that fell perfectly in front of the Kop, then spent most of his 
post-match press conference telling the media to back off and refusing to 
embellish the occasion with platitudes. It made sense and the manager was 
probably correct to say he could have scored that goal, too, but Liverpool have 
long expected this day. Many others in football have, too.

Woodburn, who joined Liverpool’s academy a decade ago, was touted as the 
club’s strongest prospect by their former academy director Frank McParland, who 
left in 2013. His high hopes for Trent Alexander-Arnold are also coming to 
fruition and, amid the headlines created by the forward’s slice of history 
against Leeds, it should not be forgotten that the 18-year-old right-back 
produced another commanding display in the competition.

Klopp was sufficiently impressed by the “big songs” being sung about Woodburn 
by Liverpool’s academy coaches to deploy him in pre-season friendlies at 
Fleetwood Town and Wigan Athletic. He scored in both and the hugely impressive 
display at Wigan on 17 July prompted the Latics’ then manager, Gary Caldwell, a 
seasoned defender well aware of the qualities required in a forward, to inquire 
about a possible loan deal.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were open to many loan moves 
this summer but Caldwell was told there was no chance on Woodburn. His 
employers had their own plans for this season.

The Liverpool manager wants to keep his counsel on the teenager’s potential 
but the club’s deeds have spoken volumes. One of Michael Edwards’s first acts 
as Liverpool’s first sporting director, before the title was officially
announced this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/liverpool-michael-edwards-sporting-director-transfers-anfield>
, was to concludethree-year professional contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/klopp-delighted-liverpool-deals-ben-woodburn-kevin-stewart-trent-alexander-arnold>
 for Woodburn and Alexander-Arnold.

The pair’s pedigree and progress have also factored in Liverpool’s transfer 
considerations. Plans for a new right‑back to provide cover for Nathaniel Clyne 
were shelved in the summer because of Alexander-Arnold’s development. Klopp 
confirmed he wanted to strengthen up front in January after Danny Ings wasruled 
out for the rest of the campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/danny-ings-liverpool-injured-rest-of-season>
 with another serious knee injury and with Sadio Mané bound for the Africa Cup 
of Nations with Senegal.

The manager’s idea is for a signing who can operate out wide rather than as an 
out-and-out striker, however, ensuring Woodburn’s pathway to the first team 
remains clear.

“He looks like a very down-to-earth guy but you could see the emotion in his 
eyes after the game,” said Divock Origi, Liverpool’s other goalscorer against 
Leeds and a striker who knows all about expectations as a teenager. “I’m very 
happy for him because scoring at this age at Anfield I think is a huge boost 
for him. He still has to learn but I think he is in the perfect environment 
because we all want to help each other.

“You can’t imagine a better manager to develop young players so it is all good 
for him and the other youngsters.

“We all try to help each other. For him it is most important that he enjoys 
the game, he tries to learn and to learn to make steps. This is an age you can 
make a lot of steps really quickly. I think it is all on him but he has the 
quality. I can tell you that he has qualities and I hope that we can see more 
of him in the future.”

Then there is the inevitable, brewing argument between the Welsh and English 
Football Associations over the teenager’s international future. That has not 
suddenly come to their attentions since Woodburn struck against Leeds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fben-woodburn-liverpool-wales-jurgen-klopp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b9f1a23ed193f17304f59e2f508631e64bcf9f%2F2_35_2996_1798%2F2996.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Woodburn%E2%80%99s%20rise%20no%20surprise%20despite%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20kid-gloves%20approach%20at%20Liverpool%20%7C%20Andy%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fben-woodburn-liverpool-wales-jurgen-klopp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Woodburn%E2%80%99s%20rise%20no%20surprise%20despite%20Klopp%E2%80%99s%20kid-gloves%20approach%20at%20Liverpool%20%7C%20Andy%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fben-woodburn-liverpool-wales-jurgen-klopp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b9f1a23ed193f17304f59e2f508631e64bcf9f%2F2_35_2996_1798%2F2996.jpg>
 Ben Woodburn is ‘very low maintenance and high output’ according to 
Liverpool’s Under-23 coach Michael Beale. Photograph: John Powell/Liverpool FC 
via Getty Images 
Woodburn hails from Tattenhall in Cheshire and attended Bishop Heber high 
school in nearby Malpas. The Olympic silver-medal rower Vicky Thornley is 
another alumnus of an understandably proud school. Liverpool’s prodigious young 
talent still lives at home in the county, with the club having always provided 
private transport to take him to training or their official academy education 
centre at Rainhill high school. However, he has chosen to represent Wales, 
captaining the under-17s team, scoring twice for the under-19s in a recent 6-2 
triumph in Luxembourg and aiming to follow Gareth Bale and Aaron Ramsey into 
the first team. That has not stopped the English FA from attempting to change 
his allegiance in recent months. Woodburn has shown no sign so far of switching 
to England and its far greater scrutinies. Liverpool, you suspect, will be 
happy at that.

Woodburn has excelled above his age range throughout his time at Liverpool and 
continued his impressive goalscoring form for the under-23s this season. Their 
coach, Michael Beale, in keeping with most you speak to at the club about the 
teenager, believes temperament as well as talent bodes well for Woodburn’s 
future at Anfield and his ability to blossom under a manager unafraid to give 
youth its chance.

“The biggest thing with Ben is that he’s very low-maintenance and 
high-output,” said Beale this season. “That’s what you want from a young 
player. He’s not brash or flash. He works hard and is from a fantastic family. 
You don’t need to keep his feet on the ground.

“My worry sometimes with this team is that we put too much of a lens on it. I 
remember Steven Gerrard making a great comment a few years back about the time 
when there was no LFCTV, no media around the academy teams, and how the young 
players developed away from the cameras. This is a young team and we need to 
just let these boys grow.”
 