
Which Batman villains should Affleck bring back – and who should play them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/02/batman-villains-ben-affleck-film-riddler-penguin-poison-ivy>
Ben Affleck was “incredibly unhappy” about the derisive reviews Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice received,according to well-regarded fan site 
Birth.Movies.Death 
<http://birthmoviesdeath.com/2016/05/06/ben-affleck-is-now-executive-producer-of-justice-league>
.

A new report alleges the Oscar-winning film-maker was “humiliated” by the 
negative reception afforded to Zack Snyder’s sprawling superhero smackdown 
after bigging up the film in promotional interviews. Affleck had suffered a 
knock to his reputation after starring in the poorly received superhero movie 
Daredevil in 2003.

“My sources have told me that Affleck was incredibly unhappy about the 
reception of BvS,” alleged the site’s editor Devin Faraci. “He felt humiliated 
after spending so much of the press tour saying how much better this film would 
be than Daredevil.”

Faraci also suggests that Affleck’s agent was furious when Warner Bros CEO 
Kevin Tsujiharaannounced the actor and film-maker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/ben-affleck-batman-confirmed-direct-star-in-solo-movie>
 as the director of a forthcoming solo Batman outing because “there were still 
negotiations happening”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20v%20Superman%20stars%20Ben%20Affleck%20and%20Henry%20Cavill%3A%20'Batman's%20like%20Hamlet'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20v%20Superman%20stars%20Ben%20Affleck%20and%20Henry%20Cavill%3A%20%27Batman%27s%20like%20Hamlet%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fbatman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview&media=>
Batman v Superman stars Ben Affleck and Henry Cavill: ‘Batman’s like Hamlet’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/24/batman-v-superman-ben-affleck-henry-cavill-video-interview>
Affleck was named as executive producer of the Justice League films last week, 
according to the site. And Birth.Movies. Death claims the timing is no 
coincidence as Warner battles to save its superhero cinematic universe 
following Batman v Superman’s critical travails.

Why Captain America: Civil War is better than Batman v Superman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/07/captain-america-civil-war-better-than-batman-v-superman>
“This move seems to help placate Affleck while also edging Zack Snyder out of 
a controlling central position in the DC Movieverse,” suggests Faraci. The 
site’s report claims the film-maker will work with Argo screenwriter Chris 
Terrio, who also co-wrote Batman v Superman, to ensure the script for the 
sequels are up to scratch.

Justice League parts one and two, due in November 2017 and June 2019 
respectively, will see Affleck’s caped crusader begin to build the titular 
superhero team hinted at in Dawn of Justice. Snyder has been named as the 
director of both movies, but there has been speculation he could be replaced 
following Batman v Superman’s difficulties.

Affleck became the subject of an internet meme 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VZVR1IzXDWg> after his apparently sorrowful 
reaction to the news that Batman v Superman was suffering poor reviews was 
caught on camera last month.

 