

Ben Affleck will direct and star in his own Batman movie, Warner Bros chairman 
and CEO Kevin Tsujihara hasofficially confirmed 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/warner-bros-chief-confirms-ben-883358>.

Batfleck begins: Ben Affleck 'has written his own Batman movie'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-ben-affleck-written-own-movie>
Affleck is currently starring as the caped crusader in Batman v Superman: Dawn 
of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
. He has generally been praised for his debut in the role, though Zack Snyder’s 
superhero epic has received short shrift from critics andlooks likely to fall 
short of the magic $1bn mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/11/the-boss-batman-v-superman-dawn-justice-box-office-melissa-mccarthy>
 at the box office despite a blistering worldwide opening weekend of $422.5m 
last month.


But speaking at the CinemaCon event in Las Vegas, Tsujihara touted Snyder’s 
movie as the perfect foundation for the studio’s planned cinematic universe 
based on its rights to theDC Comics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dc-comics> back catalogue.

“It set up a great foundation for our DC slate, which includes at least 10 
movies through 2020,” said Tsuijhara. “I’m also excited to know that we will be 
working withBen Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> on a 
stand-alone Batman movie.”

There have long been reports that Affleck, a recent Oscar-winner for his work 
as a film-maker on the period thrillerArgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review>, would eventually 
take charge of Batman. Last month the actor and director’s agent, Patrick 
Whitesell at WME-IMG,told the Hollywood Reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-ben-affleck-written-own-movie>
 that his client had already written the script for his own film.

Where does Batman v Superman's mauling leave Warner's plan for a DC comics 
cinematic universe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/mar/24/batman-v-superman-warner-dc-comics-zack-synder-dawn-of-justice>
Affleck is also due to return as the dark knight of Gotham in two Justice 
League movies, in which he will team up with Henry Cavill’s Superman and Gal 
Gadot’s Wonder Woman to defend the Earth, though the shine has been somewhat 
taken off that prospect by thederisive critical response to Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/mar/28/is-the-biggest-batman-v-superman-smackdown-between-fans-and-critics>
.

The Hollywood Reporter suggests Affleck’s debut solo outing could arrive in 
cinemas for either 5 October, 2018 or 1 November, 2019, both of which have been 
set aside by Warner for unspecified comic book movies.

In other Batman news, delegates at CinemaCon were treated to a sneak peek at 
the new Lego Batman movie, revealing the first big screen appearance for the 
caped crusader’s perennial sidekick Robin since Joel Schumacher’s disastrous 
1997 outing,Batman & Robin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/03/batman-robin-worst-film-ever>. 
The clip reportedly reveals 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/04/12/lego-batman-movie-robin-origin> that the 
new Robin, voiced by Michael Cera, is the caped crusader’s adopted son, Batman 
having accidentally returned from a swanky gala some years before with the 
fledgling crime fighter in tow. It also emerges that Robin’s red and green 
costume originated as Batman’s “Reggae Man” outfit from a long ago “caper” in 
Jamaica.
 