
Ben Affleck confirmed to direct and star in solo Batman movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/ben-affleck-batman-confirmed-direct-star-in-solo-movie>
Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> has revealed that 
his upcoming Batman film will probably tell a completely “original story”, and 
not be based on an existing comic.

The actor, who starred in Zac Snyder’s critically maligned but commercially 
successful spring blockbusterBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>, will reprise the role in the 
character’s new solo outing, as well as write and direct the picture.

He’s also set to play the Dark Knight in two Justice League movies, in which 
he will team up with Henry Cavill’s Superman and Gal Gadot’s Wonder Woman. It’s 
rumored that Affleck’sBatman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> will 
factor somehow into this summer’s Suicide Squad, which will see Jared Leto play 
the Joker and is based on the successful DC Comics of the same name.

The as-yet untiled Batman film will mark Affleck’s first stab at directing a 
superhero picture. His last film as director, 2012’s Argo, won the Oscar for 
best picture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8AO19XY2rqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8AO19XY2rqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8AO19XY2rqc&media=>
Asked if he planned on adapting a classic Batman comic arc such as A Death in 
the Family or Under the Red Hood, Affleck toldCines Argentinos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MZ6MTTngd7o> that he seeks to “borrow certain 
things from the great comic books, but create an original story around it”, 
much like Snyder did with Batman v Superman, which very loosely used elements 
from Frank Miller’s acclaimed The Dark Knight Returns comic.

The Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/warner-bros-chief-confirms-ben-883358> 
suggests Affleck’s Batman could arrive in cinemas for either 5 October 2018 or 
1 November 2019 (both dates have been set aside by Warner for unspecified comic 
book movies).

In other Batman news, Warner Bros has debuted the first trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=2&v=8AO19XY2rqc> for the extended 
cut of Batman v Superman, which runs a full 30 minutes longer than the 
theatrical cut and boasts an R-rating (the film that played in theaters was 
rated PG-13).

The preview includes a glimpse of actor Jena Malone, who was nixed from the 
version that played in cinemas. The Ultimate Edition will be available on 28 
June.
 