
‘I was always the Frog in America,” says Benjamin Millepied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/benjamin-millepied>, “and then I was the 
American in Paris. It was naive of me not to realise how different the two 
worlds are and how differently the politics work.” When he was appointed 
director of dance at theParis Opera 
<https://www.operadeparis.fr/en/artists/ballet> in 2014, the French-born 
choreographer was, in theory, returning to his native ballet culture. Yet the 
fact that he’d spent all his professional life in the US – first as a dancer 
withNew York City Ballet <https://www.nycballet.com/>, then as director of his 
ownLA Dance Project <http://www.ladanceproject.com/#new-page-1> – had made him 
more American then he knew.

When he arrived in Paris with a sweeping programme of reform, Millepied found 
himself being criticised as an arrogant outsider, out of touch with French 
traditions and taste. However, making changes atParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> had been a prime condition of his 
taking the job. “I had to feel that there was an honesty, an integrity, in the 
way I ran the company. I needed to build something that reflected the things I 
believed in, social as well as artistic issues, from A to Z.”

He looks and sounds entirely transatlantic … casual clothes, hybrid of clipped 
Parisian vowels and American drawl

When he realised how much resistance there would be, Millepied decided it 
wasn’t worth battling on. Just 18 months after taking the post, he announced he 
would be leaving Paris to concentrate on his LA company, which had continued to 
operate during his absence. The company is now coming to Britain and, meeting 
Millepied ahead of their visit, it’s easy to see why he and Paris had initially 
seemed so workable a fit.

He looks and sounds entirely transatlantic. His casual black suit and sky blue 
loafers are matched by a cool hybrid accent of clipped Parisian vowels and 
American drawl. While cynics suggested that he’d been hired primarily for his 
fundraising potential – he’s married to the actorNatalie Portman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/natalie-portman-five-best-moments>
, whom he met on the set ofBlack Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/20/black-swan-review> – Millepied 
comes across as a man of passionate convictions, talking fluently about his 
vision for dance, his concern for its fragility, and his commitment to 
developing new economic models for its survival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2bf93dd6adc135b18a181dea9b11af0edfcb210%2F0_0_5088_3392%2F5088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Millepied%20on%20quitting%20Paris%20Ballet%20and%20his%20LA%20'love%20story'%20with%20Natalie%20Portman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Millepied%20on%20quitting%20Paris%20Ballet%20and%20his%20LA%20%27love%20story%27%20with%20Natalie%20Portman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2bf93dd6adc135b18a181dea9b11af0edfcb210%2F0_0_5088_3392%2F5088.jpg>
 Benjamin Milliepied with his wife Natalie Portman in Cannes last year 
Photograph: Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images 
In 2012, when Millepied set up his LA company, he’d wanted to create a 
platform for his own choreography, but he was also ambitious to build an 
organisation that could “bend” the old rules. “In America, people are 
struggling to bring in audiences for dance. I wanted to create a new kind of 
organisation where you could be genuinely smart about the quality of work you 
put on, but also smart about the people who would support you.Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> folds together all the art forms. At 
LA, we found brands who were very interested in sponsoring us because of our 
association with great contemporary artists and music.”

I could have gone slower and handled some things differently
Benjamin Millepied 
When the offer came from Paris, however, Millepied felt it was an 
extraordinary opportunity. “The company has such a great tradition – it’s where 
ballet started. But I felt it had lost some sense of its heritage.” As 
director, he wanted to update the repertory but also restore some of the 
qualities for which Paris has traditionally been famous: the distinctive 
musicality of its dancing, and the virtuosity of its pointe work. Just as 
importantly, he wanted to institute practical changes, which he believed were 
chronically overdue, such as the introduction of specialist physiotherapists to 
prevent and repair injury, the installation of sprung dance floors in studios, 
and the development of a social media department.

But Millepied didn’t take into account the company’s size and the weight of 
its traditions. Nor was he tactful about local sensibilities. In his rush to 
reform, some dancers complained of his abrasive directorial style while a 
section of the public complained that he’d ditched too many beloved French 
classics for the sake of imported, Anglo-American choreography. He acknowledges 
that mistakes were made: “I could have gone slower and I could have handled 
some issues differently.” Certainly, when he announced his resignation, some 
commentators suggested his entire tenure had been a wilful car crash of 
cultures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42bf3bf44b7cd70d13d921c0325f80df68ef4987%2F359_560_4131_2479%2F4131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Millepied%20on%20quitting%20Paris%20Ballet%20and%20his%20LA%20'love%20story'%20with%20Natalie%20Portman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Millepied%20on%20quitting%20Paris%20Ballet%20and%20his%20LA%20%27love%20story%27%20with%20Natalie%20Portman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbenjamin-millepied-interview-paris-opera-natalie-portman-la-dance-project%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42bf3bf44b7cd70d13d921c0325f80df68ef4987%2F359_560_4131_2479%2F4131.jpg>
 Harbor Me, part of LA Dance Project’s triple bill at Sadler’s Wells. 
Photograph: Andrea Stappert 
In his defence, Millepied says the reaction against him was hugely exaggerated 
– and was modest compared with complaints suffered by his predecessors. “There 
were no letters sent to parliament asking for me to be removed, as there were 
in the time of Brigitte Lefèvre, and I didn’t have strikes like Nureyev.”

Natalie is a smart, normal person who spends time with her amazing friends 
from college – not running around to parties

Many dancers supported the changes he tried to implement, as did some of the 
public. “Ticket sales outdid themselves during the last season. Most of the 
audience seemed very willing to go on this journey with me.” Millepied is also 
convinced that, when he departs in July, he will leave a positive legacy: some 
“awesome” new ballets; a healthy budget (he raised a record €1m at the season’s 
opening gala); some practical improvements; and above all a more questioning 
culture from which his successor,Aurélie Dupont 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aurelie_Dupont>, can benefit.

 But he does admit he was the wrong man for the job. The demands of running a 
company of 154 dancers, and orchestrating 170 performances in two theatres, 
were far heavier than he’d imagined, and left him no time for choreographing 
his own work. While some criticised him for failing to stick at the job, he 
believed it was better for the company that he left as soon as he realised it 
wasn’t working – and essential for him. “I could have stayed in Paris for 
another five years, or 10, but for the first time in my life I was afraid of 
losing my energy. If I’d stayed I would have become a different person.”
Watch a trailer for the LA Dance Project show at Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/la-dance-project-mixed-bill/> 
He’s delighted to now be returning to LA. “The city is a love story with me, 
the light, the crazy history of the place, and it feels full of possibilities.” 
His LA is a city of writers and artists and, despite being married to Portman, 
he has little contact with the movie industry. “My wife is very much a smart 
normal person who spends time with her amazing friends from college. You don’t 
see her running around to parties.” It’s also a city that gives both of them a 
“flexible quality of life”, allowing them to devote time to their five-year-old 
son, Aleph, as well as their individual careers.

Millepied is relieved to now be focused entirely on his own company, for which 
he has enthusiastic plans. Over time, he wants to expand it to 20 dancers, 
making it versatile enough to perform classical and contemporary choreography 
and new works, as well as revivals of modern dance classics. He’s got plans, 
too, for film and digital projects, residences in cities around the world, and 
ideas for importing the experimental spirit of new opera and theatre-making 
into ballet.

“Dance is such a fragile art form,” he says, “and I want to create an 
environment where the choreographers, composers and artists have all the time 
they need to make new work. I want to develop my dancers – there’s one woman 
showing real talent as a choreographer – and I want to have artistic 
conversations with them. It’s so different from Paris, where I used to get 
phone calls from the union at 10 at night. People find it hard to understand 
how I could leave such a prestigious organisation, but I love what this company 
has. It feels like a treasure.”

• LA Dance Project 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/la-dance-project-mixed-bill/> is at 
Sadler’s Wells, London, 24-25 June.
 