
Hail, Caesar! review: Coen bros hit peak star-cameo in superb sister film to 
Barton Fink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/hail-caesar-review-coen-brothers-george-clooney-josh-brolin>
The Berlin film festival opens on 11 February on something of a high, having 
secured a number of high-profile participants and screenings for its 10-day 
run. Hollywood stars such as George Clooney and Channing Tatum will grace the 
red carpet on its opening night, Meryl Streep will lead the festival jury as it 
deliberates over the winner of the top prize, the Golden Bear, while the legacy 
of such high-profile figures asAlan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> and David Bowie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>will be celebrated in special 
tribute events.

Ten to watch at the Berlin film festival 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/feb/09/10-to-watch-berlin-film-festival-2016>
Berlin has always had a predilection for socially engaged film-making, and 
with titles such as existential drama Death in Sarajevo by the Bosnian director 
Danis Tanović and refugee documentary Fire at Sea, from Italian film-maker 
Gianfranco Rosi, among the competing films, this looks likely to continue. 
However, the festival has given its prestigious opening slot toHail, Caesar! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hail-caesar>, the star-stuffed comedy about 
Hollywood’s early-50s golden age, directed by festival favourites Joel and 
Ethan Coen. This is in sharp contrast to the 2015 edition, which opened with 
Nobody Wants the Night from Spanish director Isabel Coixet, which drew mixed 
reviews and remains unreleased in the US and UK. Following the presentation of 
the big-budget mountain movieEverest  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/everest-review-star-studded-adventure-proves-a-difficult-summit>
as the opening film at the Venice film festival in September 2015, it may 
indicate that Europe’s major film festivals are ready once again to embrace 
Hollywood. Hail, Caesar!’s roster of big-name actors – including Clooney, Tatum 
and Tilda Swinton – is likely to add considerable lustre to proceedings – as 
does the presence of Streep as jury head, an unexpectedly high-profile 
appointment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hail%2C%20Caesar!%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hail%2C%20Caesar%21%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Hail, Caesar! Watch the trailer for the new Coen brothers comedy 
Saying “celebrities are also artists”, festival director Dieter Kosslick 
suggested that “the Berlinale has had good relationships with the studios for 
many years and the studios know that the festival is a good launchpad for their 
films”. However, he points out the “diversity” in the festival’s programming, 
and adds: “What links many films is the ‘right for luck and happiness’ they 
postulate.”

Nick James, editor of Sight and Sound magazine and a member this year of the 
Berlin jury, said: “If you look back, Berlin has consistently got high-quality 
product into the festival. Every year sees strong Hollywood titles.” Securing 
Streep would appear to be part of the same process of fostering relationships: 
the actor was awarded an honorary Golden Bear in 2012, which paved the way for 
Kosslick’s successful invitation for 2016.The festival director said: 
<http://www.nprberlin.de/post/life-berlin-parents-are-happy> “You always can 
get a ‘No,’ but we got a ‘Yes.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16224e747ee893fe0c933afa381c0fa4245f5912%2F0_120_2368_1420%2F2368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16224e747ee893fe0c933afa381c0fa4245f5912%2F0_120_2368_1420%2F2368.jpg>
 Star judge … Meryl Streep will head the Berlin film festival jury. Photograph: 
Jason Merritt/Getty Images 
James also suggests that Berlin has bounced back from a period when 
high-profile films, jostling for position on an ever-more frantic awards-season 
circuit, tended to sidestep the festival due to its calendar position – too 
late to influence Oscar voting, too early to generate momentum for the 
following year. Says James: “I think Berlin was at a disadvantage for a while, 
when everyone was holding their films back for Cannes, but that has ameliorated 
over the last few years.” Part of the change in thinking, no doubt, was due to 
the Oscar success ofThe Grand Budapest Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-grand-budapest-hotel>, which opened the 
Berlinale in 2014, andwent on to be nominated for nine Oscars a year later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscar-nominations-2015-boyhood-clips-birdmans-wings-birdman-soars-over-boyhood-selma-steals-a-march-on-boyhood-and-birdman>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663a2f4ed7882ab04c73d94223e31169068e0c4f%2F0_183_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663a2f4ed7882ab04c73d94223e31169068e0c4f%2F0_183_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Oscar-winner … Wes Anderson’s The Grand Budapest Hotel opened the Berlin film 
festival in 2014. Photograph: Allstar/Fox Searchlight Pictures/Sportsphoto 
Ltd/Allstar 
As one of Europe’s pre-eminent film festivals alongside Cannes and Venice, 
Berlin has, over the decades, forged its own identity, becoming renowned for 
selecting socially engaged material. In 2015, for example, the main Golden Bear 
was won byTaxi Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/01/taxi-tehran-review-admirable-jafar-panahi-takes-to-the-streets>
, from Iranian film-maker Jafar Panahi who has struggled with punitive working 
conditionssince his arrest in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/27/jafar-panahi-iran-berlin-taxi>, 
including spells of imprisonment, accusations of anti-state propaganda and 
travel bans. For Kosslick, who has been director of the festival since 2001, 
film-makers are “seismographs” of their individual societies, with their films 
“reflecting the world we live in”. James says: “Berlin has always shown a huge 
range of European cinema in particular, and the Berlinale programmes are very 
interstested in political cinema, that has been very clear over the years. 
Issue-driven films have always played a prominent part in the programme.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbcb05f308b2478faf9117b422681d13f09b27c8%2F0_451_2999_1799%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20film%20festival%20embraces%20Hollywood%20with%20Coens%2C%20Clooney%20and%20Tatum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fberlin-film-festival-george-clooney-scarlett-johansson-meryl-streep-hail-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbcb05f308b2478faf9117b422681d13f09b27c8%2F0_451_2999_1799%2F2999.jpg>
 Special tribute … David Bowie in The Man Who Fell to Earth, which will be 
screened at the Berlin film festival. Photograph: Allstar/British 
Lion/StudioCanal 
Kosslick emphasises the amount of films dealing with migration in the festival 
lineup – including Gianfranco Rosi’s documentary Fire at Sea, which examines 
the experiences of the inhabitants of the Italian island of Lampedusa, 
currently one of the frontlines of the migration crisis. However, Berlin is not 
above indulging in a little sentimentality, as the series of tribute screenings 
to recently departed entertainment industry notables suggests.Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> will be commemorated with a 
screening of Sense and Sensibility, the Ang Lee-directed Jane Austen adaptation 
which won the Golden Bear at the 1996 Berlinale, while Bowie – who lived and 
worked in Berlin for an extended period in the late 1970s, and is described by 
Kosslick as “an avant-garde artist who expressed his creativity in many 
disciplines” – will be recognised with a showing of the Nicolas Roeg-directed 
sci-fi parable The Man Who Fell to Earth, which competed in Berlin (but failed 
to win an award) in 1976. The festival will also honour Italian director Ettore 
Scola, who died in January, with a screening of his 1983 dialogue-free film The 
Ball, which won Scola the Silver Bear for best director.

• The Berlin film festival  <https://www.berlinale.de/en/HomePage.html>opens 
on 11 February and runs until 21 February.
 