
Bermuda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bermuda> is the world’s worst 
corporate tax haven, according to a list by Oxfam, which includes three other 
UK territories among those it names and shames.


The charity’s list of the “world’s worst” 15 tax havens includes the Cayman 
Islands, Jersey and theBritish Virgin Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-virgin-islands>, which, like 
Bermuda, are under the sovereignty of the UK. It warned that allowing these 
territories to act as tax havens “undermines Britain’s efforts to be an 
outward-facing, responsible member of the international community”.

To compile the list, Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> looked at 
practices such as offering unfair and unproductive tax incentives and zero or 
extremely low corporate tax rates, as well as failure to co-operate with 
international processes to combat tax avoidance.

Earlier this year, the charity said that British overseas territories such as 
Bermuda were popular with US firms seeking to slash their tax bill by 
“profit-shifting” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/us-corporations-14-trillion-hidden-tax-havens-oxfam>
. In 2012, it found US firms had reported $80bn (£64bn) of profit in Bermuda, 
more than their combined reported profits in Japan, China, Germany and France.

It said that though these practices, tax havens were distorting the global 
economy and depriving other governments of much-needed resources. The pressure 
to compete by offering tax incentives to multinationals costs developing 
countries $138bn annually, it said.


Ana Arendar, Oxfam’s head of inequality, said: “Tax dodging isn’t an abstract 
accounting game – the lost revenue has devastating consequences for the world’s 
poorest people who miss out on life-saving medicines and the chance to go to 
school.”

The government of Bermuda said there were “substantial errors” in Oxfam’s 
report. It disputed claims that there were “anonymous shell corporations” on 
the island, and said that it cooperated with international attempts to combat 
tax avoidance.

Its deputy premier and minister of finance, Everard Richards, said in a 
statement: “The government of Bermuda notes with surprise and disappointment 
statements by Oxfam concerning tax and transparency in which Bermuda has been 
wrongly included.”

He added: “We have a leading role in supporting global property/catastrophe 
and other insurance, which directly benefits many of the ‘poorest people’ to 
which Oxfam refers, as well as providing employment in many economies beyond 
our shores, including the UK.”

In October Theresa May, the prime minister, pledged to “come after” the 
accountants, financial advisers and middlemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-conference-interventionist-government-for-workers>
 who help tax dodgers avoid paying what they owe to society.

However, Arendar said: “Allowing our overseas territories and Crown 
dependencies to operate as tax havens undermines Britain’s efforts to be an 
outward-facing, responsible member of the international community. It’s time to 
end this embarrassing contradiction in our own backyard.”

UK corporation tax is due to fall to 17% by 2020 from its current level of 
20%, andthe prime minister has suggested there could be further cuts to attract 
businesses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-cuts-to-corporation-tax-cbi-speech>
. Oxfam warned that governments that cut corporate tax balance their books by 
reducing public spending or by raising taxes such as VAT that fall 
disproportionately on the poorest.
 