
The pension pot at Bernard Matthews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bernard-matthews> is set to miss out on 
millions of pounds in payouts under the company’s rescue package – despite 
“corporate elites” getting their money back in full.

MPs have vowed to review the pre-pack model for businesses going into 
administration, which has been dubbed “a huge detriment to pensioners”.

A report for the Commons work and pensions select committee found the deficit 
on the Bernard Matthews pension fund is now likely to be around £20m.

But the fund is only due to receive 1p in the pound, as part of its pre-pack 
model arranged by administrators Deloitte.

This is despite sale proceeds of the company being used to make a full payment 
of £46.4m to lenders Wells Fargo Capital Finance (UK) and PNC Financial 
Services UK Ltd.

Rutland Partners, which was Bernard Matthews’s ultimate owner, has already 
received £34m and is likely to receive a total of £39m.

Deloitte, meanwhile, has already billed £790,000 and its legal fees are likely 
to amount to £668,000. The hourly rate for Deloitte and its advisers is between 
£390 and £872 per hour.

A briefing report by Prof Prem Sikka, from the University of Essex, notes that 
Deloitte and Rutland Partners had a “prior relationship”.

The report says: “The administration strategy seems to have been carefully 
crafted to enable secured creditors and controllers of Bernard Matthews to 
extract maximum cash from the company and dump the pension scheme and other 
liabilities.

“No attention has been paid to the hardship caused to retired and existing 
employees.

“It is all too easy for companies, their directors and shareholders to extract 
cash and dump pension obligations to employees, leaving the Pension Protection 
Fund or taxpayers to foot the bill, and effectively boost returns to corporate 
elites.”

Pre-pack administration arrangements are where a buyer is lined up to take on 
a company’s assets, but without liabilities such as pension deficit.

Those who back pre-pack arrangements say it may enable a company to survive 
and rescue jobs.

But Sikka says the confidentiality of the deal hides its true nature, while 
creditors are not consulted and typically lose out.

Unsecured creditors worth £39m are also unlikely to receive more than 1p in 
the pound, which includes around £1.4m to HMRC for tax and National Insurance 
contributions.

Sikka’s report warns that administrators are left with “enormous powers and 
discretion” over who gets what when a company enters administration.

He adds that administrators “may well be swayed by their fees and prior 
relationships with company directors or parties to the sale/purchase of 
business.

“It is not unusual for major accountancy firms to receive business, including 
insolvency work, from banks,” added Sikka.

The Pension Protection Fund, which is funded through levies on private sector 
employers, has beenlined up to absorb Bernard Matthews’s defined benefit scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/19/frank-field-condemns-plan-to-dump-bernard-matthews-pension-scheme>
.

Committee chair, Frank Field, said: “What looks likely to be an increase in 
these pre-pack arrangements, which act to the huge detriment of pensioners, and 
bump up still further the levies on good employers through increased Pension 
Protection Fund contributions, is no doubt an issue the committee will want to 
look at early on parliament’s return.

“We expect that the Government will soon publish a new Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Bill, and this may offer the 
committee an opportunity of proposing further reforms so as to protect better 
the position of pensioners in circumstances similar to Bernard Matthews Ltd.”
 