
It was a year when the No 1 book was a play script. When hyper-prolific James 
Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/11/james-patterson-life-in-writing>
, dubbed the “library king” as Britain’s long-reigning most-borrowed author, 
could manage no higher than 60th place. When the anonymous, insanely difficult
GCHQ Puzzle Book was 43rd, and so beat super-sellers like Patterson and Ian 
Rankin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianrankin>, not to mention all those 
much-hypedhygge books.

The all-year sales rankings for 2016 are full of such surprises, as befits an 
unpredictable year, but also contain much that is comfortingly recognisable, 
such as the ghosts of Christmas charts past at the top. WithHarry Potter and 
the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/28/harry-potter-cursed-child-play-script>
, JK Rowling reclaims the No 1 spot that used to be reserved for her in the 
noughties, and her versatility is underlined by four other entries in various 
genres (12, 28, 64, 95). Bill Bryson reprised the round-Britain trip behind his 
mid-90s hit,Notes from a Small Island, in The Road to Little Dribbling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/11/the-road-to-little-dribbling-review-bill-bryson-more-notes-from-a-small-island>
 (13) and the result is the list’s highest placed non-fiction title.Mary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> (17), easily this year’s 
leading conventional cookery writer, was penning bestselling festive gifts long 
before either of them emerged.

Authors who’ve come through more recently reappeared too, or just hung around: 
Paula Hawkins’sThe Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
 (2), which was in 2015’s top five as a hardback, stays there as amovie-boosted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
 paperback. Jojo Moyes’s 2012 successMe Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/me-before-you-review-emilia-clarke-sam-claflin-thea-sharrock>
 (4) also has a film to thank for its second bite of the cherry, with the love 
story’s sequel (8) benefiting too.Michael Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/michael-mosley-ecigarettes-miracle-menace-tv>
, co-writer of 2013 sensationThe Fast Diet, is back to winning ways with The 
8-Week Blood Sugar Diet (15).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e57f49ca90bde0eae21018335f993d263a1d12e%2F177_0_2721_3223%2F2721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bestselling%20books%202016%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Christmas%20charts%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bestselling%20books%202016%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Christmas%20charts%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e57f49ca90bde0eae21018335f993d263a1d12e%2F177_0_2721_3223%2F2721.jpg>
 ‘A sixpack-baring YouTube idol’ … Joe Wicks onThis Morning. Photograph: Ken 
McKay/ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
Add the children’s writers David Walliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/childrens-books-site+tv-and-radio/david-walliams>
 (eight entries including 5 and 6) andJeff Kinney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/12/my-writing-day-jeff-kinney> (10, 
36, 59), perennial presences in the past few years, plusGuinness World Records 
(9), and the most-bought writers look very familiar. There are some significant 
exceptions: newcomerJoe Wicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/lunch-with-joe-wicks> (3, 
7, 27), a sixpack-baring YouTube and Instagram idol whose books blend fitness 
and food;Jason Hazeley and Joel Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/12/ladybird-the-dad-review-zoe-williams>
 (11 entries including 16, 20), whose Ladybird spoofs are all over this year’s 
list after achieving two slots in the bottom half in 2015; and Bruno Vincent, 
who mimicked their formula with Enid Blyton take-offs so smartly that his best 
effort,Five on Brexit Island (14), is two places ahead of theirs.

As this suggests, a revival in humour – largely absent since a decade ago, 
when it was represented by comedians’ autobiographies, Jeremy Clarkson’s column 
collections and quirky one-offs – was among the most obvious trends in 2016, 
and it was not confined to those top 100 books officially tagged as belonging 
to the genre. As well as the slew of Ladybirds and the revamped Blyton, fun 
pervades Bryson’s droll travelogue and the annual autumnal offerings of 
Walliams and Kinney, which are designated children’s books but could equally be 
called comic fiction.

After a list dominated by women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/24/bestselling-books-2015-analysis-fifty-shades-on-top>
 in 2015, this year saw men staging a comeback, spearheaded by the combination 
of the rise of male-written diet guides, either mixed with workouts (Wicks) or 
promising to “reprogramme your body” (Mosley), with these humour titles – and 
helped by a ploy, borrowed from female authors and taken further, of bombarding 
readers with books (in the past, EL James and others have had three or four 
titles in the same chart, but nothing like the number resulting from Penguin’s 
release of a shelf-full of Ladybirds this year, or the continuing sales of 
Walliams’s previous novels).

As a result, the male:female ratio tilted dramatically, with 61 men featuring 
(even treating the Hazeley/Morris pairing as a single author) as against 32 
women, compared with near parity in 2015. While male authors had humour almost 
to themselves, lacked serious opposition besides Rowling in children’s books 
and moved boldly into fitness and wellbeing, their female counterparts were in 
discreet retreat. The vlogger Zoe (Zoella) Sugg, the colouring book artist 
Millie Marotta and the healthy eating evangelist Ella Woodward, for example, 
all did less well, although they were far from falling out of the charts. No 
psychological thriller writers, inspired by Hawkins and Gillian Flynn, charged 
up the chart, and nor was there a posse of fellow female social media stars 
looking to emulate Zoella’s quaint sideline of producing books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8bd1125ec436b0c6094eb081e6c82bb01a608cb%2F98_0_3308_1986%2F3308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bestselling%20books%202016%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Christmas%20charts%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bestselling%20books%202016%3A%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Christmas%20charts%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbestselling-books-2016-analysis-ghost-christmas-past%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8bd1125ec436b0c6094eb081e6c82bb01a608cb%2F98_0_3308_1986%2F3308.jpg>
 Back for more … Emily Blunt inThe Girl on the Train. Photograph: 
Allstar/Dreamworks Skg 
Other absences or near-absences, unfilled by men or women, are striking: no 
politics apart fromFive On Brexit Island, although wars and polls dominated 
2016’s news; sport only represented by motorcyclist Guy Martin’s autobiography 
(75), although it was an Olympic year and Alex Ferguson’s autobiography was No 
1 three years ago; no mainstream TV cooks other than Berry and the apparently 
fading Jamie Oliver (40, 53) – ie no Nigella, Rick, Hugh, Tom, Lorraine, Hairy 
Bikers orBake Off tie-in book; only two celebrity memoirs – by Tim Peake (19) 
and Bruce Springsteen (24) – in the top 50. Translated titles (just David 
Lagercrantz (31) and Elena Ferrante (98) in fiction) are hard to spot, and so 
are books by authors from ethnic minorities –Paul Beatty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/29/my-writing-day-booker-winner-paul-beatty>
’sThe Sellout has racked up decent sales since winning the Man Booker, but 
short of the 102,000 copies needed to break into this year’s top 100.

In a list that’s less literary than 2015’s (in which garlanded debuts 
by Jessie Burton and Emma Healey joined Harper Lee’sGo Set a Watchman in the 
top 10), prize contenders are unusually invisible too – out of all the year’s 
major award-winners and shortlisted titles, in fiction and non-fiction, only 
Kate Atkinson’sA God in Ruins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/10/a-god-in-ruins-kate-atkinson-observer-review>
 (23), winner of the Costa novel prize, sold enough to rub shoulders with 
commercial heavy hitters such as Lee Child and John Grisham. Otherwise, when 
picking literary novels, readers seemingly sent a tacit message to judging 
panels, going for books by the reliable old favourites –Sebastian Faulks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/26/where-my-heart-used-to-beat-sebastian-faulks-review>
 (41),William Boyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/sweet-caress-william-boyd-review>
 (77),Kazuo Ishiguro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/buried-giant-kazuo-ishiguro-review-nicholas-lezard>
 (85) – that they had rejected.
table 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1q5IAYeZ9VCunvwvcg1Ai-09aVaQ_x-hzzUiU_rajN2U> 