
Betfair’s annual profit beat expectations after last year’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> helped the online 
bookmaker increase customer numbers by more than half.

Earnings before interest, tax and other items for the year to 30 April rose 
32% to £120m. The result outstripped increased profit guidance issued in March 
of between £113m and £118m.

Befair increased its full-year dividend by 70% to 34p.

Its chief executive, Breon Corcoran, said the World Cup in Brazil last summer 
attracted new customers, many of whom then placed bets on the Cheltenham 
festival and the Grand National.


Active increased by 52% to 1.7 million, with most new punters opting for 
fixed-odds bets.Betfair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/betfair> then 
offered them other products, leading to a 20% increase in new customers on its 
exchange gambling marketplace and a 74% rise in first-time players of poker and 
other games.

Corcoran said: “The financial year started with the World Cup, which allowed 
us to engage with many new and existing customers and gain trading momentum. 
This carried on throughout the rest of the year. We are successfully executing 
our strategy and achieving profitable scale in sustainable markets.”


Betfair’s main business is the exchange, which lets gamblers bet against each 
other in real time instead of accepting the bookie’s odds.

The company rebuffed a takeover by CVC, the private equity firm, in 2013 soon 
after Corcoran took over as boss. He cut costs, concentrated on markets where 
regulation was unlikely to spring surprises and introduced fixed-odds bets to 
tempt first-time users.

 Betfair’s share price has soared over the past two years from 937p to a 
record £26.66 this month.Some analysts think the shares are now overpriced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jun/05/betfair-drops-nearly-5-after-sell-note>
 and that the valuation does not take account of competition from rivals such 
as William Hill and Sky Bet. The shares were down 2.5% to £24.52 in early 
trading.
 