
Betsy DeVos, a billionaire philanthropist and conservative activist, has been 
chosen by President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to be education secretary in 
his incoming administration.

In a statement on Wednesday, Trump called DeVos “a brilliant and passionate 
education advocate”.

But she faced criticism even before it was formally announced on Wednesday 
afternoon. Conservatives warned that DeVos, a longtime Republican donor, 
previously supported the Common Core education standards that Trump railed 
against during the campaign.

DeVos, 58, currently heads the advocacy group American Federation for Children.


Her brother is Erik Prince, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/blackwater-founder-erik-prince-benghazi>
 the founder of Blackwater, a private security contractor that became infamous 
after its operatives killed 17 Iraqis and wounded 20 more in Baghdad in 2007. 
Prince has since left the company, which is now called Academi.

Nikki Haley chosen to serve as Trump's US ambassador to United Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/nikki-haley-named-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
DeVos is a strong advocate of charter schools and allowing parents to use 
vouchers for private and religious schools in the name of “choice”. Teachers’ 
unions condemned her appointment as a blow to equality of opportunity.


Lily Eskelsen García 
<http://www.nea.org/home/President-National-Education-Association.html>, 
president of the National Education Association, said: “Her efforts over the 
years have done more to undermine public education than support students. She 
has lobbied for failed schemes, like vouchers – which take away funding and 
local control from our public schools – to fund private schools at taxpayers’ 
expense. These schemes do nothing to help our most vulnerable students while 
they ignore or exacerbate glaring opportunity gaps.

“She has consistently pushed a corporate agenda to privatize, 
de-professionalize and impose cookie-cutter solutions to public education. By 
nominating Betsy DeVos, theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> has demonstrated 
just how out of touch it is with what works best for students, parents, 
educators and communities.”

DeVos, a former chair of the Michigan Republican party, previously supported 
the Common Core, the set of math and reading guidelines adopted by most states, 
that Trump assailed during the election campaign. She is a member of the board 
of the Foundation for Excellence in Education, set up by the former Florida 
governor Jeb Bush.

Reacting to the news of the announcement, Bush called DeVos an “outstanding 
pick” for the post.

“I cannot think of [a] more effective and passionate change agent to press for 
a new education vision, one in which students, rather than adults and 
bureaucracies, become the priority in our nation’s classrooms,” Bushsaid in a 
statement <https://www.facebook.com/jebbush/posts/1031443833651326>.

DeVos donated funds to Bush and Carly Fiorina during the Republican primary 
contest before endorsing Senator Marco Rubio. Like Haley, she expressed 
reservations about Trump. In March, she told theWashington Examiner 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/michigan-mega-donor-trump-doesnt-represent-gop/article/2584867>
 that she considered him an “interloper” who “does not represent the Republican 
party”. In July she told the Associated Press: “A lot of the things he has said 
are very off-putting and concerning.”

The DeVos family has been active in Republican politics for decades, 
especially as donors to candidates and the party. Her husband, Dick, is an heir 
to the Amway direct sales fortune and a former president of the company.

They co-founded the Windquest Group, which invests in technology and 
manufacturing, and gave $22.5m to the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing 
Arts in Washington in 2010, then the biggest private donation in the complex’s 
history.
 