
On the way to meeting Bob Odenkirk, I see him in the bright California sky. 
Not a vision, but a huge advertising billboard, floating above Sunset Boulevard 
in West Hollywood. I half expect to see a tiny him up there, too, reaching down 
to rescue ... “rescue” the man who went up to take the billboard down, on legal 
grounds, and who slipped (“slipped”). You’ll know what I’m talking about if 
you’ve seen Breaking Bad spin-off prequelBetter Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul>; it’s one of the 
most memorable scenes from a memorable first season. If you haven’t seen Better 
Call Saul, here’s what you need to know:Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> (if you haven’t seen BB 
then God help you, frankly) creator Vince Gilligan and co-writer Peter Gould 
needed a lawyer for Walter White. And they wanted some levity at a time when 
everything was getting a little heavy. So they brought in Saul Goodman, played 
by Odenkirk, who grew as a character as the show went on, to the extent that 
when Breaking Bad finally came crashing splendidly to a halt, Gilligan and 
Gould felt that their dodgy lawyer was worth further investigation.

Turns out Saul Goodman’s not his real name (it’s made-up, and made-up Jewish, 
a play on “S’all good, man”). Really he’s Jimmy McGill, with a colourful (murky 
colours) past and a complicated relationship with the law, with his more 
successful lawyer brother, and with himself. He’s a more sympathetic, more 
interesting character than we knew from Breaking Bad, more than just an 
ethically challenged slickster in a cheap suit. And his show – although it 
shares DNA with the behemoth that gave birth to it (it’s about transformation 
and change and has much of the same dark humour) – became a thing in itself. It 
may not have the epic scale ofBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, but it makes up for 
that in warmth and wit, and tragedy. Perhaps it’s easier to identify with; the 
things that drive the character, as Odenkirk will tell me, “almost anybody can 
relate to ... trying to please your family or your older brother or win a girl, 
trying to be effective in the world and have people appreciate your skills – 
things that everyone’s working on nearly every day”.

In short: great character, great performance, great show. Better Call Saul is 
that rare thing, the spin-off that works. What do you need to know about Bob 
Odenkirk? He’s 53, from a nice suburb of Chicago; Catholic mother, absent 
alcoholic father. He’s a comedian, director, actor; he has written for Saturday 
Night Live and The Ben Stiller Show. He created the sketch showMr Show With Bob 
and David <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qojw-JwQgpU>, with David Cross. He 
was cast in Breaking Bad, played Bruce Dern’s news-anchor son in the film 
Nebraska and a cop in the first TV series of Fargo, and so on and so forth. 
He’s successful and seriously respected in the business without having made a 
massive impact on the general public consciousness, or the billboards of Sunset 
Strip. Until now.

Here he is then, in the flesh, on the ground, the right size, in a hotel room. 
How does he feel when he sees himself like that, immense and in the sky? “I 
feel like I hope the show does well enough to justify that announcement.”

The show has already done well – big ratings (it’s on AMC in the US, but 
streams on Netflix in the UK), awards and plaudits from critics, from hardcore 
Breaking Baddites, from people who have never even seen BB and have come to BCS 
fresh; it’s a success, you’re a success, Bob. “Yeah, but what about season two? 
I never see it as me, I see it as the show, and I think that the show is made 
by such an amazing group of people who are all working at the top of their game 
and ...”

Yes, Bob Odenkirk is modest. But it’s not modesty for modesty’s sake, it’s 
thought-out, measured, confident modesty, coupled with a healthy cynicism and a 
nicely pessimistic worldview. If he was younger, he says, maybe he would look 
up at the billboard and go: “Look at me, look what I did.” But he’s at a stage 
where he can’t see himself through that lens: “There’s no way to pull it out of 
the muck of my everyday strainings and efforts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a282d9a2211bca156a543750eb479736357c77b%2F0_61_1791_1074%2F1791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20Call%20Saul%E2%80%99s%20Bob%20Odenkirk%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20is%20hilarious.%20Until%20he%20wins'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20Call%20Saul%E2%80%99s%20Bob%20Odenkirk%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20is%20hilarious.%20Until%20he%20wins%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a282d9a2211bca156a543750eb479736357c77b%2F0_61_1791_1074%2F1791.jpg>
 With Jonathan Banks in Better Call Saul. Photograph: Ben Leuner/Netflix 
He’s making his work sound like defecation. Odenkirk speaks more slowly and 
more softly than his character does, pausing to think as he goes, but, he says, 
“weirdly, I have more confidence than Jimmy does. Jimmy has these skills that 
he enjoys putting on display but that he’s ashamed of as well, and he’s aware 
that the world as seen through his brother’s eyes – which is how he sees 
himself – does not respect this specific skillset that he has. Whereas I feel 
like whatever my skillset was, for being funny or working with funny people to 
create something funny, I kind of had a weird confidence in it from a pretty 
young age, and that if I just hung in there I would find a place for it. I’m 
nowhere near as concerned about getting the adulation of the people around me 
as Jimmy seems to be.”

Hence the billboard not being so important? “I don’t give a shit.”

I’ve been fishing around hopefully trying to find links between the character 
and the man who plays him. Specifically, there’s a bit in the first season in 
which Jimmy’s brother Chuck tells Jimmy it’s time for him to build his own 
identity instead of riding on others’ (Chuck’s) coat-tails. And I’m wondering 
if – after all of the years of working on other people’s shows, as well as 
helping other people get ahead (of which he has done a lot) – this is the 
moment Bob is finding his identity? “I don’t think there are a ton of 
similarities,” he says.

But not dismissively. And when I just won’t drop it, and wonder if there are 
any similarities between him and his younger brother, who works in the same 
kind of world (he works on The Simpsons) and whether he resents that and wants 
Bill to fail and tries to block Bill’s path, as Chuck does to Jimmy ... well, 
the answer is, again, no. Bob only has nice things to say about his brother, 
and says he’s funnier than he is. “If I had a parallel in my life,” he adds, 
“it would be with my mother, who is very Catholic and is wonderful and loves 
me, but cannot ever watch anything I do.”

Because? “Because it’s too ...” He pauses.

Uncatholic? “Uncatholic. She never watched Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02sHIyXf3DY>, has never seen anything I’ve 
done in comedy, can’t watch this show, there’s too much violence and crude 
language.”

Does it sadden him that he doesn’t have his mother’s approval? “Yes, it does, 
but it clearly hasn’t stopped me. And it’s something I knew when I started. I 
always wrote risque comedy and crude comedy. I enjoy crude behaviour and 
language. I revel in it.”

What makes him laugh? “Stupidity, idiotic behaviour, scamming people. I mean, 
Trump is hilarious. To see an ego on display and maneuvering so joyfully and in 
such a destructive way, it’s the craziest, it’s hilarious to see.”

Is there a point where it becomes less funny? “Well, if he gets elected, 
that’s a point where it’s not funny, it’s not a joke any more. But until you 
get elected, keep doing the show, for all of us, please, we’re all enjoying it, 
you’re a fucking riot, keep it up, please Donald Trump, don’t write anything 
down, don’t prepare anything, just go by the seat of your pants, it’s a 
wonderful show.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6979b27dc31799ac090092c44296ac67597aff8a%2F0_0_2816_1691%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20Call%20Saul%E2%80%99s%20Bob%20Odenkirk%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20is%20hilarious.%20Until%20he%20wins'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20Call%20Saul%E2%80%99s%20Bob%20Odenkirk%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20is%20hilarious.%20Until%20he%20wins%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbetter-call-sauls-bob-odenkirk-trumps-ego-is-so-destructive-its-hilarious-until-he-gets-elected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6979b27dc31799ac090092c44296ac67597aff8a%2F0_0_2816_1691%2F2816.jpg>
 With Walter White (Bryan Cranston) in Breaking Bad. Photograph: 
AMC/Everett/Rex Features 
I think I’ve kind of fallen for Bob Odenkirk a little bit. Maybe not what you 
want in an interview, but I can’t help it. I’m not proud, I asked for a selfie 
– a Saulfie! – I got one, too, though being middle-aged, I had my phone the 
wrong way round and ended up with a wallfie. He’s generous and modest, but not 
too sickeningly so, because it’s believable and because he’s also aware of his 
talents. He’s confident and funny, and he likes rude stuff. And guess where he 
last went on holiday? Scotland! Walking with his daughter, the Great Glen Way 
(“I wanted to be as far away from LA as I could, but still be in 
civilisation”). It was always going to be hard not to like Bob Odenkirk.

At the beginning of the second season – I won’t give anything away – Jimmy is 
lying on one of those inflatable chairs in a U-shaped swimming pool with a 
cocktail in his hand and a little bowl of snacks on a separate float, a kind of 
peanut raft tethered to the main event. No, not a midlife crisis, he claims. 
“Midlife clarity.”

It’s clearly not entirely true in Jimmy’s case, but has Bob reached any kind 
of midlife clarity? “Erm, hmm ... no. Jesus Christ, I hope I get it by 
late-life. I hope I get some clarity. Maybe I have a little, I don’t know, 
maybe I have a little.”

• Season two of Better Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> is available on 
Netflix from 16 February, with new episodes weekly.
 