
“Jimmy doesn’t understand Chuck, and Chuck sure as hell doesn’t understand 
Jimmy,”Better Call Saul  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul>co-creator Peter 
Gould 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/16/vince-gilligan-and-peter-gould-on-better-call-saul-breaking-bad>
 said on Saturday during the SaulPaleyfest 
<https://media.paleycenter.org/paleyfest-la-2016-lineup/> panel at the Dolby 
Theater in Los Angeles. Gould was responding to a question about the state of 
the relationship between morally compromised protagonist Jimmy McGill (Bob 
Odenkirk) and his irascible older brother Chuck (Michael McKean). We had just 
watched episode five of season two, which airs on Monday on AMC in the US and 
in that episode, the relationship between Chuck and Jimmy continues to sour. 
What Gould and co-creatorVince Gilligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/18/breaking-bad-vince-gilligan-walter-white>
 wanted to point out to the audience is that despite the viewer’s natural 
affinity for the future Saul Goodman, neither brother lacks culpability in the 
rivalry that dominates the overall narrative of the series.

Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould on Better Call Saul: 'It could have been a huge 
flop'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/16/vince-gilligan-and-peter-gould-on-better-call-saul-breaking-bad>
“Chuck is difficult, but so is Jimmy. They’re just different kinds of 
difficult,” Gould continues. Gould and Gilligan revealed that a major influence 
on the series when it was in the initial planning stages was theTerry Zwigoff 
documentary Crumb <http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-crumb-1994>, 
which followed the eccentric artist Robert Crumb and his equally unique 
brother. Relationships between brothers, especially brothers with the 
diametrically opposed personalities of Jimmy and Chuck McGill, are never 
simple. It would be cruel to spoil much of tonight’s excellent episode, titled 
Rebecca, but I will say that it begins with a flashback to a time before Jimmy 
passed the bar and became a lawyer.

McKean’s performance as Chuck in this long-ago timeframe is more confident and 
more assertive, but the one constant is his jealousy and the aforementioned 
lack of understanding. People love Jimmy. They find his lowbrow sense of humour 
and fast-talking ways charming. Chuck is dour, serious, intellectual and 
rational. One brother is motivated by pure instinct, the other by careful 
calculation. Thus far, we’ve only truly been privy to Jimmy’s perspective of 
their conflict. By the end of tonight’s episode, the picture broadens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fbetter-call-saul-at-paleyfest-the-only-master-plan-is-to-be-interesting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facefbe290afd920a22fb06da6e535c0cb3a5c00d%2F0_0_5243_3488%2F5243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20Call%20Saul%20at%20Paleyfest%3A%20'The%20only%20master%20plan%20is%20to%20be%20interesting'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fbetter-call-saul-at-paleyfest-the-only-master-plan-is-to-be-interesting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20Call%20Saul%20at%20Paleyfest%3A%20%27The%20only%20master%20plan%20is%20to%20be%20interesting%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fbetter-call-saul-at-paleyfest-the-only-master-plan-is-to-be-interesting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facefbe290afd920a22fb06da6e535c0cb3a5c00d%2F0_0_5243_3488%2F5243.jpg>
 Bob Odenkirk, Michael McKean and Rhea Seehorn on the Better Call Saul panel. 
Photograph: Rob Latour/Rex/Shutterstock 
Ultimately, the goal is to turn Jimmy McGill into Saul Goodman, a 
transformation that will probably sever many of Jimmy’s relationships as seen 
on Better Call Saul – including Chuck and his girlfriend, Kim Wexler. According 
to Rhea Seehorn, who portrays Kim, there’s no reason to assume Kim is out of 
Jimmy’s life when he becomes Saul just because she wasn’t inBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, but for her to 
surrender her morality to be with Saul would be a betrayal of both characters. 
Tonight’s episode contains a powerhouse performance from Seehorn, who embues 
Kim with a quiet dignity that is constantly being tested both by Jimmy and by 
the profession she’s chosen. In a way, her story is the most tragic, because 
she doesn’t have the gift of deception that her boyfriend can always fall back 
on. If Jimmy were to cling to Kim after becoming Saul, it would lessen the 
abjection he must go through to submerge himself fully into the underworld. 
Jimmy and Kim can’t last because Saul and Kim can’t either.

That said, Gould, Gilligan, Seehorn, Odenkirk and the rest of the cast made it 
very clear that nothing is set in stone. “There is no master plan, other than 
to be interesting,” Gillian said. This allows them the latitude to make changes 
on the fly and to execute some of the more thrilling narrative fireworks that 
they pull off in tonight’s show. With the second season at the halfway mark, 
one can see the path to Saul getting shorter and the threads lining up with 
Breaking Bad. But what lies beyond what we already know is also of interest to 
the staff of Saul. The flashes of Saul’s life in the Cinnabon in Nebraska after 
the Breaking Bad finale in the first and second season premieres makeBetter 
Call Saul <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> a prequel 
and a sequel, a narrative quirk that Gilligan teases might pay off eventually. 
“All bets are off once you get to Omaha,” he said with the smile of a man who 
knows he has his audience’s rapt attention for as long as he likes.
 