
Almost 40% of all serious crime against businesses targeted betting shops last 
year, according to a presentation byLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> flying squad officers to the gambling 
industry.

The presentation, which has not been published but has been seen by the 
Guardian, is the first official indication of police concern about the
vulnerability of the bookmakers’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/22/theres-always-someone-kicking-off-the-perils-of-being-a-bookmaker>
 business model, which relies on large cash transactions in lightly staffed 
premises.

'There's always someone kicking off': the perils of being a bookmaker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/22/theres-always-someone-kicking-off-the-perils-of-being-a-bookmaker>
The data is confirmation that thieves appear to see betting shops as easy, 
cash-rich targets. Last year high-speed, high-stakes gambling machines, which 
are disproportionately found in poorer parts of Britain, generated £1.7bn of 
revenues for bookmakers. Politicians of every party have been alarmed by the 
rise of the machines.

The figures also challenge the view put forward by Malcolm George, chief 
executive of the Association of British Bookmakers, that betting shops are the 
safest place to gamble.

The presentation reveals that:

 * Betting shops accounted for more than 200 of the 523 serious robberies 
against commercial properties in the capital in 2015.

 * Betting shops accounted for 70% of all robberies at commercial premises in 
London involving a firearm, being hit 167 times. Banks by comparison recorded 
17 robberies at gunpoint. 
 * The worst-hit part of the capital was Haringey, which contains prosperous 
Highgate and poor Tottenham, and where flying squad officers dealt with almost 
a robbery a week. Commercial robberies in numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jul/2016-07-26T12:10:13/embed.html>
Of the 523 offences, the flying squad said 196 had been “detected with 
offenders charged”.

There is no sign of the problem improving. The flying squad – part of the 
Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
charged with dealing with serious violent crime – said that in the three months 
from December 2015 to February 2016, “betting shops remain a big concern with 
attacks making up almost 50% of all flying squad offences [in London and the 
south-east]. The majority involve a firearm and losses above £1,000.”

The big gamble: the dangerous world of British betting shops | Tom Lamont
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/big-gamble-dangerous-british-betting-shops>
The document highlights how petty criminals graduate from small-scale drug 
dealing to street robberies before engaging in “gun-enabled commercial 
robbery”. In one example, a minor with a history of stealing jewellery from 
women in the street committed 13 armed robberies against betting shops in south 
London over nine months.

Experts said the presentation should be a wake-up call for the industry and 
warned of a “profit-before-safety” corporate culture that has emerged along 
with the rise of fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs).

Campaigners say that while there has been an upward trend in crime at betting 
shops, bookmakers increasingly rely on single staffing in their shops, often a 
lone female worker, and security systems that direct staff to call central 
control rooms rather than the police.

Concerns have been raised since one lone worker was killed in 2013 and a 
second was raped last year. In court the rape victim, who had been working 
alone at the time, said her employer, Ladbrokes, had given her no training on 
what to do if a customer was losing a lot of money. The judgedescribed the 
company as “negligent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/big-gamble-dangerous-british-betting-shops>
.

In an interview, Barry Phillips, a former detective superintendent in the 
flying squad and ex-head of security and safety atLadbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes>, said: “My concern is that the 
industry is putting profit ahead of staff safety. As an industry we have had a 
shop worker killed and horrific sexual assaults on staff.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff337467a88490e0f87a4c2cd966ccc7907ee10e1%2F0_1995_3992_2395%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Betting%20shops%20odds-on%20favourites%20to%20be%20targeted%20by%20robbers%2C%20police%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Betting%20shops%20odds-on%20favourites%20to%20be%20targeted%20by%20robbers%2C%20police%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff337467a88490e0f87a4c2cd966ccc7907ee10e1%2F0_1995_3992_2395%2F3992.jpg>
 Barry Phillips, ex-flying squad detective superintendent and former head of 
Ladbrokes security and safety: ‘My concern is that the industry is putting 
profit ahead of staff safety.’ Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Phillips said it was a “real problem” that companies had boosted their profits 
by cutting down on the number of staff in shops. “We have shops opening until 
10pm being staffed by one person. In the industry it is known that first thing 
in the morning and last thing at night is the most vulnerable time for violent 
attacks on staff. It’s my judgment that people would be alive if that had not 
been the case.”

He said there needed to be greater cooperation between bookmakers and police. 
“We have seen that work with banks and the cash-in-transit industry. We have 
seen them adopt security measures and use higher standards of equipment. 
Working in partnership with the police, they have made the opportunities much 
more difficult for criminals. Whereas the betting shops are always dealing with 
high turnover of staff which impacts on training. Counters are not always left 
secure. There are issues with training [in] cash handling.


“You have staff emptying betting machines in front of customers. A robber will 
notice all this. FOBT machines give rise to opportunities because staff have to 
empty the machines to pay the punters. These are people on the minimum wage, 
young, who are on their own. They have to start emptying the machines, leaving 
counter areas open.”
Commercial robberies (map) 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/london_crime_map/giv-12515JtY1BOxKp707>
Last April the government announced that bookmakers would have to put checks 
in place so that punters who wanted to bet more than £50 at a time would need 
to set up gambling accounts.

Phillips said: “When you look at the crime figures, it’s not just the 
robberies which are a cause for concern. The machine damage across the industry 
is also increasing. Also increasing is violence in the workplace and assaults 
on staff.”

Councils, too, have become alarmed at the rise of crime associated with 
betting shops, which under the law could lead to a bookmaker losing its licence 
to operate. Last year Westminster council in London said there was evidence 
that a William Hill betting shop on Harrow Road was being “used by criminals to 
sell drugs and possibly stolen articles 
<http://committees.westminster.gov.uk/documents/s15447/William%20Hill%20357%20Harrow%20Road%20W9.pdf>
”.

The council now says police are monitoring the shop. “Building on this, we 
have done a lot of work to regulate betting shops across the city more widely, 
to make them safe for residents, customers and staff. Specifically, we were the 
first local authority to implement tougher conditions, including a restriction 
on lone working in betting shops after 8pm where it was deemed appropriate,” it 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47644c0c25bbf3c115466d3e0ec0657ebe00ddb2%2F0_0_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Betting%20shops%20odds-on%20favourites%20to%20be%20targeted%20by%20robbers%2C%20police%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Betting%20shops%20odds-on%20favourites%20to%20be%20targeted%20by%20robbers%2C%20police%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fbetting-shops-serious-crime-robbery-metropolitan-police-flying-squad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47644c0c25bbf3c115466d3e0ec0657ebe00ddb2%2F0_0_4784_2870%2F4784.jpg>
 A man plays roulette on a fixed-odds betting terminal. Photograph: Alamy 
Adrian Parkinson, a spokesman for the Campaign for Fairer Gambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling>, said: “There is a clear problem 
with violence and criminality in betting shops, whether that is attacks on 
gaming machines, violence and antisocial behaviour towards staff and robberies 
– very often armed robberies in which staff are in direct danger.

“One of the three principles under which bookmakers operate is that of keeping 
crime out of gambling. Clearly they are failing in this and the regulator just 
defers responsibility to local licensing authorities. It’s not good enough.”

A spokesperson for the Association of British Bookmakers said: “Betting shops, 
like other businesses, are occasional victims of crime. That is why we took 
action in 2010 to create the Safe Bet Alliance, a cross-industry working group 
with the Met police, trade unions and betting shops. Since its creation, 
robbery against betting shops has halved.

“We will continue to work with the Met police, the flying squad and other 
agencies to ensure that it continues to fall and the perpetrators are brought 
to justice.”

• This article was amended on 26 July 2016 to clarify the data source for the 
graphics.
 