
The Columbia History of the Twentieth Century ed Richard Bulliet 650pp, 
Columbia University Press, £39.95
 The Oxford History of the Twentieth Century ed Michael Howard and Wm. Roger 
Louis 458pp, Oxford University Press, £25
History in Our Time by David Cannadine 308pp, Yale University Press, £16.95.

 A torrent of retrospectives is roaring towards us. Oxford and Columbia have 
struck early, but we will soon be drowned under similar volumes from other 
well-established publishers along with every newspaper, magazine, and TV 
channel. 1999 will be the Year of the Massive Lookback, though our puny 
20th-century minds will focus mainly on the past hundred rather than thousand 
years. A millennium is a concept of fiction, an imaginary notion which cannot 
be summarised or defined.

 Even the attempt at encapsulating a single century is problematic, as the two 
volumes by Oxford and Columbia make clear. Each is a collection of roughly two 
dozen essays by different academic authors. They attempt to be worldwide in 
their coverage, but neither publisher took the opportunity of varying the mix 
by going to historians from outside the confines of Anglo-American culture, 
either on the European continent or further afield. The result, inevitably, is 
a 'metropolitan' view, suffused by liberal humanism and highly focused on 
technological change, as well as being overwhelmingly white and male. The 
Columbia volume only has three women writers, Oxford two. Both books have a 
broadly optimistic feel, based on the comforting notion - at least for the 
people of the northern hemisphere - that we are moving towards a single global 
culture aping the Western life-style. Even if the enlightenment belief in 
inevitable progress took heavy blows during the 20th century with the wounding 
of socialism (Ralf Dahrendorf, in the Oxford volume, says 'Utopia is one of the 
century's casualties'), the concept of globalisation has become a kind of 
milder substitute.

 In spite of these substantial similarities, the two books come at the century 
from different angles. The Oxford volume splits its subject into geographical 
regions after chapters on urbanisation, science, the economy, and the arts. 
Michael Howard's opening essay and foreword throw out several caveats. 
Resisting the Hobsbawm tendency to start the century in 1914, he points out 
that in 1900 the kind of 'end of history' complacency to which some succumbed 
in 1989 after the fall of the Berlin Wall was already strong. Too many people 
thought the era of worldwide liberal capitalism had arrived.

 The Columbia book is entirely thematic or, as its editor Richard Bulliet 
calls it, infrastructural, sweeping through the arts, religion, war, ethnicity, 
nationalism, agriculture, medicine, the economy, the environment, and a dozen 
other subjects. Bulliet himself contributes two stimulating essays on high and 
popular culture, in which he questions the viability of the distinction between 
them and suggests that the global expansion of new Western-originated media 
technology creates a set of potentials which can be adapted to any cultural 
setting. In his closing chapter he also takes a witty knock at the master 
narrative underlying much of his own book as well as the Oxford volume. He 
sketches out various proposals for alternative views of the 20th century which 
historians in 2050 might offer publishers as they look back on it with the 
advantage of substantial distance. By then the 20th century may look like 'The 
Asian Century', marked by the rise of Japan and East Asia. Or it may be 'The 
End of Nationhood', the century which saw the start of international law, 
financial institutions, and regional organisations. Or even 'The Pacification 
of Hearts: the New World of Islam', the century in which Islam rediscovered 
itself and broke loose from Western attempts at domination.

 Dense with detail, every reader will easily pick his or her own nuggets in 
these volumes beyond the broad ideas they express. From the Oxford book, I 
learnt that the noise and pollution brought to the richer cities of the world 
by the car is less than that which a similar number of horse-drawn vehicles 
would cause. In the Columbia book we are told that 'more original drama is 
aired in a week of American network TV programming than was produced by 
Shakespeare and all the other Elizabethan playwrights combined'.

 From David Cannadine I got the insight that while the rise of relatively easy 
divorce means that one-third of marriages entered into today end abruptly, the 
same was true in Victorian Britain. 'The only significant difference is that 
then it was death which undermined the family . . . the unprecedented rise in 
the divorce rate during the last one hundred years is merely a compensatory 
mechanism for the decline in adult mortality'. Cannadine's book is full of 
similarly stimulating points, though it makes no claim to be a history of the 
20th century. It is a collection of book reviews on British history, published 
over the past decade and a half in the the London Review of Books, the New York 
Review of Books, the New Yorker and other journals. A third are on various 
royals, a third on other celebrities, and the most interesting third on themes 
like privacy, intellectuals, divorce, morals and empire.

 Cannadine is a fluent and entertaining writer as well as being the perfect 
reviewer. He follows a classical but increasingly rare pattern, starting with a 
faithful summary of the book's content and arguments before supporting or more 
frequently taking issue with them and broadening the review into a wide-ranging 
essay. Knowledgeable and amusing, he is an easy read who is never facile.
 