
The Irish trainer Paul Gilligan has been disqualified from racing for six 
months for running a horse at Uttoxeter that had previously competed in an 
unlicensed “flapping” meeting in Ireland. The ban came after the rehearing of a 
disciplinary case that was initially heard by a panel that includedthe lawyer 
Matthew Lohn. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/14/jim-best-case-british-horseracing-authority-reopening-cases>

The penalty handed down on Monday is identical to that issued by the earlier 
hearing in March, which inquired into the running of a horse called Dubawi 
Phantom at Uttoxeter in June 2014. Dubawi Phantom was backed at long odds and 
ran out a cosy half-length winner of the race at 14-1.

Along with several other inquiries on which Lohn was a panel member, including 
the case against the Lewes trainerJim Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/jim-best-verdict-bha-king-george-vi-chase>
 for ordering a jockey to stop his horses, the Gilligan verdict was 
subsequently identified as potentially unsound since Lohn had accepted payments 
from the British Horseracing Authority for work unrelated to disciplinary 
matters.

Best, who was originally banned for four years by a panel chaired by Lohn, had 
his licence suspended for six months when the rehearing of his case concluded 
last week. Best has until 5pm on Wednesday – seven days from the receipt of 
written reasons for the judgment – to lodge an appeal against the decision,

Jim Best case fallout may result in BHA reopening seven cases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/14/jim-best-case-british-horseracing-authority-reopening-cases>
The BHA’s case against Gilligan, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/paul-gilligan-bha-delay-flapping-hearing-trainer-matthew-lohn>
 whose career includes a victory with Berties Dream in the Albert Bartlett 
Novice Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival in 2010, was that Dubawi Phantom had 
run at the unlicensed Dingle Festival in the west of Ireland in August 2013 
under the name Ayres Rock.

The panel heard evidence from Nick Bowen, a BHA vet, that he had studied both 
photographs and video recordings of Ayres Rock and Dubawi Phantom and concluded 
that it was the same horse, mainly due to its unusual markings.

In addition to Gilligan’s six-month disqualification, Dubawi Phantom has been 
disqualified from his victory at Uttoxeter, with Donald McCain’s Red Merlin 
promoted to first.

The reasons for the panel’s finding and its penalty are expected to be 
published in the new year.
 