
“One of the reasons I came here,” said Philip Green, right at the very end of a
marathon six-hour hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 before a combined business and work & pensions select committee, “was so 
people could judge for themselves if they think I am honest or not.” Put that 
one down to either tiredness or a fatal lack of self-awareness, given he had to 
be dragged screaming and kicking to parliament to explain his part in the 
collapse of BHS.

Trust is generally a two-way street: something to be earned on both sides. The 
suntanned billionaire who has never knowingly missed a chance to make a quick 
buck sees it somewhat differently. He desperately wants to be taken at his word 
while treating everyone else with a suspicion that at times verges on paranoia.

Big Phil set the tone by rolling his eyelids at the committee while sitting 
down and his performance became progressively more unstable the longer the 
session dragged on. First in line was Conservative Richard Fuller, who he 
believed was looking at him in a funny way. “Stop staring at me like that,” he 
demanded. Then he had a pop at another Tory, Jeremy Quin, for playing with his 
glasses in an annoying way. The committee clerk was ticked off for whispering 
and Labour’s Karen Buck, aka “That Lady”, was called out for being a 
mind-reader in a former life. Most bizarrely of all, the reporter from the 
Sunday Times was all but accused of bringing about the collapse ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> by investigating the deal.

I work at BHS. Here’s why Philip Green deserves to lose his knighthood | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/15/boss-philip-green-knighthood-bhs-employee-injustice>
“I’m not here to blame anyone because that’s not my style,” he insisted. “But 
there are some other people I could mention who are to blame.” Quite.

“Can we get back to talking about some of the details?” asked co-chair Frank 
Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>. “I’m afraid I don’t 
understand the question,” said an apparently bemused Big Phil. Field tried 
again. “Can we get back to talking about the some of the details?”

“That’s not the right question to be asking me,” insisted Big Phil second time 
round. This became a familiar pattern; almost every question was either too 
difficult or not the right one. It’s fair to say that Big Phil has 
concentration issues as well as trust issues.

Slowly, slowly, the committee made painful headway. It had been a complete and 
utter coincidence that his family had moved to Monaco in 1998 and if he had 
really wanted to avoid tax he could have been a great deal more aggressive 
about it. No, he had never thought about selling BHS in 2005. Apart from to 
Asda. No, he hadn’t sold a property for a knockdown price to his son-in-law. 
Oh, that property. Yes, he had sold the property, even though he hadn’t because 
he’d never been involved.

The longer the session went on, the greater the fears for Big Phil’s mental 
health became, for by now he was showing signs of delusional psychosis. When he 
could finally find a question he was able to understand or willing to answer, 
his responses were either that he was far too important to have got involved in 
that level of detail or a microscopic analysis of the price of coat hangers.

“You have been described as a controlling Napoleon figure,” observed co-chair 
Iain Wright. “Look out the window,” said Big Phil. “Is it light or dark 
outside?” Wright correctly decided everyone needed their first therapy break at 
that point.

The second period kicked off with Big Phil distraught, as well as suspicious, 
forgetful and delusional. The therapy hadn’t done him much good. Too much 
raking over the past. Anyone could be said to have made mistakes in hindsight 
and there was nothing to be gained in raking up the past. He’d never intended 
to leave a £500m hole in the BHS pension pot and all that had stopped him from 
doing anything about it was that thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator hadn’t bothered to phone 
him. Just then his phone – an old Nokia – rang.

“Maybe it’s the Pensions Regulator,” Wright said drily.

“Look, I’m going to make things right for people,” said Big Phil, desperate to 
hang on to his knighthood as well as the £100m yacht he has just treated 
himself to. Why not bung the pensioners a couple of yachts? Bish bash bosh.

Big Phil was equally certain he hadn’t met Sports Direct’s Mike Ashley to 
discuss the possible sale of BHS, apart from the few times when they had met to 
discuss just that. “That’s really rude. You owe me an apology. I haven’t come 
here in order not to tell the truth,” Big Phil shrugged. “Why would I want to 
do that?” That’s another question that never got a proper answer.
 