
Dominic Chappell <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell>, the 
former owner of BHS, has been arrested as part of an investigation into unpaid 
taxes on profits made from the collapsed department store chain.

HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) officers are understood to have arrested Chappell, 
49, in a dawn raid at his home near Blandford Forum, in Dorset, south-west 
England.

Chappell’s personal company, Swiss Rock Ltd, owes more than £500,000  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/dominic-chappell-owes-500000-in-tax-from-bhs-ownership-profits>
in tax, including £365,000 in VAT and £196,306 in corporation tax. Swiss Rock 
was paid at least £1.6m by BHS as part of Chappell’s controversial acquisition 
of the department store chain.

HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> refused to confirm that 
Chappell had been arrested. It said: “We do not comment on identifiable cases, 
but can confirm we have arrested a 49-year-old businessman.” The arrest took 
place on 2 November and he has subsequently been released.


Chappell did not return requests for comment.  Speaking about Swiss Rock’s tax 
bill in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/hmrc-dominic-chappell-tax-high-court-petition-bhs-swiss-rock>
, he said: “There was a return that was made in error; they [HMRC] have acted 
upon it and we are rectifying that as we speak.”

BHS collapsed into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 in April, leading to 11,000 job losses and leaving a £571m pension deficit.

Chappell, a former bankrupt with no retail experience, bought BHS for £1 in 
March 2015 fromSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> through Retail 
Acquisitions, a consortium of which he owned 90%.

Retail Acquisitions collected an estimated £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/dominic-chappell-bled-bhs-dry-says-paul-sutton>
 from BHS despite owning it for just 13 months before it collapsed. Green 
controlled the retailer between 2000 and 2015, during which time his family and 
other shareholderscollected more than £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
.

In June, Green told MPs he would sort out the problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 facing the pension scheme. However, no deal has been forthcoming and the 
tycoon was photographedon his new yacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/sir-philip-green-clashes-with-tv-reporter>
 during the summer.


Last month, the House of Commons voted unanimously to strip Green of his 
knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, which was awarded a decade ago for services to retail. During a fiery debate 
in parliament, Green was lambasted anddescribed as a “billionaire spiv” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/20/mps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
.

The BHS pension scheme is currently in an assessment period with the Pension 
Protection Fund. If a deal or settlement with Green cannot be reached, the 
scheme willeventually enter the PPF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/pension-protection-fund-bhs-retirement-ppf>
, where the members’ benefits will be cut by at least 10%.

Chappell has previously said he “earned” the money paid out from BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, his “conscience is very clear” and 
his team “did the right thing, right the way through”.

The Pensions Regulator has started legal proceedings in an attempt to fill the 
BHS pension deficit, while the Financial Reporting Council and the Insolvency 
Service are also investigating the scandal. The Serious Fraud Office is 
conducting preliminary inquiries in order to consider whether to launch a 
formal investigation.
 