
Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> has 
pledged to resolve the problems facing the BHS pension scheme and apologised 
for the collapse of the department store chain.

In a fiery session with MPs, Green said the pension problems the company faced 
were resolvable, and promised that beneficiaries would get a better deal than 
if the scheme entered the pension protection fund. TheBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> scheme has a deficit of £571m.

“We will solve it. We will find a solution,” Green said, without providing 
details.

Sir Philip Green: 'stupid and idiotic' decisions made over BHS - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/15/sir-philip-green-questioned-by-mps-over-bhs-collapse-live-updates>
There were some extraordinary exchanges between Green and MPs during the joint 
hearing of the business, innovation and skills committee, and the work and 
pensions committee. Green asked Richard Fuller, the Conservative MP, to stop 
looking at him. “Sir, do you mind not looking at me like that all the time? 
It’s really disturbing,” he said.

He also appealed to Frank Field, the work and pensions committee chairman, 
saying that the Tory MP Richard Graham was “beating me up”. Green asked Graham: 
“Are we in the same room?” during questions about the BHS pension scheme.

“Which bit of ‘I don’t remember’ is not clear to you?” Green asked another MP.

BHS is being wound down after administrators failed to secure a rescue deal, 
putting 11,000 jobs at risk. Green controlled BHS for 15 years until March 
2015, when he sold it to Dominic Chappell’s consortium, Retail Acquisitions, 
for £1.

The tycoon and other investors collected more than £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
 in dividends, rent and interest payments during his tenure at BHS. Green 
apologised for the collapse of the 88-year-old chain and insisted the dividends 
he took out of the company were not excessive.

The billionaire said he should have sold BHS earlier and that “stupid, idiotic 
mistakes” had been made about the pension scheme. “Nothing is more sad than how 
this has ended,” he said.

In response to questions from MPs, Green said the financing of BHS was “not an 
aggressive finance strategy” and not excessive. He said that as much as £800m 
had been pumped into the business between 2004 and 2015. “We put all that back 
into the business and more,” he said.

Green also said he left the UK in 1998 because of a heart scare, and moved to 
Monaco because “someone suggested it” and it had good schools for his children. 
“I had never spent a day there previously,” he said. Green’s business 
interests, including Arcadia, his retail business, are owned by his wife, who 
is also based in Monaco.

The tycoon told MPs he did not accept claims he was avoiding tax. “There are 
competitors of ours who don’t pay tax as a normal course of business,” he said.

Chappell and senior managers at BHS made a series of explosive allegations 
when they faced MPs last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/10/bhs-scandal-what-we-learned-this-week>
. Chappell was accused of being a “mythomaniac”, a “Premier League liar” and of 
having his “fingers in the till” at BHS. In his own evidence, Chappell said 
Green had blocked a rescue deal for BHS with Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct after 
going “insane” when he found out about the talks.

MPs have called for Green to be stripped of his knighthood. He was accused of 
being an “unscrupulous chancer” and overseeing “wealth extraction rather than 
wealth creation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/06/mps-accuse-sir-philip-green-of-being-an-unscrupulous-chancer>
 during a parliamentary debate into the collapse of BHS.
 