
More than £25m was paid out from BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>
 to its owner, Retail Acquisitions, in the 13 months between the department 
store’s sale and its collapse into administration, the Guardian has learned.


Almost 11,000 jobs are at risk after BHS called in administrators on Monday, 
the UK’s biggest high street failure since the collapse of Woolworths in 2008.

Retail Acquisitions and billionaire tycoon Sir Philip Green, the former owner 
of BHS, now face serious questions over their role in the 88-year-old company’s 
downfall.

MPs called for the government to launch an inquiry into the collapse of BHS, 
with Green’s handling of the retailer labelled as the “unacceptable face of 
capitalism”.

Dominic Chappell and the BHS takeover that alarmed retail watchers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/dominic-chappell-and-the-bhs-takeover-that-worried-retail-watchers>
BHS has been left with a pension deficit of £571m, despite Green and his 
family collecting £586m in dividends, rental payments and interest on loans 
during their 15-year ownership of the retailer.

The Pensions Regulator has confirmed that it is investigating BHS, suggesting 
that it is considering whether to force Green to contribute to the pension 
scheme. Thestate-backed Pension Protection Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/pension-protection-fund-bhs-retirement-ppf>
 is already in talks to bail out the pension scheme, although this will lead to 
members under the age of 60 suffering a cut to their benefits of at least 10%.
BHS pension graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/bhs-zip/giv-12515nn8ByEFoWjbE/>
In addition, sources with knowledge of BHS’s finances have told the Guardian 
that more than £25m was paid from BHS to Retail Acquisitions in the past 13 
months. This included £2.8m in management fees, £2.1m in salaries and wages, 
£11m in legal and professional fees and £10m in interest payments.

The man behind Retail Acquisitions is Dominic Chappell, a former racing driver 
who has been declared bankrupt twice. Chappell owns 90% of Retail Acquisitions,
which bought BHS for £1 from Green in March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/dominic-chappell-and-the-bhs-takeover-that-worried-retail-watchers>
.

The payments include a loan of £8.4m to Retail Acquisitions, taken out in 
March 2015, which hasalready been reported by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/07/over-a-third-of-proceeds-from-84m-bhs-loan-went-to-four-directors>
. This is part of the professional fees.


About £7m of the £10m of interest payments is understood to have been passed 
on to investment firm Grovepoint for a loan taken out to support BHS.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3016aa12397b4f098c1b22a23136e51f2455e99e%2F0_141_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BHS%20paid%20more%20than%20%C2%A325m%20to%20owner%20in%2013%20months%20before%20administration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BHS%20paid%20more%20than%20%C2%A325m%20to%20owner%20in%2013%20months%20before%20administration&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3016aa12397b4f098c1b22a23136e51f2455e99e%2F0_141_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Philip Green sold BHS for £1 last year. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Duff & Phelps has been appointed as administrator to BHS and will keep stores 
open as it tries to find a buyer. It insisted that staff will be paid as 
planned on Friday.

Anna Soubry, the business minister, said in parliament that the government 
“stands ready to offer its assistance” if a buyer cannot be found. This 
includes helping workers to find new jobs through the Jobcentre Plus’ Rapid 
Response Service.

However, a string of MPs called for the government to investigate whether 
there had been any impropriety in the downfall of BHS.

Referring to the conduct of Green, Angela Eagle, the shadow business 
secretary, said: “In this situation it appears this owner extracted hundreds of 
millions of pounds from the business and walked away to his favourite tax 
haven, leaving the Pension Protection Scheme to pick up the bill.”

Richard Fuller, the Conservative MP, said leaving the taxpayer to pick up the 
pension scheme through the PPF was the “unacceptable face of capitalism” and 
there were “reputational questions” for Green to answer. The tycoon is about to 
take delivery of a new £100m 300ft yacht.

Iain Wright, chairman of the BIS committee, said that “something is gravely 
wrong” for the BHS pension scheme to be facing a deficit and 11,000 jobs to be 
at risk when Green is understood to have collected millions from the business.

Soubry insisted the government would take action if it found evidence of 
wrongdoing.
Philip Green graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/bhs_green-zip/giv-12515Rs8cEALe2gL8/>
The Pensions Regulator said in a rare statement that it would look at whether 
it can use its “anti-avoidance powers” to get money injected into the pension 
scheme, most likely from Green. The tycoon is thought to have offered to put 
£80m into the scheme, including £40m in cash and a £40m loan secured against 
BHS assets. However, the regulator is thought to want a bigger contribution, 
potentially as much as £300m.

A spokesperson for the regulator said: “We can confirm that we are undertaking 
an investigation into the BHS pensions scheme to determine whether it would be 
appropriate to use our anti-avoidance powers.

“Such cases are complex. There is a clear process that must be followed and 
this can sometimes take a considerable amount of time. We are unable to provide 
a running commentary on case investigations, or confirm the targets of our 
investigation.”

BHS fell into administration after failing to secure the emergency funding it 
needed to pay rent and wages.

Chappell held talks all weekend with Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct about the 
sportswear retailer buying BHS, which has 164 shops. However, the talks broke 
down.

Sports Direct could now try to buy BHS stores from the administrators. Duff & 
Phelps is already understood to have had more than 30 expressions of interest 
in buying BHS. A source close to the process said at least two of these were 
“serious people”.

Sir Philip Green must sort out the BHS pension mess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/apr/25/sir-philip-green-must-do-more-to-sort-out-the-bhs-pension-mess>
BHS has more than £1.3bn of debts, including the pension scheme. Accountants 
have previously estimated that creditors would get just 1.23p for every pound 
if BHS collapsed, meaning landlords, clothing suppliers and staff could lose 
millions of pounds.

Trade unions described the collapse of BHS as devastating. John Hannett, the 
Usdaw general secretary, said: “This is devastating news for the employees of 
BHS and we urge the company to change their attitude to trade unions and begin 
a dialogue with us at this difficult and worrying time.”

Green declined to comment while Chappell did not return calls or messages 
seeking comment on the payments.


In a letter to employees on Sunday night, Chappell said: “It is with a deep 
heart that I have to report, despite a massive effort from the team, we have 
been unable to secure a funder or a trade sale.

“I would like to say it has been a real pleasure working with all of you on 
the BHS project, one I will never forget. You all need to keep your heads held 
high, you all have done a great job, but remember that it was always going to 
be very, very hard to turn around.”
 