
BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> has been placed into 
liquidation following pressure from the Pension Protection Fund, which argued 
that closing down the business would produce the best outcome for the failed 
retailer’s pensioners.



It also emerged that lawyers picking over the carcass of the BHS collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/09/bhs-collapse-could-cost-public-around-35m-philip-green-dominic-chappell>
 are looking at the validity of a £35m floating charge held in the name of 
former owner Sir Phillip Green. This ranks Green as a secured creditor of BHS 
and entitles him to get all his money back from the administration proceeds.

Duff & Phelps, one of BHS’s joint administrators until this week, had already 
judged Green’s claim to be valid. But it is thought that lawyers working for 
FRP Advisory, which is now in sole charge of the liquidation process, had 
demanded that the sum be returned from an escrow account at Green’s legal firm.





The PPF, a government-backed lifeboat for troubled pension schemes, is the 
company’s biggest creditor and had rowed with Duff & Phelps over the next step 
for the failed business. In the summer it pressed for FRP Advisory’s 
appointment after it was argued that Duff & Phelpswas too close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/pension-fund-wants-new-insolvency-experts-to-investigate-bhs-collapse>
 to Green. Duff & Phelps were accused of being the retail tycoon’s “ponies” by 
Dominic Chappell, the former bankrupt who bought BHS for £1 in 2015.

Labour MP Frank Field, who has locked horns with Green over BHS’s fate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/31/philip-green-accused-of-being-evil-as-frank-field-escalates-war-of-words>
, said liquidation – where a company’s remaining assets are sold off – offered 
the best chance of recovering cash for the collapsed retailer’s pension scheme. 
BHS’s scheme had a deficit of as much as £571m at the time of the retailer’s 
collapse in April this year.


Sir Philip Green's yacht and other assets could be seized, says regulator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/sir-philip-green-courts-could-seize-yacht-other-assets-pensions-regulator>
“This is another milestone in the collapse of BHS that Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> sailed away from,” said 
Field. “At this stage, though, it is welcome. It gives the PPF’s preferred 
administrator – rather than Sir Philip’s – the best chance of salvaging some 
money for the pension schemes.”

The administrators’ duties include scrutinising the actions of BHS’s former 
directors. However it is understood that, seven months on from BHS’s collapse, 
this investigatory work, which would provide the basis for any legal action to 
recover funds, is not yet at an advanced stage. The administrators’ report 
reveals that forensic accountants and lawyers are wading through 4,000 boxes of 
hard copy records and nearly 200 terabytes of data from BHS’s servers and 
company laptops.

“We believe the liquidation is the right way to secure the best possible 
recovery for the pension schemes and other creditors of the insolvent company,” 
said Malcolm Weir, head of restructuring and insolvency at the PPF. “The 
liquidator will now be able to progress all remaining issues, including the 
leases and the ongoing investigatory work.”


As liquidators FRP Advisory have more power to take decisions, including 
handing back stores to landlords, and in doing so, mitigating the rent that can 
be claimed out of the general pot for creditors. Even though all BHS stores are 
empty the company remains liable for monthly rental payments.

At present BHS’s unsecured creditors have been told to expect a maximum of 8p 
in the pound from the sale of BHS’s assets.

“We will be continuing our process of making recoveries through liquidation on 
behalf of all creditors and continuing with our statutory duties,” said a 
spokesman for FRP Advisory.

A parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer found that BHS 
had been systematically plundered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 under its former owners Green and Dominic Chappell. Green, his family and 
other BHS shareholderscollected at least £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
 from the retailer, while Chappell’s company Retail Acquisitions waspaid an 
estimated £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/pensions-regulator-seeks-millions-dominic-chappell-retail-acquisitions-bhs-pension-deficit>
.

The Topshop owner is still in talks with the Pension Regulator over how to 
resolve the shortfall in the BHS pension fund. Last monthits chief executive, 
Lesley Titcomb, told MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/sir-philip-green-courts-could-seize-yacht-other-assets-pensions-regulator>
that Green’s assets, including his £100m superyacht, could be seized by the 
courts if he refuses to comply with a legal demand tocover the £571m deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/former-bhs-workers-may-wait-years-for-pension-scheme-bail-out>
.

Titcomb told the work and pensions select committee a court would determine 
how to raise funds from the billionaire tycoon, including possible seizure of 
assets, if he does not pay up when a legal demand is issued, or reach a 
settlement with the regulator.
 