
The remaining 22 BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> stores downed 
shutters for the final time on Sunday, bringing to an end the department 
store’s 88-year history on the high street.

BHS began as an affordable general store in Brixton in south London in 1928 
and became one of the stalwarts of the British high street. Its collapse into 
administration in April is the largest retail failure since Woolworths in 2008 
and has left 11,000 people without jobs.

Everything must go as BHS Wood Green closes its doors for the last time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/everything-must-go-as-bhs-wood-green-closes-its-doors-for-the-last-time>
The administrators, Duff & Phelps, had already closed 141 stores in recent 
weeks, including its flagship Oxford Street branch in the West End of London.

Scores of bargain hunters turned up at the last BHS shops over the weekend, 
with queues forming outside some branches on Sunday. Some shoppers snapped up 
heavily discounted goods, while others walked away empty-handed, disappointed 
by what was left. Several people said it was a sad day and that they would miss 
the department store. The stores were largely stripped of merchandise, shelves 
and other fittings and several branches shut before the official closing time.

While staff oversaw the last of the closing-down sales, former BHS owner Sir 
Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> continued his 
holiday in the Mediterranean on board his new £100m super yacht, Lionheart.

 The Labour MP Frank Field, a fierce critic of Green, renewed his attack on 
the billionaire, accusing him of asset stripping at BHS. Field, who chairs the 
parliamentary work and pensions committee, told Sky that he stood by his 
description of Green as “evil” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/31/philip-green-accused-of-being-evil-as-frank-field-escalates-war-of-words>
.

He accused the retail tycoon of “plundering” the company. “What he turns out 
to be is a sort of asset stripper,” Field said.

Green owned BHS for 15 years before selling it to former bankrupt Dominic 
Chappell <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> for £1 in 
2015. Green has come under fire for taking more than £400m in dividends from 
the now defunct department store chain and for selling it to a man without 
retail experience.

A damning report from the work and pensions and the business, innovations and 
skills committees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 found last month that BHS was subject to “systematic plunder” by Green, 
Chappell and their hangers-on, and labelled Green the “unacceptable face of 
capitalism”.


Chappell is planning to put his personal business into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/27/dominic-chappell-company-wind-up-swiss-rock-bhs>
 this week and is restructuring his assets, in an attempt to avoid a 
substantial tax bill and to protect his cash from investigations into the 
failure of BHS.

This will further enrage BHS staff. Chappell, a former racing driver, has 
lined up David Rubin & Partners as the administrator of Swiss Rock Ltd., his 
personal business, which means he could walk away from its debts, which are 
thought to include a tax bill on his earnings from BHS. Swiss Rock was paid at 
least £1.6m by BHS and its parent company as part of his acquisition of the 
retailer.

Chappell’s consortium, Retail Acquisitions, which bought BHS last year, 
received at least £17m from BHS during the 13 months of its ownership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ffrank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8e6025b4c0fe44481270acca40314525a38c31%2F0_181_2510_1505%2F2510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BHS%20closes%20its%20doors%20for%20the%20last%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ffrank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BHS%20closes%20its%20doors%20for%20the%20last%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Ffrank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d8e6025b4c0fe44481270acca40314525a38c31%2F0_181_2510_1505%2F2510.jpg>
 Frank Field. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
Green wants assurances that regulators will drop their investigation 
<http://news.sky.com/story/sir-philip-green-makes-conditional-offer-to-plug-bhs-pension-hole-10554303>
 into BHS’s £571m pension deficit if he makes a voluntary contribution, 
estimated at at least £300m, Sky News reported. The Pensions Regulator launched 
an anti-avoidance probe shortly after the retail tycoon sold BHS to Chappell.

Field said it would be “great to get a settlement which ensures no one takes a 
pension cut, but that’s not the end of the story”.

Thousands of people have been left in limbo over their pensions, and could 
lose up to 10% of their retirement pots. It could be months before they get 
clarity. About 22,000 pensions are estimated to be affected.

Asked whether Green should be stripped of his knighthood, Field said there 
would be considerable pressure from the business community, adding that it was 
not just Labour MPs but also a large number of Tory MPs “who will be furious”. 
“That is a very big alliance that [Green] has got to break up if he is to keep 
his knighthood,” he said.

But the bigger question, Field said, was how to undo the damage inflicted by 
Green on the department store chain and its staff. He highlighted the Serious 
Fraud Office’s investigation into the collapse and whether it was caused by 
fraud or deception. He said: “It doesn’t get the jobs back which is the key 
thing, but it means justice will be delivered even it it’s late.”

Green’s Arcadia retail empire, which includes Topshop, is also under 
investigation from the Pensions Regulator.
 