
Nearly 100,000 workers at the Royal Mail and the Post Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> are likely to be the victims 
of turmoil in markets as the companies plan big cuts to their “simply 
unaffordable” pension schemes.

One manager in his 40s at the Post Office was told that his projected pension 
at retirement will collapse from £38,000 a year to just £18,000.

Currently, Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> pays 
around £400m a year into its “defined benefit” scheme, which guarantees a 
pension based on a postal worker’s average salary over his or her lifetime, 
rather than what happens on the stock market.


But the company said financial market conditions had deteriorated so much that 
the cost of keeping the plan fully open would balloon to £900m over the next 
few years. Although the cuts were first mooted just before the EU referendum, 
historic lows in bond markets since the vote have made the pensions even less 
affordable to companies.


The Post Office pension scheme is facing a similar cut, but with changes 
coming through one year ahead of the Royal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/post-office-pension-benefits-cut-defined-contribution>
. The Post Office remains in the public sector after the Royal Mail was split 
off and privatised in 2012; their pensions schemes are identical in most 
respects.

A Post Office spokesman said the changes to the pension scheme were announced 
in February.

A ballot among Communication Workers Union (CWU) members of the 3,500-strong 
Crown Post Offices pension scheme is expected toagree to strike action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/post-office-pension-benefits-cut-defined-contribution>
 when the result emerges next week. Unite is also planning a ballot starting on 
15 August of its members in the Post Office.

Royal Mail bosses are now braced for a similar backlash over its much larger 
pension scheme, which has about 90,000 workers affected by the cuts.


Andy Furey, CWU national officer, said: “We are confident of a big yes vote to 
the ballot from Post Office workers. Our members have been receiving 
projections about what it means to their pensions, and there has been a huge 
outcry. They are really, really angry.”

Big cuts to final salary pensions are coming not just at former state-owned 
enterprises but also at the few private companies that still operate so called 
“gold-plated” schemes. Marks & Spencer is currently consulting on cuts that 
will affect the pensions of about 11,000 longstanding shop workers.


At both the Royal Mail and M&S, final salary-style pension schemes have 
already been closed to new joiners, but existing staff have continued to accrue 
benefits and retire with a pension based on their final salary. It is these 
future accruals that are now under threat.


It is understood that the Royal Mail and Post Office defined benefit schemes 
cost the employers the equivalent of 45% of salary. M&S said its pension scheme 
costs 34% of salary, but that the proposed replacement would be capped at a 
maximum of 12%.

The companies argue that the cost of maintaining the pension schemes has 
become unsustainable, in part because of big increases in longevity but also 
because of falls in gilt and bond yields, which mean they have to pay in more 
to keep them financially afloat. These gilt and bond yields have hit historic 
lows since Brexit, making the pension schemes even more expensive to maintain.

In a statement, the Royal Mail said: “We understand how much our people value 
their pension benefits. We committed to keep the Royal Mail pension plan open 
to future accrual on a career average basis for existing members without 
further changes, at least until March 2018.


“Early indications from the latest triennial valuation of the plan suggest 
that the company’s contributions to the pension plan each year would have to 
increase from around £400m to over £900m. Such an increase in costs is not 
sustainable. We are talking to our unions about the future of the plan after 
March 2018.”

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> experts warn that the 
likely outcome of a review of the Royal Mail and M&S pensions will be 
significantly less generous “defined contribution” style schemes, where the 
outcome is dependent on the performance of the stock market, without any 
guarantees on the level of income on retirement.

But Royal Mail will face the challenge of explaining why it needs to slash its 
pension, when the scheme is one of the few major ones in the UK which has been 
running a surplus. It says the surplus will disappear by 2018.

Unions say an agreement struck in 2012 allowed the Royal Mail to keep its 
pension contributions at just 17.1% of salary, and use the surplus in the 
scheme to finance the gap.

Royal Mail reported a 5% rise in profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/19/royal-mail-profits-slump-by-a-third>
 to £742m in the UK in the year to March 2016 and awarded its chief executive, 
Moya Greene, an annual pay package of £1.5m, similar to the year before.
 