
Saturday night, Camden, north London, and a massive queue has formed outside 
an industrial-looking building down a side street. Fashionable young people in 
their 20s mostly, some in their 30s, dressed up for a night out, energised and 
excited. Two queues, in fact – there is another smaller one heading the other 
way: for the guest list. A club? Too early, it’s only 7.30pm. Must be a gig 
then. Who’s playing? Actually, everyone is. Playing bingo.

What! Well, it’s Rebel Bingo <http://www.rebelbingouk.com/> – bingo reinvented 
for a new generation, for the 21st century, with bells and whistles, but still 
unmistakably, undeniably, bingo. There are cards and callers, numbers to be 
crossed off or dabbed, lines and full houses to be had, winners in waiting. 
We’ll come back to Camden and Rebel Bingo.

Traditional bingo has been hit hard in the past 20 years or so: by the 
national lottery; by scratch cards (basically, instant bingo); by the smoking 
ban (about60% of bingo players smoked, and half of them stopped coming when the 
ban 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/smoking-ban-death-bingo-2275712> 
was introduced in 2007); by the internet and the rise of online bingo and other 
gambling; and by austerity.

“Austerity was not good for bingo,” says Miles Baron, chief executive of the 
Bingo Association <https://www.bingo-association.co.uk/home>. “A lot of our 
customers are of a very vulnerable demographic – 55 years old, women, working 
class, for want of a better word.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F915bddbf968f61a9f39c44db42fdc5b43bd0f062%2F0_388_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F915bddbf968f61a9f39c44db42fdc5b43bd0f062%2F0_388_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Man Alive … winners go wild at Rebel Bingo. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi 
for the Guardian 
Twenty years ago, there were about 1,200 commercial bingo clubs in the 
country. Just before the smoking ban, there were about 600. Today, there are 
351. “We know there are about 850,000 visits a week,” says Baron. “So if you 
want to multiply, that’s 44 million a year. It sounds a lot better when you say 
it like that.”

In 2014, George Osborne halved the tax on bingo halls, from 20% to 10% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/19/budget-2014-bingo-tax-cut-hits-jackpot-punters>
, and the decline began to slow, “almost but not quite to flat, so now it’s 
kind of level, maybe a whisper south of level,” says Baron. “So the rot has 
stopped, if that’s the right word, but we’re not into growth just yet. What 
needs to come first is the investment. The first priority for a lot of 
operators when the 10% duty came was to to get up to standard, put that new 
roof on or refurbish those toilets, do the things they’d perhaps been a bit 
slow to do.”

To the Greyhound retail park, 40 miles east of Camden in Southend-on-Sea, 
Essex. Mecca Bingo <http://www.meccabingo.com/bingo-clubs/southend/> here has 
had recent cosmetic surgery, and seems to be doing OK. On a Thursday night 
there are about 400 people in the main lounge, a vast liver-coloured space, 
brightly lit and oddly hushed. The average age is about 55 (it’s considerably 
older during the afternoon session, manager Peter tells me). And women 
outnumber men by about four to one – because, Baron says, it’s “about family, 
mums tend to go with daughters, with extended family members. Secondly, I think 
women feel safe at bingo, it’s a female environment, membership only.”

The caller – Fran – is calling. Four and seven, 47; two and four, 24; five and 
six, 56, on its own, number four … There is something entrancing about 
listening to the numbers. No bingo lingo here – fat ladies or little ducks – to 
break the monotony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8765d6e9455ef01fdc57741363f8443e5c9e8033%2F0_476_7228_4336%2F7228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8765d6e9455ef01fdc57741363f8443e5c9e8033%2F0_476_7228_4336%2F7228.jpg>
 Sober affair … traditional bingo in Southend. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi 
for the Guardian 
Come on now, don’t get entranced, concentrate. Frankly, I’m struggling to keep 
up. Each card has six grids on it; by the time I’ve found the number and dabbed 
it, Fran is calling the next one. I’m playing catchup, and losing. Maybe I 
should have opted for an electronic terminal that fills in the numbers for me. 
But doesn’t that take all the fun (?!) and the skill (?!) out of it? Focus now; 
that quick pint before the game is beginning to look – and feel – like a 
mistake. Most people are having soft drinks, or tea.

“I don’t have a wine in case I miss a number,” Nicola tells me in the queue 
for the bar during the break. She is having one now though, because she just 
won £65 and is celebrating. Nicola, 44 (“all the fours”), is here with her mum 
Janet, 68. They usually come with Nicola’s 24-year-old daughter Gemma, but 
she’s looking after her baby. “It’s friendly, we’ve made a lot of friends 
here,” says Janet.

“You treat it as a night out,” says Denise, 51, a new queue friend, who comes 
about once a month. “A win is a bonus.” She once won £1,000, but that was 15 
years ago.

Back at my table, my neighbours, another daughter and mother – Marie, 58, and 
Jean, 77 – help me find the right cards. They explain the national game and the
Cashline board 
<http://bingosupermarket.co.uk/bingo-news/mecca-bingo-cashline-jackpot-win/12656>
, with the counters on the table that link up with other bingo halls around the 
country. They come once a week. “I wouldn’t come in the winter if it wasn’t for 
Mum,” says Marie. “She’s hooked. If we didn’t come, she’d have the withdrawals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78218d49463c76d240ab88a640c1d173cda3e09a%2F0_0_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78218d49463c76d240ab88a640c1d173cda3e09a%2F0_0_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 Eyes down … Sam Wollaston struggles to concentrate. Photograph: Christian 
Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
Once the game restarts, it’s eyes down and the talking stops. Silence descends 
over the vast space, apart from Fran’s numerical monologue, a faint but rising 
buzz of expectation, a shout from someone and a groan of disappointment from 
everyone else, then it’s time to go again.

In some ways, I am enjoying my Southend bingo evening. I like meeting Nicola 
and Janet, Denise, Marie and Jean. They are all very friendly and welcoming, 
but everything keeps getting interrupted by this bloody bingo, which really is 
the most boring thing. Manager Peter tells me that bingo is one of the top 
activities for getting your heart rate going, the excitement when you’re down 
to just one number left. But I never feel it (possibly because I never get 
anywhere near having just one number left). Couldn’t we just find out who has 
winning cards at the beginning, then they can get the wines in?

The levelling out of what looked like the terminal decline of a national 
pastime is not just reflected by a healthy turnout in one Essex seaside town. 
In October,Caledonian Investments <http://www.caledonia.com/about-us/history>, 
the trust that manages the wealth of the Cayzer family, one of Britain’s 
richest, agreed a£241m deal to buy Gala Bingo’s 130 clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/bingo-takeover-gala-coral-cayzer-trust-ladbrokes>
 (although not its online bingo business). Gala Coral, itself planning a merger 
with Ladbrokes, is the UK’s biggest bingo operator, with 38% of the UK market, 
4,000 employees, more than a million active members and 15 million visitors a 
year. Its pre-tax profit in the year to September last year was £33m. Oh, and 
they are even opening a brand-new £5m bingo club in Southampton this year.

“To sum up bingo’s health, I’d say reports of its death are greatly 
exaggerated,” says Baron.

Back to Camden then, which looks more like the rebirth of bingo than its 
death. The building is actually Mecca Bingo, but it has been taken over – with 
Mecca’s blessing, I’m afraid, not by force – for the night by Rebel Bingo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb26fca6f0fa15aad424fb927e171d9f5021fb6%2F0_291_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb26fca6f0fa15aad424fb927e171d9f5021fb6%2F0_291_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 Try cashing this at the bank … a Rebel Bingo prize. Photograph: Christian 
Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
Before the bingo – the show, whatever it is, I’ll soon find out – begins, in a 
dressing room behind the scenes, a man in a white shirt, bowtie and underpants 
(“Oh my God, did I not bring my trousers?”) tells me the Rebel Bingo story. 
He’s Freddie Sorensen, 37, a TV producer by day, who along with his friend 
James Gordon, is responsible for Rebel Bingo. It started in a church hall in 
Farringdon, where they used to put on “kind of like variety shows”. One day, 
when they were tidying up, they found the church hall’s old bingo set, started 
messing around with it, wondering how they could incorporate it into their 
show. “This is sort of the evolution of that night. We inadvertently started 
our own sort of bingo. The first night we put it on by itself, it sort of took 
on a life of its own.”

News spread from their friends, via word of mouth and social media. Now they 
do a night every month or so in the capital, and the odd one further afield – 
Strathclyde, New York, places like that. Tonight is a sellout, again.

Sorensen thinks bingo should be an exciting experience. “Everyone’s involved, 
everyone in the room is in the show, it’s happening for you, everyone in the 
room reacts to every single number, so the show has a really engaging feel to 
it,” he says. “Bingo is an emotional experience, although in traditional bingo 
they seem to have done their best to take the emotion out of it. If you go to a 
bingo hall, it’s a serious place, it’s about winning money, everyone’s got to 
be quiet the whole time. We wanted it to be a social experience.” Thinking of 
the liver-coloured, hushed tension in Southend-on-Sea, I can see what he means.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08014c5d453f79ccc00578979dce8f6dd2a8dab1%2F0_418_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08014c5d453f79ccc00578979dce8f6dd2a8dab1%2F0_418_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Full house … the crowd at Rebel Bingo. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the 
Guardian 
The reaction from the bingo establishment has been mixed. “People started 
talking about us on bingo chatrooms, some people were interested and some 
people were like: ‘This is ridiculous, we don’t want this, it’s not what 
bingo’s about,’” says Sorensen. “So we sort of ran with it and became the black 
sheep of the bingo family.” Now the bingo family – well, Mecca – has opened its 
doors to the black sheep.

It is time to find out what Rebel Bingo is all about. The vast space is 
packed, every table taken, 700 people in all. Sorensen’s onstage now, trousers 
found and on, master of ceremonies and explainer of rules, which he does to the 
accompaniment of Eminem. “It’s like the fucking Super Bowl,” he shouts. “This 
is what dreams are made of!”

Because tonight it’s at Mecca, which has a gambling licence, there will be 
cash prizes, but not big ones, and not yet. First up, there is a pair of 
“high-fashion” rollerskates to be won, then a massive mirror ball.

Two women – dressed sparingly and sparklingly, like club dancers – call the 
numbers, in Rebel Bingo lingo: “Up the bum, no harm done, 31.” It’s a bit 
saucy. And loud. Music plays a big part, with a lot of 90s hip-hop and R&B. A 
lot of Jägerbombs go round. And it’s not just the bingo cards that get dabbed: 
faces, bodies – go on, dab it!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d537e79319e390ab81007fe8fbdc675063fae30%2F0_113_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bingo%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20and%20even%20the%20hipsters%20have%20got%20their%20eyes%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbingo-is-back-and-even-the-hipsters-have-got-their-eyes-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d537e79319e390ab81007fe8fbdc675063fae30%2F0_113_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 Beer and popcorn … unlike the sober concentration of traditional bingo, Rebel 
Bingo is a boozy affair. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
“The first time I went to bingo was on holiday,” says Dawn, 27. “It was 
nothing like this. This is much better, like a rave with bingo thrown in. I 
love it. It’s exciting, fun, different. And the things they say when they call 
out the numbers, so funny!”

When someone wins, it goes a bit wild and there’s an explosion of tickertape, 
as if they’ve won The X Factor. “I love how rowdy it is,” says Poppy, 32, who 
is here with 10 mates and has just won 100 bottles of Bulmers cider. “I used to 
go and play traditional bingo in Catford. We’ve ditched normal now, it’s all 
about this. Rebel Bingo is for life!”

On to the cash prizes. “They say money doesn’t make you happy,” says Sorensen. 
“Tell that to P Fucking Diddy!” It starts at a fiver, and just keeps on going 
up – £10, £20, £50, £75 (“Have you even heard of that amount of money?”) 
Finally, 100 English pounds are won, by Chris, 33, from Tottenham. And it comes 
in a comedy-sized cheque, like Blankety Blank in the olden days. “Take that 
down to Barclays and say: ‘Cash that motherfucker,’” yells Sorensen.

It’s hipster bingo, then. A bit ironic, a bit knowing, a bit annoying, 
definitely metropolitan, white. But it is also funny. And fun. Maybe Janet and 
Jean in Essex don’t need all the mofo-ing and Jägerbombing. But then maybe 
bingo could also learn something from the rebels if it wants not just to stop 
the rot but to see full houses again – that if you’re competing with the 
internet, you have to make it different to the internet. More of an experience, 
more emotional, as Sorensen would say.

I haven’t quite got to emotional yet. A Jägerbomb might help. A win might 
help! I still haven’t won anything, but I’m having a better time not winning.
 