
An investment trust that manages most of the wealth of one of Britain’s 
richest families will become Britain’s biggest bingo operator in a £241m deal 
to buy Gala Bingo.

Caledonia Investments has agreed to buy 130 bingo clubs from Gala Coral, the 
bookmakerpreparing to merge with Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
.

Crucially, the Caledonia deal does not include Gala Coral’s online bingo 
business, galabingo.com, but the clubs will keep the Gala name and the two 
businesses will work together.

Gala Bingo has 38% of the UK bingo market with 1.1 million active members and 
it made a pretax profit of £33m in the year to September, Caledonia said. Gala 
is the UK’s biggest bingo operator with 15 million visitors a year, employing 
4,000 people.

Bingo has staged a surprise revival in recent years, helped by the popularity 
of the game’s online version and ahalving of bingo duty in last year’s budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/19/budget-2014-bingo-tax-cut-hits-jackpot-punters>
.

In the past month queues have formed outside clubs up and down the country as 
customers were enticed to play for free in special sessions. The new owners are 
confident they can build on the recent up-turn in the appeal for a form of 
entertainment that until recently looked like being in terminal decline.

Jane Anscombe of Edison Investment Research said the price tag “looks good for 
Caledonia given the strong cash-flows”.

Simon Longbottom, managing director of Gala’s gaming division, told Euroslot 
International, a gaming publication: “We were delighted to see queues forming 
around some of our clubs. Bingo is a great British institution that thrives on 
community involvement. So to hear the buzz of a full club made customers and 
staff alike feel overjoyed.”

Caledonia, backed by the Cayzer shipping dynasty, said it was buying Gala 
Bingo for its steady cashflow and long-term popularity. The current management 
team, led by the chief executive, Simon Wykes, will stay on.


Duncan Johnson, Caledonia’s head of unquoted investments, said: “Gala Bingo is 
well known to Caledonia’s unquoted investments team. Its defensive, enduring 
business model, which delivers strong cash generation and dividend yield, fit 
ideally with the investment criteria sought by Caledonia.”

Johnson was on the board of Gala Bingo until 2002.

Caledonia was bought by the Scottish Cayzer dynasty in 1951 as a holding 
company for its shipping interests and is still 48.5% owned by the family, 
whose wealth is estimated at £620m by the Sunday Times Rich List(£) 
<http://features.thesundaytimes.co.uk/richlist/2015/live/richlist/view/group6/150/rank/#list>
.

The trust has increased its dividend for each of the past 48 years. It donated 
£75,000 to the Conservative party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jul/19/caledonia-investments-political-donations-pirc>
 before the 2010 election but stopped funding the party after other 
shareholders protested.

Will Wyatt, Caledonia’s chief executive, is a direct descendent of Charles 
Cayzer, who amassed the family’s fortune in the 19th century. The family’s 
head, Tory peer Lord Rotherwick, is the brother in law of Mark Carney, governor 
of the Bank of England.

The trust’s net assets of £1.6bn include investments in private businesses 
such as loudspeaker maker Bowers & Wilkins and stakes in public companies 
including AG Barr, the owner of Irn-Bru.

Gala Coral said the deal would pave the way for its merger with Ladbrokes to 
form Britain’s biggest bookmaker. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
The bingo business was not part of the merger plan.

There is still a possibility that the competition regulator might block the 
deal because the combined group would have too dominant a position in the 
betting shop market. It is possible that the groups might have to sell off a 
certain number of shops in order to ensure clearance.

Carl Leaver, chief executive of Gala Coral commented: “We are very pleased to 
have agreed the sale of Gala Retail, following a competitive process. The sale 
is another transformative step for Gala Coral Group, following the turnaround 
of the business over the past few years.”
 