
The war of words over the next levy scheme intensified yesterday ahead of an 
apparently inevitable referral to the government to determine how much racing 
should receive from the betting industry in 2011.

The deadline for an agreement on the scheme is 31 October but racing and the 
bookmakers seem as far apart as ever after the Association of British 
Bookmakers accused Nic Coward, the chief executive of the British Horseracing 
Authority, of "plucking figures out of thin air" to support a claim by the BHA 
for a huge increase in the levy, which returns money to the sport from 
off-course betting.

The ABB also reiterated a suggestion that the total return from betting to 
racing, including both the levy and media rights payments for live coverage in 
betting shops, has reduced by "only 2.4%", from £164m in 2009 to £160m in 2010.

Later in the day Paul Roy, the BHA chairman, described the money on offer from 
bookmakers as "derisory" and said that the Bookmakers' Committee, which 
coordinates the betting industry's role in the levy process, "is doing all it 
can to avoid saying what it thinks is [a] fair [return to racing]".

For the moment at least the exchange of press releases seems to have replaced 
any serious negotiation, as the levy process approaches a formal determination 
by the government, something that both racing and the bookmakers say they do 
not want and that the government would certainly be eager to avoid.

Patrick Nixon, chief executive of the ABB, said yesterday that until the 
deadline is reached there must still be some hope of a resolution. "We would 
certainly want to avoid a determination and we hope that Paul Lee, the new 
chairman of the Levy Board, will be able to broker some sort of agreement," 
Nixon said.

"But it's probably fair to say that, if there is to be any more, it will come 
very late on in the process. This year 31 October happens to be a Sunday and 
I'm sure all of us who have any cause to be directly involved will already be 
looking at our plans for the weekend. In the past the process has often gone on 
until late on the 31st.

"At the moment, though, it does look pretty intractable. The desires of one 
side and the willingness of the other do not match."
 