
Shoppers are being warned that Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> deals might not live up to 
the hype, after an investigation found that many products promoted as being “on 
sale” last year were actually cheaper before or after the event.

Currys and AO are singled out by Which?, the consumer group, which claims they 
may have broken government guidelines by inflating the “was” price to make 
promotions look more appetising.

“Consumers should be wary of claims of massive savings this Black Friday as 
they may not be as spectacular as they seem,” said Pete Moorey, the head of 
campaigns at Which?. “Shoppers might be surprised to learn that only half of 
Black Friday deals are actually cheapest on Black Friday.”

Which? investigated 178 deals from Black Friday 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/nov/26/black-friday-2015-the-best-deals-and-latest-news-live>
 tracking the daily price moves of 20 popular electrical gadgets on Amazon, AO, 
Argos, Currys and John Lewis for three months before and two months after Black 
Friday.

They found that only 90 deals were cheapest on Black Friday. A Currys promise 
of a £101 saving on a Samsung TV was not as good as it looked, as the £748 
price tag was only a pound less than on the eve of Black Friday and it had been 
on promotion at £699 in September. AO trumpeted a £200 saving on a Vax vacuum 
cleaner at £99, yet it had been on sale for £69 the previous day and on average 
for £96.50 in the three months leading up to Black Friday.

Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> introduced Black Friday 
discounts to Britain in 2010 but the event is now a fixture of the retail sales 
calendar with Currys, John Lewis and Argos key players in an event increasingly 
focused on aggressively discounted electronics and domestic appliances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fblack-friday-uk-warning-report-half-offers-real-deal-pricing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f10a0e1f7a98a7832011a849c1f1b4ce05e923e%2F608_0_4120_2472%2F4120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Friday%20warning%20as%20report%20finds%20only%20half%20of%20offers%20are%20the%20real%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fblack-friday-uk-warning-report-half-offers-real-deal-pricing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Friday%20warning%20as%20report%20finds%20only%20half%20of%20offers%20are%20the%20real%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fblack-friday-uk-warning-report-half-offers-real-deal-pricing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f10a0e1f7a98a7832011a849c1f1b4ce05e923e%2F608_0_4120_2472%2F4120.jpg>
 A worker at Amazon’s warehouse in Hemel Hempstead. Photograph: Jeff 
Spicer/Getty Images 
For many the last weekend of November coincides with the last pay day before 
Christmas, and analysts at PwC predict Britons will spend £2.9bn over the four 
days starting on 25 November, up from £2.1bn in 2015.

Initially Black Friday, which always falls after the US Thanksgiving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/thanksgiving> holiday, was a 24-hour 
sale but this year it has beenstretched over nearly a fortnight with Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/amazon-to-spread-black-friday-sales-over-two-weeks>
 starting its event on Monday, offering up to 50% off thousands of products 
ranging from 70in TVs to cordless screwdrivers and advent calendars.

When promoting a discount the “was” price is supposed to be the most recent 
price the item has been sold at for 28 consecutive days or more. Which? said it 
found numerous examples where it thinks AO and Currys were not following the 
government’s pricing practices guidance (PPG) by using an older, higher “was” 
price.

Tesco makes gains as Aldi and Lidl growth hits five-year low
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/tesco-aldi-lidl-growth-five-year-low>
Black Friday has been Currys biggest trading day for the past three years. The 
retailer, which is part of the group that owns PC World andCarphone Warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carphonewarehousegroup>, said it 
“fundamentally disagreed” with the approach taken by Which?.

“We comply fully with the PPG guidelines, displaying a clear date from when 
the ‘was’ price was taken, allowing customers to make a fully informed 
decision. Currys offered thousands of deals on leading brands over Black Friday 
in 2015 and this year’s event is set to be even bigger.”

An AO spokesperson said: “The internet is the most transparent marketplace 
ever created for consumers to be able to compare price and service associated 
with it and we work hard to be exceptional on both fronts. This has been 
recognised many times by Which? themselves.

“We work hard to ensure that any promotions we make are clear and take our 
obligations to consumers very seriously.

“The sheer scale of Black Friday’s great offers means that these are planned 
up to 12 months in advance to maximise the value and service for our customers. 
That demands significant planning for a very fluid trading environment across 
hundreds of offers and we are always focused on offering the best price match 
promise all year and especially around Black Friday.”
 