
Black Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> is here to 
stay because British shoppers expect to be able to buy heavily discounted items 
before Christmas, according to the boss of AO.Com, the online electrical goods 
retailer.

Announcing AO’s first-half results, John Roberts said he expected the 
US-inspired discount day, which takes place on 27 November, to be bigger than 
last year. “Exact demand and volumes nobody knows, but it feels like the frenzy 
is definitely bigger this year,” he added.

However, he said he did not expect theevent to create any extra sales of 
appliances and televisions over the year as whole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/10/black-friday-asda-sales-shopping>
. “Last year was a brilliant experience for us, we just didn’t make any money 
out of it,” Roberts said. “It is an opportunity for us to reach lots of 
customers and we are all about channel shift [to the internet].You didn’t see 
any customers of ours getting punched in the face while trying to buy a TV. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/22/black-friday-safety-fears-harassed-shopworkers-usdaw-union>
”

Roberts said he hoped the forthcoming event would be profitable for AO as the 
company had spent a year planning with suppliers to ensure efficient 
operations. “We start everything with the consumers and they are telling us 
that they love Black Friday and they vote for it with their credit cards. The 
genie is firmly out of the bottle and customers will vote for it. We have 
planned for it to be busier than last year.”

AO is under pressure to improve its bottom line after revealing a slump into 
the red as a result of set-up costs in Germany. The company made an underlying 
loss of £4.5m in the six months to 30 September compared with a £7.3m profit 
for the same period a year before. That was despite a 21.7% rise in revenues to 
£264.3m.

Roberts said he was pleased with progress in Germany and that the experience 
there had given AO the confidence to move into the Netherlands, its second 
market in mainland Europe in spring next year. Black Friday is here to stay 
because British shoppers now expect to be able to buy heavily discounted items 
before Christmas, according to the boss of AO.Com, the online electrical goods 
retailer.

AO had record sales on Black Friday last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/12/ao-world-ikea-booming-online-christmas-trading-internet-sales>
 but Roberts admitted in February that the event had condensed sales into a 
shorter time period without increasing them overall. The effecthelped trigger a 
profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/ao-world-shares-plummet-appliance-retailer-profits-warning>
 that AO’s shares have yet to recover from, after itfloated in February 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/27/ao-world-flotation-payout-bankers-rothschild>
 amid a flurry of interest in online retailers.

UK shoppers are expected to spend up to £2bn on Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/20/will-black-friday-break-all-uk-retail-records>
, a record for a single day and up from £1.75bn last year, Visa said.Big 
retailers are increasingly having misgivings about the imported US event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/marketing-agencies-association-partner-zone/2015/nov/18/black-friday-sign-dark-days-ahead-brands-retailers>
because the chaotic surge in buying – which caused pandemonium in stores and 
crashed websites – does not appear to have much impact on overall sales.

“If you look at it across the quarter it will probably be about the same 
retail spend in the categories we are in but it’s an amazing opportunity for 
hard-pressed consumers to stock up with Christmas presents ahead of the peak 
Christmas period.”

Asda, which claims to have imported the event from its US parent Walmart, 
plans to keep a low profile on Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/asda-to-step-away-from-black-friday-deals>
 after fights broke out between bargain hunters at its shops last year.

John Lewis is participating but has warned that growth of the event is against 
retailers’ interests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/05/john-lewis-boss-says-rein-in-black-friday>
. Argos, which has said Black Friday makes trading unpredictable, is trying to 
spread its offers across the Fridays in Novemberalthough it has angered 
shoppers with website failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/09/angry-argos-bargain-hunters-complain-at-online-sales-glitch>
.

Roberts said Black Friday was better for online shopping instead of going to 
the shops because customers can compare prices and avoid the fraught atmosphere 
in stores. “Asda suffered last year with a lot of ugly scenes. As an 
environment in store it could be dangerous for their staff and it could be 
dangerous for their customers,” he said. “As a concept, it’s more suited to 
online than in store.”

Roberts said after a slow start to the year sales picked up in the UK and that 
AO traded well in recent weeks. Business in Germany was stronger than expected 
as shoppers in Europe’s biggest economy warmed to buying appliances online. AO 
would invest heavily in marketing to keep momentum going, he said.

AO shares fell by 10% to 146.5p on Tuesday morning. The shares have lost more 
than half their value since February’s profit warning.
 