
I always wanted to work for the NME <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nme>. 
They weren’t the first to pick up onpunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/punk>, but they did it best. They had a 
sense of humour as well as earnest political beliefs. It was very influential 
in Australia, where I lived, even if it arrived three months late.


So I moved to London in 1980. I wanted to see England, see the real thing – 
even if the real thing, like the Wizard of Oz, proved disappointing. Everything 
was much greyer than I’d imagined. I lived in Whitechapel and you could still 
see signs of bomb damage. The accommodation was squats, walls were crumbling, 
and it seemed to be dark all the time.

I was going to gigs and taking photos. The NME had a photo competition, and 
they picked a shot I took ofThe Birthday Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/02/nick-cave-interview-jack-barron-rocks-backpages>
 as runner-up. It was a foot in the door. The band were full of sound and fury, 
but there was a great ironic intelligence to their work, which I found 
inspiring. I had to make a nuisance of myself, but I became the person they 
turned to for photography.

At first, they were intimidating. They were smacked out, for one thing, and 
full of themselves and what they were doing. But frontman Nick Cave and Roland 
Howard were very funny, very fond of teasing. They’d tip over any situation if 
it was getting po-faced, bring to it that Australian sense of humour, brutal 
and harsh. They were interested in American literature, in the southern gothic, 
mostlyMary Flannery O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jul/05/fresh-look-flannery-o-connor-cartoons>
. I’d read Carson McCullers and William Faulkner, so that was a fruitful field 
of enthusiasm and drunken raving. They were also interested in the theatre of 
the absurd, using it as a half-arsed justification for bad behaviour.

This photo of Cave was taken in Berlin, where he lived, in 1985. Back then, no 
one thought his career would last so long. The Birthday Party were viewed as a 
goth band: just tight pants and doomy music. That’s not what I heard in it, 
though, and I felt frustrated. I wanted to show there was more to Cave than a 
tough guy with incredible hair.

He’d written a novel, And the Ass Saw the Angel 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/and-the-ass-saw-the-angel.html>, about a deaf 
mute called Euchrid from a severely dysfunctional family. He creates his own 
world, building himself a bower in the heart of a swamp. I wanted to echo that 
in the shoot, seating him on his mezzanine, getting him to pretend to be 
Euchrid.

Lying around are bits of the manuscript, photocopies of a 19th-century Bible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-bible> he was taking language from, and 
various fetishes, like the pictures ofElvis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley> and the three graces. He 
bought the hair hanging on the wall from the markets he liked to visit on 
Sunday mornings. He was readingEzra Pound’s Cantos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/27/posthumous-cantos-ezra-pound-massimo-bacigalupo-review>
, seen on the right, and was probably quite impressed with himself. He has 
always read poetry. It can be quite disconcerting: if you stop talking to him 
for a while, he just digs into his pocket and starts reading poems.

It was a lot of fun. Apart from taking photos, the priority in my life back 
then was making sure I had several drinks every day. Now I look back and think: 
“Wow! That’s pathetic.” We’d go to clubs, talk about innumerable things, have 
innumerable laughs. Most of the time, though, the chief concern was to have a 
good idea and bring it to fruition. But I mean, a man posing with locks of hair 
– what could be more goth?

 * Bleddyn Butcher’s A Little History: Photographs of Nick Cave and Cohorts 
1981-2013 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/general-books/music/A-Little-History-Bleddyn-Butcher-9781760110680>
 is published by Allen & Unwin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbleddyn-butcher-best-photograph-nick-cave-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56f98a10b4e72ec7058e0ae8ea217e905f563675%2F0_0_2500_3756%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bleddyn%20Butcher's%20best%20photograph%3A%20Nick%20Cave%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbleddyn-butcher-best-photograph-nick-cave-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bleddyn%20Butcher%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20Nick%20Cave%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbleddyn-butcher-best-photograph-nick-cave-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56f98a10b4e72ec7058e0ae8ea217e905f563675%2F0_0_2500_3756%2F2500.jpg>
 Photograph: Bleddyn Butcher 
Bleddyn Butcher <https://www.facebook.com/bleddyn.butcher>’s CV

Born: London, 1953.

Trained: “At my place, with trial and error.”

Influences: Richard Avedon, Anton Corbijn, Pennie Smith, Yousuf Karsh.

High point: “Working for the NME in the 1980s.”

Low point: “I got fired from the NME in 1987, but that’s kind of a badge of 
honour.”

Top tip: “Do it now – it won’t be there on your way back.”
 