
Bleed for This review – Miles Teller boxing biopic is flattened by cliche
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/bleed-for-this-review-miles-teller-vinny-paz-boxing-biopic>
Another weekend, another boxing biopic, another young star looking to make a 
name for himself. Stepping into the ring has been a rite of passage for 
talented, mostly method-friendly young actors for six decades or so now, 
starting with (non-method) Errol Flynn as “Gentleman Jim” Corbett in 1942 and 
Paul Newman as Rocky Graziano in Robert Wise’s Somebody Up There Likes Me (a 
role inherited from James Dean) in 1956. The most influential, of course, were
Sylvester Stallone’s Rocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/24/sylvester-stallone-profile-creed-rocky>
 (not a biopic, but no matter) andRobert De Niro’s Jake LaMotta in Raging Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/24/favourite-film-raging-bull>
, but in recent years all manner of pretenders have taken a shot at the crown.

In the last decade or so we’ve seen Russell Crowe as James J Braddock in 
Cinderella Man <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/sep/09/1>, Mark 
Wahlberg as “Irish” Micky Ward in The Fighter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/03/the-fighter-review>, and Edgar 
Ramírez as Roberto Durán in Hands Of Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/22/hands-of-stone-review-roberto-duran-boxer-robert-de-niro>
 (with De Niro as his manager). This week, it’s Miles Teller’s turn in Bleed 
For This, which sees him play Vinny “Paz” Pazienza, whose promising career was 
derailed after a terrible car crash.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df2sHTKQUa7c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df2sHTKQUa7c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df2sHTKQUa7c&media=>
Miles Teller: ‘I felt extremely misrepresented’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/21/miles-teller-i-felt-extremely-misrepresented-war-dogs>
Teller was ready for a boxing pic. He’s one of the most gifted young actors we 
have – intelligent, instinctive, charismatic – and either full of himself or 
full of shit, it’s hard to tell. No matter, he’s always riveting to watch, and 
as Vinnie Paz, he delivers another lived-in, rounded performance. And the same 
is true of the cast supporting him, a mouthwatering assortment, all working at 
full throttle, including Aaron Eckhart as his trainer,Ciarán Hinds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/31/ciar-aacute-n-hinds-actor-portrait-artist>
 as his dad (clad in pastels and Florida leisurewear, as though his wardrobe 
froze the day they cancelled Miami Vice), Katey Sagal as his religiously devout 
mother, and an almost unrecognisable Ted Levine as his manager.

Director Ben Younger handles things tidily yet there’s no escaping the sense 
that this is an extremely conventional (no matter that it’s true) story arc of 
success, setback, struggle and triumph. The milieu is no less familiar: 
Providence, Rhode Island, where everyone sounds like they’re from Boston, so 
they all get to do that honking north-eastern accent as if they’re in The 
Depaaahted. Quite apart from standing in the shadows of every boxing picture of 
the last 40 years, Bleed For This is constantly outranked by David O Russell’s 
outwardly similar, but infinitely richer The Fighter, right down to each 
boxer’s septet of hard-boiled sisters.

This is to be expected in a sports picture – like sports themselves, they have 
their own unbreakable rulebook – but Bleed can’t fight its way out of the 
genre’s conventions and strictures. A pity, because the performances here 
deserve a punchier movie than this one.

Bleed For This is in cinemas from Friday 2 December
 