
German car giant BMW has revealed plans to shut its two final-salary pension 
schemes for 5,000 staff in Britain – prompting the country’s biggest trade 
union,Unite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>, to say it will fight 
the proposals “by whatever means possible”.

The company, which made pre-tax profits of more than €9bn 
<https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/detail/T0258078EN/bmw-group-achieves-record-earnings-in-2015?language=en>
 (£7.8bn) in 2015, intends to close its two defined-benefit pension schemes to 
future contributions from June 2017, and shift workers over to its less 
generous defined-contribution pension scheme.


The move will affect 5,000 workers at all the company’s British bases, 
including Oxford, Swindon, the Rolls-Royce plant at Goodwood near Chichester in 
West Sussex, Hams Hall near Birmingham, and Farnborough in Hampshire.


BMW <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw>, which owns Mini and 
Rolls-Royce, said that the cost and risk associated with defined-benefit 
pension schemes “is making them increasingly unsustainable and unaffordable for 
both members and companies”.


However, the Unite union expressed fury at the announcement 
<http://www.unitetheunion.org/news/bmw-final-salary-pension-closure-will-be-fought-tooth-and-claw-says-unite/>
, and said its members would lose thousands of pounds a year in retirement 
incomes if the proposal was allowed to go ahead.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fbmw-to-shut-final-salary-pensions-for-5000-staff-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404bb82ac2a0a8865ae30f8e746ea538d7b2608c%2F0_134_4401_2641%2F4401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BMW%20to%20shut%20final-salary%20pensions%20of%205%2C000%20staff%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fbmw-to-shut-final-salary-pensions-for-5000-staff-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BMW%20to%20shut%20final-salary%20pensions%20of%205%2C000%20staff%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fbmw-to-shut-final-salary-pensions-for-5000-staff-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F404bb82ac2a0a8865ae30f8e746ea538d7b2608c%2F0_134_4401_2641%2F4401.jpg>
 BMW Group pre-tax profits have passed €9bn (£7.8bn) for the first time. 
Photograph: Andrew Cowie/AFP/Getty Images 
Tony Murphy, the union’s national officer for the automotive industries, said: 
“This is plainly unacceptable, and Unite will be fighting this proposal tooth 
and claw. It is becoming increasingly too easy for highly profitable 
multinational companies to energetically salami-slice workers’ pensions in 
pursuit of even greater profits.”


He added: “BMW is blaming both the increase in national insurance payments and 
the cost of future liabilities as to why the final-salary pension has become 
unaffordable, though, ironically, profits are still rising in the last two 
quarters.”


In March this year, the BMW group announced it had achieved its “sixth 
record-breaking year in succession” in 2015, posting new highs to date for 
sales volumes, revenues and pre-tax profits, despite a volatile market 
environment.

Group pre-tax profits rose for the first time above €9bn (£7.8bn). Last month, 
the company revealed that its second-quarter profits rose nearly 8%.


If the plans go ahead, all staff would join the company’s defined-contribution 
scheme, which was launched in 2014 for new employees and now has more than 
2,000 members. BMW described this scheme as “market-leading”.

The scandalous changes to company pension schemes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/aug/13/scandal-closure-company-pension-schemes>
Instead of carrying on paying into a scheme that guarantees a level of pension 
benefits linked to their salary, employees will have to pay future 
contributions into a money-purchase scheme where the value of the pension they 
receive will depend largely on the stock market’s performance.


Unite called meetings on Tuesday of both the pension committees and shop 
stewards’ committees at four BMW sites, and a 60-day consultation period is due 
to begin on Thursday. The union said it was planning to hold a consultative 
ballot to gauge members’ views “to show the company the union intends to fight 
this plan by whatever means possible”.


One of the two defined-benefit schemes, known as the “old Rover scheme”, has 
5,173 active members, 17,099 deferred members (those who have left the company) 
and 53,029 pensioners. The other scheme has 215 active members, 450 deferred 
members and 220 pensioners.


A spokesman for BMW said: “BMW Group has always prided itself in providing 
excellent pensions for its staff, and wants to act now to protect future 
pension provision for all its staff and to help protect the cost 
competitiveness of the UK as a manufacturing base. The company is now 
consulting with its employee representative bodies on this proposal.”

 