
Bob Diamond is expected to look at parts of the African business being put up 
for sale by Barclays – whichhe ran before being forced out during the 
Libor-rigging crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
 – as he attempts to fulfil his ambition of developing a major banking presence 
on the continent.

The former chief executive of Barclays has already established a banking 
operation in Africathrough Atlas Mara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/17/bob-diamond-invest-african-banks-atlas-mara>
, which is listed on the stock exchange and has a stock market value of about 
£250m. He created the business with Ashish Thakkar, a British national now 
based in Dubai.

If Diamond were to make an offer for the Barclays operations through Atlas 
Mara he would need to raise hundreds of millions of pounds and also find a way 
to unravel the complexBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> 
operations in Africa, which could prove to be extremely difficult.

Speculation about Diamond’s interest in buying up some of the operations owned 
by his former employer have been rife afterBarclays confirmed this week that it 
intended to scale back on the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/barclays-cuts-dividend-as-profits-fall-8-percent>
 as a part of an effort by its new chief executive, Jes Staley, to simplify the 
business and preserve capital.

The Financial Times reported 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/81c98d48-e16b-11e5-8d9b-e88a2a889797.html#axzz41w3KKZoW>
 (£) that Diamond could seek backing from sovereign wealth funds in the Middle 
East or Asia to support any bid and calculated that the value of the Barclays 
operations outside South Africa that could fit with the Altas Mara business 
were valued at £1.5bn.

Staley wants to reduce Barclays’ 62.3% stake in its African business, which is 
listed on the Johannesburg stock exchange. Barclays made a big push back into 
South Africa 10 years ago when it bought a 60% stake in local bank Absa. The 
business has now become Barclays Africa Group Limited, which is listed on the 
stock market and holds most of the bank’s operations inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Barclays has admitted it could take two to three years to reduce its presence 
in Africa, which generates about 20% of the bank’s profits and is prepared to 
hold a smaller stake in the Johannesburg-listed business. It did not elaborate 
on its statement from Tuesday when it announced its profits had fallen 8% to 
£2.1bn in 2015 and warned it was more than halving its dividend for this year 
and next.

Altas Mara, which refused to comment, already has operations in Nigeria, 
Rwanda, Botswana and is focused on developing on the continent, but not in 
South Africa where the bulk of Barclays’ operations are based.
 