
The author Bonnie Greer has quoted Jane Eyre’s calm assertion that “I will be 
myself” in the wake of a dispute over the future of the Brontë Society that saw 
her resign from her position as president this weekend.

The clash, which dates back to last summer 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/main-topics/general-news/wuthering-fights-as-bronte-society-accused-of-losing-its-way-1-6811473>
, centres on how the organisation is being run, with one faction calling for 
the society, founded in 1893 and one of the oldest such literary groups in the 
world, to be modernised. It runs theBrontë Parsonage Museum 
<https://www.bronte.org.uk/bronte-society>, in the Yorkshire village of Haworth 
where the Brontë family once lived, and is also responsible for “promoting the 
Brontës’ literary legacy within contemporary society” . There are bicentenaries 
for Charlotte Brontë in 2016, Emily Brontë in 2018 and Anne Brontë in 2020.

But John Huxley, local parish council chairman, told the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/11657876/Warring-Bronte-Society-told-to-stop-squabbling-to-save-Haworth-parsonage.html>
 that trustees of the society “have become divorced from the local community”. 
He added: “They say they do not want to be seen as the snobs on the top of the 
hill, but they are. We have not enjoyed watching them implode. But the Brontë 
legacy is just bumbling on. It is not like the Stratford-upon-Avon and 
Shakespeare [organisations]. The society needs to get its act together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fbonnie-greer-resigns-bronte-society-yorkshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433859941301%2F06bbb75e-95f2-4c90-ba87-71aa3f860aaf-1020x783.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bonnie%20Greer%20resigns%20from%20floundering%20Bront%C3%AB%20Society%20after%20months%20of%20infighting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fbonnie-greer-resigns-bronte-society-yorkshire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bonnie%20Greer%20resigns%20from%20floundering%20Bront%C3%AB%20Society%20after%20months%20of%20infighting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fbonnie-greer-resigns-bronte-society-yorkshire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433859941301%2F06bbb75e-95f2-4c90-ba87-71aa3f860aaf-1020x783.jpeg>
 The Bronte Parsonage Museum, in Haworth. Photograph: Don McPhee for the 
Guardian 
At an annual general meeting on 6 June, where Greer used a Jimmy Choo shoe as 
a gavel to bring order – and, she later said, “levity” – to proceedings, a 
report by consultants on the society’s future recommended “draw[ing] a line 
under past conflict”, bringing in more committee members with museum management 
experience and healing the “growing rift” with the village,reported the 
Yorkshire Post 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/bronte-society-president-bonnie-greer-suddenly-resigns-1-7299554>
.

She told BBC Radio 4’s The World at One: “I brought my shoe because it’s been, 
for some of us, so grim that I thought, I’m going to make this funny. So I 
brought out the shoe, made for me by Jimmy Choo himself, and said, ‘I’m going 
to bang this if it gets out of control’.”

Greer also used the annual general meeting to resign from her position. Six 
other council members also stood down from the committee, with six new members 
elected in their stead,according to the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-33052731> . The new members include 
John Thirlwell and Janice Lee, who had called last year for the society to 
“modernise” and become more professional. “The big picture is that the Brontë 
Society has lost its way. The museum should be run by a trust, and in a more 
professional way,”Thirlwell told the Yorkshire Post in 2014 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/main-topics/general-news/wuthering-fights-as-bronte-society-accused-of-losing-its-way-1-6811473>
.

Greer later took to Twitter to castigate the “malevolent lamebrains” who “have 
been leaking private, out-of-context words from meetings etc all year”. She 
also took issue with her characterisation as “snooty”, saying that in the past 
year she had “brought in @bradfordmdc with funding; suggested PALS WW1 
initiative, and brought in three diverse/younger members.”

Thanking the outgoing council for being “quite simply heroic”, Greer said the 
Brontë Society “has great potential going forward”, with the parsonage 
“impeccably run” and deserving of more visitors.

“A stranger walked up to me at Leeds station: ‘You don’t know me. I just want 
to say: @BrontëParsonage belongs to the world’. Yes,”she tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Bonn1eGreer/status/607819877890576384>, later adding a 
quote from Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre: “I will be myself.”

Rebecca Yorke, on behalf of the society, thanked Greer and others for their 
work and said, “We are building on our established links with Haworth 
businesses and the local community to ensure the Brontë Parsonage Museum 
continues to play its part in contributing to the visitor economy, encouraging 
visits by new, younger, more diverse audiences as well as by returning loyal 
Brontë enthusiasts.”
 