
A rare first edition of Thomas Bewick’s History of British Birds belonging to 
Frances Currer, the woman believed to have inspired Charlotte Brontë’s 
pseudonym of Currer Bell, has come to light.

Dubbed “England’s earliest female bibliophile” in Seymour de Ricci’s history 
of collectors, Frances Mary Richardson Currer’slibrary in her family home of 
Eshton Hall, Yorkshire 
<http://special.lib.gla.ac.uk/images/exhibitions/women/Bd17_c.12_e.jpg>, ran to 
15,000 to 20,000 volumes. Among them lay Bewick’s classic of British 
ornithology - the work Jane Eyre is reading as Charlotte Brontë’s novel opens, 
and whose “enchanted page[s]” the author also celebrated in poetry.


Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undeveloped understanding 
and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting,” Brontë’s heroine 
tells her readers in the novel which would go on to be published by the 
pseudonymous Currer Bell. “With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at 
least in my way. I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon.”

Currer herself would have been known to the Brontës, said the antiquarian 
bookseller Bernard Quaritch in its catalogue for the edition: she was the 
patron of the Cowan Bridge School, attended by Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte and 
Emily, and was known locally as a generous patron.

“It is thought that she was the ‘benevolent individual, a wealthy lady, in the 
West Riding of Yorkshire’ who gave £50 in 1821 to a fund to aid the 
impoverished and recently widowed curate of Howarth – Patrick Brontë,” said the 
bookseller.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fbook-inspired-charlotte-bronte-bewick-history-british-birds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424792888427%2F793285f3-82d7-4abc-a19c-242a0fca1824-1500x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bookseller%20offers%20rarity%20that%20inspired%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%20%E2%80%93%20and%20her%20pseudonym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fbook-inspired-charlotte-bronte-bewick-history-british-birds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bookseller%20offers%20rarity%20that%20inspired%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%20%E2%80%93%20and%20her%20pseudonym&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fbook-inspired-charlotte-bronte-bewick-history-british-birds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424792888427%2F793285f3-82d7-4abc-a19c-242a0fca1824-1500x2040.jpeg>
 The manuscript of Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë, who wrote the novel under the 
pseudonym Currer Bell – now believed to be after local patron Frances Currer. 
Photograph: Hulton Archive 
In an essay, scholar Marianne Thormahlen goes so far as to suggest 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/bronte/cbronte/thormahlen.html> that “it 
is not impossible that Charlotte herself had access to Miss Currer’s books at 
some point”. Winifred Gerin, meanwhile, writes that “while a governess at the 
Sidgwicks, Charlotte had certainly heard much of their neighbour, Miss Frances 
Mary Richardson Currer, of Eshton Hall, Skipton, whose property touched 
Stonegappe, and whose library was famous throughout the north”.

“There are many points of contact between Currer and the Brontë family,” said 
Mark James at Bernard Quaritch, “but frustratingly, as far as I know, it is not 
known whether Charlotte and Frances Currer ever met.”

Despite this, the bookseller writes in its catalogue that it is “generally 
thought” that Frances Currer inspired the Currer Bell pseudonymCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> would go on to adopt. The 
novelist would later write that she and her sisters Emily and Anne, who took on 
the pseudonyms Ellis and Acton Bell, made the “ambiguous choice” of names 
because of a “sort of conscientious scruple at assuming Christian names 
positively masculine, while we did not like to declare ourselves women, because 
— without at that time suspecting that our mode of writing and thinking was not 
what is called ‘feminine’ — we had a vague impression that authoresses are 
liable to be looked on with prejudice”.

Bernard Quaritch <http://www.quaritch.com/> acquired Currer’s edition of 
British Birds at auction from the estate of a private collector, and has priced 
it at £5,000. Just 1,000 volumes were printed of the first volume and 1,750 of 
the second, and James at the antiquarian bookseller said that “sets in very 
good contemporary bindings like this are scarce”.

Currer’s edition also includes “an engraving which depicts someone urinating 
out of a cowshed [which] was considered rather coarse by some contemporaries 
and was bowdlerised in some copies but is untouched in this,” he added.

Bewick’s work was popular for its wood engravings depicting birds in their 
natural habitats. TheBrontë children’s own edition 
<http://www.bl.uk/collection-items/copy-from-thomas-bewicks-history-of-british-birds-by-charlotte-Bront%C3%AB>
 was much read and copied, Christine Alexander going so far as to write in The 
Brontës in the World of the Arts that “the profound effect that Bewick’s 
two-volume History of British Birds, in particular, had on the creative 
development of the Brontës cannot be overestimated”.
 