
Britain’s bookmakers fear they will be “trying to stop a moving train” on the 
first afternoon of theCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> on Tuesday, when victory 
for four favourites from the Willie Mullins stable could trigger a payout to 
match or exceed their £40m loss in September 1996, when Frankie Dettori rode 
all seven winners on the card at Ascot.

The bookies peered over the same precipice last year, when Mullins saddled 
three winners on the opening cardonly for Annie Power, the 1-2 favourite, to 
fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/10/annie-power-fall-bookies-50-million-cheltenham-festival>
 at the final flight when apparently certain to win.

Cheltenham Festival Champion Hurdle: horse-by-horse guide to runners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/cheltenham-festival-champion-hurdle-horse-by-horse-guide>
Annie Power was unhurt in the fall and returns to Cheltenham this year as the 
9-4 favourite for theChampion Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/champion-hurdle>, Tuesday’s feature race. 
The remaining Mullins-trained favourites on the card are Min (5-2), Douvan 
(2-5) and Vroum Vroum Mag (evens) in the Supreme Novice Hurdle, Arkle Trophy 
and Mares’ Hurdle respectively.

“If the big four all go in, I think it would be the most expensive day that 
we’ve known by quite a long chalk,” David Williams, a spokesman forLadbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes>, said on Monday.

“It’s about 25-1 for all four to win. It ought not to happen. The odds show 
that, and there’s some margin built in as well, but last year gave us the 
fright of our lives because it felt so utterly real. We got to the fourth and 
final race so we know what the swing would have been had Annie Power not 
fallen.”

The betting industry has changed significantly since Dettori went through the 
card at Ascot two decades ago. The emergence of online betting, and betting 
exchanges such as Betfair in particular, makes it more difficult for bookmakers 
to hedge growing liabilities.

The overwhelming majority of punters putting all four Mullins favourites 
together in an accumulator will also take a price on all four. As a result, any 
attempt to shorten up the later runners by sending money to the on-course 
betting ring will be straw-clutching at best.

“Compared to Dettori Day, the game now is unrecognisable,” Williams said. 
“Back then, you could shorten them up on course and punters had to like it or 
lump it.

“Now, it would be like trying to stop a moving train. There’s really not much 
you can do about it.”
 