
Sebastian Barry is having a happy new year, with a stack of Books of 2016 
recommendations and now a Costa award shortlisting (again). “Barry is a 
marvellous writer, andDays Without End is a beautifully written novel of the 
American west, the US cavalry, the Indian wars, the civil war and its 
aftermath,” wroteAllan Massie in the Scotsman 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/culture/books/book-review-days-without-end-by-sebastian-barry-1-4269821>
. “The narrative is gripping, descriptions of landscape vivid and beautiful, 
evocations of military life, brutal warfare, cruelty and courage utterly 
compelling.” Barry’s hero is a young Sligo boy, Thomas McNulty, andErica Wagner 
in the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4245e980-945f-11e6-a1dc-bdf38d484582> described his 
relationship with another young outsider, John Cole, as “not only a story of 
survival [but] a love story, too, written in a gorgeous style that blends 
Barry’s characteristic eloquence with the straight-talk of early America ... 
firmly in the tradition of Irish diaspora writing”. The Telegraph’sGillian 
Reynolds admired how Barry’s “great river of drama, poetry and fiction flows 
from the spring of living history, stories your grandfather might have 
remembered his mother telling him about her grandfather”, while forEoin McNamee 
in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/books/days-without-end-by-sebastian-barry-review-epic-intimacy-in-the-old-west-1.2832723>
, the language was the thing: “There is a majestic rhythm to Barry’s prose, 
deep craft in the shaping of the novel, the impetus of events carrying us 
through at pace … Barry is the most humane of writers.”

Penelope Lively is another “master” storyteller, according to Imogen Lycett 
Green in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3925134/SHORT-STORIES.html>, and 
her collectionThe Purple Swamp Hen and Other Stories is “Lively at her most 
affecting”. With “guts and style”, she “takes a situation and holds it upside 
down, rattling its pockets until she has squeezed out of it every last ounce of 
meaning and turned the whole story, stylistically, on a sixpence. [She] can use 
a shopping trip to explore the whole spectrum of human behaviour. Yet there is 
something unnerving about her ability to see through her protagonists; they get 
away with nothing, and you, as the reader, feel under scrutiny, too.” The 
Sunday Times’sPhil Baker agreed, finding the stories “well thought-out”, with 
“patterns of interaction between past and present … sounded out to good 
effect”, while the Sunday Telegraph’sSarah Crown argued that Lively’s work has 
always been about time. “Lively has the gift, rare and wonderful,” she wrote, 
“of being able to peel back the layers one by one and set them before us, 
translucent and gleaming.”

Reviewers were divided on Grayson Perry’s treatise The Descent of Man. To 
William Leith in the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2bd505cc-8fa6-11e6-a72e-b428cb934b78>, it is 
“thoughtful, clearly written and a joy to read. It would be great if he was 
right. In any case, a lot of what he says feels timely.”Helen Davies in the 
Sunday Times wrote that “Perry … has done lots of research and his book is 
studded with depressing statistics … [but] in the end, one is left with the 
feeling that, for all the bluster, and despite the importance of the issue, his 
cheerleading for the future of his fellow men (in whatever they may choose to 
wear) has fallen rather flat.” The Times’sClive Davis found that “Whenever 
Perry’s own voice breaks through, he is thoroughly engaging and charismatic. 
For the most part, though, he adopts the guise of a pious writer of long-winded 
‘whither the male sex?’ comment pieces.” Butthe Observer’s Matt Haig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/23/descent-of-man-masculinity-grayson-perry-review-a-mans-man-is-yesterdays-hero-gender-role>
 was a fan, reassuring readers that “WhileThe Descent of Man may be an attack 
on certain aspects of masculinity, it is not an attack on men.”
 