
Bookmaker Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> has been 
hit by the worst Cheltenham horse racing festival in living memory, which left 
the betting industry nursing collective losses of more than £60m.

Cheltenham proved disastrous for bookmakers, as nine favourites and one joint 
favourite won in the 28 races over four days. Former Barclays banker Rich 
Ricci, now a racehorse owner, scooped almost £400,000 atthe festival when three 
of his horses romped home. The racing results forced rivalWilliam Hill to issue 
a profit warning last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/william-hill-issues-profit-warning-after-cheltenham-and-online-losses>
.

Ladbrokes’ chief executive, Jim Mullen, said its results would meet 
expectations, despite the hit from Cheltenham, as he reported a 10.6% rise in 
group net revenues in the first quarter.

Sporting results were favourable up until Cheltenham, he said. The festival 
“proved to be the worst in living memory, which took some of the shine off the 
period”. He added that “experience tells us to expect results to normalise over 
time”.

Mullen said intense competition at the festival had pushed the industry into 
offers and pricing which “abandoned bookmaking principles”. Ladbrokes offered 
punters money back on first races, and other bookmakers offered best price on 
every race. Mullen told analysts that while bookmakers were in the gambling 
industry, they should not gamble themselves.

Ladbrokes faces £3m bill if Leicester win Premier League, but results please
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/apr/21/ladbrokes-faces-3m-bill-if-leicester-win-premier-league-but-results-please>
The industry ditched many of those offers at the Grand National at Aintree, 
and fared better with the winner, Rule the World, a 33-1 outsider.

Ladbrokes said it would lose £3m should Leicester City win the Premier League. 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/apr/21/ladbrokes-faces-3m-bill-if-leicester-win-premier-league-but-results-please>
Its performance will also depend on the outcome of the European football 
championships in June. It noted that France remained favourites followed 
closely by Germany and Spain.

The company’s retail net revenues in the UK were up 4.1% between January and 
March, while in Europe they rose 6.5%. Digital net revenues jumped 36.5%, as 
online gaming continues to gain in popularity.

Ladbrokes slumped to a £43m loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/feb/23/ladbrokes-shares-jump-6-despite-43m-loss>
 last year, its first in a decade, owing to the cost of shutting and 
refurbishing betting shops, revamping its digital business and implementing its 
proposed merger with Coral, which still needs to be cleared by regulators. The 
Competition and Markets Authority has postponed the publication of its 
provisional findings until mid-May.

Mullen said there was plenty of evidence to suggest that the group’s 
turnaround plan was working but added that it was still early days. More than 
70 shops have been refurbished.

Steve Clayton, head of equity research at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Current 
trading at Ladbrokes is encouraging, but in truth, a little bit of a sideshow 
in the short term. The real story here is whether the merger with Coral will be 
allowed, and for that news we must wait a while longer. If it does go through, 
the deal could be transformational for the group.

“A merged Ladbrokes and Coral will have a dominant retail position, even if 
many shops have to be sold off. We expect substantial cost saving will be 
possible because there will be vast areas of overlap and unnecessary 
duplication of functions across the combined business.”




 