 See the full visual 
Non-fiction

Russia in Revolution: An Empire in Crisis 1890-1928 by Steve Smith (Oxford). 
The centenary of the Russian Revolution will be marked by many millions of 
words of analysis this year. Smith, who has written widely on both Russia and 
China, gets in early with an overview of the disintegration of the ramshackle 
tsarist empire and its replacement by a Marxist-Leninist successor state.

Istanbul: A Tale of Three Cities by Bettany Hughes (Weidenfeld). Over its 
6,000-year history, Istanbul has been home to Phoenicians, Genoese, Venetians, 
Jews, Vikings and Azeris, and been the cornerstone of the Roman, Byzantine and 
Ottoman empires. Telly historianHughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bettany-hughes> traces the history of one 
of the world’s greatest cities.

Age of Anger: A History of the Present by Pankaj Mishra (Allen Lane). An 
attempt to understand the rise of populism and the breakdown of the 
liberal-democratic consensus that ruled in the west for three generations after 
the end of the second world war. Whatever happened toFrancis Fukuyama and the 
end of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/bring-back-ideology-fukuyama-end-history-25-years-on>
?

Fiction

4 3 2 1 by Paul Auster (Faber). In the year that Auster turns 70, his densely 
written epic about a boy born, like him, in 1947 whose life takes four separate 
paths is both a history of postwar America and a meditation on fate and 
possibility.

Homegoing by Yaa Gyasi (Viking). Already a huge success in the US for its 
young author, who is being compared toToni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison> and James Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesbaldwin>, this impressive debut follows 
two sisters born in Ghana in the 18th century, one a slave and one a slaver’s 
wife, and their descendants in modern-day America.

The Massacre of Mankind by Stephen Baxter (Gollancz). A sequel to HG Wells’s 
alien invasion classicThe War of the Worlds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/19/war-worlds-hg-wells-review>, set 
14 years after the Martians’ defeat.

The Burrow by Franz Kafka (Penguin Classics). Michael Hofmann’s new 
translation brings together the posthumously published short fiction, from tiny 
fragments to longer pieces such as “Building the Great Wall of China”.

Poetry

Unreconciled: Poems 1991–2013 by Michel Houellebecq (Heinemann). The French 
controversialist rails against modernity in a selection of his poetry perfectly 
suited to the age of Trump.

Events and anniversaries

It’s 250 years since the completion of Tristram Shandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/28/100-best-novels-tristram-shandy-sterne>
, with the publication in 1767 of Laurence Sterne’s final volume.

16 TS Eliot prize for poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/20/vahni-capildeo-shortlist-ts-eliot-poetry-prize-alice-oswald-ian-duhig-denise-riley>
, won last year by Sarah Howe.

27 Release of Denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/03/david-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial>
, a film scripted by David Hare, about the David Irving v Penguin Books trial, 
withTimothy Spall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/timothy-spall-the-feeling-of-doing-it-wrong-gets-bigger-and-bigger>
 as Irving andRachel Weisz <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-weisz> as 
Deborah Lipstadt <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/deborah-lipstadt>.

31 Costa book <https://www.theguardian.com/books/costabookaward> of the year 
announced.
 See the full visual  A new collection of short stories from Viet Thanh Nguyen 
Non-fiction

The Last of the Tsars: Nicholas II and the Russian Revolution by Robert Service
(Macmillan). More on Russia’s revolutionary year. Service provides an account 
of the final year of Nicholas II’s reign, his abdication in February 1917 and 
the murder of the tsar and his family in Yekaterinburg inJuly 1918 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/tsar-nicholas-executed-1918>. 

From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds by Daniel Dennett 
(Allen Lane). The American philosopher tackles the subject of the origin of the 
conscious mind – what is human consciousness and how is it possible? The key, 
it seems, is culture, which enables reflection by installing a profusion of 
thinking tools in our brains.

A Woman’s Work by Harriet Harman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/harrietharman> (Allen Lane). A history of 
women’s progressive politics over the last 30 years by a leading woman in the 
Labour party and one of its great survivors. Harman promises to take on the 
question of why it has been so difficult to change the male culture of the 
Labour party.

The Islamic Enlightenment by Christopher de Bellaigue (Bodley Head). The last 
200 years have seen a remarkable flowering in Islamic societies, but will those 
changes now be reversed by the new fundamentalism? De Bellaigue offers a 
radical rethinking of the way in which Islam is perceived in the west.

Fiction

Norse Mythology by Neil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/neil-gaiman> (Bloomsbury). One of our 
pre-eminent mythmakers, Gaiman has long been inspired by Norse myth. Here he 
retells the core stories, from the creation of the world to the twilight of the 
gods.

The Good People by Hannah Kent (Picador). Her debut Burial Rites, about an 
Icelandic murder case, made a big impression. This follow-up, again based on 
real-life events, explores rumours of a changeling in 19th-century Ireland.

The Refugees by Viet Thanh Nguyen (Corsair). Short stories about migration, 
identity and love written over 20 years by the author of last year’s Pulitzer 
winnerThe Sympathizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/12/the-sympathizer-viet-thanh-nguyen-review-debut>
.

The Heart’s Invisible Furies by John Boyne (Doubleday). The story of one man’s 
life is also a portrait of Ireland over the last 70 years in this engaging epic 
from the author ofThe Boy in the Striped Pyjamas.

The Last Days of New Paris by China Miéville (Picador). Fantasy and historical 
events intermingle in a visionary tale of war and resistance taking in 
surrealist André Breton, the Nazi occupation and the forces of hell.

First Love by Gwendoline Riley (Granta). An intimate, uncompromising anatomy 
of love and revulsion between husband and wife, child and parents, from a 
writer of singular vision.

A Line Made by Walking by Sara Baume (Heinemann). The follow-up to the 
wonderfulSpill Simmer Falter Wither  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/13/spill-simmer-falter-wither-sara-baume-fiction-review>
incorporates photographs and riffs on art, and is the story of a young woman in 
crisis hiding out in the Irish countryside.

Poetry

Stranger Baby by Emily Berry (Faber). Childhood loss and dark humour in 
Berry’s much-anticipated follow-up to her 2013 Forward prize first collection 
winner,Dear Boy.

Children’s

We Come Apart by Sarah Crossan and Brian Conaghan (Bloomsbury). Crossan’s 
novel in free verse,One, was a multiple prizewinner in 2016. Here she 
collaborates with Conaghan to tell, again in verse, the story of two teenagers 
falling in love.

Uncle Shawn and Bill and the Almost Entirely Unplanned Adventure by AL Kennedy 
(Walker). Horrible children, heroic badgers and depressed llamas abound in a 
book for seven- to nine-year-olds from the novelist and short story writer 
better known for the Costa-winningDay.

Events and anniversaries

10 Ang Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee>’s film adaptation of Ben 
Fountain’sBilly Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk is released.

19 Centenary of birth of Carson McCullers in Columbus, Georgia. 22 75th 
anniversary of the Austrian author Stefan Zweig’s death in 1942 in exile in 
Brazil.

25 Centenary of the birth of Anthony Burgess in Manchester.
 See the full visual  Mohsin Hamid explores love and migration in his new 
novel,Exit West. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Non-fiction

How the Hell Did This Happen: The US Election of 2016 by PJ O’Rourke (Grove). 
The American satirist (and Republican supporter) offers his scabrous take on 
the triumph of Trumpocracy.

Fathers by Sam Miller (Cape). Sam Miller, son of the great literary editor 
Karl whodied in 2014 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/karl-miller>
, has written a memoir of his father and their relationship. Promises to reveal 
a “family secret” that has led him to see his father in a new light.

Everywoman by Jess Phillips (Hutchinson). A cri de coeur from the 
self-confessed “gobby MP who has a tendency to shout about the stuff I care 
about”.

The Enemy Within: A Tale of Muslim Britain by Sayeeda Warsi (Allen Lane). The 
Conservative peer <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sayeeda-warsi> and 
former co‑chair of the party assesses the place of Muslims in modern Britain, 
and wonders whether her grandchildren will still find a home in a society that 
is becoming increasingly intolerant.

Mail Men: The Story of the Daily Mail – The Paper that Divided and Conquered 
Britainby Adrian Addison (Atlantic). Addison, a former news editor on the Today 
programme, gets to grips with the paper that has shaped – or perhaps mis-shaped 
– Britain.

Why We Can’t Stop Checking, Scrolling, Clicking and Watching by Adam Alter 
(Bodley Head). A good title, but will anyone have the attention span to read 
the book?

Fiction

Lincoln in the Bardo by George Saunders (Bloomsbury). The much-anticipated 
long-form debut from the US short‑story maestro does not disappoint: based on 
the death of Abraham Lincoln’s young son, it is a novel written in voices and 
set in a supernatural realm between life and death.

Exit West by Mohsin Hamid (Hamish Hamilton). A love story set against the 
backdrop of the refugee crisis from the author ofThe Reluctant Fundamentalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/03/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
.

The Long Drop by Denise Mina (Harvill). The Scottish crime writer makes a 
sortie into true crime, with this extraordinary story of a 1950s Glasgow murder 
mystery.

A Natural by Ross Raisin (Cape). In his third novel, the author of God’s Own 
Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/22/featuresreviews.guardianreview40>
 andWaterline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/13/waterline-ross-raisin-review> 
tackles masculinity, class and identity against the backdrop of professional 
football.

Poetry

The Unaccompanied by Simon Armitage (Faber). The Oxford professor of poetry 
addresses globalisation, recession and social division in a new collection of 
verse after recent excursions into drama, translation and travel writing.

Events and anniversaries

1 Centenary of the birth of Robert Lowell in Boston. 

10 Film of Hans Fallada’s Alone in Berlin, with Brendan Gleeson and Emma 
Thompson as the central couple, is released.

24 Release of The Sense of an Ending, a film based on Julian Barnes’s Man 
Booker-winning novel, withJim Broadbent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent> as protagonist Tony.

31 Release of Terence Davies’s film adaptation of A Quiet Passion, an Emily 
Dickinson biopic starring Cynthia Nixon.
 See the full visual  The Globe theatre company performs Hamlet in the Zataari 
refugee camp in Jordan, 2015. The theatre’s former artistic director Dominic 
Dromgoole captures the worldwide expedition in his latest book. Photograph: 
Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Non-fiction

Hamlet, Globe to Globe: Taking Shakespeare to Every Country in the World by 
Dominic Dromgoole (Canongate). When Dromgoole was artistic director of the 
Globe theatre, he had an idea – to mark the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s 
death by performing the Bard throughout the world. Then, rather than sensibly 
forgetting about it, he went ahead with what turned into atwo-year expedition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/apr/23/shakespeare-globe-world-hamlet-birthday-in-pictures>
.

The Dilemmas of Lenin: Terrorism, War, Empire, Love, Revolution by Tariq Ali 
(Verso). An examination of the political philosophy of the principal architect 
of the Russian revolution. Ali asks whether Lenin’s revolutionary ideas still 
have relevance.

The Exile: The Flight of Osama Bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> by Catherine Scott-Clark and 
Adrian Levy (Bloomsbury). Two former foreign correspondents reconstruct the 
decade that Bin Laden spent in hiding after the 11 September attacks

Memoir by Nicola Adams (Penguin). The life behind the winning smile of the 
double Olympic gold-winning boxer.

The Literary History of the Beat Generation by Allen Ginsberg (Penguin Press). 
A history of the generation by one of its key members, edited by Bill Morgan 
from a celebrated series of lectures given by Ginsberg in 1977

Fiction

Reservoir 13 by Jon McGregor (4th Estate). A teenager goes missing in rural 
England, in the fourth novel from the author ofEven the Dogs. This is a lyrical 
exploration of human violence and the rhythms of the natural world by one of 
the UK’s most impressive younger novelists.

White Tears by Hari Kunzru (Hamish Hamilton). Kunzru’s first novel since 2011’s
Gods Without Men sees two music-obsessed New Yorkers discover a forgotten blues 
song in a story about race, exploitation, contemporary greed and historical 
guilt.

The Blood Miracles by Lisa McInerney (John Murray). She won the 2016 Baileys 
prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/baileys-prize-goes-to-the-glorious-heresies-by-lisa-mcinerney-margaret-mountford>
 forThe Glorious Heresies, a rambunctious chronicle of modern Ireland; this 
sequel continues the story of young Ryan Cusack, getting into trouble and 
trying to grow up.

Spoils by Brian Van Reet (Cape). A superb debut from a US army veteran, about 
a young female soldier and the conflict-weary jihadi who takes her captive in 
2003 Iraq.

Poetry

Inside the Wave by Helen Dunmore (Bloodaxe). 
“To be alive is to be inside the wave, always travelling until it breaks and 
is gone.” Dunmore explores the borderline between the human world and the 
underworld in her first collection since winning the 2012 National Poetry 
Competition.

Children’s

Straight Outta Crongton 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/straight-outta-crongton.html> by Alex Wheatle 
(Atom). FollowingCrongton Knights, the winner of last year’s Guardian 
children’s fiction prize, this is another hard-hitting, linguistically 
exuberant tale about teenagers’ lives on a tough London estate.

Dragon’s Green by Scarlett Thomas (Canongate). The first novel for younger 
readers from the author ofThe End of Mr Y is set after a “Worldquake” that 
wipes out the internet. It features Thomas’s customary mixture of arcane 
knowledge and invention, as a young girl discovers a library of magical books.
 See the full visual  Historian Lucy Worsley commemorates the Jane Austen 
bicentenary. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
Non-fiction

Adults in the Room by Yanis Varoufakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/yanis-varoufakis> (Bodley Head). The 
former Greek finance minister details the battles he fought against the EU and 
international financial authorities during the 2015 economic crisis.

Queer City by Peter Ackroyd (Chatto). The prolific chronicler of London’s 
history charts gay life in the city from the Romans on, and finds periods of 
acceptance alternating with periods of revulsion and repression.

Jane Austen at Home by Lucy Worsley (Hodder). Of the making of books about 
Austen there is no end, especially in the year that marks the bicentenary of 
her death. TV presenter and historianWorsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lucy-worsley> offers a kind of life in 
objects – looking at “the rooms, spaces and possessions that mattered to her”.

Admissions by Henry Marsh (Weidenfeld). The neurosurgeon who had a huge 
success withDo No Harm returns with post-retirement reflections on the pros and 
cons of our healthcare system, our attitudes to death and our questionable 
obsession with prolonging life.

That’s the Way it Crumbles: The Americanisation of English by Matthew Engel 
(Profile). British banks are now sending out circulars asking customers to 
“check” rather than tick boxes. Matthew Engel issues a call to arms in defence 
of Britain’s linguistic heritage.

Between Them: Remembering My Parents by Richard Ford (Bloomsbury). The US 
novelist and short story writer offers a touching recollection that is also a 
vivid portrait of mid‑20th-century American life.

Balancing Acts by Nicholas Hytner (Cape). Hytner’s account of his highly 
successful 12 years as artistic director of theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>.

October: The Story of the Russian Revolution by China Miéville (Verso). 
Miéville is best known as a writer of science fiction, but we are promised a 
history rooted solidly in fact, albeit one written with the gusto of a novel.

Dismembered: Why the Assault on the State Harms Us All by Polly Toynbee and 
David Walker(Faber). A passionate case for the preservation of the public 
services, under attack now as never before.

Fiction
 A first new story collection in more than a decade from Haruki Murakami. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
House of Names by Colm Tóibín (Viking). In this novel of longing, betrayal and 
intimate violence, Tóibín reworks ancient Greek myth and drama to tell the 
story of the fall of the house of Atreus: Agamemnon, who sacrificed his 
daughter for fair winds for Troy, and the bloody revenges of his wife 
Clytemnestra and children Electra and Orestes.

Into the Water by Paula Hawkins (Doubleday). How to write a follow-up after 
the global success of The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
? With a novel about two sisters set in a small riverside town that 
investigates, says Hawkins, how “memories can be washed away and whole 
histories submerged”.

Peculiar Ground by Lucy Hughes-Hallett (4th Estate). A debut novel from the 
acclaimed cultural historian, whose biography of Gabriele D’Annunzio won the 
2013 Costa biography award and the Samuel Johnson prize, spans 300 years, from 
the 17th century to the fall of the Berlin Wall.

The Seventh Function of Language by Laurent Binet (Harvill Secker). From the 
author of the tricksy Nazi assassination taleHHhH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/16/hhhh-laurent-binet-review>, a 
playful conspiracy thriller positing that Roland Barthes was assassinated and 
investigating the idea of truth.

Men Without Women by Haruki Murakami (Harvill). His first new story collection 
in more than a decade promises “vanishing cats and smoky bars, lonely hearts 
and mysterious women, baseball and the Beatles”, so no major departures there.

New Boy by Tracy Chevalier (Hogarth). The latest in Hogarth’s project to 
novelise Shakespeare seesThe Girl with a Pearl Earring author transpose the 
action ofOthello to a 1970s American middle school.

I’d Die for You and Other Lost Stories by F Scott Fitzgerald (Scribner). 
Unpublished stories, 16 finished and one uncompleted, from the American great.

Poetry

British Museum by Daljit Nagra (Faber). Nagra probes how the contemporary UK 
ticks via an exploration of its great institutions.

Then Come Back: The Lost Neruda Poems by Pablo Neruda (Bloodaxe). Twenty-one 
previously unknown poems of love and politics, discovered by archivists in 
2014, by the Chilean nobel laureate.

Children’s

Release by Patrick Ness (Walker). A new YA novel about love and letting go 
from the author ofA Monster Calls and the Chaos Walking trilogy, in which a 
young man is caught between his religious family and his ex-boyfriend.

Events and anniversaries

19 Albert Camus’s L’Etranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/camus-letranger-stranger-than-fiction-alice-kaplan>
 was published 75 years ago in France, withThe Myth of Sisyphus appearing in 
the same year.

25 Hay festival opens, running until 4 June.

30 It is 50 years since the publication in Buenos Aires of Gabriel García 
Márquez’sCien Años de Soledad (One Hundred Years of Solitude).
 See the full visual  Second serve … John McEnroe’s memoir No 2. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Non-fiction

The Secret Life by Andrew O’Hagan (Faber). An exploration of the lives of 
three “elusive” individuals – WikiLeaks editorJulian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, Bitcoin creator Satoshi 
Nakamoto and “Ronald Pinn”, the fake identity O’Hagan assumed to explore the 
“furthest, darkest reaches” of the internet.

But Seriously: An Autobiography by John McEnroe (Weidenfeld & Nicolson). 
McEnroe has already published one bestselling memoir,Serious. Now, 15 years on, 
comes his second serve, charting the transition from player to trenchant 
commentator.


Pale Rider by Laura Spinney (Cape). The Spanish flu of 1918-20 killed more 
than 50 million people, but, coming in the wake of a global conflagration, it 
has been treated as a footnote to the first world war. Science journalist 
Spinney argues that the effects of the pandemic were as great as the war itself.

What Can Aristotle Do For You? by Edith Hall (Bodley Head): We are all 
Aristotelians now, or at least we should be, according to the distinguished 
classicist Edith Hall, who reckons his philosophy holds the key to living a 
good and fulfilled life.Roots, Radicals and Rockers by Billy Bragg (Faber). The 
songwriter and activist charts the history of skiffle, the UK’s first 
indigenous pop movement, which developed against a backdrop of cold war 
politics, rock’n’roll riots and a newly assertive generation of working-class 
youth.

Fiction

The Ministry of Utmost Happiness by Arundhati Roy (Hamish Hamilton). Perhaps 
the most eagerly awaited book of the year, the second novel from the Indian 
activist and author arrives a meretwo decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/03/arundhati-roy-announces-second-novel-after-20-year-gap>
 afterThe God of Small Things won the Booker. It follows the stories of various 
characters, human and animal, who have been “broken by the world we live in and 
then mended by love”.

The Idiot by Elif Batuman (Cape). The Possessed, Batuman’s passionate, 
irreverent 2012 study of the Russian classics, was a funny, genre-busting gem. 
Her fiction debut is a campus novel about a Turkish-American Harvard student 
negotiating life, love and literature.

Phone by Will Self (Viking). Umbrella was shortlisted for the Booker in 2012; 
his latest novel includes a central character called Jonathan De’Ath, aka “the 
Butcher”, and is a satire on the contemporary world.

Borne by Jeff VanderMeer (4th Estate). This SF fantasia from the US author 
whoseSouthern Reach trilogy catapulted him into the big league is set in a 
ruined future city, home to scavengers, dealers – and a giant despotic bear.

Poetry

Angel Hill by Michael Longley (Cape). For close on half a century, Longley has 
anatomised the flora and fauna of rural Ireland, as well as producing some of 
the greatest poetry of both love and war. He now extends his canvas to take in 
the Scottish village where his artist daughter has made her home.

Skin by Hollie McNish (Picador). This first full-length collection from a poet 
known for her performance work is a semi-autobiographical account of the life 
of a young woman from seven to 30.

Events and anniversaries

Centenary of publication of TS Eliot’s debut pamphlet, Prufrock and Other 
Observations.

7 Baileys women’s prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/baileys-womens-prize-for-fiction-2016> for 
fiction result announced.

7 50 years since Dorothy Parker’s death in New York City in 1967.

14 International Man Booker prize for fiction awarded.

26 Twenty years since the publication in 1997 of JK Rowling’s Harry Potter and 
the Philosopher’s Stone, the first in the series.
 See the full visual  A new short story collection from Sarah Hall. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Non-fiction

The Unwomanly Face of War by Svetlana Alexievich (Penguin). A long-awaited 
English translation of the oral history of women in the second world war across 
Europe and Russia, which was the Nobel prize-winner’s first book, published in 
1985; it has sold more than 2m copies.

Bitch Doctrine by Laurie Penny (Bloomsbury). A collection of essays for 
“dissenting adults” from the socialist feminist, which covers such topics as 
surveillance, the dangers of Facebook, trigger warnings and transgender rights.

Fiction

H(a)ppy by Nicola Barker (Heinemann). Described as a “post-post-apocalyptic 
Alice in Wonderland”, the latest novel from one of Britain’s most inventive and 
unusual writers has an SF flavour: it’s the story of a perfect society with no 
death, God nor fear …

McGlue by Ottessa Moshfegh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/16/ottessa-moshfegh-interview-book-started-as-joke-man-booker-prize-shortlist>
(Cape). Booze, murder and terrible memories in 19th-century Massachusetts in 
the novella-length debut of the young US author who was a surprise addition to 
the Booker shortlist, published in the UK for the first time.

Madame Zero by Sarah Hall (Faber). A new short story collection from the 
acclaimed novelist and winner of the BBC short story award.

Events and anniversaries

Man Booker prize longlist revealed.

18 Bicentenary of death in Winchester of Jane Austen.
 See the full visual  Amit Chaudhuri who, in his latest novel, visits his 
childhood home, Bombay Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Non-fiction

September 1st, 1939 by Ian Sansom (4th Estate). WH Auden’s poem “September 1, 
1939” was written on the outbreak of the second world war; it contains the 
famous line “We must love one another or die”. This book explores Auden’s life 
and exile, the city of New York in 1939, and the world on the brink of 
momentous change.

One of the Boys by Robert Webb (Canongate). A memoir from the Peep Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peep-show> comedian, one half of 
Mitchell and Webb, which doubles up as an exploration of masculinity.

Post-Truth by Evan Davis (Little, Brown). The Newsnight presenter considers a 
world full of lies – told not just by presidential candidates and on social 
media sites but by estate agents and financial institutions. The book claims to 
offer a “tool-kit to spot signs of deception”.

Fiction

Midwinter Break by Bernard MacLaverty (Cape). The first novel in 16 years from 
the Northern Irish author features a retired couple reassessing their marriage 
on a weekend in Amsterdam.

The Secret Books by Marcel Theroux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marcel-theroux> (Faber). From the author of
Strange Bodiesand Far North, a globetrotting yarn about Russian spies in 
British India on the trail of a manuscript revealing Jesus’s lost years.

Friend of My Youth by Amit Chaudhuri  
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amit-chaudhuri>(Faber). In which a 
novelist by the name of Amit Chaudhuri visits his childhood home of Bombay and 
muses on the 2008 terrorist attacks.

Poetry

Zoology by Gillian Clarke (Carcanet). Nature often enriches human life in 
Clarke’s poetry, but it also engenders a profound anxiety about its – and our – 
future.

Events and anniversaries

9 50th anniversary of the death of Joe Orton, who was killed by his partner 
Kenneth Halliwell in August 1967 in the London flat they shared.

12 Start of Edinburgh international book festival, which runs until 28 August.

31 150th anniversary of the death of Charles Baudelaire in Paris in 1867.
 See the full visual  Part memoir part manifesto from architect Sir Richard 
Rogers. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
Non-fiction

The Age of Unreason by George Osborne (William Collins). The former chancellor 
assesses the populist revolution that brought down the Cameron government and 
which promises to remake global politics.

Inside Out: Architecture, Society and Me by Richard Rogers (Canongate). Part 
memoir, part manifesto for a better society fromthe great architect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers>.

The Last London by Iain Sinclair (Oneworld). The phrasemaker, member of the 
awkward squad and radical laureate of the capital writes his last big book on 
the metropolis, pre- and post-Brexit referendum.

Eat the Buddha by Barbara Demick (Granta). The author of Nothing to Envy, a 
prize-winning book on North Korea, turns her attention to Tibet in the 21st 
century, and life lived in the shadow of modern China.

Brit(ish): Getting Under the Skin of Britain’s Race Problem by Afua Hirsch 
(Cape). First book from a former Guardian legal correspondent.

Fiction

Smile by Roddy Doyle (Cape). It’s 30 years since The Commitments was 
published. Now a man thinks back over his life, and is tormented by his 
memories of being taught by the Christian Brothers, in the new novel fromthe 
much-loved Irish author <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roddydoyle>.

Home Fire by Kamila Shamsie (Bloomsbury). A retelling of Sophocles’ Antigone 
set in contemporary London and centring on two British Muslim families with 
very different takes on the idea of what loyalty to the state should mean.

A new Millennium novel by David Lagercrantz (MacLehose). The Girl in the 
Spider’s Web, Lagercrantz’s 2015 sequel to Stieg Larsson’s blockbusting crime 
series, was a respectful and accomplished homage to the late writer.

Origin by Dan Brown (Bantam). His adventures have already sold 16m print books 
in the UK. This new thriller starring Harvard symbologist Robert Langdon 
ventures into “the dangerous intersection of humankind’s two most enduring 
questions, and the earth-shaking discovery that will answer them”.

59 by Attica Locke (Serpent’s Tail). The first in a new series from the US 
crime author best known forBlack Water Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/28/attica-locke-thriller-review>, 
this story of racial violence and justice in the American South focuses on a 
black police officer.

Go, Went, Gone by Jenny Erpenbeck (Granta). The prize-winning author of The 
End of Daysexplores the refugee crisis and one man’s search for meaning, in a 
tale about a retired Berlin professor befriending a group of African refugees 
living in a tent city on Alexanderplatz.

The Red-Haired Woman by Orhan Pamuk (Faber). A philosophical novel by the 
Nobel laureate investigating civilisation’s founding myths through the story of 
a murder near Istanbul.

A Life of Adventure and Delight by Akhil Sharma (Faber). Set in New York and 
Delhi, nine short stories fusing fiction and memoir from the Folio prize-winner.

Poetry

The Noise of a Fly by Douglas Dunn (Faber). Best known for his heartbreaking 
Elegies for his late wife, Dunn’s first collection in 16 years also looks 
outwards to engage with Scottish independence and the refugee crisis.

Children’s

Untitled by Cressida Cowell (Hodder Children’s). The first in a new fantasy 
adventure series inspired by ancient Britain, from the author of the 
world-conquering How to Train Your Dragon books.

Events and anniversaries

Man Booker prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> shortlist 
announced.
 See the full visual  A set of essays on ‘further feminisms’ from Rebecca 
Solnit. Photograph: IPA/REX/Shutterstock 
Non-fiction

Logical Family by Armistead Maupin (Transworld). This memoir from the author 
of the popularTales of the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/31/tales-city-armistead-maupin-damian-barr>
 recounts his evolution from a conservative son of the Old South into a gay 
rights pioneer, via Vietnam and the bathhouses of 1970s San Francisco.

Edward Lear: A Life of Art and Nonsense by Jenny Uglow (Faber). Known 
principally for his nonsense poetry and limericks, Lear was also an artist, 
musician and traveller to Greece, India and elsewhere; he was gay and 
epileptic, and suffered from depression. Uglow provides a full account of a 
rich 19th-century life.

Hear Me Out by Armando Iannucci (Little, Brown). The co‑creator of Alan 
Partridge and creator ofVeep writes an introduction to classical music.

The Mother of All Questions by Rebecca Solnit (Granta). The follow-up to the 
bestsellingMen Explain Things to Me comprises a set of essays on “further 
feminisms”.

Sacred by Neil MacGregor (Allen Lane). A book about world beliefs, which 
accompanies a BBC radio series and an exhibition at the author’s old haunt, the 
British Museum.

Dawn of the New Everything by Jaron Lanier (Bodley Head). The computer 
scientist, philosopher and populariser of the term “virtual reality” writes 
about his own life, and what lies in store as new technologies take over.

Anthony Powell by Hilary Spurling (Hamish Hamilton). The ace biographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/17/hilary-spurling-biographer-pearl-buck>
 turns her attention to the master novelist (and arch snob) whose cycle of 
novels, A Dance to the Music of Time, offers an enduring portrait of 
mid-20th-century Britain.

Fiction

The Sparsholt Affair by Alan Hollinghurst (Picador). His first new novel since 
2011’sThe Stranger’s Child. 

Gnomon by Nick Harkaway (Heinemann). Author of Angelmaker and The Gone-Away 
World, Harkaway is known for his high-concept, high-energy adventures. 
Cryptography, paranoia and politics feature in this playful vision of a 
near-future dystopia, a “perfect” society in which all are kept under 
surveillance by the System.

Events and anniversaries

6 Cheltenham literature festival begins, running until 15 October.

14 It’s 125 years since The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes was published, the 
first collection of Holmes stories.

17 Man Booker prize winner announced.
 See the full visual  The second instalment in Ali Smith’s seasonal quartet is 
published this month. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
Non-fiction

The Rub of Time by Martin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-amis> (Cape). This collection of 
essays from the last two decades covers such subjects as Vladimir Nabokov, 
Donald Trump, Princess Diana, tennis, Diego Maradona, Christopher Hitchens and 
Jeremy Corbyn.

Fiction

Winter by Ali Smith (Hamish Hamilton). Following last year’s Autumn, the 
second in Smith’s speedily written and published seasonal quartet is still a 
work in progress; all we know so far is that winter, she says, is a place where 
you can see clearly.

The White Book by Han Kang (Granta). From the prize-winning author of The 
Vegetarian, a work that promises to be both autobiographical and experimental: 
memories of an older sister who died two hours after birth prompt a poetic 
exploration of whiteness – the colour of the swaddling bands that became her 
shroud, the breast milk she was not to drink, and the blank page where she is 
being remembered.

The Dreams of Bethany Mellmoth by William Boyd (Viking). A new short story 
collection from the author ofSweet Caress and Any Human Heart.

Heather by Matthew Weiner (Canongate). The debut novel by the creator of Mad 
Men is a modern morality tale set in contemporary New York.

Poetry

Salt by David Harsent <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-harsent> 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-harsent>(Faber). An appropriately 
astringent title for Harsent’s invigorating new “assembly” of short, intense 
and primal poems.

Events and anniversaries

30 The 350th anniversary of the birth of Jonathan Swift in Dublin, 1667.
 See the full visual  This month marks the 200th anniversary of the posthumous 
publication of Persuasion, seen here in the 1995 film adaptation. Photograph: 
Sony/Everett/REX Shutterstock 
Fiction

The Secret of Superhuman Strength by Alison Bechdel (Cape). Her graphic memoir 
Fun Home, about her relationship with her father and her own coming out, made 
her one of America’s most-loved cartoonists: a new graphic novel will be an 
event.

Events and anniversaries

Bicentenary of the posthumous publication of Persuasion and Northanger Abbey, 
when Jane Austen was identified as the author of her novels for the first time 
in a biographical note by her brother.

 * Browse these and many more books online at bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over 
£10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 