
Sky has signed the biggest ever TV rights deal for netball in the UK after 
reaching a four-year agreement with EnglandNetball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/netball>, the sport’s governing body, that 
includes internationals and the domestic Superleague.

Sky will show all home England Test matches and for the first time will air 
all matches of the annual Quad series between England, Australia, New Zealand 
and South Africa. Previously only matches featuring England had been shown. The 
terms of the deal were not disclosed.

Sky will air all of its netball coverage on its new Sky Sports Mix channel, 
which is available to its 10 million-plus TV customers and not just subscribers 
to the more costlySky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> 
packages.

Why should women's sport become more like men's? Let's shoot for a new model | 
Danae Bosler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/why-should-womens-sport-become-more-like-mens-lets-shoot-for-a-new-model>
“Over the past few years netball has been a huge hit with our viewers and it 
is fantastic that more people than ever before will be able to watch it,” said 
Barney Francis, managing director of Sky Sports. “Sky is an unrivalled 
supporter of women in sport and we really recognise what an important time this 
is for women’s sport.”

There has been criticism that women’s sport does not get enough airtime 
compared with men’s sport, either in terms of live coverage or in sports news 
bulletins.

In 2014, the former Olympic cycling champion Nicole Cooke called on the BBC to 
give thesame amount of coverage to women’s sport as it does to men’s 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-26653208>. 

Joanna Adams, chief executive of England Netball, said the deal with Sky 
strengthened the broadcaster’s commitment to women’s sport.

Sky’s coverage of women’s sport includes LPGA golf, including all five majors, 
international rugby, next year’s cricket World Cup and the weekly Sportswomen 
show.
 