
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> will issue a 
warning that democracy is in retreat across the world and that a “cult of the 
strongman” is taking hold, raising the prospect that the concept of a global 
liberal order will fade into irrelevance.

Boris Johnson is a clown who has united the EU against Britain | Jean Quatremer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/boris-johnson-clown-eu-britain-foreign-secretary>
In his first set piece speech as foreign secretary, he will argue that Britain 
outside theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> could still 
play a global role in preventing a dystopian future in which the powerful 
devour the weak.

He will also set out a strong warning to Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> that the UK will not normalise 
relations with Moscow, or buckle over Ukraine or Syria, adding that he fully 
supports Donald Trump, the US president-elect, in demanding that more Nato 
member countries lift the levels of their defence spending.

The speech will be important in shaping Johnson’s secretaryship, as well as 
shoring up his credibility as someone at the heart of the cabinet’s discussions 
on the shape of Brexit.

Since his surprise appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/13/pmqs-cameron-may-reshuffle-labour-leadership-bid-as-mcdonnell-defends-claim-that-anti-corbyn-plotters-fucking-useless-politics-live>
, he has been accused of alienating European foreign ministers by trivialising 
the Brexit talks and by his determination to differentiate himself from the 
rest of the EU by praising Trump.

He has himself been irritated by a series of public put-downs from Theresa May 
and the chancellor, Philip Hammond, as well as by leaks claiming thathe backed 
a complete amnesty for all illegal immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/boris-johnson-denies-privately-supporting-principle-of-free-movement>
 in the UK on the date the UK Leaves the EU.

On Thursday he was forced to deny a broadcast report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/01/boris-johnson-denies-saying-he-backed-free-movement-video>
 claiming that he had told four ambassadors at a breakfast briefing that he 
supported the free movement of workers inside the EU, popular antagonism to 
which is supposedly the main force driving the UK’s departure from the EU. He 
insisted: “I said no such thing,” and said he had argued that “immigration had 
been a good thing for the UK in many respects but it had got out of control, 
and that we needed to take back control”.

In his speech at Chatham House, he will warn that if the west fails, “We risk 
reverting to an older and more brutal system where the strong are free to 
devour the weak, where might is always right, and the rules and institutions we 
have so painstakingly built fade away into irrelevance.”

Claiming that the world is still looking to the UK for leadership, he will 
say: “We have to acknowledge that in many respects the world is not in good 
shape. We have the cult of the strongman, we have democracy in retreat, we have 
an arc of instability across the Middle East from Iraq to Syria to Libya. What 
is the answer of the UK? Is it to cower and put the pillow over our heads? 
Emphatically not. We are struggling against non-state actors who view the whole 
concept of a global liberal order with contempt and it is precisely because of 
the intensity of these challenges that we need to redouble our resolve and to 
defend and preserve the best of the rules-based international order.”

With the Foreign Office still waiting to see the shape of the new US 
president’s foreign policy and the extent to which Trump truly seeks to forge 
closer ties with Vladimir Putin, Johnson will not use the speech to rush to 
press the reset button with Putin.

He will say: “Britain is prepared to be tough with Russia. But that does not 
mean that it is not also sensible to talk. Yes, it is Britain that insists on 
our resolve to enforce sanctions against Russia for their occupation of Crimea 
and their hand in the war in eastern Ukraine. And it is Britain again that has 
been the firmest in denouncing Russia’s part in the destruction of Aleppo. For 
all these reasons, we cannot normalise relations with Russia or go back to 
‘business as usual’.”

Russia, he will reiterate, could still win the world’s acclaim by “halting its 
bombing campaign in Syria, delivering Assad to peace talks, and abiding by the 
letter of the Minsk agreements in Ukraine”.

He insists he will not shy away from delivering these tough messages to 
Russian leaders in person. Trump has suggested that he is happy for Assad to 
remain in power in Syria but the Foreign Office does not believes that is a 
sustainable solution.

Johnson will also insist the Brexit vote does not mean the UK is becoming 
isolationist or turning its back on the world. The UK’s future role, he will 
say, “is to be a flying buttress – supportive of the EU project, but outside 
the main body of the church. To those who say we are now too small, too weak 
and too poor to have any influence on the world. I say there are plenty of 
people who do understand what this country can do and the effect it can have.


“Indeed, there are many people in this country who would not recognise the 
image of Britain – of ourselves – as seen through the eyes of others. A nation 
taking back control of its democratic institutions [is] not a nation hauling up 
the drawbridge or slamming the door. Instead it will show that the UK is a 
nation that is now on its mettle.”
 