
The international press freedom group, Reporters Sans Frontières (RSF), has 
written to foreign secretary Boris Johnson 
<https://rsf.org/en/news/rsf-urges-boris-johnson-raise-case-jailed-blogger-raif-badawi-during-saudi-arabia-visit>
 to air concerns abouthis current visit to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/boris-johnson-emphasises-friendship-with-saudi-arabia>
.

It urges Johnson to take up the case of jailed blogger Raif Badawi along with 
the plight of other journalists detained by a regime with one of the world’s 
worst press freedom records.

Saudi Arabia is ranked at 165th of 180 countries in RSF’s world press freedom 
index <https://rsf.org/en/saudi-arabia>, noting that there are no really free 
media in a country where “all journalists censor themselves.”

The letter to Johnson, signed by RSF’s secretary general, Christophe Deloire, 
calls on Johnson to take up the “dire press freedom climate in the country at 
the highest possible levels during your visit.”

Saudi Arabia’s king, Salman bin Abdelaziz Al Saud, has been on RSF’s list of 
“predators of press freedom” 
<https://rsf.org/en/predator/salman-bin-abdelaziz-al-saud> since he succeeded 
his brother Abdullah as king in 2015. He is said to embody “the heritage of a 
dynasty that has always been hostile to media freedom.”

At least 10 journalists and citizen journalists are currently jailed in Saudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> on a range of charges, 
such as harming the king’s image and reputation, blasphemy, insulting religion, 
and “inciting chaos.”

RSF points in particular to the case of Badawi, the co-founder of an online 
discussion forum, the Liberal Saudi Network, who has been in jail since June 
2012.

He was convicted in May 2014 of insulting Islam and sentenced to 10 years in 
prison, plus 1,000 lashes and a 10-year ban on travelling abroad after the 
completion of his prison sentence,.

Badawi’s flogging was widely condemned internationally, including by the the 
foreign office. An international outcry followed the administration of the 
first 50 lashes. Thus far, the rest of the sentence has not been carried out.

His wife, Ensaf Haidar, has been fighting to keep his case in the public eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/saudi-blogger-raif-badawi-faces-further-flogging>
. She was granted asylum in Canada, where she lives with the couple’s three 
children.

Badawi’s lawyer, Waleed Abu Al Khair, has been in jail since 15 April 2014. He 
was sentenced to 15 years in prison in July 2014 on a variety of charges.

At least eight other journalists and citizen journalists are currently in 
prison in Saudi Arabia. They include Zuhair Kutbi, (held since July 2015); 
Fawzan Al-Harbi, (June 2014); Jassim Mekki A’al Safar (June 2014); Alaa Brinji 
(May 2014); Fadhel Al-Manafes (April 2014); Wajdi Al-Ghazzawi (February 2014); 
Ali Jaseb Al-Touhifah (August 2012); and Jalal Mohamed Al-Jamal (February 2012).

Johnson has also been urged by fellow Conservatives not to brush aside human 
rights concerns. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/boris-johnson-emphasises-friendship-with-saudi-arabia>

The full text of the RSF letter can be found here 
<https://rsf.org/en/news/rsf-urges-boris-johnson-raise-case-jailed-blogger-raif-badawi-during-saudi-arabia-visit>
.Full disclosure: I am on the advisory board of RSF’s UK office.
 