
In all the furore surrounding Boris Johnson's comments on IQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/nov/28/boris-johnson-iq-unpleasant-elitism-nick-clegg>
, one of the many respects in which he was utterly wrong has been barely 
mentioned. In fairness, this isn't entirely Johnson's fault. It is an endemic 
misunderstanding, the assumption that people with IQs over 130 are likely to 
sail through life, effortlessly achieving "success".

It's been good to see neuroscience getting a popular airing this week. One can 
certainly complain that a study from the University of Pennsylvania into mental 
illness in children and young adults, widely reported as having demonstrated 
brain differences between males and females, has been "reduced to pop psychology
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/03/men-women-brain-wired-differently-study-mental-illness>
". But, in truth, neuroscience does not penetrate our general culture nearly 
enough.

Even experienced psychologists, let alone "pop" ones, often fail to understand 
how high intelligence can isolate people, especially children. Yet, 
neuroscience tells us the difference between "normal" and "gifted" brains is 
significant.A 2006 study 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v440/n7084/full/nature04513.html> from 
the National Institute of Mental Health and the Montreal Neurological Institute 
at McGill University, found that more intelligent children "demonstrate a 
particularly plastic cortex, with an initial accelerated and prolonged phase of 
cortical increase, which yields to equally vigorous cortical thinning by early 
adolescence". The study also demonstrated that maximum cortical thickness came 
at around five-and-a-half for its "average" group, eight-and-a-half for its 
"high" group and just past 11 for its "superior" group. The more intelligent a 
child is, the later their cortex will start thinning and the later it will 
become fully "sculpted",as researcher Jay Giedd puts it 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/teenbrain/interviews/giedd.html>
. This all fits with previous psychological theories. Gifted children, it is 
accepted, exhibit "asynchronous development <http://tip.duke.edu/node/839>", as 
described by the Columbus Group in 1991. This causes them all kinds of 
problems, not least because an 11-year-old can be one minute regaling 
captivated adults with their thoughts on the banking crisis, and the next 
throwing a tantrum because everyone else in the class can tie their shoelaces, 
while they can't.

This theory incorporates an older theory, the Theory of Positive 
Disintegration, posited by the Polish psychiatrist and psychologist, Kazimierz 
Dabrowski, who suggested that gifted kids are prone to one or more of five "
overexcitabilities <http://giftedkids.about.com/od/gifted101/a/overexcite.htm>
": psychomotor, sensual, emotional, intellectual and imaginational.

Time and research has certainly borne him out on the first two. Gifted 
children are prone to learning disabilities – dyslexia, dyspraxia, dyscalculia, 
all those conditions that cynics are prone to insist are manifestations of 
little Tarquin's parents' inability to accept that he isn't as clever as they 
want him to be. But lot of the time little Tarquin's parents are not deluded, 
not at all.

Gifted children tend to have particular problems with sensory processing, 
sensory modulation and dyspraxia. [pdf download 
<http://www.spdfoundation.net/pdf/SensoryissuesinGiftedChildren.pdf>] They are 
also more likely to be overwhelmed by their over- and sometimes underdeveloped 
senses, with their brain failing accurately to "read" what their bodies are 
telling them about their environment. This is not surprising, since they have 
so many neural pathways to choose from, in their big, messy cortices, and so 
much sculpting to do.

Sometimes these symptoms are merely a consequence of asynchronicity, and will 
sort themselves out.Dyslexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/dyslexia>, 
for example, sometimes just disappears. But sometimes a gifted child with these 
deficits will become a gifted adult with these deficits. The cliches – 
absent-minded professor, computer genius who can't drive a car, artistic giant 
with explosive temperament – chime with what neuroscience tells us.

Asynchronous development can also mean a child's intellect is way ahead of his 
executive functions <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive_functions>, the 
parts of the brain that manage cognitive processes. This will make him 
disorganised, unable to grasp spoken instructions or challenged by mental 
arithmetic. Even if his brain is generating ideas thick and fast, he may 
struggle to put them on paper.

In the US, it's more common for a child to be recognised as being gifted and 
also learning-disabled. They call it being "twice exceptional 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twice_exceptional>" or "2e". In Britain, however, 
virtually the only organisation that is really up on what they call "dual or 
multiple exceptionality 
<http://www.potentialplusuk.org/parents.php?webid=252#.UqBttWRdXGI>" is the 
charity Potential Plus UK.

What all this means, contrary to Johnson's banal non-observations, is that 
children with IQs of more than 130 can be very vulnerable. The selective 
private sector education system that blessed us with Johnson and his 
colleagues, and also the grammar school system he lauds, are not the infallible 
machines for attracting the finest minds he thinks they are. On the contrary, 
they test children before the smartest have even stopped growing, let alone 
started sculpting their neural pathways, and when their mental abilities may 
still be highly asynchronous. Someone who is good at maths and English will 
pass their 11-plus, while someone who is highly able at one but – as yet – 
terrible at the other, perhaps due to a passing learning disability caused by 
asyncronicity, will fail. Selective education identifies the children who are 
good at everything already, not the children with the greatest learning 
potential.

In the state system, these children do not always thrive either. They are 
often bored in class, especially if they have an unrecognised learning 
disability. Even if it's recognised, a child may not qualify for extra help if 
that disability is not driving their academic performance below a 
bureaucratically fixed point. Which is like saying that a child doesn't need a 
prosthetic leg because he hops quite fast. If a child has sensory processing 
issues, too, then just the stimulation of large classrooms will drive them to 
distraction, or "sensory overload", causing an "emotional meltdown".

Even for a clever child without such difficulties, school has essentially been 
designed to encourage them to become independent learners. A gifted child is an 
independent learner already, but is still expected to sit in class for 15 years 
being coaxed into thinking for herself. The writer, Jenn Ashworth,has described 
what torture all this was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/13/jenn-ashworth-refusing-to-go-to-school>
, without quite realising what she was describing. But Ashworth was one of the 
lucky ones. She found her own way, pretty much avoiding school altogether from 
11 to 15, then gritting her teeth to get the exams that would take her to 
Cambridge.

Many gifted children are at risk of underachievement, or even of leaving 
education, entirely unaware that their problem is not that they are stupid, but 
that they're clever. Potential Plus UK warns thatvulnerable groups of students 
<http://www.potentialplusuk.org/new_schools_main.php?contentid=451&webid=426#.UqB0yGRdXGI>
 include, among others, those in low socio-economic groups, black and minority 
groups, and those with English as an additional language.

Yet, even the Tarquins of this world are hard to advocate for. The US 
psychologist James T Webb <http://videos.med.wisc.edu/videos/32540> warns that 
gifted children are often misdiagnosed as having behavioural, emotional or 
mental disorders. Even when they do have such disorders, the chances are that 
the disorder will be attended to, but not the underlying ultra-brightness. They 
will be pathologised, rather than understood and supported.

There is indeed a male-female brain difference relevant to this matter. Female 
brains have larger basal ganglia, which help the frontal lobe with executive 
functioning. As Giedd says: "Almost everything is more common in boys – autism, 
dyslexia, learning disabilities, ADHD, Tourette's … girls, by having larger 
basal ganglia, may be afforded some protection from these illnesses."

So, as Britain's politicians ponder the reasons why the UK is so far down the 
PISA mathematics list 
<http://www.oecd.org/pisa/aboutpisa/pisa-2012-participants.htm>, they might 
want to consider funding some research from some paediatric neuropsychologists. 
Their endless arguments over whether it's all the fault of the left or the 
right are unproductive. The answers lie in the brains of children, not of 
politicians.
 