
Were you born in the 1980s? Then you’re half as well off as someone born in 
the 1960s at the same stage in life. Stagnant wages, falling home ownership, 
weaker pensions and low interest rates have left today’s young adults 
significantly worse off,according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/born-in-early-80s-then-youre-half-as-wealthy-as-1970s-children-says-ifs>
. When Guardian Money talked to people in their 20s and 30s, and compared their 
situations with adults in their 50s, we found reality may be worse than the 
figures suggest

Born in the 1960s


‘Our house earned more than we did’

Deborah Talbot, 49, lives in Wivenhoe, Essex, with her partner and daughter

“In some ways I’ve been quite lucky financially, but also unlucky. I came of 
age during the 1980s when there was no work and no sense of a future. I worked 
as a waitress and then went to university. I got a grant, albeit a small one, 
but still had to work. Sometimes I had to choose between heating and eating, 
which is no joke in Glasgow where I was studying. But I did quite well and 
moved into academia in the New Labour years when academic wages shot up, and 
finally got some economic stability.


I bought my first flat in 2004 for £150,000 – it was above a shop in West 
Norwood, south London. It was a complete dump. I sold that and bought another 
in Haringey for £289,000. We were both working and earning good money. We sold 
it during the financial crash because it wasn’t great for bringing up a small 
child, and bought a tiny house in Walthamstow in 2010 for £270,000. We 
benefited from gentrification, because our house earned more than we did. We 
sold it recently for £575,000 and moved to North Essex, massively reducing our 
mortgage.

I wish that all the promises made after the second world war were kept. But 
successive generations have suffered

Work was precarious until I was 31, and I always felt pretty poor. Just when I 
began to settle into having secure employment from 36-41 the screws were 
tightening in the higher education sector and I had a baby, which wasn’t a 
great mix, and I went freelance. But because of the London property market, and 
the fact I bought flats and worked on them, I feel quite asset rich, which is a 
joke really – I’m not compared with many people who are more solidly middle 
class.

Owning your home is certainly a lot better than renting in London. That said, 
private ownership makes me very angry and I think house prices have totally 
messed up the economy. Everyone should have a decent place to live. I’d like 
our society to be more communal, more lived in the streets than the home. 
Spending all your money on housing encourages social isolation and an obsession 
with status, like who has the best kitchen – while some people can’t feed their 
children.

I wish that all the promises made after the second world war were kept. But 
successive generations have suffered the consequences. Not equally, of course. 
I can remember being on a student demonstration outside a Tory party conference 
and delegates went in the hall waving their wallets at us. They knew what that 
was about, that we had nothing, and they thought it was funny. I’ll never 
forget that image. They’re still doing it, aren’t they?”

‘We were lucky – we couldn’t afford it today’

Mike Tizard, 51, is married with two children

“We bought our first flat in 1995, at the age of 30, almost by accident. 
Despite having no money we were about to get married, and had just seen a 
terrible place to rent in Oval, south London. We saw a queue of people outside 
an old hospital. We went over thinking it was an art exhibition – 45 minutes 
later we’d put down a £100 refundable deposit on a one-bed £60,000 flat in the 
basement. It turned out to be the best decision we ever made.

At the time the London market was on its knees, and our endowment mortgage was 
just 0.99% for the first year. We were able to borrow the £6,000 deposit from 
my wife’s employer – without that it wouldn’t have happened.

The consequences for society could be disastrous

Three years later, with a baby on the way, we moved to Herne Hill. Our Oval 
flat had almost doubled in value to £109,000, and we paid £137,000 for our 
two-bed flat upgrade. A spell in the west country and abroad for three years 
saw us rent the flat out, covering our mortgage. When we returned to south 
London in 2004, with two small children in tow, houses were already 
unaffordable, so reluctantly we moved to Hertfordshire. The Herne Hill flat 
sold for £310,000, and our four-bed house cost £390,000, which seemed like a 
fortune. Today it must be worth £680,000 – we couldn’t even dream of buying it.

I feel sorry to have friends who for various reason missed out on this 
windfall because they simply couldn’t, or didn’t, buy a flat. And what of the 
future? Children of parents who like us bought at the right time will probably 
be all right. But god help the others, particularly once student loans are 
applied. The consequences for society could be disastrous.”

Born in the 1970s

‘It was relatively easy to buy a flat in London’

Polly Chadwick, 41, lives in Bristol with her husband
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae0a4078f78342d115c858e717e95eeabdea478%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae0a4078f78342d115c858e717e95eeabdea478%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 ‘I keep saying the London flat is my pension, but how realistic that is I 
don’t know.’ Photograph: Adrian Sherratt for the Guardian 
“I feel lucky that I grew up in an era that I could get a grant to go to 
university, so I came out of that without a massive debt. I really feel for 
students now who are left with thousands of pounds of debt afterwards and no 
guarantee of a job. My parents benefited from good work pensions, so their 
retirement has been good and financially stress-free. I think many of that 
generation have benefited from pensions, whereas I don’t think we have that 
luxury now.

I managed along with an ex to scrape together a £5,000 deposit to buy a small 
flat in Kilburn, London, in the early 2000s for £120,000. It was relatively 
easy and we had a good choice of lenders and rates. I now own the flat with my 
husband, who bought my ex’s share. The equity on it enabled us to buy in 
Bristol, where we moved when I set upThe Bath Massage Company 
<http://thebathmassagecompany.com/>, which is thriving. If we didn’t have the 
London flat there is no way we could have raised a deposit.

I keep saying the London flat is my pension, but how realistic that is I don’t 
know. I started a pension in my early 20s but stopped paying into it, so 
there’s not really anything substantial in it. I’ll be OK as long as we don’t 
experience another big crash and property and rental prices fall dramatically. 
I don’t think about retirement and what I will do. I imagine I will work until 
I can’t.”

‘I am successful, but can’t afford to buy’

Ebonie Allard, 36, is a life coach and entrepreneur in Brighton

“I’m good at what I do. I run my own business coaching company – 
Ebonieallard.com <http://www.ebonieallard.com> – am successful but have not yet 
been able to buy a house. The current system for assessing financial risk of 
those who are self-employed is antiquated. It could do with modernising to more 
accurately determine whether people can afford their mortgage. I’m hopeful 
because I have got on top of my money in the past year and feel a lot more in 
control and able to strategise and plan with regard to my finances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6afb371511d23d9a587f076ed3aaf1b3deb3ee%2F0_193_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6afb371511d23d9a587f076ed3aaf1b3deb3ee%2F0_193_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 ‘I wish I’d been paying a mortgage instead of rent for the past 15 years.’ 
Photograph: Sarah Lou Francis 
I have been through a lot of financial instability and navigated my way out of 
a lot of debt, which has left me much more aware of my situation and how money 
works. That said, I think that it is so much harder to be financially stable 
now. The cost of living – house prices, food prices, energy prices – has 
increased far more than incomes, and this has left people often being forced to 
spend around 40% of their earnings on simply keeping a roof over their heads.

I share at the moment because it is the only way I can afford to live in a 
good-sized house in a nice neighbourhood. I have been saving to get a place of 
my own and am looking to buy in the next year.

I save a percentage of my income each month. This is important so that I’m 
eventually able to buy, and going forward I will continue to save and invest in 
order to give myself some kind of pension. I’m not currently in a pension 
scheme; I don’t trust any of them. In fact I’m not even sure where I’d go for a 
self-employed person’s pension.

Overall, I’m pretty optimistic about my financial future. I believe that with 
my business growing and the right education and investment, it’s still possible 
for me to be in a much more financially affluent and stable position. I would 
like to own my home outright, and wish I’d been paying a mortgage instead of 
rent for the past 15 years. I would feel much more secure if I knew I had a 
roof over my head and with an end in sight to such high monthly payments.”

Born in the 1980s

‘We don’t own. Prices are borderline insane’

Sharmin Cheema-Kelly, 29, lives in London with her husband Darren

“We don’t own our own home. Unless you live with your parents, are willing to 
live far away from London and pay obscene amounts to be burrowed in someone’s 
armpit for at least two hours on a daily basis, or don’t mind living in a 
so-called “up-and-coming” area and paying through the nose for it, owning 
remains a distant dream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbccc68dcb33198cc585396e05e0f18251c08b9d0%2F0_39_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20lucky%3F%20Children%20of%20the%2060s%2C%2070s%20and%2080s%20on%20buying%20their%20first%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fintergenerational-differences-children-1980s-out-of-pocket%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbccc68dcb33198cc585396e05e0f18251c08b9d0%2F0_39_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Sharmin Cheema-Kelly, with her husband Darren: ‘I just wishd I had started 
investing earlier.’ 
We rent a one-bedroom flat in Raynes Park in a new leasehold development. 
Imagine my shock when I walked past an estate agent’s to see a similar unit in 
the same building for £410,000! It’s a nice place, but it is bordering on 
insane to fork out that much. My husband is from Dublin and an investment in a 
property there seems more sensible.

I am a regular saver. I pay a fixed amount into a savings account as soon as 
my salary comes in, and also have a regular investment in a stocks and shares 
Isa. I’m hoping that will make up for the lack of a property and that 
compounding works its magic over the next 20 or 30 years! Being a saver is 
extremely important to me as I’d like to achieve financial independence.

I’m pretty confident we’ll be fine financially going forward. I just wish I 
had started investing earlier. I intend on going travelling for an extended 
time, which means saving for that, but nothing is confirmed yet.

Like many other millennials priced out of buying homes in the capital, I am 
all for ‘buying experiences’ – within reason, of course. Life’s too short so 
might as well make the most of it.”

‘I’d support a rent cap and a ban on buy to let’

Thea de Gallier, 27, lives in a London flat with two other people
 ‘Homes are a basic human need, not an investment.’ 
“I wish I could live on my own, but that’s impossible on what I earn, which 
averages at about £25,000. It annoys me how expensive rents in London are – 
with bills I pay around £650 a month – but I want to be here because of work, 
and it’s where my friends are.

I’m not bothered about owning a property as any kind of investment or status 
symbol. In fact the obsession with it really grates on me, because homes are a 
basic human need, not an investment. I would happily back a law that said 
people could only own one home and ban buy to let. My preference would be to 
see renting reformed and made a cheaper, with more long-term options and 
protection for tenants. I’d like to find a housing association property with a 
long term lease.

I feel uncertain about my financial future. On the one hand I’ll continue 
saving when I can, but I can’t see me ever affording to buy in London. I can’t 
drive so moving further out to somewhere with fewer transport links would be 
difficult. I do worry sometimes that I’ll be screwed in old age, but in some 
respects I’m doing better than others my age with the amount of savings I’ve 
got.

I don’t want kids, so that’s one worry off my mind. I imagine if that’s 
something I wanted, though, I’d be pretty panicky it might never happen because 
I’d never have a secure home for them.

My biggest wish is that the property market wasn’t so ridiculous and landlords 
didn’t have all the power. I’d support things like rent caps, house price caps, 
a ban on foreign investors buying property they’re not going to live in.”

‘We bought cheaply in the West Midlands’

Emma Payne, 36, lives with her husband and her three children

I’d like access to more advice on what savings products I should be using – 
it’s all too confusing

“My mum and dad bought their house and it was paid off years ago; they have 
money to retire and are sorted. It isn’t as good as in their day. You are 
trying to save, but the cost of living is higher. You’re surviving and live to 
work.

I feel I’m better off than others because I own a house. When I took the 
mortgage out it was quite easy. If I had to do it now, there’d be no chance. It 
has 10 years left on it. After that I intend to save more towards my retirement.

If I could talk to 20-year-old me I’d say: ‘Save more – it comes quicker than 
you think.’ But when you’re young you don’t think about retirement because it 
seems such a long way off. I’d really like access to more advice around what 
savings products I should be using – it’s all too confusing and there are so 
many options it’s hard to know what’s best.

It would be nice to make things better for yourself and the family, rather 
than just putting up with what you’ve got.”
 