
Kelly Fremon Craig’s Edge of Seventeen premieres this week, a fresh entry in 
an enduring genre: the coming-of-age film. In movies as in real life, these 
stories are awkward, tender, tragic, triumphant, surreal, nightmarish, funny – 
sometimes all at once. Their magic lies in the insight they can offer, how 
universal and unifying they are no matter the details of the narratives, their 
time and place. Here are the essentials.

American Pie 

Everyone’s favorite movie about an awkward young man doing unspeakable things 
to an apple pie to a soundtrack almost entirely dedicated to Blink-182.

Clueless 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f8be6ab6e1a543447d302df2f2cd7292776a9d6%2F0_109_2643_1586%2F2643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f8be6ab6e1a543447d302df2f2cd7292776a9d6%2F0_109_2643_1586%2F2643.jpg>
 As if … Clueless. Photograph: Allstar/Paramount 
Makeovers give fashion-obsessed Cher Horowitz (Alicia Silverstone) a sense of 
control in a world full of chaos in Amy Heckerling’s film inspired by Jane 
Austen’s Emma. Cher’s epiphany takes place when her best friend, Dionne, 
accidentally gets on the freeway while she’s learning to drive, and Cher 
realizes it’s her soul that needs a makeover. In the words of Charles Dickens 
and Cher: “’Tis a far, far better thing doing stuff for other people.”

Wonder Boys

Moonlight's Tarell Alvin McCraney: 'I never had a coming out moment'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/21/moonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview>
A drama revolving around an eccentric editor, a blind pitbull, Marilyn 
Monroe’s sweater and a washed-up writing professor whose wife just left him, 
and the living embodiment of a bummer. Curtis Hanson’s adaptation of Michael 
Chabon’s novel examines the paths we take, what to do when we get stuck there, 
who guides us, and whether our 2,000-page novel really needs all those details, 
like dental records and genealogies on everyone’s horses.

Pan’s Labyrinth

Guillermo del Toro’s masterpiece blends a war story with fairytale and horror. 
The film is set in civil war-era Spain, where Ofelia (Ivana Baquero) lives with 
her pregnant mother and cruel new stepfather, who is a captain in Spain’s 
notorious Guardia Civil. She meets a faun who tells her she’s the lost princess 
of the underworld and gives her three tasks to prove she hasn’t become mortal. 
During her journey to complete these tasks, Ofelia learns to make her own 
choices and break the rules in a world without freedom of choice.

The Breakfast Club 

John Hughes engineered the modern coming-of-age comedy and The Breakfast Club 
is the genre’s apotheosis, a study in 80s teen angst revolving around five 
high-school archetypes in Saturday detention. It articulated one of our 
greatest childhood fears: when you grow up, your heart dies.

Hunt for the Wilderpeople 

Ricky Baker (Julian Dennison) is a 13-year-old labeled “a real bad egg” by the 
foster system who becomes an outlaw as he journeys through the New Zealand bush 
with reluctant foster parent Hector. Taika Waititi’s movie has it all: a dog 
named Tupac, Sam Neill giving a pig a piggyback ride, haikus, and a crazed Rhys 
Darby wearing a shrub disguise.

Heathers 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a28917dfe9ab389f278db03e2e5166a04197317%2F0_45_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a28917dfe9ab389f278db03e2e5166a04197317%2F0_45_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Christian Slater and Winona Ryder in Heathers. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Michael Lehmann’s Heathers is Clueless’s dark predecessor, a meaner film than 
Mean Girls, an indictment of bullying and mob mentality and a culture that 
champions mediocrity and the status quo. Never forget to be a Veronica in a 
world of Heathers.

The Graduate 

Mike Nichols’ 1967 adaptation of Charles Webb’s satire is a product of its 
time that still speaks to us, though in retrospect Mrs Robinson (Anne Bancroft) 
seems more complex and compelling than the film’s disillusioned “hero” Benjamin 
Braddock (Dustin Hoffman). Like Holden Caulfield’s reviled phonies, Benjamin is 
disappointed by “plastics”. The film is best summed up by its last scene: the 
look between Benjamin and Mrs Robinson’s daughter (Katharine Ross) at the back 
of a bus, conveying the uncertainty of their future, Braddock realizing he has 
no idea who she is, or whohe is. 

The 400 Blows 

The 1959 French New Wave classic features François Truffaut’s cinematic alter 
ego, Antoine Doinel (Jean-Pierre Léaud). Truffaut illustrates the ups and downs 
of childhood with two of the film’s most famous scenes: a frozen Antoine’s 
haunted look in the final frame and an ecstatic Antoine spinning in a carnival 
ride.

Rebel Without a Cause 

Released a month after James Dean’s death, Nicholas Ray’s seminal film 
cemented his legacy as an American icon and eternal symbol of disaffected youth.

Carrie 

Brian De Palma’s 1976 adaptation of Stephen King’s novel has all the hallmarks 
of a classic coming-of-age movie: an oppressive mother, loneliness, school 
bullies, a bucket of pig’s blood, and a protagonist with the power to kill with 
her mind. All coming-of-age tales are horror stories at heart.

Rushmore
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a51dfef908c97829cf42785b06557e1e243a703%2F0_105_2038_1223%2F2038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a51dfef908c97829cf42785b06557e1e243a703%2F0_105_2038_1223%2F2038.jpg>
 Jason Schwartzman stars as Max Fischer in Rushmore. Photograph: PR Image 
Melancholic steel magnate Herman Blume (Bill Murray) befriends Max Fischer 
(Jason Schwartzman), an enthusiastic, precocious 10th grader at Rushmore 
Academy. Max deals with his mother’s death and being the son of a barber at a 
prep school for rich kids by overachieving and joining about 19 different 
clubs. The essence ofWes Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wes-anderson> whimsy, Herman is a self-made 
millionaire with a tiny moustache and a case of ennui. They find common ground 
when they both vie for the affection of first-grade teacher Miss Cross.

Boyhood 

Richard Linklater’s magnum opus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/richard-linklater-dream-is-destiny>
 follows Mason (Ellar Coltrane) over the course of 12 years, from age six to 
18. Mason is an observer, a hazy, passive character shaped by the people around 
him and his experiences that unfold in a series of vignettes, all the small 
moments that comprise a life. Mason discovers the truth in some advice he’s 
given: we’re all just winging it.

Girlhood 

Céline Sciamma’s moving film about the bond between girls and growing up in 
France. Lost at school and unhappy at home, Marieme (Karidja Touré) joins a 
gang, transformed by her new friendships. One of many mesmerizing highlights: 
Marieme and her girl gang lip-synching to Rihanna’s Diamond in a hotel room.

Mud 

Jeff Nichols’ gorgeous southern-gothic film about a young boy named Ellis (Tye 
Sheridan), who lives on the river with his miserable parents. Ellis encounters 
a man called Mud (Matthew McConaughey) who inhabits a cabin cruiser stuck in a 
tree. Sweet on a girl named Juniper (Reese Witherspoon) since childhood, Mud 
killed a man who beat her – now he’s on the run from bounty hunters and looking 
for Juniper. Ellis’s friendship with Mud teaches him about the difference 
between myth and reality and the human flaws in our heroes.

Girl, Interrupted
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04973e6680f61dd438081d83c4e42602294803e3%2F0_0_1768_1061%2F1768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04973e6680f61dd438081d83c4e42602294803e3%2F0_0_1768_1061%2F1768.jpg>
 Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie in Girl, Interrupted. Photograph: Columbia 
Pictures/Everett/Rex Features 
In 1967, Susanna Kaysen was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder and 
institutionalized after a suicide attempt. In 1994 she wrote a memoir about her 
time there, and James Mangold’s adaptation premiered in 1999. Susanna (Winona 
Ryder) meets and befriends a nurse, a sociopath, an eternal child, an anorexic 
woman, a pathological liar, and a woman hiding rotisserie chickens beneath her 
bed. The film itself questions our perception of women, of mental illness, and 
who really qualifies as “crazy”.

Mustang 

Turkish-French director Deniz Gamze Ergüven’s film debut about five orphaned 
sisters living in Turkey is tragic, uplifting and beautiful. A neighbor reports 
the sisters to their grandmother for playing a game with boys at the beach, and 
they’re beaten, taken to the hospital for a “virginity report” and forced to 
wear “shit-colored dresses”. Their home becomes a wife factory, and then a 
prison, but the sisters won’t give in without a fight.

Ghost World 

Best friends Enid (Thora Birch) and Rebecca (Scarlett Johansson) have just 
graduated from high school and find themselves at a crossroads in Terry 
Zwigoff’s adaptation of Daniel Clowes’ classic graphic novel. Rebecca is ready 
to grow up, but Enid takes a detour when she meets weird, lonely Seymour (Steve 
Buscemi), a record collector who is as genuine as she is ironic.

Crooklyn 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6f83ede7f12f82651211b2f6644d3b6cdae956%2F0_69_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6f83ede7f12f82651211b2f6644d3b6cdae956%2F0_69_3312_1987%2F3312.jpg>
 Crooklyn Zoo: Spike Lee. Photograph: Moviestore Collection/Rex 
A semi-autobiographical Spike Lee joint co-written with his siblings Joie 
Susannah Lee and Cinqué Lee in 1994. Technically Crooklyn is set in the 1970s 
but it feels timeless, evoking summer break and cartoons and raucous family 
dinners and tragedy and road trips and RuPaul dancing in the aisles of the 
local liquor store.

The Virgin Suicides 

Sofia Coppola’s adaptation of Jeffrey Eugenides’ novel focuses on the 
disenchantment that comes with loss of innocence. The boys who knew the Lisbon 
sisters struggle to make sense of their mysterious suicides years later, but 
the Lisbon sisters remain unknowable, enigmatic creatures to them, and the 
memory still feels like a confounding dream.

Stand by Me 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467aabf887053cd5799c5f4f48053e85535a62ef%2F0_136_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467aabf887053cd5799c5f4f48053e85535a62ef%2F0_136_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Wil Wheaton, River Phoenix, Corey Feldman, and Jerry O’Connell in Stand by Me. 
Photograph: Columbia/Everett/Rex Feature 
In Rob Reiner’s adaptation of a Stephen King novella set in the summer of 
1959, four boys bond during their quest to see a dead body. It’s a study in 
parental rejection, bullying (perpetrated by Kiefer Sutherland as the sadistic 
Ace), and the bonds of youth and childhood.

Almost Famous 

It doesn’t matter if you were never a Rolling Stone writer in the 60s – if you 
ever felt like you were on the outside looking in, real-life critic Lester 
Bangs’ (played by Philip Seymour Hoffman) line seared itself in your memory 
when you first saw Cameron Crowe’s semi-autobiographical film: “The only true 
currency in this bankrupt world is what you share with someone else when you’re 
uncool.”

Scott Pilgrim vs the World 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb902a2f32983138397c17bccaf000269e0f07f8b%2F0_16_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%2C%20Moonlight%20and%20beyond%3A%20the%20best%20coming-of-age%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbest-coming-of-age-movies-clueless-moonlight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb902a2f32983138397c17bccaf000269e0f07f8b%2F0_16_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Scott Pilgrim v the World. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar/Universal 
Pictures 
Scott Pilgrim (Michael Cera) must defeat the seven evil exes of love interest 
Ramona Flowers (Mary Elizabeth Winstead) in Edgar Wright’s graphic novel 
adaptation. Scott battles a man who commands “demon hipster chicks”, a vegan, a 
ninja, twins, a sinister record executive, and Lucas Lee (Chris Evans), the 
star of Action Doctor, Thrilled to be Here, You Just Don’t Exist, and Let’s 
Hope There’s a Heaven (tagline: “Kiss me … I’m dying”). In the process Scott 
learns how to deal with the past, fight for himself, and earn the power of 
self-respect.

13 Going On 30 

The guilty-pleasure essential, a romcom carried by the potent charm of 
Jennifer Garner and Mark Ruffalo. Jenna (Garner) is a 13-year-old yearning to 
be “30, flirty and fun” who gets her wish, waking up with a nude man in an 
apartment – and a body – she doesn’t recognize. What follows is light and goofy 
and joyous, with a more substantial message about maintaining emotional 
engagement and heart in a world that wants us to be cynical, mean and detached.

Moonlight 

“At some point, you got to decide for yourself who you’re gonna be – can’t let 
nobody make that decision for you,” Juan (Mahershala Ali) tells Chiron, 
nicknamed Little (Alex Hibbert), a boy bullied by other children and his own 
mother. This is the story of a black gay man told in three chapters by three 
different actors, set in director Barry Jenkin’s home town of Miami. It’s a 
luminous, human, wrenchingexploration of identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/29/moonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay>
.
 