
Uzbeks will elect a new leader for the first time in more than 25 years on 
Sunday. Just don’t expect a Trump-like upset.

About 18 million people are eligible to vote for a successor to Islam Karimov, 
the long-time dictator who died in September after rulingUzbekistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uzbekistan> ever since it gained 
independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.

Shavkat Mirziyoyev, Karimov’s prime minister for the past 13 years, is set to 
step seamlessly into the shoes of his former boss and is widely expected to 
continue his predecessor’s autocratic rule.


Mirziyoyev is likely to win a landslide following a lacklustre election 
campaign enlivened only by a wild (and probably false) rumour that the new 
regime had poisoned Gulnara Karimova, the late president’ssocialite eldest 
daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/uzbekistan-feuding-first-family-mystery-president-missing-gulnara-karimova>
, and buried her in a secret grave.

Mirziyoyev’s three challengers are all regime loyalists standing only to lend 
a democratic veneer to an election in a country that has no political 
opposition or free press.

“This is to show to the outside world that we have some kind of democracy in 
Uzbekistan,” a local businessman told the Guardian, speaking on condition of 
anonymity for fear of reprisals. “It’s a show, but the outcome will be the 
same.”

In the capital Tashkent, signs of election hurly burly are hard to detect amid 
the weak winter sun and snowmelt streets. Drab campaign posters hang over main 
roads, each featuring a middle-aged grey-haired man in a dark suit staring out 
at voters with an earnest expression on his face.

The most colourful billboards are the bright blue and pink posters urging the 
electorate to get out and vote on Sunday, a sign that Tashkent wants a high 
turnout to legitimise the choice of Mirziyoyev as the next president.

The four candidates have delivered monologues on identikit manifestos in 
lecture halls and meeting rooms around the country. Opposition to the status 
quo that has persisted since Karimov took over in 1989 has been non existent.

Under Karimov the opposition was at best hounded into exile, at worst jailed, 
tortured and even killed. “Opposition is viewed as a destabilising factor,” 
said Rustam Burnashev, an Uzbekistan-born analyst based in neighbouring 
Kazakhstan. “Not a single person in his right mind, if he really believes in 
this [authoritarian] model – and I think the leadership of Uzbekistan sincerely 
does believe in it – would go for that kind of liberalisation, because they see 
it as first and foremost destabilisation.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf31410044602f00811c4ed819b9c4dd1afcaf31%2F7_5_810_486%2F810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brand%20new%20leader%2C%20same%20old%20autocracy%20as%20Uzbeks%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brand%20new%20leader%2C%20same%20old%20autocracy%20as%20Uzbeks%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf31410044602f00811c4ed819b9c4dd1afcaf31%2F7_5_810_486%2F810.jpg>
 Uzbek politician Samandar Kukanov, left, shown with Islam Karimov, before 
Kukanov was jailed under the president’s rule. Photograph: Human Rights Watch 
The release last month of political prisoner Samandar Kukanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/political-prisoner-freed-after-23-years-following-death-of-uzbek-despot>
 after 23 years in jail sparked a glimmer of hope for those rooting for 
liberalisation, and washailed by the European Union 
<https://eeas.europa.eu/node/16168_en> as “an encouraging political message” 
from Tashkent.

However, human rights campaigners point out that Kukanov is only one among 
thousandsheld on spurious charges 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2014/09/25/until-very-end/politically-motivated-imprisonment-uzbekistan>
 in jails where torture is rife.

“If interim president Shavkat Mirziyoyev is serious about showing the world 
that his rule will be an improvement over Islam Karimov’s repression he’ll need 
to release many more political prisoners in addition to ending torture,” Steve 
Swerdlow of Human Rights Watch told Agence France-Presse.

But Mirziyoyev is standing on a platform of continuing the policies of his 
predecessor – and although some voters chafe against authoritarian rule, others 
are happy to vote for more of the same.

“He’s strong, he’s smart, he’s experienced,” explained Abduvahid, a 
twentysomething resident of Tashkent who gave only his first name. He planned 
to cast his ballot for Mirziyoyev as “Karimov’s disciple”.

The result may be a foregone conclusion, but a dose of excitement was injected 
into an otherwise lacklustre election last month by the rumour that the new 
regime had poisoned Gulnara Karimova, buried her in a secret grave in a 
Tashkent cemetery and then bulldozed her resting place.

Once a powerful diplomat, wealthy entrepreneur and flamboyant pop diva, 
Karimova disappeared from the public eye in 2014 when she was placed under 
house arrest after dragging Uzbekistan into disgrace through her involvement in 
several international corruption investigations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548ef3faebc11bd561aa1f5a30b261d08882353b%2F1414_1060_2625_1575%2F2625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brand%20new%20leader%2C%20same%20old%20autocracy%20as%20Uzbeks%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brand%20new%20leader%2C%20same%20old%20autocracy%20as%20Uzbeks%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fuzbekistan-poisoning-rumours-unlikely-to-halt-landslide-karimovs-disciple%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548ef3faebc11bd561aa1f5a30b261d08882353b%2F1414_1060_2625_1575%2F2625.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin talks to Tatyana Karimova and her daughter Lola 
Karimova-Tillyaeva in September. Photograph: Alexei Druzhinin/Sputnik/EPA 
Her downfall coincided with a bitter public feud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/21/uzbekistan-ruling-family-feud-twitter>
 waged with her mother, Tatyana Karimova, and sister Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva. 
She once accused her mother of practising witchcraft.


Tashkent has not reacted to the murder allegation, but Gulnara’s UK-based son 
has cast doubt onthe report 
<https://centre1.com/uzbekistan/gulnara-karimova-ubita-utverzhdaet-istochnik-iz-snb-uzbekistana/>
, published by the Central Asian news website Centre-1 and quoting an anonymous 
source claiming to be from Uzbekistan’s security services.

Islam Karimov, who is named after his grandfather (from whom he was latterly 
estranged owing to the family feud) said he believed she remained under house 
arrest in Tashkent, although he could not confirm it beyond doubt. He still 
thinks his mother’s life might be in danger following the death of his 
namesake, he added.
 