
It has been 28 months, but finally Brazil will return to the site of their 
greatest trauma. Their World Cup qualifier against Argentina on Thursday will 
be their first game in Belo Horizonte sincethe 7-1 defeat to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in the World Cup semi-final. Nothing will ever erase that horror but a victory 
over Argentina would make the ghosts loom less menacingly over the Mineirão in 
future – particularly if it adds to the growing fear in Argentina that the 
country may not qualify for the next World Cup.

“There’s no way to escape it,” said Paulinho, who came off the bench in the 
7-1 and is likely to start on Thursday. “But football gives you the chance to 
rewrite history. We’re not going to reverse what happened, but we can leave a 
good impression this time around.”

Argentina also have their memories of Belo Horizonte from 2014. It was where 
Alejandro Sabella’s squad was based during the tournament. Last time they were 
in the city they were preparing to play in the World Cup final. Twenty-eight 
months on, they return having lost not onlythat game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 buttwo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/chile-argentina-copa-america-final-match-report>
 Copa Américafinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
, lying sixth in their World Cup qualifying group, outside even the play-off 
spot.

Do South American World Cup qualifiers put the Champions League to shame?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/06/south-american-world-cup-qualifiers-lionel-messi-neymar>
If it is not quite a crisis yet, with eight qualifying games to play and three 
teams within a point’s reach, it is not far from being one. The coach, Edgardo 
Bauza,who succeeded Gerardo Martino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/03/edgardo-bauza-argentina-chaos-lionel-messi>
 in August, held emergency talks with his squad on Tuesday, urging them to be 
honest with each other, not to hold back. He has admitted the possibility of 
failing to qualify for Russia is a concern.

Clearing the air may help, but there is an obvious problem: just as the 
Argentina of the late 80s and early 90s became “Diego-dependent”, so this side 
are Leo-dependent. With Lionel Messi, they have taken nine points from three 
games in qualifying; without him they have picked up just seven in seven. 
Argentinians used to mock Brazil for the way everything to do with the national 
siderevolved around Neymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/06/world-cup-stunned-brazil-neymar>
; the reasons for their reliance on one superstar may be different but the 
symptoms are the same.

“I think first you have to reduce the space of all the players, not only 
Messi, and then when he receives the ball, just block the angles of his 
passes,” said theBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> 
midfielder Renato Augusto. “This is something we worked on a lot with Neymar. 
So our aim is, as much as we can, to try to minimise his chances to shoot or 
pass to team-mates.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbrazil-argentina-belo-horizonte-world-cup-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ba1c26ce5e07ed717c250405e5f88b5965e44fd%2F0_95_2577_1547%2F2577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil%20look%20to%20banish%20Belo%20Horizonte%20demons%20against%20struggling%20Argentina%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbrazil-argentina-belo-horizonte-world-cup-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%20look%20to%20banish%20Belo%20Horizonte%20demons%20against%20struggling%20Argentina%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fbrazil-argentina-belo-horizonte-world-cup-qualifying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ba1c26ce5e07ed717c250405e5f88b5965e44fd%2F0_95_2577_1547%2F2577.jpg>
 Argentina have a 100% record with Lionel Messi so far in qualifying, but 
average just one point per game without him. Photograph: Victor R. Caivano/AP 
Which is true, but it is also ridiculous. This is an Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> side whose problem even six 
months ago was an embarrassment of riches: how did you fit in Messi, Sergio 
Agüero, Gonzalo Higuaín, Ángel Di María, Ezequiel Lavezzi, Javier Pastore, 
Paulo Dybala, Érik Lamela? Such is the depth of talent, the last three of those 
aren’t even in the current squad. To take such riches and make a side dependent 
on one man is a desperate failure of leadership.

Brazil's problems are far deeper than an early exit at Copa América
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/13/brazil-copa-america-world-cup-2018>
Agüero’s tentative performance against Paraguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/south-america-conmebol-world-cup-argentina-brazil>
, culminating in a missed penalty, spoke of how confidence has leached from the 
side as the possibility grows that this most gifted of generations will not end 
a trophy drought that stretches back to 1993. Agüero has spoken of his 
gratitude to Bauza for publicly backing him after the Paraguay game. Bauza is 
the inheritor rather than the cause of Argentina’s problems, which stretch far 
beyond whoever happens to be coach.

He coaxed Messi out of international retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/lionel-messi-argentina-reversing-retirement-decision>
 and has had him available for just one game since, the 1-0 win over Uruguay in 
September. Bauza is noted for creating teams that are well-organised, hard to 
break down and not necessarily thrilling. It may be rather easier to justify 
that sort of approach against a resurgent Brazil, and the expectation is that 
he will field a 4-4-2 with a narrow midfield and the two banks of four sitting 
very deep to try to deny space to Neymar and Philippe Coutinho.

Even the fact that both are likely to play underlines the change since Tite 
replaced Dunga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/brazil-confirm-tite-new-coach>
 following thegroup-stage exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/dunga-sacked-by-brazil-after-copa-america-exit>
 from the Copa América in June. His vision is much less insular, his approach 
far more modern and expansive than that of his predecessors. There’s still a 
long way to go in tackling thedecadence of Brazilian football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/13/brazil-copa-america-world-cup-2018>
 culture but four wins in four games under Tite’s management (plusan Olympic 
gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/brazil-germany-rio-2016-mens-football-olympic-final-match-report>
 achieved on his watch if not under his direct supervision) is a promising 
start.

Their main problem is the absence of Casemiro, who offers balance at the back 
of a largely aggressive midfield. He will probably be replaced, as he was in 
the last two qualifiers, by Fernandinho, the only player likely to be involved 
who started the 7-1.

What’s striking, though, is how the momentum has shifted since the Copa 
América. Brazil’s trauma at the Minerão is the backdrop but it’s Argentina now 
who are locked in a cycle of introspection.
 