
Its collection includes George Washington’s trunk, the top hat worn by Abraham 
Lincoln on the night of his assassination, and the flag that inspired Francis 
Scott Key to writethe Star-Spangled Banner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/aug/11/malcolm-gladwell-star-spangled-banner-america-200th-anniversary>
.

And now, Walter White’s crystal meth.

The Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History 
<http://americanhistory.si.edu/> in Washington hosted cast and crew of the TV 
dramaBreaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> on 
Tuesday, taking into custody more than 10 of its props “to recognise the show’s 
influence on American culture”.

The series made a low-key start in 2008 but came to join the likes of The 
Sopranos, The Wire, Mad Men and House of Cards in the binge-viewing, box set 
pantheon, scooping numerous awards over five seasons. It followed the moral 
descent of White, played byBryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston>, a chemistry teacher 
who, after being diagnosed with terminal cancer, makes and deals in crystal 
methamphetamine to support his family.

“Artifacts” donated to the museum include two yellow Tyvek suits and gas masks 
used by White and his former-student-turned-business partner Jesse Pinkman 
(Aaron Paul) while cooking in their lab, and a small plastic bag of the “Blue 
Sky” meth they manufactured. There is also an ID card belonging to White’s 
brother-in-law Hank Schrader, a drugs law enforcement agent, and a paper cup 
from Los Pollos Hermanos, a fast food restaurant and front for money laundering 
in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where the tale is set.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bb7bbab3b01b2a8c092b4958f84357f4b1c023%2F0_190_3296_1982%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show's%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show%27s%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bb7bbab3b01b2a8c092b4958f84357f4b1c023%2F0_190_3296_1982%2F3296.jpg>
 Bryan Cranston in the Heisenberg hat worn by his character, Walter White. 
Photograph: Patsy Lynch/REX Shutterstock 
At Tuesday’s informal and jocular handover ceremony, Cranston walked over to a 
table displaying the props and put on the black“Heisenberg hat”  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NfdjBz8E_dw>– an alias borrowed from Werner 
Heisenberg, the scientist who formulated the uncertainty principle – he wore 
for much of the series.

Amid laughter, wistful exclamations and rapid clicking of cameras, Cranston 
told the audience: “I wanted to see if it still fit. Thank you, everybody. Boy, 
it feels strange putting that back on.”

He told fellow cast members he misses them but added: “I don’t miss the show, 
though. I’m asked often, do you miss playing this character, and the truth is, 
after really some reflection, that I don’t because Vince [Gilligan, series 
creator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/18/breaking-bad-vince-gilligan-walter-white>
] and the writers created and crafted such a perfectly designed beginning, 
middle and end to this journey. People said incredulously, why wouldn’t you 
want to continue?

“I said, it feels like we had a beautiful meal. We had an aperitif, a nice 
salad, a beautiful entree, a vegetable side, we had a great dessert and we had 
a coffee with it and you’re just satiated, and then someone says here’s more 
dessert. If you dived into that then it almost ruins the experience you had. I 
don’t know if my personage could take another dessert after the sweet ride that
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> was.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e2410cf65646b59ccfffd4563ce274fe9d9f40%2F0_177_2992_1798%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show's%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show%27s%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e2410cf65646b59ccfffd4563ce274fe9d9f40%2F0_177_2992_1798%2F2992.jpg>
 Dean Norris, who played Hank Schrader, poses near some of the props. 
Photograph: Patsy Lynch/REX Shutterstock 
Later Cranston, who last year won a Tony award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/09/bryan-cranston-scoops-tony-award-for-best-actor-in-broadway-debut>
 for his Broadway debut playing president Lyndon B Johnson, toured a gallery 
devoted to American presidents and first ladies and was informed that Johnson 
used to drop in at the museum from the White House. The actor’s recent work 
also includesTrumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/trumbo-review-bryan-cranston-toronto-tiff>
, a biopic in which he plays blacklisted Hollywood screenwriter Dalton Trumbo.

But it will be hard to repeat the runaway success of Breaking Bad which, 
having initially struggled to get studio backing, won awards including 16 
Primetime Emmys and two Golden Globes. “I think the thing that really resonated 
was that Breaking Bad was a story of an average man who made decisions both 
good and bad, mostly bad,” Cranston told the Guardian. “People related to the 
sense of going from paycheque to paycheque and having desperate needs at home 
and the plight of teachers, the burnout sensation facing apathetic students 
every day. A man lost and depressed – it’s a very relatable thing – and how he 
makes a decision that turns out to be the worst in his life.

“But if you asked Walter White if you regret making those decisions, I think 
he would be hard pressed to change his mind after two years of an exciting life 
or maybe three years of withering away and shrinking as a person. I think he 
didn’t want that, he wanted to go out more on his terms if that was possible, 
and I think that’s very relatable as well to people.”

Cranston, 59, said he hoped the series would open the way for less 
conventional forms of narrative in the future. “I think it’s wide open. I think 
Breaking Bad showed the world that storytelling can be small or large, you can 
slow the pace down, people won’t just click off as the prevailing thought was. 
‘If you’re not fast paced, they’re going to leave you,’ and they didn’t leave 
you. We were able to slow it down and that made the drama even more intense at 
times.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055a38a63eba9b727f5c3b8458572a23caf269ba%2F0_0_3500_2304%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show's%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show%27s%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055a38a63eba9b727f5c3b8458572a23caf269ba%2F0_0_3500_2304%2F3500.jpg>
 Yellow Tyvek suits are taken away after the memorabilia donation. Photograph: 
Gary Cameron/Reuters 
Gilligan, whose writing credits include The X-Files, used to visit the 
Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum as a boy and admitted on Tuesday he 
felt he was dreaming.

“I honestly thought Breaking Bad would never really get made. If you had told 
me in 2005 that props from our show would eventually find their way into the 
Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History, this same hallowed 
institution which houses the Star-Spangled Banner, Edison’s first lightbulb, 
Dorothy’s ruby slippers, Abraham Lincoln’s pocket watch, I would have thought 
you were using too much meth.”

Currently overseeing the Breaking Bad spin-off Better Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul>, which two weeks 
ago hosted fan Warren Buffett on set, Gilligan made clear that White has run 
his course but hinted that other characters from the fictional universe could 
return. “I almost feel like it would be bad form or bad karma to go back to 
that well, but having said that I don’t know, check with me in a few years. I 
don’t think there’s any more story to tell about Walter White necessarily, but 
maybe, who knows, some other characters who survive the series may have further 
that we might decide later that we wish to tell. But right now I really do feel 
like Brian, I feel like I’m satiated and it was time to push back from the 
dinner table, as it were.”

The loss of both Breaking Bad and Mad Men left some viewers bereft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/01/mad-mens-final-series-the-bittersweet-joy-of-saying-goodbye>
. But Gilligan rejected the notion that the golden age of US television drama 
has passed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4c974c98d693c412bde34ddd86f25437b5f7ec%2F0_75_3500_2103%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show's%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20Bad%20cast%20visits%20Smithsonian%20museum%20as%20show%27s%20props%20join%20collection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Fbreaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4c974c98d693c412bde34ddd86f25437b5f7ec%2F0_75_3500_2103%2F3500.jpg>
 The Heisenberg Hat is displayed. Photograph: Gary Cameron/Reuters 
“I think there are many more great shows to come and I will be very jealous 
when even more great ones come along and surpass ours but I think it’s all to 
the good,” he said. “I grew up watching three or four channels and now we live 
in a world of hundreds of channels and there needs to be content for all those 
channels. It’s this amazing democratising technology that allows in theory for 
a television show for everybody.”

The National Museum of American History’s best known entertainment exhibit is 
probablya pair of ruby slippers 
<http://www.artlyst.com/articles/ruby-slippers-go-on-view-at-londons-va-museum> 
worn by Judy Garland in The Wizard of Oz. Its growing television collection 
includes objects from Mad Men, The Wonder Years, Seinfeld and All in the 
Family. But these, along with the Breaking Bad items, are not likely to go on 
display until a culture gallery opens in 2018.

Dwight Bowers, the museum’s curator, told the audience: “It gives me great 
pause to think I’m the man who brought crystal meth to the museum.”
 