
The fallout from the Brexit vote dominated our business coverage in 2016, led 
by Graeme Wearden and his daily live blog.


Six of our 10 most-read articles covered the aftermath of the shock referendum 
result, from the trillions wiped off global markets to the plummeting pound and 
the prospect of negative interest rates.


There was Donald Trump too, of course, and an apocalyptic warning from 
economists in January to “sell everything” before a new crash.

 Based on the number of page views, here are our 10 most popular business 
stories in 2016.


1. U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
S election reaction: stocks rally but warnings of trouble ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
 A trader at his London desk after Trump’s victory. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty 
With more than 2m page views, our live blog of the aftermath of Trump’s 
election victory was the most-read business article of the year.


Our teams in New York, London and Sydney tracked the initial panic as it swept 
through world markets, followed by an extraordinary rally. Shares in private 
prison groups and gun makers did particularly well on Wall Street. There were 
warnings of trouble ahead, but traders appeared to pay no heed.

2. Brexit panic wipes $2tn off world markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/24/global-markets-ftse-pound-uk-leave-eu-brexit-live-updates>
 Traders at BGC react to Britain’s vote to leave the EU. Photograph: Russell 
Boyce/Reuters 
Friday 24 June brought shock, horror and sheer panic to trading floors around 
the world. Wearden and Nick Fletcher covered it all in an 18-hour live blog of 
the turmoil that greeted Britain’s decision to leave the EU.


It was an extraordinary day’s trading. More than $2tn was slashed from the 
value of global markets and sterling suffered its biggest selloff in recent 
history.


The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, stepped up with a promise to take 
any measures necessary, but economists said the Brexit vote had left Britain on 
the brink of a recession that would reverberate around the world.

3. Sell everything ahead of stock market crash, say RBS economists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/sell-everything-ahead-of-stock-market-crash-say-rbs-economists>
 Stock markets came under severe pressure in 2016. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
In January economists at RBS issued an apocalyptic warning that stock markets 
could crash by 20% and oil prices slump to $16 a barrel. “Sell everything 
except high quality bonds,” they said.


China could be the crisis point, they argued. Their numbers were wrong but 
they were right when they said it would be a “cataclysmic” year. Just as well 
they didn’t know then about Brexit and Donald Trump.

4. UK credit rating downgraded after Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/27/pound-shares-markets-brexit-crisis-osborne-lew-business-live>
 George Osborne tries to calm Brexit fears. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/AFP/Getty 
In the turbulent aftermath of the EU referendum result, as the pound hit 
31-year lows and shares tumbled again, Britain was stripped of its last AAA 
credit rating.

Standard & Poor’s downgraded the nation’s creditworthiness to AA, with a 
negative outlook. The agency said Brexit would hit growth and had weakened the 
predictability, stability and effectiveness of policymaking in the UK.

5. Richest 62 people as wealthy as half of world’s population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/richest-62-billionaires-wealthy-half-world-population-combined>
 Oxfam’s prediction became true a year earlier than forecast. Photograph: 
Valery Hache/AFP/Getty 
Oxfam’s annual analysis of how global wealth is (not) shared always makes grim 
reading. Its analysis in 2016 was timed to coincide with the gathering of many 
of the world’s superrich at Davos, and the figures laid bare the vast gap 
between rich and poor.


The charity called for urgent action to tackle the growing inequality that saw 
the wealth of the poorest half of the world’s population drop by 41% between 
2010 and 2015, while the wealth of the planet’s richest 62 people jumped by 
$500bn to $1.76tn.

6. Pound hits $1.30 as property funds are frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com./business/live/2016/jul/05/mark-carney-to-outline-bank-of-englands-brexit-stability-moves-business-live>
 Mark Carney insists the Bank of England’s Brexit plan is working. Photograph: 
Kirsty Wigglesworth/PA 
The fallout from the Brexit vote continued to reverberate through the markets, 
as City property funds barred investors from withdrawing their cash and the 
Bank of England said risks to the financial system had begun to crystallise.

The then chancellor, George Osborne, held a summit with the heads of the major 
high street banks, who pledged to avoid a new credit crisis by making loans 
available.

7. Pound and shares rally after two days of record Brexit losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/28/brexit-3-trillion-stock-markets-sterling-ftse-business-live>
 Screens display the pound’s exchange rate against the dollar after the Brexit 
vote. Photograph: Jacky Naegelen/Reuters 
Shares in London and around the world rebounded in volatile trading after 
three traumatic days that wiped an unprecedented $3tn off global markets.


As he called for a second referendum to be held, the Virgin boss, Sir Richard 
Branson, said “thousands and thousands” of jobs would be lost in Britain as a 
result of Brexit.





8. Lagarde urges speedy Brexit deal as pound hits new lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/07/pound-dollar-brexit-politicians-city-stock-markets-retail-live>
 Christine Lagarde urged the UK to do a swift deal on Brexit. Photograph: Yuri 
Gripas/Reuters 
The IMF’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, called for clarity on 
Britain’s Brexit plan “sooner rather than later”. That was two weeks after the 
referendum. Six months on, we’re still waiting.


The leading economist Mohamed El-Erian, meanwhile, piled on the pain for the 
battered pound, saying it could slump to parity with the dollar.


9. Cafes serving drinks with 25 teaspoons of sugar a cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/cafe-chains-selling-drinks-25-teaspoons-sugar-starbucks-costa-coffee>
 A Starbucks venti drink was found to contain 25 teaspoons a cup. Photograph: 
Nick Ansell/PA 
One sugar … or 25? A shocking report from the campaign group Action on Sugar 
found that 98% of the 131 hot flavoured drinks found in the big high street 
chains would carry a red warning if they were forced to label them.


Some hot chocolate and other trendy chai drinks contained staggering amounts 
of sugar, up to 25 teaspoons, in one serving.

10. NatWest paves way for introduction of negative interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/natwest-paves-way-for-introduction-of-negative-interest-rates>
 You may have to pay to save with us, NatWest told its business customers. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Nat West bank raised the spectre of negative interest rates, telling its 
business customers it might have to charge to accept deposits.

The bank, which is part of the Royal Bank of Scotland and so owned by the 
taxpayer, issued its warning in a letter changing the terms and conditions for 
its 850,000 business customers, which range from self-employed traders to 
clubs, charities and large corporations.
 