
Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> is facing 
an uphill battle in his attempt to bail out BHS’s pension fund after the 
British vote to leave the European Union added about £100m to the potential 
bill.

As MPs prepare to publish a report on the demise of BHS on Monday, Green is in 
talks with regulators and pension fund trustees about how to fulfilhis promise 
to “sort” the failed department store’s pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/mps-sir-philip-greens-reputation-and-knighthood-depend-on-pension-offer>
, which stood at £571m on one measure at the time of the company’s collapse.

Call for new powers to protect company pensions after takeovers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/03/call-for-new-powers-to-protect-company-pensions-after-takeovers>
Industry experts said a plunge in the value of gilt yields after the EU 
referendum had contributed to a near 19% rise in the average value of pension 
deficits controlled by the Pension Protection Fund (PPF), a lifeboat scheme 
funded by levies on industry, between February and June. This indicates a rise 
of about £100m for theBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> scheme.

In order to ensure members of BHS’s schemes receive full pension benefits, 
Green’s total bill could now be about £670m, valued on a buyout basis that 
includes the assumed overheads that an insurance company would seek to recoup.

Green, who sold BHS for £1 to the formerly bankrupt Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 about a year before the retailer went into administration, remains responsible 
for bailing out the pension deficit as regulators have powers to pursue former 
owners.

The former BHS owner is thought to be hoping to work out a deal under which he 
could use cash lump sums to buy out members of the pension scheme who have 
savings of less than £18,000. That would leave a small number of remaining 
members who could transfer to a new scheme, potentially knocking hundreds of 
millions of pounds off Green’s bill.

A spokesman for Green’s Arcadia Group declined to comment but sources close to 
the company admitted the deal would need more work given Brexit’s impact on the 
pension deficit.

Lord Myners, the former M&S chairman who is working as an adviser to MPs 
investigating BHS’s pension problems, has suggested such a deal could cost 
about £400m.

Green began working on the plan, then named Project Thor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/philip-green-10m-a-year-in-bhs-pensions-scheme-mps-dominic-chappell>
, when he owned BHS, but decided to sell the business before a deal had been 
agreed. WhenBHS went into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
, the pension scheme automatically fell under the auspices of the PPF.

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> experts said the PPF’s 
rules meant it would now be much tougher for Green to buy out BHS fund members 
with small pension pots. The lifeboat’s rules do not allow him to buy out 
individual members unless its lawyers can be assured that no members of the 
scheme are disproportionately benefiting or losing out.

John Ralfe, an independent pensions expert, said no such deal had ever been 
agreed with the PPF and it would be difficult for Green to break new ground.

An alternative would be to move all members to a new scheme and then offer to 
buy out those with small pension pots – potentially a highly expensive move.

“There is no clever ‘financial engineering’ solution available. The only way 
for Sir Philip to square the circle, and remove the threat of legal action, is 
to agree a big cash payment with the Pensions Regulator,” Ralfe said.

Frank Field MP, chairman of parliament’s work and pensions committee which has 
been investigating the demise of BHS, said: “Sir Philip can break the logjam by 
signing a cheque. The only restraint is his generosity.”

Given the complexity of agreeing a deal within Green’s budget, it’s thought to 
be unlikely that pensioners will hear about the future of their savings before 
the end of the year.

Chris Martin, chairman of the BHS pension fund trustees, said: “The trustees 
are really positive about the possibility of finding a solution but are also 
very conscious that sorting out the practicalities and technical complexities 
may take some time.”

The importance of the PPF reaching a deal with Green was laid bare on 
Thursday. The body’s annual report revealed that the value of claims on the PPF 
rose by £322m to £476m in the year to the end of March, with BHS making up more 
than half the value of all claims on the pensions lifeboat in the year.

For technical reasons, including its ability to trim benefits to members by 
10%, the cost to the lifeboat of bailing out BHS’s pensions scheme is £275m.

On Friday, a second administrator tasked with investigating the role of former 
directors was appointed to BHSafter pressure from the PPF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/pension-fund-wants-new-insolvency-experts-to-investigate-bhs-collapse>
. FRP Advisory will work alongside the existing administrators at Duff & Phelps.
 