
Crazy stupid love match: Steve Carell and Emma Stone set for tennis comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/21/crazy-stupid-love-match-steve-carell-and-emma-stone-set-for-tennis-comedy>
Brie Larson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brie-larson>, the star of Room, 
the drama which has won the prestigious People’s Choice award at the Toronto 
film festival, is in talks to replace Emma Stone as Billie Jean King in 
forthcoming film Battle of the Sexes.

The film, which will be directed by Little Miss Sunshine team Jonathan Dayton 
and Valerie Daris, from a script by Simon Beaufoy, is due to shoot later this 
year. Stone was attached to the project, but has now dropped out because of a 
scheduling conflict.

In 1973, King, then 29 and world No 2 female tennis player, was challenged to 
a match by Riggs, the 55-year-old retired formerWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> champion. She accepted and it was 
played in Houston, with a $100,000 prize and much pageantry.

King was carried into the Astrodome on a throne held by four muscled men 
stripped to the waist, while Riggs followed in a rickshaw drawn by lightly 
dressed models. Riggs gave King a giant lollipop. She presented him with a – 
live – piglet.

Brie Larson at Telluride: 'It’s so easy to fall into a world of pleasing 
everyone'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/08/brie-larson-at-telluride-its-so-easy-to-fall-into-a-world-of-pleasing-everyone>
It is the third film in development about the clash: Elizabeth Banks and Paul 
Giamatti 
<http://www.thewrap.com/emma-stone-steve-carell-to-play-tennis-stars-billie-jean-king-bobby-riggs-in-battle-of-the-sexes/>
 are lined up for an HBO production, whileWill Ferrell is attached to a 
competing title called Match Maker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/04/will-ferrell-match-maker-bobby-riggs-billie-jean-king>
.

Larson is tipped for an Oscar nomination for her role as Ma, a woman 
kidnapped, raped and held captive in Room, Lenny Abrahamson’s adaptation of the 
Emma Donoghue bestseller. Earlier this year she played Amy Schumer’s sister in 
Trainwreck, and will also be seen in monkey horror Kong: Skull Island.

• This article was amended on 21 September 2015. An earlier version said Brie 
Larson played Amy Poehler’s sister in Trainwreck. Larson played Amy Schumer’s 
sister in the film.

 