
Their differences extended down to their dogs. Dwight, a perfectly poof-y 
white Coton de Tuléar, stays with the elegant and eternally camera-ready 
Debbie. But good luck keeping your eyes off Gary, the dark, panting bulldog 
with his slobbery tongue drooping out of the side his mouth. Gary was forever 
in Carrie’s arms, on her side of the Reynolds-Fisher compound where the
legendary Hollywood mother-daughter team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2017/jan/06/carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-deaths-hollywood-story>
 lived and laughed during their final years.

Related: Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher: surviving instant fame and finding 
a lasting bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/01/debbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary>

It’s impossible to watch Alexis Bloom and Fisher Stevens’ warm documentary 
Bright Lights: Starring Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/04/bright-lights-debbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-trailer>
 right now without reflecting on the shockinglate December deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/03/carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-family-billie-lourd-joely-fisher>
 of its two subjects. HBO had intended to air the film (which played some of 
the major festivals last year) in spring, but the channel is correct in its 
decision to bump up the date. Cynics might say the network is capitalizing on a 
hot topic, but the film makes its own argument. These were two women who 
reached a state of balance thanks to an almost aggressive honesty. Their lives 
were on display anyway (“We arealways on a red carpet,” Fisher tells reporter 
who asks what they do when they aren’t on a red carpet), so why not shed some 
light when interest is at its peak?

Debbie Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>, allegedly 
retired, lived in golden-hued glamour down the hill from Carrie Fisher’s 
Pee-wee’s Playhouse-esque kitsch pavilion, a perfect embodiment of her quick 
wit and survivor’s sarcasm. (The shower curtain with the Psycho bloodstain 
handprints is my personal favorite.) The plot of Bright Lights is almost in 
reality television territory. Basically, we’re privy to various “days in the 
life”. There’s preparation for one of Reynolds’ Vegas nightclub acts, and 
travelling with Fisher to a Star Wars-related “lap dance session” – what she 
calls the quick autograph/photo op cash transactions that bring in a nice 
revenue stream.

Luckily, there is an inherent gravitas at play, and not only because of the 
recent tragedy. These women meant a lot to their respective fans, and the 
footage wisely includes a good deal of directorial coloring outside the lines. 
Among the best sequences is a fairly standard interview interrupted by an 
errant burglar alarm. Reynolds and Fisher lightly zinging one another as they 
blaze through the newest obstacle of the day has shades of the great American 
documentary Grey Gardens, but its melancholy doesn’t share the same decay or 
underachievement. Fisher is shown getting in shape (begrudgingly) for a return 
to Star Wars, and the ailing Reynolds does well accepting a lifetime Screen 
Actors Guild award, even if, during the limo ride, it seems like she won’t be 
able to string two sentences together.

Reynolds was well aware of her place in the Hollywood pantheon, and maintained 
a rich appreciation for collecting memorabilia. No one thinks it strange that 
she owns a piece of furniture that belonged to Elizabeth Taylor – the woman who 
notoriously “stole” Reynolds’ one true love, Fisher’s father, Eddie. Similarly, 
there is no mention that one of Fisher’s remaining vices is a ubiquitous can of 
Coca-Cola, for which her late father was a famous pitch man.

Related: My friend, Carrie Fisher: 'You could have lit a candle with the 
twinkle in her eyes' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/filmblog/2016/dec/30/my-friend-carrie-fisher-selina-cadell-tribute>

There is an uncomfortable sequence in the film, shot in 2010, in which Fisher 
visits her quite ill father, who was absent during most of her childhood, and 
just lays it out: “I was funny because I thought you’d want to be around me.” 
It’s a heavy scene, and old home movie footage is dripping in heartache and 
loss. Clips from Postcards From the Edge, the Mike Nichols film based on 
Fisher’s quasi-memoirs (written when she was “very angry”), loom like the 
memories of a bad fight to remind us of less harmonious times.

But Fisher, her mind forever twelve steps ahead, always snaps it back with a 
joke, and the spine of Bright Lights is a strong two-hander comedy between 
veteran show-folk. Self-deprecating bon mots, wordplay, song lyrics and 
perfectly timed occasional moans are what elevate this beyond simple “Keeping 
Up With” material. The highlight, old film of Reynolds decked out in Bob 
Fosse-style spangles introducing pre-Princess Leia Fisher to sing Bridge Over 
Troubled Water, proves that they really don’t make stars like they used to.

 * Bright Lights: Starring Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds premieres on HBO 
on 7 January at 8pm  