
In the summer of 1989, the American magazine the National Interest published 
an essay with the strikingly bold title "The End of History?". Its author, the 
political scientist Francis Fukuyama, announced that the great ideological 
battles between east and west were over, and that western liberal democracy had 
triumphed. With anti-communist protests sweeping across the former Soviet 
Union, the essay seemed right on the money. Fukuyama became an unlikely star of 
political science, dubbed the "court philosopher of global capitalism" byJohn 
Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johngray>. When his book The End of 
History and the Last Man 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241960240>
 appeared three years later, the qualifying question mark was gone.

The "end of history" thesis has been repeated enough to acquire the ring of 
truth – though it has also, of course, been challenged. Some critics have cited 
9/11 as a major counterexample. Others have pointed to the rise of Islamic 
fundamentalism and the Arab spring as proof that ideological contests remain.

But Fukuyama was careful to stress that he was not saying that nothing 
significant would happen any more, or that there would be no countries left in 
the world that did not conform to the liberal democratic model. "At the end of 
history," he wrote, "it is not necessary that all societies become successful 
liberal societies, merely that they end their ideological pretensions of 
representing different and higher forms of human society."

Fukuyama was talking about ideas rather than events. He believed that western 
liberal democracy, with its elegant balance of liberty and equality, could not 
be bettered; that its attainment would lead to a general calming in world 
affairs; and that in the long run it would be the only credible game in town. 
"What we are witnessing," he wrote, "is not just the end of the cold war, or a 
passing of a particular period of postwar history, but the end of history as 
such: that is, the end point of mankind's ideological evolution and the 
universalisation of western liberal democracy as the final form of human 
government."

Fukuyama drew on the philosophy of Hegel, who defined history as a linear 
procession of epochs. Technological progress and the cumulative resolution of 
conflict allowed humans to advance from tribal to feudal to industrial society. 
For Marx, the journey ended with communism; Fukuyama was announcing a 
new destination.

For a long time his argument proved oddly resilient to challenges from the 
left. Neoliberalism has been pretty hegemonic. Over the last three years, 
however, in a belated reaction to the 2008 bank bailouts, cracks have started 
to appear. GlobalOccupy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy-movement> 
protests and demonstrations against austerity have led many commentators on the 
left – including the French philosopherAlain Badiou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/may/18/alain-badiou-life-in-writing> 
inThe Rebirth of History 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/review/history-and-the-sphinx-of-riots-and-uprisings>
 andSeumas Milne <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/seumasmilne> in his 
collection of essaysThe Revenge of History 
<http://www.counterfire.org/index.php/articles/book-reviews/16572-the-revenge-of-history-the-battle-for-the-twenty-first-century>
 – to wonder whether history is on the march once again. "What is going on?" 
asks Badiou. "The continuation, at all costs, of a weary world? A salutary 
crisis of that world, racked by its victorious expansion? The end of that 
world? The advent of a different world?" He tentatively regards the uprisings 
of 2011 as game-changing, with the potential to usher in a new political order. 
For Milne, likewise, developments such as the failure of the US to 
"democratise" Iraq and Afghanistan, the financial crash and the flowering of 
socialism in Latin America demonstrate the "passing of the unipolar moment".

What remains an open question is whether these developments – dramatic as they 
are – will actually result in anything. Leaderless and programme-light, dissent 
keeps failing to cohere, fragmenting into online petitions and single-issue 
campaigns. Is the left going to mount a coherent ideological challenge to the 
right, or are these just border skirmishes? Has history ended, or not?

As some on the left have long realised, Fukuyama was performing an ideological 
sleight of hand. Is "western liberal democracy", as he argued, really an 
application of the principles of the French revolution? Or is it in fact a 
way of cloaking rightwing politics in benignly incontestable disguise? "Man's 
universal right to freedom" sounds inspiring, but if you are on the right it is 
another way of saying economic liberalism. Besides, even that is a fiction: 
capitalism pretends to love free markets; in reality, it rigs markets for 
elites.

When he wrote "The End of History?", Fukuyama was a neocon. He was taught by 
Leo Strauss's protege Allan Bloom, author ofThe Closing of the American Mind; 
he was a researcher for the Rand Corporation, the thinktank for the American 
military-industrial complex; and he followed his mentorPaul Wolfowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/01/usa.suzannegoldenberg> into the 
Reagan administration. He showed his true political colours when he wrote that 
"the class issue has actually been successfully resolved in the west … 
the egalitarianism of modern America represents the essential achievement of 
the classless society envisioned by Marx." This was a highly tendentious claim 
even in 1989.

In 2006, in the wake of George W Bush's catastrophic blunders in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, Fukuyama repudiated neoconservatism in a book titledAmerica at the 
Crossroads. In order to keep his end-of-history thesis intact, Fukuyama argued 
that the neocons had gone off on a Leninist tangent of historical determinism 
and artificial nation-building, and had departed from the correct understanding 
of historical evolution as an organic byproduct of material comfort and access 
to consumer goods.

The "post-ideology" sleight of hand nevertheless continues. "The markets", 
which he hailed as the engine of progress, were and are talked about as 
"natural" – as if they were forces of gravity or Darwinian evolution. They are 
believed to impose "realistic" limits on policy; political prioritising hides 
behind practical references to the "public purse". "This is the sober reality I 
must set out for the country today," David Cameron said in June 2010, 
announcing his plan for cuts in public spending. "We are not doing this because 
we want to, driven by theory or ideology … We are doing this because we have 
to." Through three decades of wonkery and spin, the right has systematically 
constructed an ideological movement that presents itself as anything but 
systematic, anything but ideological.

Fukuyama distinguished his own position from that of the sociologist Daniel 
Bell <https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/jan/26/daniel-bell-obituary>, 
who published a collection of essays in 1960 titledThe End of Ideology. Bell 
had found himself, at the end of the 1950s, at a "disconcerting caesura". 
Political society had rejected "the old apocalyptic and chiliastic visions", he 
wrote, and "in the west, among the intellectuals, the old passions are spent." 
Bell also had ties to neocons but denied an affiliation to any ideology. 
Fukuyama claimed not that ideology per se was finished, but that the best 
possible ideology had evolved. Yet the "end of history" and the "end of 
ideology" arguments have the same effect: they conceal and naturalise the 
dominance of the right, and erase the rationale for debate.

While I recognise the ideological subterfuge (the markets as "natural"), there 
is a broader aspect to Fukuyama's essay that I admire, and cannot analyse away. 
It ends with a surprisingly poignant passage: "The end of history will be a 
very sad time. The struggle for recognition, the willingness to risk one's life 
for a purely abstract goal, the worldwide ideological struggle that called 
forth daring, courage, imagination, and idealism, will be replaced by economic 
calculation, the endless solving of technical problems, environmental concerns, 
and the satisfaction of sophisticated consumer demands."

It is hard not to conclude that this passage offers an accurate portrait of 
our age, in which the campfire conversations of young activists merely concern 
relative concentrations of CO2; the politics of nudge and solutionism are 
embraced by right and left alike; and the hordes camped out on the streets of 
Rio de Janeiro are awaiting the opening of Latin America's first Apple store.

"In the post-historical period," Fukuyama continues, "there will be neither 
art nor philosophy, just the perpetual caretaking of the museum of human 
history. I can feel in myself, and see in others around me, a powerful 
nostalgia for the time when history existed." Doesn't this vision seem exactly 
right? We appear to be losing a clear sense of both our history and our future, 
living in a perpetual present in which we have forgotten that things were 
different in the past and that there are, therefore, alternatives. (A parallel 
can perhaps be drawn with pop: we are in the post-postmodern age of the 
retro-authentic mashup. Contemporary songs - by Adele, Lady Gaga, La Roux - are 
simulacra of those produced in the 60s, 70s and 80s.)

I grew up in the 80s, marching against Thatcher. The left laid into the right. 
In 1990, when I turned 16, John Major became prime minister and the ideological 
clashes of British politics faded out. Major's "back to basics" campaign was 
against highfalutin ideology; a disavowal of politics. (In recent advice to 
Conservative MPs, Major told them to focus less on "ideology" and more on 
"issues that actually worry people in their daily lives". His rejection of the 
hardline right is to be applauded, but since when did daily issues have nothing 
to do with ideology?) Next came the triangulation of Tony Blair, his saintly 
transcendence of left and right; Barack Obama's call for "a declaration of 
independence … from ideology"; and David Cameron saying he "doesn't do isms". 
Politics is now a matter of technocratic optimisation, of doing "what works" 
and "getting the job done". In 2010, even the veteran conviction politician 
Shirley Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shirley-williams> 
praised the coalition government for its pledge to "work together in the 
national interest". "The generation I belong to, steeped in ideology and 
partisan commitment, is passing away," she wrote, commending a new spirit of 
"co-operation" over "the safe, long-established confrontation". While declaring 
that the old polarities no longer pertain, all the main parties have shifted to 
the right.

Meanwhile, the performance of confrontation continues. Popular disaffection 
with mainstream politics manifests as a rejection of its tribal, shouty style. 
PMQs is criticised for being too raucous, but that is a distracting irrelevance 
now that policy differences seem imperceptible. The problem is not 
"divisiveness" but its opposite: the lack of democratic choice.

In the recent commentary on the death of Tony Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-obituary>, he has 
been repeatedly described as one of the final representatives of a sharply 
delineated political culture. "To the modern eye he broke the mould: a brazen, 
aristocratic ideologue in an age of middle-class triangulation and third ways," 
wrote Mark Wallace <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mark-wallace>, an 
editor at ConservativeHome. "But if those things seem so alien today, it's not 
because he was a one-off but because he was the last of his kind." The passing 
of political conviction is accepted as a given whatever one's political 
conviction, but it is the left that stands to lose most.

In The End of History and the Last Man, Fukuyama writes that the "enormously 
productive and dynamic economic world created by advancing technology" has a 
"tremendous homogenising power": global political harmony is the "ultimate 
victory of the VCR". But are consumerism and technology, as he suggests, really 
progressive? The internet came of age at the same time as I did. My 
undergraduate essays were handwritten, but in my third year I sent my first 
email using a green interface called Pine. My childhood correspondence fills 
several cardboard boxes, but during the 1990s the paper trail peters out. 
The rest is on email accounts owned by corporations with infantile names; some 
of those accounts are lost.

Is it an accident that the digital blitzing of boundaries between historical 
eras, work and play, this book and that, is happening at the same time as the 
seeming end of movements of all kinds, both cultural and political? My 
nostalgia for my own childhood is bound up with my nostalgia for political 
opposition and the material written word. I miss history, just as I miss my own 
history, and my childhood visions of the future. In my grander moments I feel 
like an embodiment ofSlavoj Žižek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/slavojzizek>'s Living in the End Times 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844677023>
, meandering mournfully around Spotify and fretting about the left's 
intellectual bankruptcy.

"The modern age was a time when human beings, alone or together, could sculpt 
the marble of history with the hammer of will," writes the writer and activist
Franco "Bifo" Berardi <https://mitpress.mit.edu/authors/franco-bifo-berardi>. 
Today, this has "vanished from sight. There is no longer … a progressive 
temporal dimension."

As modernist housing projects fall into ruin, it is hard to recall the 
sincerity ofTomorrow's World or SF that is not ironically space age or 
steampunk. It is barely possible to articulate a utopia, even (or especially) 
if you are on the left. Is this because of neoliberalism's domination of the 
ideological landscape, or is it that we are in a post-ideological age, of which 
the internet is either a symptom or a cause? When every single person in 
a train carriage is staring at a small illuminated device, it is an almost 
tacky vision of dystopia. Technology – along with turbo-capitalism – seems 
to me to be hastening the cultural and environmental apocalypse. The way I see 
it, digital consumerism makes us too passive to revolt, or to save the world. 
If we accept it as inevitable it will indeed lead to the end of history, in 
more ways than one.

Is the recent challenging of Fukuyama's thesis grounds for new optimism? It is 
still too early to tell. "What is happening to us in the early years of the 
century," Badiou writes, is "something that would appear not to have any clear 
name in any accepted language." Fukuyama himself speculated that the absence of 
idealism and struggle might yet spark their rekindling: "Perhaps this very 
prospect of centuries of boredom at the end of history," he wrote, "will serve 
to get history started once again." There is a glimmer of perverse hope in the 
fact that boredom is a luxury most of us can no longer afford.

• Eliane Glaser's Get Real 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007416820>
 is published by Fourth Estate.
 