
Post Office staff are on strike today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/more-than-300-post-offices-24-hour-walkout-strike>
, protesting at the rolling closure of crown post offices. Some 60 are 
scheduled to go now, with many more expected to follow. More than 2,000 
experienced counter staff will go too. The fine, 100-year-old crown post office 
I know well in Lewes always has long queues, where people talk as they wait – 
but now it’s to be replaced with a counter crammed into the back of a small 
branch of WH Smith. TheCWU says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/post-office-future-strike-cuts>
 that trained Post Office staff will be replaced by lower-paid shop workers.

Here’s why it matters. Post offices are a precious public face of the state, 
the front door to myriad things the state does. Penny-pinching and lack of 
imagination means they have never been well developed commercially, even as the 
mass sending and returning of parcels has become essential to internet 
shopping. Think what else these prime sites could do.

Even schools are no longer plainly part of our public heritage with academy 
chains run and branded by business

But above all, think what they are: the welcoming providers of help, 
information and support. However much we do online we still need a human face: 
someone to ask, someone to explain.Royal Mail has gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/royal-mail-government-sell-remaining-stake-shares>
, and the Queen’s head with it,shockingly undersold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/18/royal-mail-sell-off-undervalued-firm-180-million>
 at a knockdown price. Watch the Post Office ebb away too.

The human face of the state is everywhere in retreat, no longer speaking to 
its citizens. HMRC has closed all its public counters, where people often came 
for help with paying their taxes.Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/22/lambeth-council-closed-libraries-security-guards>
, that great fount of civic knowledge, are closing everywhere, occasionally 
replaced by well-meaning volunteers without the information people need on 
everything from benefit applications to local planning consultations.

Even schools are no longer plainly part of our public heritage, with academy 
chains run and branded by business. As for “free” schools, what are they “free” 
of? Of us, of our councils, of public ownership.

Pools and leisure centres are privatised, costing more, while half of all 
parks, says the Heritage Lottery Fund, have hired out or sold off chunks of 
their estate to private enterprises, making hiring pitches or other resources 
more expensive.

Bus services have been savagely cut back in rural areas as public subsidy is 
slashed. Ticket inspectors are replaced by machines, stations denuded of 
reassuring staff in uniforms. Local museums are closing or sharply reducing 
their opening hours.

Deep police cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/08/theresa-may-police-years-budget-cuts-come>
 means less presence on the street as daily reminders of a sense of order and 
security.Local magistrates courts are shutting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/11/ministry-of-justice-close-86-courts-england-wales>
, so justice is taken a further remove from everyday life.

As the armed forces shrink rapidly, local bases close – bases that used to 
link many communities to the life of the services. Even our air search and 
rescue is now privatised,run by the Bristow Group  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-21934077>– its pilots (Prince William included) 
parasitically trained, of course, by the RAF, not by the company.

Public space is replaced by the growing world of shopping malls: private 
spaces patrolled by private guards, with limited public rights. In that private 
sector, the human face is vanishing too, friendly supermarket checkout staff 
replaced by those damned self-checkouts.

Local banks are closing, leaving just an ATM and online banking. Britain is 
“advanced” in dehumanised services, but it may help explain why polls show we 
are becoming one of the European nationsleast trusting of each other 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/half-the-british-public-dont-trust-the-british-public-survey-finds-10452928.html>
, suspicious and alienated.

The Post Office’s future is in jeopardy – a strike is the only option | Dave 
Ward
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/post-office-future-strike-cuts>
By 2020 the plan is to shrink the state to 33% of GDP. Even if, as before, it 
misses that target and is 35% of GDP, it will become American-sized, far from 
the average of 45% in the EU, where social democratic traditions persist.

The headcount of public employees has already shrunk to just one in five. 
Good, say those who think the state a wastrel and the enemy of enterprise. How 
absurd to resist cuts. What next, bring back the lamp-lighters?

But when does the moment come when the functions of the state are worn too 
thin, too invisible, too impersonal? The veneer of civilisation is perilously 
thin. One by one, they might justify cutting a rural bus with too few 
passengers, a library or post office with low footfall, a museum or pool not 
used enough at certain times. But take it all together, and we lose communal 
space, owned by us all, run for our benefit alone.

Knowing something is there in our community is a reassurance. There is a 
warmth about something being public, for all of us. Even for those who can 
afford to pay, the emotional sense of civic pride is lost when a service 
becomes a privatised transaction. A sense of order and safety depends on plenty 
of public servants behind public counters or in uniforms, comfortingly visible, 
from park keepers to station masters, street cleaners to CSOs. A bouncer in a 
borrowed G4S uniform working for a temp agency, here today and gone tomorrow, 
is no substitute for a civic presence employed by us, working for us.

Goodbye, crown post offices. With you goes a great symbol of what we pay our 
taxes for: who we are, how we access the faceless state, with a friendly chat 
and explanation across the post office counter. The vanishing public realm 
diminishes us all.
 