
Britannia Life, the insurance company, has been fined £500,000 for a string of 
failures linked to pensions mis-selling, one of the largest penalties imposed 
after the scandal.

The Glasgow-based group, a subsidiary of Britannia Building Society, was 
guilty of 'a catalogue of severe problems' including failing to identify 
properly which cases should be reviewed and missing a key deadline for 
compensating victims, said the Personal Investment Authority.

However, in a rare show of defiance, the company hit back at the City 
watchdog, describing the fine as 'excessive' and 'out of all proportion to the 
nature of the problems'.

Britannia is the latest in a long list of companies to be punished for the 
£11bn personal pensions mis-selling debacle, which involved bad ad vice given 
between 1988 and 1994. Many of those affected were wrongly advised by 
commission-hungry sales staff to opt out of company pension schemes and take 
out less advantageous personal plans.

In addition to the £500,000 fine, Britannia has been ordered to pay £15,000 in 
costs. The fine is the fourth largest of more than 220 levied since the end of 
1995. The biggest penalty to date is a £600,000 fine imposed on Sun Life of 
Canada in April 1998, while Brittanic Assurance and London & Manchester were 
each fined £525,000 last year.

The problems came to light during a visit to Britannia Life by PIA staff in 
September. They included: failing to identify accurately which cases should be 
reviewed; 'unacceptable delay' in setting up an adequate system for identifying 
affected investors who had died or retired; failing to act on recommendations 
made by external auditors; and not doing enough to chase up 2,000 possible 
mis-selling victims who had changed address. The company failed to meet a 
deadline of December 31, 1998 for compensation in all its priority cases.

Britannia Life has approximately 500,000 policyholders and assets of £6.7bn. 
Its spokesman, Graham Leftwich, claimed the issues for which it had been 
punished were largely 'procedural shortcom ings' rather than directly affecting 
policyholders.

Out of 500,000 policyholders, just over 19,000 were identified as being 
potentially reviewable, and of that number some 1,300 are likely to receive 
compensation by October this year. 'In that context, we think that £500,00 is 
an excessive amount,' said Mr Leftwich. The PIA rejected Britannia's arguments 
and pointed out that the firm had not appealed.
 