
Workers in the UK will have the worst pensions of any major economy and the 
oldest official retirement age of any country, according to the Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The typical British worker can look forward to a pension worth only 38% of 
their salary, once state and mandatory private pensions are combined, and after 
tax.The Paris-based thinktank 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/social-issues-migration-health/pensions-at-a-glance-2015_pension_glance-2015-en#page30>
 said on Tuesday that this compares with above 90% in the Netherlands and 
Austria and 80% in Spain and Italy.

Only Mexico and Chile offer their workers a worse prospect after retirement, 
although Turkey is the surprise table topper, giving its retirees an average 
pension equal to 105% of average wages, according to theOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> report.

The figures, however, did not include voluntary private pension savings, which 
are substantial in the UK. Once these sums are included, and assuming the 
person pays into a private pension across their working life, the OECD 
estimates the average British worker will retire on 61% of former earnings, 
before tax, or 71% after tax.
The pensions workers are likely to receive as a percentage of their former 
salary 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/pensions_chart/giv-32650x8endMqQFLqd/>
The pensions workers are likely to receive as a percentage of their former 
salary 
Workers in the UK will also have to toil for longer than anywhere else before 
they qualify for a state pension. Over the next two decades, the state pension 
age will move up to 68 in the UK, matched only by Ireland and the Czech 
Republic. In the rest of the developed world, even by the 2050s, the average 
retirement age will have moved up to only 65.5.

The French and the Belgians enjoy the earliest retirement. France is raising 
its state pension age from the current level of 62 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/03/which-best-countries-grow-old-in-pensions-benefits-happiness>
, but widespread early retirement means that, on average, French men and women 
stop work at 59.4 and 59.8 respectively, with the Belgians not far behind.

Koreans labour for longer than workers in any other OECD country. On average, 
men in South Korea work until the age of 72.9, while women do not stop working 
until 70.6.

Britain has begun an auto-enrolment scheme that will offer millions of 
low-paid workers a private pension for the first time. But with contribution 
rates low, the payouts will not be generous. Last week, the chancellor, George 
Osborne, gave employers a six-month delay to planned increases in their 
contribution rates.


Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> expert Tom McPhail, of 
Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “This analysis makes embarrassing reading for the 
politicians who have been responsible for the UK’s pensions over the past 25 
years.

“The state pension was in steady decline for years. Even though it is 
improving for lower earners now, average payouts will not be rising. It is in 
the private sector though where the real damage has been done; the collapse in 
final salary pensions has not yet been replaced with well-funded alternatives.”

The huge increase in the number of self-employed people in the UK is worsening 
the outlook for pensions. More than 4.5 million people are now self-employed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/12/uk-self-employment-capital-western-europe-ippr-recovery>
, up 1.5 million in the past 13 years, with many in low-paid and precarious 
work, and few paying into a pension.

Research by Prudential to be published on Thursday reveals that just one in 10 
self-employed people is making contributions into a private pension, with most 
saying they simply can’t afford it.

Vince Smith-Hughes of Prudential, said: “There has been a fundamental shift in 
the way people work in recent years, with the number of self-employed workers 
increasing by nearly 40% since 2001. But the step away from the security of 
salaried work also sees many workers giving up the benefits of company pension 
schemes and employer contributions.” Self-employed workers do not come under 
the government’s auto-enrolment scheme.

The OECD notes a striking change across the globe in the number of workers 
aged 55 to 64 who are remaining in work. In Germany, the employment rate for 
people in this age group has jumped from 45% to 66% over the past decade; it 
has risen from 31% to 46% in Italy.

 While many European countries offer significantly better pensions than in 
Britain, the cost is now close to sustainable, said the OECD. In recent years, 
there have been frequent warnings about the “demographic timebomb” that will 
wreck the finances of ageing European nations.

But the OECD said: “The combination of higher pension ages, fewer options for 
early retirement, changes in the way benefits are calculated and more people 
working and contributing longer has greatly improved the financial 
sustainability of pay-as-you-go pension systems.” It said that the burden of 
paying pensions would rise from the current level of 9% of GDP to just 10.1% by 
2050, with some countries even seeing reductions in spending.


 * This article was amended on 7 December 2015 to clarify that the main 
figures compared countries based on state pension plus mandatory private 
pension savings. It did not include voluntary private pension savings which, 
once included, sees the OECD estimate that UK workers will retire on 61% of 
former earnings. It was further amended on 8 December to clarify that the 38% 
figure represented net pension rates; that the 61% figure was gross and applied 
to the average British worker, and to include its net calculation of 71%.  