
One of the major shrines to the Brontë family is facing closure and sale 
because of budget cuts and recession – a combination that almost did for its 
wealthy owner in the days of Charlotte, Emily and Anne.

The Red House in Gomersal <http://www.bronte-country.com/redhse.html>, in West 
Yorkshire's "heavy woollen district", is targeted inprovisional savings drawn 
up by Kirklees district council 
<http://www2.kirklees.gov.uk/news/onlinenews/newsdesk/fullstory.aspx?id=4123>, 
which is having to find savings of £64m in what councillors describe as "the 
most difficult financial landscape in living memory".

The proposal has triggered uproar led by the Brontë Society 
<http://www.bronte.info/> which is appealing for supporters to lobby the 
council to change its mind. The Red House, a handsome early Georgian mansion 
built of brick in the largely millstone grit area between Huddersfield, 
Dewsbury and Bradford, played a significant part in Charlotte Brontë's youth.

She described visits to the rich but radical family of Joshua Taylor as "one 
of the most rousing pleasures I have ever known", and modelled her classic 
Yorkshireman Hiram Yorke inShirley <http://www.classicreader.com/book/1735/4/> 
on the textile manufacturer and banker. Taylor's daughter Mary was one of her 
closest friends and a robustly feminist critic. When Charlotte became famous 
and appeared to argue that only unmarried women should seek work, Mary, who had 
emigrated to run a successful shop in New Zealand, rounded on her as "a coward 
and a traitor".

The director of the Brontë Parsonage at Haworth, Andrew McCarthy, said the 
proposal had come as a shock, along with other suggested cuts including reduced 
hours atOakwell Hall <http://www.friendsofoakwellhall.org.uk/>, another 
Kirklees museum that plays an important part in Shirley.

"We appreciate the challenges faced by local authorities in terms of balancing 
the budgets at the moment but this does seem a pretty drastic step that can be 
made in haste and repented at leisure," he said. "There are very few buildings 
which combine Brontë history and Brontë fiction in the way Red House does. It 
would be a huge loss."

A petition has also been launched to present to the council, which is not 
controlled by any one party and has seen cross-party negotiations over the 
coming budget. Kirklees's wellbeing and communities directorate, whose 
portfolio includes museums, has to make 19% savings from £129m spent last year 
to £105m. Councillors will decide the issue on 22 February.

Closure of the Red House in September would make a full-year saving of 
£116,000 with sale of the site an additional, one-off capital receipt, probably 
of around £750,000. The museum has won a raft of prizes, from Sandford 
educational awards to Loo of the Year, but drew only 28,602 visitors last year 
and fewer than 1,000 children in school parties.

Taylor almost lost the house himself in 1826 when his private bank went under 
without any hope of a government buyout to help it. He recovered by dint of his 
own efforts and a reputation, also ascribed to Yorke in Shirley, for helping 
his own workers find alternatives when his mill was forced into lay-offs during 
a recession.
 