
Spoiler alert: this blog contains details from the pilot episode of Sneaky 
Pete, which is available to view free onAmazon Prime Instant Video 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B012W5V04A?ie=UTF8&keywords=sneaky%20pete&qid=1438950728&ref_=sr_1_1&s=instant-video&sr=1-1>

In Breaking Bad, he was the one who knocks. Then, with his armful of best 
actor Emmys and a last-gaspGolden Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/12/golden-globes-breaking-bad-bbc-tv-netflix>
, Bryan Cranston knocked TV on the head, cashing in on the sustained critical 
hoopla surrounding BB’s lopped-in-half final season to rack up some movie 
roles. He was a sporadic goodie in the sporadically goodGodzilla update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/15/godzilla-review-scary-monsters-boring-humans>
, and a roaring baddie in the roaringly badTotal Recall reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/30/total-recall-review>.


Now Cranston is back on TV with Sneaky Pete. While it feels as if his return 
to the small screen should be a big deal, the reality is a little more mundane. 
Sneaky Pete isn’t so much a Cranston vehicle as Cranston’s baby: he co-created 
the show with David Shore (the man behind mega-hitHouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house>) and has helped to shepherd 
Sneaky Pete through the slings and arrows of TV development. In the pilot 
episode – available to watch free now on Amazon Prime Instant Video in the US, 
the UK and Germany – Cranston also makes a belated but impactful appearance to 
remind us all that Walter White knows more than a little about screen chemistry.


Cranston might attract the headlines here, but the actual Sneaky Pete is 
played byGiovanni Ribisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/apr/16/comment.akinojumu>. Except he’s 
not really called Pete, he’s imprisoned conman Maris, who owes $100,000 to the 
wrong sort of people. With his release from prison looming, he urgently needs 
somewhere to lay low that has no connection to his previous life. After three 
years listening to his long-serving cellmate Pete reminisce about idyllic 
summer holidays on a remote farm owned by kin he hasn’t seen for 20 years, a
Martin Guerre <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Guerre>-ish idea begins to 
form in Maris’s mind.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLiHCtexwuZg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLiHCtexwuZg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLiHCtexwuZg&media=>
 Sneaky Pete trailer 
On his release, he strikes out to reconnect with Pete’s long-lost grandparents 
to the sleazy strains ofEels’ Fresh Blood 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4Qp1TEKswQ>. After appearing on their 
doorstep, Maris ingratiates himself into the lives of a close-knit, hard-up 
clan that includes pensive single mother Julia (Marin Ireland, who recently 
turned up inGirls <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> as Hannah’s 
ice-cold classmate Logan) and, rather less promisingly, a local cop. Under the 
homely but watchful eye of matriarch Audrey (Margo Martindale), “Pete” finds 
himself roped into helping out with the family business. They are veteran 
bail-bond agents currently short of a reliable skip tracer, so the unreformed 
conman becomes an apprentice bounty hunter tracking down skedaddling suspects, 
a task to which his shady skills are surprisingly well suited.

As pilots go, it is a hooky concept with – and you suspect the House-y 
influence of Shore here – an easily repeatable procedural element: Pete and 
Julia could chase down a different fugitive each week, while the burning fuse 
of Maris’s grand deception sparks ominously in the background as he grows 
ever-more attached to his surrogate family. A solid framework, then – and 
Ribisi is surprisingly good. Despite his varied career, he is still remembered 
as Phoebe’s oddball brother Frank Jr in Friends, and, for a long time in 
movies, he seemed typecast as the pathetic little brother who gets in over his 
head and has to be bailed out by more capable outlaws, such asNicolas Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/aug/04/culture.peterbradshaw> or Mark 
Wahlberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/15/contraband-review>.

But, in Sneaky Pete, Ribisi finds a natural outlet for his slightly ratty, 
fast-talking energy – being a successful con artist sometimes involves making 
the mark feel sorry for you, or superior, and he plays it beautifully. Maris is 
instinctive, street-smart and even capable of being suave, but once each of his 
impromptu performances is over, his features set into something a little sadder 
– and that’s even before he finds out that the brother he left behind is 
potentially at risk if he can’t come up with the money he owes.

Will we get to see any more of Sneaky Pete? If Netflix’s preferred model is to 
release an entire season in one big binge-worthy batch whether it was asked for 
or not – and did anyone really want a third season ofHemlock Grove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/10/netflix-hemlock-grove-eli-roth>? 
– Amazon’s forays into original programming have so far favoured the 
traditional pilot method. Sneaky Pete was originally developed at CBS before 
Amazon scooped it up, and while it has launched it with a decent fanfare – 
alongside another pilot,the Diego Luna-starring period romp Casanova 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYgF31OIFpE> – it will depend on Amazon Prime 
subscribers watching, rating and reviewing favourably, and in decent numbers, 
before there’s even a chance of it going to a series. Even with Cranston’s 
considerable rep behind it, the fate of Sneaky Pete will be decided by cold, 
hard data – and even the talented Maris can’t con an algorithm.

Will you be watching the Sneaky Pete pilot? Let us know in the comments below 
 