
Breaking Bad star Bryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston> is to star in a new 
10-part science fiction series on Channel 4, called Electric Dreams: The World 
of Philip K Dick, fromBattlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/battlestar-galactica>’s Ronald D Moore.


Cranston, recently seen on the big screen in Oscar-nominated Trumbo, will 
executive produce and star in the series based on the celebrated sci-fi 
author’s work.

‘Every country has its fearmongers’ – Bryan Cranston on Trumbo and Hollywood’s 
blacklist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/04/every-country-has-its-fearmongers-bryan-cranston-on-trumbo-and-hollywoods-blacklist>
Each episode will be a standalone drama adapted and made contemporary by a 
team of British and American writers, “both illustratingPhilip K Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philipkdick>’s prophetic vision and 
celebrating the enduring appeal of his work”.

Dick’s sci-fi novels have long been adapted for both TV and film, including Do 
Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? which became Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner; We 
Can Remember It For You Wholesale, which was adapted as Total Recall with 
Arnold Schwarzenegger; and Minority Report, which became the film of the same 
name directed by Steven Spielberg. Another,The Man in the High Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle-amazon-prime-nazis-philip-k-dick>
, was recently adapted by Ridley Scott for US on-demand service, Amazon Prime.

Cranston said: “This is an electric dream come true. We are so thrilled to be 
able to explore and expand upon the evergreen themes found in the incredible 
work of this literary master.”

Moore, who reimagined 1970s sci-fi series Battlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/battlestar-galactica> to much acclaim, 
will write and executive produce the series along with Michael Dinner 
(Justified, Masters of Sex) which will be made by Sony Pictures Television.

“As a long-time fan of Philip K Dick’s work, it’s a tremendous honour and 
thrill to be part of this series,” he said. “His short stories are a 
treasure-trove of material for artists to draw from and I think this will be a 
very exciting project.”

Channel 4 chief creative officer, Jay Hunt, said: “Philip K Dick’s short 
stories have shaped iconic Hollywood films from Blade Runner toMinority Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/minority-report>. Electric Dreams: The World 
of Philip K Dick will adapt and modernise his singular vision for a TV 
audience. We are thrilled to be partnering with the talented team at Sony 
Pictures Television on an anthology series that brings together global stars of 
the calibre of Bryan Cranston and Ronald D Moore.”

Channel 4’s sci-fi series Humans, starring Katherine Parkinson, Gemma Chan and 
William Hurt, was the channel’sbiggest original drama hit for 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/22/humans-becomes-channel-4s-biggest-drama-hit-in-20-years>
 and will return for a second series later this year.

Charlie Brooker’s Black Mirror was another Channel 4 sci-fi hit, but it will 
not return to the station after it was bought up my Netflix, much to the 
broadcaster’s chagrin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/29/netflix-channel-4-charlie-brooker-black-mirror>
.

Another of the new show’s executive producers is Dick’s daughter, Isa Dick 
Hackett, who also worked on The Man in the High Castle.

“I’m thrilled to be working with this exceptional team to bring my father’s 
short stories to life,” she said.

“Often the source for big, high concept feature films, these short stories 
represent some of the most dazzling conceptual work of his career, and the fact 
that they will be adapted by such a diverse set of creative voices is truly an 
honour.”
 