
The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> has been awarded a 66% pay 
rise to fund a £369m 10-year refit of Buckingham Palace, after the prime 
minister and chancellor agreed that an increase in the sovereign grant was the 
best way to fund urgent repairs.

Officials warned there was a risk of a potential “catastrophic building 
failure” if the repairs were not carried out, but backbench Labour and Scottish 
National party politicians questioned why the monarch was getting so much more 
money at a time of austerity.

Queen asked for poverty grant to heat palaces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/sep/24/queen-poverty-grant-buckingham-palace>
The refurbishment, the biggest undertaken on the property since the second 
world war, will renew the palace’s 33-year-old boilers, 100 miles of electrical 
cable, some of it 60 years old, and 20 miles of lead and cast iron pipework.

The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> will not move out; it had 
been previously thought she would.

Labour’s MP for Stockton North, Alex Cunningham, said the plans highlighted 
the disparity in public funding between the south of England and the 
north-east. “I have always respected the fact that we have a royal family, but 
I know they also have vast wealth and I don’t know what sort of contributions 
they will be making towards this project,” he said.

SNP MP Paul Monaghan said it was incredible that the government was ready to 
spend such large sums on Buckingham Palace while seeking to cut the number of 
Scotland’s MPs from 59 to 53 in part to save money.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149207a719d48ede87f80b096a4ffd8718e260e3%2F0_103_2537_1522%2F2537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buckingham%20Palace%20to%20undergo%20'essential'%20%C2%A3370m%20refurbishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buckingham%20Palace%20to%20undergo%20%27essential%27%20%C2%A3370m%20refurbishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149207a719d48ede87f80b096a4ffd8718e260e3%2F0_103_2537_1522%2F2537.jpg>
 Buckingham Palace’s 28-year-old trade yard electrical panel, which staff say 
is proving increasingly difficult to find replacement parts for. Photograph: 
Buckingham Palace/PA 
Another SNP MP Hannah Bardell said: “The irony is just today the Tory 
government was debating whether to cut the number of elected representatives in 
a cost-saving measure. While steps should be taken to maintain and restore such 
buildings, I’m sure many will find it hard to grasp the millions available to 
restore Buckingham Palace when Tory cuts are leaving the poorest in our society 
to suffer.

“The Tories should have brought this matter to the House so the details can be 
properly scrutinised and debated, rather than making it to the press”.

Once the most urgent work has been completed, further work will be undertaken 
on a wing-by-wing basis, beginning with the familiar east wing, which faces the 
Mall.


By phasing the work over 10 years from April 2017, events such as the garden 
parties, investitures, state visits and changing the guard will be unaffected.


The announcement comes at a time when MPs are considering a £4bn plan for 
renovations and repairs at the Palace of Westminster.

If the Queen can’t pay the bills, why not sell a palace or two? | David McClure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/02/queen-buckingham-palace-public-150m-repair-bill>
Royal officials said the refurbishment would “future-proof” Buckingham Palace. 
Tony Johnstone-Burt, master of the Queen’s household, said: “On completion of 
the work, we’ll have a palace fit for purpose until 2067.”


 David Gauke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said ministers would hold 
the royal household to account to ensure “every penny spent achieves the 
greatest value for money”.


The sovereign grant is the funding formula under which the Queen normally 
receives 15% of the annual profit from the crown estate. The trustees recommend 
she receive 25% for the 10 years the work is taking place and the grant should 
be returned to 15% when building work is finished in 2027.

Conscious of the possibility of adverse public reaction to the enormous cost 
in times of austerity, one source indicated it was hoped it would appeal to 
peoples’s “sense of nationhood”.

Though the palace is the venue for glittering state occasions, royal officials 
have long complained of the crumbling building and the need for it to be 
updated. Examples include a chunk of masonry falling from the front facade 
several years ago and narrowly missing the Princess Royal’s car and staff 
reportedly resorting to catching rainwater in buckets to save art works. Last 
year, when a workman tried to carry out repairs to the Queen’s private 
chain-pull toilet, the whole structure reportedly came away from the wall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99abddefcfb37f59b103abaf80d58362a1424bd%2F0_108_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buckingham%20Palace%20to%20undergo%20'essential'%20%C2%A3370m%20refurbishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buckingham%20Palace%20to%20undergo%20%27essential%27%20%C2%A3370m%20refurbishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbuckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99abddefcfb37f59b103abaf80d58362a1424bd%2F0_108_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Some of the ground drainage – a mixture of lead and cast iron pipework. 
Photograph: Handout/Buckingham Palace via Getty Imag 
The Queen spends one third of her working year at Buckingham Palace, which is 
effectively her administrative headquarters, even though it is her least 
favourite royal residence. Dating back to the 17th century, the palace has 775 
rooms, including 19 state rooms, 52 royal and guest bedrooms, 188 staff 
bedrooms, 92 offices and 78 bathrooms. First used as a palace by Queen 
Victoria, it has not been redecorated since 1952.

About 300 staff work in the palace and up to 125 will move into temporary 
accommodation in the garden during the refurbishment. Among fixtures and 
fittings to be replaced will be 5,000 light fittings and 2,500 radiators.

The occupied royal palaces are held in trust for the nation and are not owned 
by the Queen, with the cost of maintaining them borne by the taxpayer. The 
royal household has been criticised in the past by MPs on the public accounts 
committee for “not looking after nationally important heritage properties 
adequately”.

Helen Goodman, Labour MP and member of the Treasury committee, said the timing 
of the announcement was bad. “The government has stopped providing grants for 
the building of social housing to rent and yet can give a straightforward grant 
to Buckingham Palace,” she said.


Graham Smith, of anti-monarchy campaign Republic, described the cost as an 
absolute disgrace. “The obvious question is why have the royals let it get into 
this state? Why haven’t they raised revenue through opening up all year round? 
If the royals can’t look after the buildings and raise their own revenue to 
fund maintenance it’s time to give them up.
 