
New year, new tenuously legitimate diet rooted in spirituality. The Buddha 
diet is one of January’s horde. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/food/shrink-the-window-of-eating-and-maybe-ill-shrink-too/2016/12/30/dd927870-cd1e-11e6-b8a2-8c2a61b0436f_story.html?utm_term=.657511d517b5>
 Ostensibly rooted in sensible, restrictive eating, it’s also one of the latest 
examples of consumer society co-opting asceticism to sell stuff. The book 
Buddha’s Diet is climbing bestseller lists; Buddha bowls, the once left-field 
food-truck lunches, are coming to Marks & Spencer (branded as nourish bowls); 
and the 15-strong chain of Buddha Bars has just celebrated its 20th 
anniversary. Nothing, it seems, is safe from this blasphemous gravy train.

“It’s hardly surprising that people are trying to sell things attached to the 
concept ofBuddhism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/buddhism>,” says 
Singhamanas, who was ordained into the Triratna Buddhist order in 2012 and now 
works at the London Buddhist Centre. “It’s the idea that something can give you 
peace, ease, energy – something mysterious, something holy but not religious.”

Semantically, it’s a logical next step on from mindfulness, which has mutated 
from meditative practice to a post-lunch app, and gone mass. Accountability 
lies with the “clever PR gurus” who have cottoned on to this, says Singhamanas. 
“In this economic system, all it takes is someone to apply that word to 
something and it suddenly seems very attractive.”

Tucked away, though, there is method here. The co-author of Buddha’s Diet, Dan 
Zigmond, is an ordained monk, and intermittent fasting has always been key to 
Buddhism. Given our propensity towards extremes “Buddha’s ‘middle way’ of 
moderation might have particular relevance” now, he suggests. It’s a good diet: 
avoid processed foods, eat more protein, dine slowly and not late. There are 
even cheat days when you can gorge, so forgiving is the religion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbuddha-branding-buddhists-religion-philosophy-year-anxious%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5636c7c2d9e49bab07576583965cf5d4c42e7ad2%2F0_80_2153_1292%2F2153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buddha%20branding%20is%20everywhere%20%E2%80%93%20but%20what%20do%20Buddhists%20think%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbuddha-branding-buddhists-religion-philosophy-year-anxious%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buddha%20branding%20is%20everywhere%20%E2%80%93%20but%20what%20do%20Buddhists%20think%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbuddha-branding-buddhists-religion-philosophy-year-anxious%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5636c7c2d9e49bab07576583965cf5d4c42e7ad2%2F0_80_2153_1292%2F2153.jpg>
 Going mainstream … a Buddha bowl 
In fairness, Buddhism has long had healthy eating nailed. The Buddha effigy – 
cuddly, pot-bellied – is actually a 1,000-year-old Chinese monk. “The real 
Buddha was quite fit,” says Zigmond. Equally, Buddha Bowls (vegetarian medleys 
in, yes, bowls) have authenticity, being loosely based on the practice ofōryōki 
– meditative eating – and the bowls are modelled on Buddha’s head.

As you might expect from a Buddhist, Singhamanas is relatively tolerant about 
the rebranding. “Most Buddhists are pretty easy-going – I haven’t heard anyone 
pontificating over M&S ,” he says, “but it might be a little misleading.”

He is more offended by the chain of Buddha Bars. Named, it is thought, because 
the original space was not dissimilar to a temple and the music played to 
customers considered to be “Zen-like”, there was a small outcry, some protests 
in Jakarta and blacking out of the bar’s CDs in Dubai over fears of idolatry. 
To Singhamanas “it’s not ethical. Buddhism promotes clarity and awareness, 
something the alcohol industry isn’t exactly behind.” Equally, consumerism is 
contradictory to the basic tenet of Buddhism: the idea of ending suffering 
through detachment. James Shaheen, editor of Tricycle: The Buddhist Review, 
agrees: “If you’re selling something a buyer doesn’t really need, it helps to 
imbue it with some promise of spiritual fulfilment or peace. It works for the 
seller. The buyer often regrets it.”

So why now, why 2017? One could blame post-Brexit vote/pre-Trump anxiety. 
“Judging by the number of people coming through the doors now, I’d say people 
aren’t looking forward to the new year,” says Singhamanas. “With regards to 
politics and the environment, they are feeling apprehensive and are looking for 
something to ground them.” He’s sceptical as to whether a healthy snack from 
M&S can save us from existential crisis: “If a bowl were able to give you all 
that – if it were that easy – I wouldn’t be doing what I’m doing.”
 