
You get an interesting reaction if you tell people in Buenos Aires that you’re 
going for a cocktail at Los Galgos, a small corner bar on a busy street a few 
blocks from the city’s courthouses. They will either offer a knowing nod of 
approval or, if they remember it in its former incarnation, a look of 
incredulity.

As one of the city’s historic cafes, Los Galgos – with its 1930s wood 
panelling and tarnished mirrors – was part of a dying breed. One by one, from 
Cafe Richmond to Bar Británico, these old haunts have been shutting down. 
Cortado coffees and cheese-and-ham toasted sandwiches just don’t bring in 
enough income to cover the overheads any more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c5d7c1edc959f4cb6e63a3b1b124fb202d98052%2F0_750_3744_4319%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buenos%20Aires%E2%80%99%20new%20cocktail%20bars%20look%20back%20to%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buenos%20Aires%E2%80%99%20new%20cocktail%20bars%20look%20back%20to%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c5d7c1edc959f4cb6e63a3b1b124fb202d98052%2F0_750_3744_4319%2F3744.jpg>
 Los Galgos 
Until recently, Los Galgos <https://www.facebook.com/LosGalgosBarNotable/> 
(Avenida Callao 501) seemed to be facing the same fate. But new ownership and a 
new business plan have brought it back to life. Now, instead of closing in the 
early evening when the court workers go home, it opens its arms to a very 
different crowd. By day, elderly men still put the world to rights over their 
morningmedia luna (croissant); by night, it’s all about the cocktails.

Los Galgos’ cocktail menu is typical of a growing niche of Buenos Aires bars 
where martinis and Manhattans are being pushed aside for something more local. 
One house special is El Pato, a potent mix of sweet and dry vermouth, gin, 
Campari, Cointreau and kirsch, which was invented in 1954 by Argentina’s most 
famous bartenders, Salvatore “Pichin” Policastro, who used it to win that 
year’s world cocktail championship in Switzerland.

“We have been working to reintroduce our roots and flavours,” says Renato 
“Tato” Giovannoni, one of the city’s leading bar entrepreneurs who is working 
to revive local classics, albeit with his own twist. “A new generation 
understands that, having a big cocktail tradition ourselves, we don’t need to 
copy what someone else is doing in New York.”

Giovannoni runs Florería Atlántico <http://floreriaatlantico.com.ar/> (Arroyo 
872), a bar entered via a “secret” staircase at the back of a shop selling wine 
and flowers . He also makes the country’s first premium gin, Principe de los 
Apostoles, which uses botanicals includingyerba mate, the basis of the 
country’s ubiquitous tea. His Balestrini negroni, named after his grandfather, 
takes this gin and gives it a thoroughly modern makeover, with seawater and 
smoked eucalyptus leaves, and serves it in an individual glass bottle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcaa6a905db88923ff81bd548c9fb054b4e0906%2F0_108_1654_992%2F1654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buenos%20Aires%E2%80%99%20new%20cocktail%20bars%20look%20back%20to%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buenos%20Aires%E2%80%99%20new%20cocktail%20bars%20look%20back%20to%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbuenos-aires-new-cocktail-bars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcaa6a905db88923ff81bd548c9fb054b4e0906%2F0_108_1654_992%2F1654.jpg>
 Florería Atlántico 
Nowhere does nostalgia quite like Buenos Aires. Other places tapping into the 
past include the dimly lit, jazz-soundtrackedVerne Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/VerneClub/> (Medrano 1475), and Doppelgänger 
<http://doppelganger.com.ar/> (Juan de Garay 500), a bar beloved by bartenders, 
and so serious about good spirits that it won’t serve beer.

So, why go for a cosmopolitan, when you can try a clarito? If you’re not sure 
what that involves, ask the bartender. They’ll be happy to enlighten you.

Buenos Aires’ second cocktail festival, BA Cóctel <http://bacoctel.com.ar/> , 
runs from 15-22 May in 50 bars around the city. The trip was provided by 
Journey Latin America with accommodation atHotel Clásico 
<http://www.hotelclasico.com/> (rooms from £87). Journey Latin America has a 
five-night stay in Buenos Aires from £875pp, including flights, transfers and 
B&B accommodation in a mid-range hotel (020-8600 1881,journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk/>)



 