
It was compared to everything from a bike helmet to a potty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/17/go-kart-helmet-potty-alternative-uses-for-zaha-hadids-olympic-stadium>
, and allowed to spiral to almost double its budget, before being 
unceremoniously scrapped and declared a national embarrassment.Zaha Hadid’s 
futuristic design for Tokyo’s 2020 Olympic stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/17/the-troubled-history-of-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-project>
 would have swaggered through the historic Meiji Park like a glossy white 
stormtrooper, breaching local building codes and leaving the city with a costly 
white elephant. But are the alternative proposals, finally unveiled this week, 
any better?

After Hadid’s heady vision, the two new designs might seem a bit 
bargain-basement. One looks like an undercooked fried egg – a wobbly white roof 
with a gelatinous, albumeny middle. The other looks like a pile of salad plates 
cleared away before anyone had finished, with bits of lettuce poking out from 
between the stack of saucers.

But both are significantly slimmer and cheaper than Hadid’s design – around 
153bn yen (£835m), as opposed to 252bn yen (£1.3bn) – and they appear to be 
models of a lighter-weight, low-key approach that would fit better with the 
parkland setting. Anonymously released as Design A and Design B, but believed 
to be the work of celebrated Japanese architectsKengo Kuma <http://kkaa.co.jp/> 
andToyo Ito <http://www.toyo-ito.co.jp/>, both are titled Stadium in a Forest 
and make prominent use of wooden construction, in contrast to Hadid’s hefty 
steel arches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07b4f260823b5befda2b4f0999e9533dd8e142f5%2F0_0_818_259%2F818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg!%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg%21%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07b4f260823b5befda2b4f0999e9533dd8e142f5%2F0_0_818_259%2F818.jpg>
 Design A … a stack of salad plates? Illustration: Japan Sports Council 
Scheme A (which looks like the work of Kuma to me) has a roof supported by a 
dense lattice of exposed timber trusses. If well-detailed it could be a 
magnificent thing, forming a cat’s cradle of interlocking beams above 
spectators’ heads and recalling the intricate complexity of Japanese joinery. 
It would be a first for any contemporary stadium, which usually rely on steel 
and stretchy skins of PVC and ETFE, and a welcome nod to the country’s building 
traditions.

From outside, its seating terraces look like slender piles of plates, 
supported on rings of raked columns with the air of a traditional Japanese 
temple, while the whole thing is garnished with greenery. It’s too early to 
tell whether it will be token sprigs or full-sized trees (as some views 
suggest), but it could enable the park to reclaim the structure after the 
Olympics, engulfing it with greenery.

Scheme B looks more like it was born on Planet Ito. It has the Pritzker 
prize-winning architect’s trademark amoebic geometries, with an undulating 
white steel roof that ripples over the seating bowl, like a toned-down version 
ofSANAA’s entry to the original stadium competition 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/7f/b3/16/7fb3161785409230d437efff1293d716.jpg>
. A colonnade of majestic timber columns march around the perimeter, supporting 
the roof that flares out like a peaked sailor’s cap. The whole thing is 
proposed to be sheathed in a full-height skin of glass, bringing all the usual 
metaphors of transparency and reflection, and allowing the structure to 
“dissolve into the park”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2442b2a9111e0723a06596a1210d7b77a26e8ea%2F0_0_818_213%2F818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg!%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg%21%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2442b2a9111e0723a06596a1210d7b77a26e8ea%2F0_0_818_213%2F818.jpg>
 Design B … a sailor’s hat? Illustration: Japan Sports Council 
Whether covering a stadium in plants or glass offers more potential for it to 
disappear is debatable – and perhaps irrelevant, given that any Olympic stadium 
will be very visible indeed, no matter what rhetorical flourishes the 
architects try and achieve. Design B could be ethereal, or it could look like a 
lumpen IMAX cinema.Design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> A 
could be a wondrous wooden tree-house, or a half-baked idea disguised with 
garden trellis.

Local reaction has been lukewarm so far. “Both designs have a mundane 
appearance,” Yasuhiro Kimura, a 34-year-old out jogging near the construction 
site on Monday, told theJapan Times 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2015/12/15/national/new-olympic-stadium-designs-draw-praise-critics-fail-excite-public/#.VnE26BqLRwA>
. “I can’t tell one from the other.” “They don’t have the characteristics 
particular to Tokyo,” added 16-year-old Akihiro Mori, a high school baseball 
player, in a disapproving tone.

Such reactions hit on the eternal existential nub of any Olympic stadium 
design: people expect them to be dazzlingly iconic, the pride of the nation 
capable of seducing the global TV audience at the opening – yet they also 
insist they must be built at a cut-price cost with as little impact on the 
context as possible. The two rarely go hand in hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420bc6cd99075b833bd7eec1cfda6badb35f4df1%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg!%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg%21%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F420bc6cd99075b833bd7eec1cfda6badb35f4df1%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Intergalactic bike helmet … Zaha Hadid’s cancelled stadium design. 
Illustration: Uncredited/Japan Sports Council 
Both Kuma and Ito are eminently capable. They understand the Tokyo context – 
and they both signed the petition to halt Hadid’s plan, lending the latest 
competition an unfortunate backstabbing air. When Hadid’s scheme was first 
unveiled, it was met with a blistering assault from the Japanese architectural 
community. Arata Isozaki, architect of Barcelona’s Olympic stadium, described 
Hadid’s project as a “monumental mistake” and warned it would be a “disgrace to 
future generations”. In a lengthy open letter to the Japan Sports Council, the 
government body in charge of plans for the 2020 games, he railed against the 
“distorted” process that had led to “a dull, slow form, like a turtle waiting 
forJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> to sink so that it can swim 
away”.

Ito was more measured in his criticism, choosing to quietly work up an 
alternative proposal 
<http://www.designboom.com/architecture/meiji-jingu-gaien-stadium-petition-zaha-hadid-tokyo-olympics-05-14-2014/>
 that would have incorporated the original 1964 Olympic stadium, a 
54,000-capacity venue already on the site. He argued it could be upgraded and 
reused, just as successful refurbishments had been made to theOlympiastadion 
<http://www.olympiastadion-berlin.de/en.html> in Berlin, host of the 1936 
Games, and to theMemorial Coliseum 
<http://www.lacoliseum.com/index.php/coliseum-history/> in Los Angeles, Olympic 
host in 1932 and 1984. His alternative could have been the best option of all – 
if the structure hadn’t already been reduced to a pile of rubble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad54adb7c77b11a88d789205af23a45c919e2701%2F0_0_3007_1566%2F3007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg!%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bye%20bye%20Zaha%2C%20hello%20fried%20egg%21%20New%20designs%20unveiled%20for%20Tokyo%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Ftokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad54adb7c77b11a88d789205af23a45c919e2701%2F0_0_3007_1566%2F3007.jpg>
 Cat’s cradle of timber … Design A features a lattice roof of exposed wooden 
trusses. Illustration: Japan Sport Council/AFP/Getty Images 
As for Hadid, her practice is bitterly disappointed at the way they have been 
treated.They had always maintained that the spiralling costs were a result of 
rising construction costs in Tokyo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/18/zaha-hadid-abandons-plans-2020-tokyo-olympics>
, not their design.

“It is disappointing that the government did not even consider working with 
the existing design team to build on the two years of design work they and the 
Japanese people had invested,” said a spokesman for the practice. “The rules of 
entry to the new competition restricted the existing design team, as well as 
many other Japanese and international architects and contractors that wished to 
take part, from entering. There are now serious risks of a rushed process, with 
no certainty on the likely construction costs of the stadium, and that it may 
not be ready in time or deliver a significant sporting legacy without expensive 
conversion after the 2020 Games.”

The risks are real, and the whole process has been a sorry but familiar saga. 
Originally intended to host the 2019 Rugby World Cup, the new stadium now won’t 
be ready in time. But, whichever option they choose, I’m looking forward to 
seeing what could be the first wooden Olympic stadium in history. As long as 
they go easy on the fireworks.

 