 The Conservative party conference will find it hard to leave the past behind 
today after being overshadowed by three controversial Tory diaries - the latest 
of which shows the admiration a former Tory minister had for Tony Blair's chief 
spin merchant.
After the revelations of Edwina Currie and Jeffrey Archer, the latest shock 
last night came in the form of former minister Alan Clark's claim that Tony 
Blair's chief spin doctorAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> tried to convince him 
to leave the Tories and offered him a peerage.

The former defence minister, who died in 1999, wrote in his diaries, which 
have been released by Mr Clark's wife, Jane, and serialised in The Times, that 
in 1995, Mr Campbell said to him: "Why don't you come over?"

Mr Clark claims to have replied that he might leave the Tory party if they put 
in [Michael] Heseltine as Conservative leader.

In 1998, Mr Clark, who was disillusioned with William Hague as Conservative 
leader, wrote: "Gratifyingly, Alastair [Campbell] came on the phone for 35 
minutes on Friday night (twice offering me a peerage incidentally).

In 1992, he wrote: "The polls this morning are bad, very bad, each showing 5 
per cent Labour lead.

". . . Intriguingly the lunch yesterday with Alastair [Campbell] opened, just 
by a chink, the possibility of a semi-alignment with Kinnock - 'the other side' 
Whew!"

Mr Campbell last night denied the claims by Mr Clark, serialised in the Times. 

He told the newspaper: "I have a vague memory of him saying he might defect if 
Heseltine became leader but you could never be sure when he was being serious 
and when he was joking. He was certainly joking if he says I offered him a 
peerage."

More details of Lord Archer's experiences in prison were revealed today in the 
first extract from his prison diaries. In them he likened conditions to those 
of Turkey or Kosovo. And he wrote of the time when he was first strip searched 
for drugs and razors under an arc light with a camera.

He also described how he was placed in a hospital wing on his first night. "I 
later learn that most first-time offenders spend their first night in the 
medical centre because it is during your initial 24 hours in prison that you 
are most likely to try to commit suicide. The door of my cell slams behind me 
and I begin to understand why."

Lord Archer's decision to write his diary and allow it to be serialised in the 
Daily Mail during the Tory conference can only guarantee that, yet again, his 
genius for generating publicity will work to the disadvantage of the party for 
which he worked so hard.

Normally the publicity surrounding two such immodest writers would have been 
heard throughout the past week. Neither is available to sit on chat show sofas, 
though their wives have done them proud.

But this year's crop of sensational disclosures for conference season have all 
been drowned out by a third diarist whom both men would disdain as a pushy 
outsider: Edwina Currie, even though Tory grandees would put all three within 
hailing distance of each other, even Old Etonian castle-dweller Clark.

Yesterday Ms Currie stoked the flames of controversy by giving an interview to 
Gyles Brandreth, himself a Tory former MP and old chum from Oxford. It was 
granted free to the Sunday Telegraph, she stressed, instead of a Â£50,000 cheque 
from the News of the World.

In a lively, self-justifying performance Ms Currie went further than before in 
conveying what a loss to government she thought she had been when her ex-lover, 
John Major, offered her nothing better than the job of prisons minister in 
1992. She turned it down.

Seeking to explain why a man she regarded as "a serious risk-taker, a chancer, 
an imaginative leaper into the dark" led such an indecisive government between 
1990-97, she asked: "Could it be that during the 1980s [when their affair took 
place] when he was a junior minister, he was getting a lot of help and 
encouragement from certain quarters that wasn't available later."

It was Mr Major's risk-taking tactics in the 1990s - despite lack of advice 
from Ms Currie - that worried some Tory MPs last night, as newspapers dug up 
his pursuit of the New Statesman magazine in 1992-93 over rumours he had an 
affair with the No 10 caterer, Clare Latimer.

With hindsight it looks as if Mr Major pursued his libel action to gag further 
inquiries in that direction, not least because the magazines had the wrong 
woman.

That was a huge risk, successfully bluffing without (unlike Archer) having to 
perjure himself. With feminist columnists backing Ms Currie as a victim of male 
double standards, she contributed to the gender wars by referring to Archer as 
a "little runt".

Last week Lady Archer spoke of Mr Major's "rare lapse of taste" in consorting 
with Ms Currie.
 