
It may have been a spur-of-the-moment overreaction and Gerard Piqué would not 
be the first Spain centre-half to be talked out of retirement after Carles 
Puyol’s U-turn in 2010, but if he sticks by his decision tostop playing 
international football in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/gerard-pique-retire-spain-2018-catalonia>
 can he really be blamed?

The Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> player, one of 
the best defenders to have played for Spain, has long been vilified for taking 
a strong pro-Catalonian independence view and the poisonous reaction to him 
cutting the sleeves off his full-length shirt as opposed to wearing a 
short-sleeved one that bears the country’s flag during the 2-0 win against 
Albania on Sunday night was the final straw.

Gerard Piqué admits that Spain’s golden era may have come to an end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/spain-gerard-pique-italy-euro-2016>
“It’s not a heat of the moment decision, I’ve given a lot of thought to this,” 
Piqué said. “It’s not because of what happened today, it’s because I always 
give my best on the field and although there are some people who have thanked 
me, some don’t think it’s OK for me to be here.”

The last point is sadly true because even though Piqué’s commitment to playing 
for Spain cannot be questioned his political views means some will still go 
ahead and do just that. He is not yet 30 but has 86 caps andwon a World Cup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/11/world-cup-final-holland-spain1>
anda European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jul/02/euro-2012-spain-italy-final-history>
. A dip in form looks some way off and when he bids farewell after the World 
Cup two years from now it is not exactly a wild prediction to suggestLa Roja 
will be a lot weaker without him.

He is not the first Barça player to play for Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> and hold pro-Catalan views, and he 
will not be the last. Yet the targeted abuse gets worse.

That unedifying episode also comes on the back of some angry reactions closer 
to home. Take a look at Wayne Rooney’s standard post-match tweet afterEngland’s 
facile win over Malta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/england-malta-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
on Saturday night. More than half of the replies are telling him to retire or 
explain how he was nutmegged in the first half, then there are the grim replies 
saying he should “get injured” or “if you were a horse you would have been shot 
by now”. Others are unpublishable.

Not for the first time this season Rooney was poor, but what gives a keyboard 
warrior the right to abuse somebody who has always given his best? It is hard 
to argue against supporters who have paid for a ticket to air grievances over a 
bad performance, yet there is a line that is being crossed with increasing 
frequency, more often than not by faceless people watching at home on TV.

Last Thursday night a baseless rumour started doing the rounds in Dublin that 
Harry Arter was going to defect from the Republic of Ireland to England because 
he had not yet played a competitive fixture.

Arter, who had a hamstring injury, has never intimated that he would switch 
allegiances and the story was quickly rejected by all parties – just not before 
the internet trolls could rear their ugly heads again. The Bournemouth 
midfielder was oblivious to the false story before noticing a surge in 
despicable personal abuse on his Twitter feed.

He gave an interview to an Irish newspaper on Sunday saying: “Honestly, it was 
the only time that I have ever had a thought that maybe I shouldn’t bother 
playing for Ireland. The messages were just vile. I was shocked by what people 
were sending my way. This was personal stuff, really nasty.” Again, could 
anybody not clouded by partisanship hold it against him if he was no longer 
interested in wearing a green shirt?

These incidents have developed to a backdrop of political turmoil in Britain 
and fair questions over why no footballer is willing to make aColin 
Kaepernick-style stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
 in an age where xenophobia is being openly encouraged by some of those in 
power. Yet Piqué’s case provides a stark explanation for Premier League players 
keeping quiet when it comes to the impending departure from the European Union 
among other issues.

There was some fun poked at Harry Kane for his non-committal response back in 
June when asked about Brexit but if he had a strong view and aired it, the 
Spurs striker would have been faced with a no-win situation.

Piqué’s long-held stance has not impacted on his job of winning football 
matches but similar to Rooney and Arter, the legions of abusive online messages 
– including several wishing physical harm – sent to the 29-year-old over the 
past 24 hours make for uncomfortable reading.

There has never been a place on social media for nuance. Sitting on the fence 
does not generate retweets and likes, but put yourself in the place of a 
high-profile footballer. Would you let your true feelings be known when an 
avalanche of abuse is guaranteed in return? Piqué should be commended for 
having a public stance but the grief appears no longer worth it.
 