
A new Mario game to go with a new Nintendo console? It's a surprise like 
having a giant turkey dinner presented to you around lunchtime on 25 December 
is a surprise. It's a surprise like slumping into a chocolate-smeared sugar 
coma at some point on Easter Sunday. What I'm clumsily saying is, thenew Super 
Mario Bros game being unveiled at industry mega-conference E3 to go with 
Nintendo's Wii U console <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-18302179> isn't 
much of a surprise at all. Since his birth as "Jumpman" in 1981 arcade game 
Donkey Kong, wherever Nintendo has gone, Mario has come too.

The SNES, N64, Wii <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii>, DS: he's 
nabbed coins, busted Koopas and rescued princesses on all of them. And he's not 
just a company mascot. Unlikely as it seems when you think about it, this 
Japanese version of an Italian-American stereotype has been an international 
icon for the last three decades. His lush moustache and bulbous nose make up 
the face of gaming generally to a lot of people – up there with Hello Kitty and 
Mickey Mouse in "bigger than Jesus" territory.

That's true even though gaming has changed an extraordinary amount since Mario 
first platformed into public consciousness. Characters have moved from sprites 
to polygons, to eerily lifelike motion-capture performances – but there's no 
chance of Mario making a dimensional leap into realism. He's warmly, resolutely 
cartoonish. And while the biggest console games have become increasingly 
"adult" and "serious" (read: beardy and gunny), Mario's stuck to a stupendously 
successful, primary-coloured mix of perfectly crafted platforming.

Of course, that's not all he's done. Mario's had some interesting sidelines 
over the years, from racer to tennis ace to brawler in Super Smash Bros. And 
while he's played the hero many times by rescuing Princess Peach, he's clearly 
got a dark side – as anyone who's been on the wrong end of a blue shell in a 
Mario Kart game can tell you.

All the same, you can trust Mario: he might make you curse, but he's never 
going to start dropping F-bombs himself or blowing up the place with 
rocket-propelled grenades. And his relationship with Peach might not be exactly 
equal (developer Tim Schafer tweeted a story 
<http://twitter.com/timoflegend/status/206613399243722752> about playing games 
with his daughter: "Today [she] asked me, 'Who does Princess Peach save?' Is 
now a good time to tell her everything that's wrong with the world?") it's got 
an endearing innocence that seems positively puritan compared with the 
self-conscious sleaze that's increasingly the norm in more grittily styled 
games likeHitman 
<http://www.computerandvideogames.com/350079/features/hitman-trailer-exposes-the-weird-writhing-sexual-politics-inside-games/>
.

Now Mario has to make another jump. The arrival of Wii U is more than just 
another stage in the inexorable upgrading of console technology. The tablet 
controller shows that Nintendo knows its most serious competition is no longer 
from Microsoft and Sony. It's not console-v-console anymore: instead, all three 
find themselves scrapping to win an audience that'squietly gone over to 
touchscreen devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jun/04/nintendo-wii-u-new-console?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
. Why switch on the box in the corner when you're likely to be carrying 
something in your pocket that will give you just as much joy for less fuss and 
less expense?

Nintendo's pre-E3 video was partly a portrait of the tragic plight of the 
smartphone family: gathered in the living, all lost in their own handheld 
world, all waiting forWii U <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u> to 
show up and reunite them. That's Mario's next challenge. He's not battling 
Bowser this time; instead, he's in a life-or-death struggle to draw gamers out 
of their technological islands and back into shared experiences where consoles 
still count. It's a lot for one plumber to do, but if anyone can – with a jump, 
a power-up and a cheeky cry of "It's a-me!" – surely it's Mario.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 