
Statins can not only lower cholesterol, but can improve erections, according to
research presented at the European Society of Cardiology Congress 
<http://spo.escardio.org/SessionDetails.aspx?eevtid=1127&sessId=19171&subSessId=5537&searchQuery=%2fdefault.aspx%3feevtid%3d1127%26days%3d%26topics%3d%26types%3d%26rooms%3d%26freetext%3dSamentzas%26sort%3d1%26page%3d1%26showResults%3dTrue%26nbPerPage%3d20%26WithWebcast%3d%26WithSlides%3d%26WithAbstract%3d%26WithReport%3d%26scroll%3D0#.V8lKxzYrKhd>
 in Rome last week. Since statins are themost commonly prescribed drug in the UK
 <https://www.bhf.org.uk/heart-health/treatments/statins>, will erectile 
dysfunction (whatever doctors call the condition, it still sounds pejorative) 
be consigned to history? The study was small and presented as a poster at the 
congress (so, not yet published in a peer-reviewed journal and full details are 
not available).

The research included 100 men between the ages of 40 and 70 with erectile 
dysfunction and abnormal cholesterol. Half were given the drug atorvastatin for 
three months; the other 50 patients had nothing. The men were assessed by the
international index of erectile dysfunction questionnaire 
<http://www.defymedical.com/services/12-services/326-what-is-your-iief-erectile-function-score>
, which asks about hardness of erections, penetration and confidence. Those on 
statins were more likely to have improved their score from moderate to mild 
dysfunction than those on no treatment. Scores rose on average for those on 
statins from 11.4 to 16.3 (the highest score is 30). Dr Alexios Samentzas, a 
cardiologist from Athens who led the research, said that this was half the 
improvement seen with Viagra – a drug specifically for erection problems. The 
comparison is not quite like for like, since Viagra works much faster (usually 
within 30 minutes), while reducing the sludge of cholesterol from the walls of 
your arteries takes longer.

But as Dr Samentzas so neatly puts it, why not boost your heart and your 
erection at the same time?

The solution

Statins reduce cholesterol and improve blood flow for all arteries. These 
include those in the penis. Doctors consider erection problems, especially in 
older men, as an early sign of heart disease.Research in 2008 suggested that 
statins might actually cause erection problems 
<http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/03/ask-well-statins-and-your-sex-life/?_r=1>
 by lowering testosterone levels. But the body of evidence now has statins 
improving erections. Thisresearch includes a meta-analysis adding up results 
from 11 randomised controlled trials 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24684744> that found a 24.3% improvement in 
erection scores (from 14 to 17.4) among men on statins who had problems before 
starting the drug.

A tablet that can take on cholesterol and improve erections may sound 
attractive. Except that while erection problems can be due to narrowed blood 
vessels, they aremost often caused by stress, smoking or drinking too much 
alcohol 
<http://www.netdoctor.co.uk/conditions/sexual-health/a3684/erectile-dysfunction-impotence/>
. Statins don’t touch any of these. And if you want to tackle cholesterol and 
prevent heart disease, you could do worse than a strict Mediterranean diet. The 
same cardiology congress that brought us statins for erectile dysfunction had
Professor Giovanni de Gaetano’s study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/29/mediterranean-diet-better-than-statins-for-tackling-heart-disease-study>
 showing that a diet of fish, vegetables, nuts and oils can reduce early death 
from heart disease by 37%. Which means it could improve blood flow to your 
penis just as well, if not better, than a statin.
 