
As the UK faces an obesity <https://www.theguardian.com/society/obesity> 
epidemic, fitness experts believe open data can play a vital part in getting 
the nation off the couch and into exercise. The belief is fitness is due its “
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> moment”, where booking a 
tennis court or fitness activity is as simple as pressing a button on a 
smartphone.

A fledgling service that aims to make this happen will be launched by London 
Sport <https://londonsport.org/> in time for the Rio Olympics this summer. The 
sporting body was set up to deliver on Boris Johnson’s policy of making London 
thefittest city in the world 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/london-aims-to-be-the-most-physically-active-city>
 by encouraging a million Londoners to get more active.

Its CEO, Peter Fitzboydon, believes connecting sporting capacity with demand 
is crucial to achieving this goal. “If you want to help people get fit, you’ve 
got to release the data on how they can access opportunities to be active,” he 
says.

“Everyone’s come across the situation where they want to have a game of squash 
or tennis with a friend but they’re not sure how to book it. If you find the 
number for your local leisure centre and it’s booked, you’re not sure what the 
options are. But if you have an online service and an app that gives you 
availability and, if there isn’t a slot, tells you where else you could book at 
the press of a button, that would open up so many more opportunities to get 
fit.”

Olympic standard

So far only the Olympic Park <http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/> is on 
board, agreeing to open up booking information and availability information to 
the new site. However, atImin.co <http://www.imin.co/>, a startup which will be 
powering the data on the new London Sport site, co-founder Nishal Desai 
believes there is cause for optimism. His company has been set up to be a 
repository of open data through which leisure centres and sports clubs can make 
booking information available to the public.

To that end, the company has set up Openactive <https://www.openactive.io/>, 
an open data project that fitness data owners are invited to join so their 
calendars can be openly shared. “We’re at the early stages of getting an open 
data standard so leisure centres and clubs across the country can make their 
booking information available,” says Desai.

“We’re having lots of very good discussions with leisure centre groups but 
they’re not all set up to make their data available at the moment. That’s why 
we’re establishing a standard which many boroughs are telling us they’ll ensure 
will be written in to future contracts to ensure centres have to open their 
data up.”

Desai believes this release of data will fuel many websites and apps that will 
make booking an activity far easier by either offering available sessions or 
suggesting viable nearby alternatives if there is no availability. The 
intention is that Imin will be the source of data these multiple apps can tap 
into to power their services.

On the right route

The power of open data in fitness is already being explored by running and 
cycling appStrava <https://www.strava.com/>. It allows people to plan cycle and 
running routes, which can also be shared on social media sites. When users sign 
up for the free app, they give permission for their anonymised data to be 
pooled. The result is freely availablestatistics 
<http://insights.strava.com/en-us/?unit=imperial&activity=ride> on cycling and 
running in major cities as well as “heat”maps 
<http://labs.strava.com/heatmap/#13/-0.11124/51.48732/orange/bike> that help 
people plan better routes, according to popularity, as well as inform local 
authorities where people are cycling and exercising the most, as Gareth 
Nettleton, vice-president of marketing at Strava, explains.

“We have millions of routes logged all around the world so when we combine 
them we can provide a really useful service to cyclists and runners,” he says. 
“They can look at the most popular routes and so incorporate them in to their 
plans. We’ve also got details about climbs which cyclists can check to see if 
they want to incorporate. You might know your area really well but we can 
provide suggested routes nearly anywhere in the world.”

This open data is not only of use in encouraging cyclists and joggers to try 
new routes, via the free app, it is also being licensed by local transport 
bodies to help them plan through Strava’sMetro <http://metro.strava.com/> 
service.

“We’re in the early days of working with TfL to show them where people are 
cycling the most,” Nettleton says. “I suspect we’ll be able to help them plan 
cycle routes around where cyclists are going but also where they’re avoiding. 
I, for example, avoid the Elephant and Castle huge roundabout in London because 
it’s massive and, to me, it appears dangerous.

“If we can show that, we might be able to help TfL decide how to plan cycle 
routes around it. We’ll also probably be able to show them where cyclists go 
when roads are closed or so they can fully understand the impact of road works. 
That’s what we’ve been doing for Brisbane in Australia, they’ve been using our 
data to plan better cycle routes for the past three years.”

It is by freeing up the data of what happens when we exercise as well as where 
and when there are opportunities to exercise that open data experts believe 
fitness levels will increase. By showing people how, where and when they can 
get fitter, there will be that extra nudge to get couch potatoes on their local 
tennis courts or pounding the streets on a popular, scenic route.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 