
Name: Lionheart.

Age: Like new, one careful owner.

Appearance: Giant, floating cycling helmet.

What is it, some kind of art installation? It’s a superyacht.

What makes a yacht a superyacht? By definition, it has to be longer than 24m, 
roughly the length of a tennis court. Lionheart is 90m.

I’m no sailor, but that sounds like a megayacht. Possibly. Lionheart also 
boasts a swimming pool, a helipad, three lifts, six luxury cabins and a crew of 
40.

How much for one of those? About £100m.

And this one is taken, is it? Yes. It belongs to Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>.

Who is Sir Philip Green? Do you mean Mr Philip Green, non-titled CEO of the 
Arcadia Group?Although MPs have voted to strip Green of his knighthood, action 
can only be taken by a special committee. He remains a sir, and a yacht owner. 
For now.

Sir Philip Green's yacht and other assets could be seized, says regulator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/sir-philip-green-courts-could-seize-yacht-other-assets-pensions-regulator>
For now? Is he thinking of selling up? Not exactly. But Lionheart could be 
seized.

Seized? Am I hearing right? Green is being asset-stripped? Labour MP Frank 
Field has written to the Pensions Regulator to ask if “assets other than cash” 
can be used to fill the £571m pension fund gap left whenBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> collapsed last spring. Green had 
sold the company a year earlier for a pound.

But I thought he had promised to fix everything. He told MPs he was working to 
find a solution, but last month it was revealed he had failed to make an 
acceptable offer.Labour MP David Winnick promptly labelled him a “billionaire 
spiv” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/20/billionaire-spiv-debate-about-sir-philip-green-was-entertaining-but-absurd>
.

It does seem odd, cruising around in a megayacht with all this going on. 
Lionheart was dubbed the “BHS Destroyer” by tabloids last summer, a name 
presumably selected over Pensiony McPensionface.

If they take his boat, how will Green navigate the Mediterranean? Fortunately 
he has two other yachts, Lioness and Lionchase.

Let’s seize those as well.

There seems to be a question over the Pension Regulator’s powers – in 
particular whether it can pursue offshore assets. Green’s wife – who has an 
estimated £2bn stake in Arcadia – is a resident of Monaco.

Let’s have them anyway. OK.

Do say: “The rain in Spain falls mainly on the helipad.”

Don’t say: “Yo no soy marinero, soy capitan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_SS-TyXhhU>.”
 