
There was no access ramp at Andy Warhol’s Factory. When popular culture pushes 
into new territory, it can be slow to lay the groundwork that might allow 
disabled people to follow. Today, in the flourishing cinematic playground of 
VOD, fewer regulations mean more films and less censorship, but also a sad 
reluctance to bring disabled viewers along for the ride. A recent survey found 
that less than a quarter of the UK’s on-demand platforms offer subtitles, 
compared with the vast majority of DVD releases.

Some good news comes courtesy of the acclaimed Notes On Blindness, available 
to stream from Monday on Curzon Home Cinema, Virgin Media and the BFI Player. 
Not only is the film available with subtitles, but it also comes with a range 
of different audio tracks specially designed for blind and partially sighted 
audiences.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20on%20Blindness%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20a%20documentary%20about%20losing%20sight%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20on%20Blindness%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20a%20documentary%20about%20losing%20sight%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fnotes-on-blindness-trailer-video&media=>
Notes on Blindness: watch the trailer for a documentary about losing sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/13/notes-on-blindness-trailer-video>
In the film, the late academic John Hull describes the physical and 
psychological sensation of losing his sight at age 45, through a series of 
archived audio diaries he made along the way. After spells of terror, grief and 
depression, Hull begins to see his blindness not as a barrier between him and 
the wider world but as an opportunity to find a vivid new mode of communing 
with it.

In that spirit, the film’s various audio tracks attempt to ensure that the 
experience is no less potent for visually impaired audiences. There’s a 
straightforward audio description track read by Louise Fryer, whose measured 
monotone stands at some distance from the film, allowing listeners to conjure 
the missing images for themselves. More evocative is a read of the same words 
by the actor Stephen Mangan, who invests the material with significantly more 
emotion than he brought to Postman Pat: The Movie, becoming something like an 
omnipotent narrator as he weaves in and out of Hull’s recordings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fnotes-on-blindness-on-demand-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ebff14e9c4c9f0c0b47d499e8cc582dc143f2b6%2F620_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Notes%20On%20Blindness%20change%20the%20way%20streaming%20caters%20for%20disabled%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fnotes-on-blindness-on-demand-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Notes%20On%20Blindness%20change%20the%20way%20streaming%20caters%20for%20disabled%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fnotes-on-blindness-on-demand-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ebff14e9c4c9f0c0b47d499e8cc582dc143f2b6%2F620_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 ‘Listeners conjure the missing images for themselves’. Notes on Blindness. 
Most fascinating of all – and something of a radical step forward for film 
accessibility – is the “enhanced soundtrack version”, which all but disregards 
the film’s visuals and instead constructs an entirely new version of the film 
through purely sonic means. Expressionistic sound design is used to create 
aural reconstructions of key episodes from Hull’s life, while additional 
excerpts from his diaries fill in any narrative gaps. Notes On Blindness may be 
just one film, but this exemplary package points towards a more inclusive 
future for VOD, just as other pop cultural arenas have sought in recent years 
to better serve their disabled clientele. Pittsburgh’s seven-storey Andy Warhol 
Museum is wheelchair accessible throughout.
 