
Activists have called on Canadian leaders to introduce concrete policies to 
confront discrimination against women and girls after the country fell from 
first to 25th in the United Nation’s gender equality ranking.

The criticism comes as the United Nations holds its 65th annual meeting to 
eliminate gender discrimination, and just a few months after the country’s 
prime minister, Justin Trudeau, was praised for a speech to the UN in New York,
where he said, “I am a feminist.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/17/justin-trudeau-im-going-to-keep-calling-myself-a-feminist-video>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fjustin-trudeau-im-going-to-keep-calling-myself-a-feminist-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20keep%20calling%20myself%20a%20feminist%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fjustin-trudeau-im-going-to-keep-calling-myself-a-feminist-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20keep%20calling%20myself%20a%20feminist%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fjustin-trudeau-im-going-to-keep-calling-myself-a-feminist-video&media=>
Justin Trudeau: I’m going to keep calling myself a feminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/17/justin-trudeau-im-going-to-keep-calling-myself-a-feminist-video>
“Canada fails to respect, protect and fulfill the social and economic rights 
of women and girls,” a group of 14 non-profit organizations said in a 
statement. “Too many women inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> 
experience poverty, homelessness, insecure housing, woefully inadequate social 
assistance incomes, food insecurity and other violations of the right to an 
adequate standard of living.”


The groups, which include Amnesty International, the Native Women’s 
Association of Canada and Oxfam, pointed to Trudeau’s comments on gender 
equality and his pledges to improve relations with the country’s indigenous 
population.

“Canada has a new federal government with a Prime Minister who says he is a 
feminist, calls for a nation-to-nation relationship, and acknowledges that 
‘poverty is sexist’. We know words matter, but now we need action,” the 
statement said.

Historically, the United Nations’ work toward gender equality has included an 
annualGender Inequality Index 
<http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-index-gii>, an international 
ranking in which Canada has steadily fallen. In 1995, Canada held the top spot, 
but has fallen to 25th over the last 20 years.

The report includes data on reproductive health, empowerment and economic 
inclusion. The GII uses maternal death rates and teen pregnancy, the number of 
women who hold national elected office and have secondary education, and 
participation in the labor market to weigh countries’ progress toward equality.

In their criticism of Canada, the groups said they were “concerned” about 
access to abortion, “particularly in rural and northern areas”, and said they 
were dismayed by the country’s continued wage gap between the sexes and even 
between women.

“We’re looking to the new government that’s taken over, who has made lots of 
promises around women’s equality,” said Kasari Govender, executive director of 
the West Coast Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund (Leaf). “Are they 
actually going to truly act on the damage that has been done over the last 
couple decades that have eroded women’s equality?”

Govender pointed to what she said was a 12% wage disparity between women with 
children and those without, what she called a “motherhood tax”, as well as 
difficulties women face finding childcare.

The groups were especially critical of the Canadian government’s failure to 
serve the needs of indigenous women.

Think Canada is a progressive paradise? That’s mooseshit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/canada-politics-progressive-liberal-trudeau>
“Indigenous women and girls in Canada suffer some of the world’s highest 
suicide rates, overrepresentation in prison and high rates of sexualized 
violence,” said Professor Pam Palmater, chair of indigenous governance at 
Ryerson University.

“These conditions are brought on by years of colonization, theft of lands and 
resources, discriminatory state legislation, chronic underfunding of critical 
social programs like water, food, housing, health and education and the theft 
of children into foster care.”

After his election in 2015, Trudeau won praise for naming a cabinet with equal 
numbers of men and women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/canada-cabinet-gender-diversity-justin-trudeau>
 – the first time in Canada’s history. Butsome activists have argued 
<http://www.macleans.ca/politics/ottawa/is-justin-trudeau-a-fake-feminist/> 
that the prime minister’s policy proposals have yet to overcome more complex 
systematic sexism, such as federal budget proposals that favored male-dominated 
industries.

For example, the government recently failed to pass a bill 
<http://www.macleans.ca/politics/ottawa/the-liberals-killed-a-bill-promoting-gender-parity-in-politics-they-were-wrong/>
 that would have financially penalized political parties for failing to run 
near-equal slates of male and female candidates.


“We were more cautiously optimistic a few months ago,” said Armine Yalnizyan, 
senior economist for the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, a group not 
affiliated with the activists that called on Canadian leaders to enact more 
meaningful legislation. “It has been a year, and there has not been much action 
other than the appointment of women to cabinet.”


The authors of the statement said there remains, “a significant implementation 
gap between Canada’s human rights obligations for women and their realization 
within domestic laws, policies and programs.”

“It is time for our federal government to take leadership and work with 
provinces and territories to implement the [UN convention against 
discrimination].”
 