
Canada has named a prominent critic of Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> who was banned by Moscow in 2014 as 
its new minister of foreign affairs, as the Canadian government prepares for 
what could be a radical recast of its relationship with the United States under 
the incoming Trump administration.


Related: There goes the neighborhood? Canada frets over Trump's trade agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/canada-donald-trump-nafta-economy-nato>

Chrystia Freeland was sworn in as Canada’s top diplomat on Tuesday, as part of 
a wide-ranging cabinet shuffle that also saw Ahmed Hussen, a Somali-Canadian 
who arrived inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> as a 
16-year-old refugee, appointed as Canada’s immigration minister.

Freeland, whose tenure as trade minister was marked by her efforts to push 
forward the trade agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
 between Canada and the European Union, will also continue to be responsible 
for Canada-US trade.

The shakeup to cabinet comes less than two weeks before Donald Trump’s 
inauguration.Senior Canadian officials have met several times with Trump’s 
advisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/nafta-canada-us-trade-justin-trudeau-trump-advisers>
 in an effort to build bridges with the incoming administration, Justin 
Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, told reporters on Tuesday. “Obviously, the 
new administration to the south will present … both opportunities and 
challenges, as well as a shifting global context,” he said.

About three-quarters of Canada’s exports headed to the US last year. Much of 
this trade flowed through Nafta, the trade agreement routinely disparaged by 
Trump as the “worst deal in history”. Trump has vowed to renegotiate the pact 
and raised the spectre of withdrawal if the US fails to secure a better deal 
for its workers. In the days following Trump’s election, the Canadian 
government said it would be opento revisiting the decades-old trade pact.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/canada-donald-trump-nafta-economy-nato>

Freeland will now oversee this file, drawing on her extensive network of 
contacts in the United States and her background as a former economic 
journalist. But her strong views on Russia risk driving a wedge between Canada 
and Trump, who has repeatedly praised Putin.

In 2014, Freeland, who lived in Moscow in the mid-1990s as bureau chief for 
the Financial Times and interviewed Vladimir Putin in 2000, was added to the 
Kremlin’s list of westerners banned from Russia as part of a series of 
retaliatory sanctions against Canada.

In a 2015 article titled “My Ukraine, and Putin’s big lie,” 
<https://qz.com/402855/chrystia-freeland-my-ukraine-and-putins-big-lie/> 
Freeland detailed her thoughts on why she had been included on the list; 
pointing to the fact that she was an activist of Ukrainian descent, a Canadian 
politician and a former journalist who in recent years had argued that Russia 
under Putin was careening towards a full-fledged dictatorship.

On Tuesday, Trudeau brushed aside concerns over Freeland’s icy relationship 
with Russia. “As to how she gets along with Russia, well, she speaks fluent 
Russian,” he said. “We continue to stand strongly with Ukraine and … continue 
to condemn in no uncertain terms the illegitimate and illegal actions of the 
Russians in Ukraine, in the Donbass and Crimea.”

When asked on Tuesday if she would be able to travel to Russia as foreign 
minister, Freeland,who has described her position on the sanctions list as an 
honour 
<https://twitter.com/cafreeland/status/448121548105592832?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>, 
said it was up to the Kremlin. “That’s a question for Moscow.”

Related: Justin Trudeau: 'Globalisation isn't working for ordinary people' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump>

Where Freeland may find alignment with the incoming US administration, 
however, could be in her views on globalisation. In 2012, Freeland published 
the book Plutocrats, whichexplored how globalisation and new technology are 
fuelling a growing gap between the super rich and everyone else. 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/chrystia_freeland_the_rise_of_the_new_global_super_rich#t-901051>


Her views seemingly echo the critique of globalisation offered by Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump>
 and his assertion that his government is offering a different means of 
tackling the issues behind the election of Donald Trump, the Brexit vote and 
the rise of anti-establishment, nation-first parties around the world.

Trudeau’s cabinet shakeup was the first substantial change made to a 
government team thatwas the first in Canada to be gender balanced. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/canada-cabinet-gender-diversity-justin-trudeau>
 With the overhaul, Trudeau has again made history – women now slightly 
outnumber men in his cabinet, with 15 female ministers to 14 men, while Hussen 
ranks as the country’s first minister of Somali descent.
 