
The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, has cancelled a trip to 
Brussels amid ongoing struggles to rescue a landmark trade deal between his 
country and the European Union.

Trudeau was due to meet the EU leaders Donald Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker in 
Brussels on Thursday, but decided at the last minute not to get on the plane as 
Belgian politicians continued to wrangle over the agreement, preventing the EU 
side from signing it.

An EU source confirmed to the Guardian that the summit would not go ahead. No 
new date has been set.

“The Canadian delegation will not be travelling to Europe tonight,” a press 
secretary for the Canadian trade minister, Chrystia Freeland,told Global News 
<http://globalnews.ca/news/3027888/ceta-trudeau-not-travelling-to-europe-as-debate-over-trade-deal-continues/>
. “Canada remains ready to sign this important agreement when Europe is ready.”

Trudeau had been expected to fly to the Belgian capital on Wednesday night as 
part of a delegation including Freeland and the foreign affairs minister, 
Stéphane Dion.

The comprehensive economic and trade agreement (Ceta), which has been seven 
years in the making,has stumbled near the finish line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/eu-trade-deal-with-canada-collapses-as-belgium-refuses-to-sign>
 owing to strong opposition from the Belgian regional parliament of Wallonia.


The EU requires all 28 member states to support Ceta for the treaty to come 
into force, but the Belgian federal government, which supports the agreement, 
has been unable to give its consent because of opposition from regional 
parliaments in Wallonia and Brussels.


Crisis talks between Belgium’s different regional leaders were continuing on 
Thursday, but politicians have struggled to patch up their differences. Hopes 
of a compromise rose late on Wednesday evening as a committee of Belgium’s 
regional leaders discussed a compromise text.

Wallonia: the EU's latest rogue element
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/oct/21/wallonia-eu-latest-rogue-element-walloons>
Paul Magnette, Wallonia’s minister president, declined to sign the agreement, 
citing “technical questions”. Magnette is backed by his Socialist colleagues 
and the centre-right Christian Democrats in Wallonia.


“What guides us is the defence of important values: cultural identity at the 
European level, defending farmers, small and medium-sized enterprises, the 
precautionary principle,” the francophone Christian Democrat president, Benoît 
Lutgen, told the TV station RTBF. “What does it matter if there is a summit 
tomorrow, in three days or six weeks? It doesn’t change anything in my eyes.


“We have managed to obtain transparency. That is already very important, not 
only for Walloon citizens, but also for Belgian citizens and even European 
citizens.”

The decision to postpone the summit will be a blow to Tusk, the European 
council president. As late as Wednesday morning he thought it would be possible 
for the long-planned meeting to go ahead and urged Belgium to live up to its 
reputation as “consensus-building champion”.

The row has reignited long-standing tensions between Wallonia, a region that 
has struggled with a legacy of industrial decline and high unemployment, and 
its wealthier neighbour Flanders, which does more trade withCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.

It has also called into question the EU’s ability to sign trade deals and 
raised questions about the prospects for post-Brexit Britain innegotiating its 
own agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brexit-canada-trade-deal-eu-model-next-steps>
.


Canada's trade deal with EU a model for Brexit? Not quite, insiders say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brexit-canada-trade-deal-eu-model-next-steps>
The European commission has always sought unanimity among EU member states on 
trade deals, but critics say it made a tactical error by giving national 
parliaments an effective veto over the Canada deal.


Even if Belgians live up to their reputation for crafting a compromise, the 
Ceta agreement will only come into force on a temporary basis. To become a 
permanent and complete agreement, Ceta must also be ratified by 28 national 
parliaments and 10 other regional assemblies and upper houses.

Britain’s secretary of state for international trade, Liam Fox, told MPs on 
Wednesday that the difficulties over Ceta underlined the importance of the UK 
signing a trade deal before it leaves the EU.


The UK would only face a procedure similar to Ceta, he said, if it failed to 
conclude a trade agreement before the end of two years of divorce negotiations 
under the EU’s article 50.

“That sort of procedure would only be undertaken were we to leave the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> after our article 50 period 
without any agreement whatsoever and were looking to seek a new FTA [free-trade 
agreement] from outside,” he said.


Some observers think that is a likely prospect, as the article 50 divorce 
talks are dedicated to unwinding Britain’s EU membership and European leaders 
will not sign a trade deal before agreeing the divorce settlement.

Fox, a prominent leave campaigner, said the experience of Ceta might cause 
some to think twice before seeking a trade agreement with the EU. “Those who 
put politics ahead of prosperity might want to think twice,” he said.

 