
Shares in outsourcing group Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> have crashed to a 10-year 
low after the company issued a second profit warning in three months and said 
it would start to sell assets.

The shares lost 7.6% to 521p and were the biggest loser in the FTSE 100 by 
mid-morning. Fifteen months ago they were changing hands at 1046p and the 
shares are the FTSE 100’s biggest loser this year.

The company – which provides services ranging from electronic tagging for 
offenders to store card services for retailers – said it would sell assets and 
trim costs to protect its balance sheet after Brexit-related client indecision 
prompted it to cut its profit forecast for the second time in three months.

UK service sector recovers after Brexit dip but inflation looms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/uk-service-sector-brexit-dip-markit-barclaycard-consumer-spending>
Chief executive Andy Parker said he was “absolutely” confident that the 
company’s actions would allay the need to raise capital or cut the company’s 
dividend. But he said: “There’s been a fallaway in what we would call 
discretionary spend, like training and employee benefits. People are delaying 
making decisions on implementing technology, so there is a whole host of things 
going on,” he said.

Capita – which also recruits for the army and runs business travel, debt 
collection and translation services and employs 75,000 staff – said it now 
expects 2016 underlying profit before tax to be at least £515m. Three months 
ago the firm was predicting £535m to £555m, and prior to that it was expecting 
£614m.

Net debt is now expected to be some 2.9 times earnings before interest, 
depreciation and amortisation – up from a target already raised to 2.7 times in 
September. The ratio would fall to under 2.5 times by the time asset sales are 
completed, Capita said.

The September downgrade had already alarmed investors and the market value has 
halved since then, bringing into doubt its dividend and the possibility of a 
capital hike. Rival outsourcer Mitie has also issued two profit warnings in as 
many months.

Outsourcers have struggled since Britain’s vote in June to leave the European 
Union as clients have delayed making decisions due to uncertainty and budgets 
remain constrained.


Capita said it would now sell the majority of its Capita Asset Services 
division, which expects operating profit of £60m in 2016. Capita has hired 
Goldman Sachs to sell the unit and has already had interest, Parker said.

Capita is predominantly UK-based, unlike bigger rivals such as G4S and Serco 
that have been sheltered to a large degree from Brexit-related fallout by their 
bigger geographical footprint.

 