
Shares in Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, the 
outsourcing company that collects the London congestion charge and the BBC 
licence fee, have crashed after it issued a surprise profit warning for 2016, 
blaming Brexit jitters as customers delayed making big investment decisions.

Shares plunged 28% – Capita’s worst ever one-day fall and the biggest decline 
on the FTSE 100 – after the unexpectedly gloomy update on Thursday morning. The 
company also flagged up a dispute with its client the Co-operative Bank.

 Investors took fright at the early warning sign that companies are starting 
to rein in spending because of uncertainty created by Britain’s decision to 
leave the EU.


Jasper Lawler, a market analyst at CMC Markets, said traders were dumping 
shares because of the “unexpectedly rapid slowdown” suggested by Capita.

“We’ve seen a significant downturn in our expectations that we’re calling out 
today,” said Andy Parker, Capita’s chief executive.

The warning followed a similar Brexit-related alert from outsourcing rival 
Mitie last week. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/mitie-profit-warning-brexit-vote-spending-eu-referendum>
 Capita’s woes hit the rest of the sector, with Serco and G4S shares also 
falling on Thursday.

Capita, which also recruits for the army and runs business travel, debt 
collection and translation services, said that although it had achieved good 
profit growth in the first half of 2016, the second half had so far been 
surprisingly weak.

“Our performance in the second half of the year to date has been below 
expectations, as a result of a slowdown in specific trading businesses, one-off 
costs incurred on the Transport for London congestion charging contract and 
continued delays in client decision-making.”

Capita, which employs 75,000 people and also provides businesses with support 
services and staff, said underlying profit before tax for the full year to 
December was expected to be in the range of £535m to £555m. Previously it was 
forecasting about £614m.

The company also warned there was a high risk of litigation after a 
contractual dispute with another client, the Co-op Bank. Capita agreed a deal 
last year to process mortgages for the bank and claims it is owed payment.

Parker said: “Everything’s ready to go and the client is refusing to sign off 
for one reason only – if they sign off, they have to pay us. We’re still 
hitting targets and delivering for this bank.”

The Co-op Bank rejected the claims, saying: “The bank strongly refutes 
Capita’s suggestion that they have delivered an element of the transformation 
programme which the bank has not paid for. In addition, there are amounts which 
the bank regards as owing to it by Capita.

“The bank continues to work through the issues surrounding this transformation 
programme with Capita. The existing outsourcing of mortgage processing to 
Capita both for new and existing bank customers continues to operate in a 
satisfactory manner and the bank is committed to ensuring that this remains the 
case going forward.”

Capita’s late delivery of an upgrade to the TfL congestion charge contract is 
likely to result in one-off costs of between £20m to £25m in the full year, the 
company said.


Parker said: “Our delivery wasn’t up to the standard expected. The upgrade 
proved more complex than we anticipated and the penalties ramped up very 
quickly.”

The company added: “The systems have now gone live, the contract is performing 
well operationally and these costs will not recur next year.”

Capita’s business is split 47% in the public sector and 53% in the private 
sector, with clients including Tesco Mobile and Zurich. It has won £949m worth 
of big contracts in the year so far, and was recently selected as preferred 
bidder to provide customer management services for Three, the telecoms company.

“We remain confident of the strength of our business model and aim to return 
the group to profit growth next year, excluding the benefit from TfL one-off 
costs dropping out,” the company said.

Rory McKenzie, an analyst at UBS, said the message from Capita was that 
forecasts should be “reset” lower. “As seen at Mitie, the UK outsourcing market 
is weak with low levels of contract awards and pressure on discretionary 
revenues. The magnitude of the impact on profits is a concern, however.”
 