
Unions and the Labour party have sought reassurances that the takeover of the 
running of the environment department’s science agency by outsourcing company
Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> will not see 
commercial interests trump public science.

On Wednesday, ministers said the government would retain a 25% share in the 
Food and Environment Research Agency (Fera) <https://t.co/ZRTtRZc86d>, which 
will be run by Capita from 1 April as a joint venture in partnership with 
Newcastle University.

Fera’s long-term research ranges from the effects of pesticides on bees and 
other wildlife to tree diseases and ways to tackle alien pests.

The deal came a day after the Independent reported 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/capita-accused-of-using-major-government-contract-to-shortchange-small-companies-driving-some-out-of-business-10037349.html>
 that the Cabinet Office is investigating claims Capita used a £250m government 
contract to ‘short-change’ small businesses.

Elizabeth Truss, the environment secretary, hailed the joint venture as a way 
of securing environmental science research.

“This exciting investment allows Fera to grow its science capability, ensuring 
the security and quality of our food supply chain and keeping our plants and 
environment healthy.

“Fera’s continued ability to deliver cutting-edge science will enhance its 
reputation and viability as an international centre of excellence that can 
compete abroad and attract further investment.”

Maria Eagle, the shadow environment secretary, has written to Bronwyn Hill, 
permanent secretary at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 
expressing concern that the joint venture will be launched while parliament is 
in purdah for the general election, avoiding full parliamentary scrutiny.

She said she wanted: “to seek reassurances over the role that Capita will play 
in the joint venture, including how much they have invested in it and what 
impact this will have on the capacity of Fera to carry out is core functions in 
the public interest.”

Eagle also asked for clarifiation on what functions Fera will retain and 
details of “what robust safeguards it will put in place to ensure that 
government science continues to take precedence over commercial interests.”


Geraldine O’Connell, national secretary for the union Prospect, which 
represents scientists at Fera and haspreviously warned over the impact on 
long-term science from such privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/28/food-and-environment-research-agency-privatisation>
, said: “This has been an anxious time for members. Sadly, our experience of 
the privatisation of other public sector scientific organisations has not been 
encouraging.

“We will want to ensure that the new provider focuses on delivering good 
quality, long-term science and is not simply concerned with making money. 
Equally, we will be seeking commitments from Capita to safeguard the future of 
the workforce and all their terms and conditions of employment.”

A spokesman for the PCS union, which represents Fera’s administrators and 
technicians, said the joint venture amounted to a sell-off: “We do not believe 
the private sector is any more efficient and effective and we’re opposed to 
public services like this being run for profit. Minsters know privatisation and 
companies like Capita are unpopular, so joint ventures are their latest way to 
try to disguise what just amounts to a sell-off, butthe most recent example in 
the civil service 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/news_centre/recent-news.cfm/government-s-latest-private-partner-wastes-no-time-cutting-jobs>
 led to job cuts and office closures almost immediately.”

The partnership with Newcastle University, which has a reputation for research 
on food security and rural development, will see the creation of a new £9m 
‘virtual’ research institute bringing together around 40 researchers.

Professor Rob Edwards, head of the university’s school of agriculture, food 
and rural development,said 
<http://www.ncl.ac.uk/press.office/press.release/item/newcastle-university-in-joint-bid-for-the-food-and-environment-research-agency>
: “This new collaboration would give us a real opportunity to drive forward 
innovation in areas such as food security and crop protection and help us to 
maximise the opportunities for our research to impact on agriculture and modern 
food security challenges.”
 