
Back in September, Netflix announced a long-term plan to fill half of its 
catalogue with original programming. This perhaps explains its feverish efforts 
in recent years to make big-budget versions of every TV format under the sun – 
with the possible exceptions of home shopping and crime scene re-enactment. 
However, the latter arrives on the platform on Friday courtesy ofCaptive, a 
slick docuseries that does for a string of high-stakes false imprisonments what 
Crimewatch does for armed robberies in Penge.

Across eight episodes, the show revisits hostage-takings in eight countries 
from Brazil to Chechnya to Yemen, using first-hand interviews, archival footage 
and glossy reconstructions to piece together precise accounts of events often 
shrouded in confusion and terror. At first, it’s not clear what Captive hopes 
to achieve beyond raising the audience’s collective heart rate but, over time, 
a few factors begin to elevate the show beyond its superficial sales pitch as a 
sleek but repetitive odyssey through the “List of hostage crises” Wikipedia 
entry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSp83eiQ-1w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSp83eiQ-1w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDSp83eiQ-1w&media=>
Most remarkably, episodes regularly secure the participation of both victims 
and perpetrators, granting the audience a more nuanced understanding of events 
by allowing them to observe from two angles. In one episode detailing a 1993 
Ohio prison riot in which 450 inmates turned the tables on their guards, a 
prisoner recalls how he located and studied the jail’s hostage negotiation 
manual, allowing him to work to the same handbook as police in the subsequent 
stand-off.

Captive allows these subjects to speak for themselves, rather than prodding 
them for details. It’s an approach that creates empathy with victims, but often 
provokes swaggering bravado in their captors, meaning little is revealed about 
the latter group. “Snitches get ditches,” says one Ohio inmate, now released 
and wearing a trilby, in a moment the show plays for edgy menace. If there’s 
more to his words than macho posturing, Captive isn’t interested in finding out.

Likewise, the show’s desire to both ratchet tension and probe for meaning 
often leaves it scrambling for cod philosophy in its closing minutes. Several 
episodes end with victims considering the humanity they share with their 
tormentors, a lofty idea unearned by a show more interested in milking hostage 
situations for their innate horror. This contradiction is nothing new: it’s 
inherent in every unsparing Crimewatch dramatisation of a Northampton 
pensioner’s murder that claims a higher moral calling. Maybe this is one TV 
format even Netflix can’t salvage.
 