
Captain Fantastic: a heart-wrenching look at an unconventional ‘hippie’ family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/31/captain-fantastic-sundance-2016-first-look-review-viggo-mortensen>
Captain Fantastic <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-fantastic> opens 
in a riot of green leaves and trees. A deer appears before us, pauses, and 
behind it we see an indefinable area of grey flickering oddly to reveal a human 
eye. Seconds later, six woad-coated tribesmen appear from nowhere, slash the 
deer’s throat, gut it and hang it to drain. A boy is blooded. He eats some deer 
heart. Today he is a man, his father tells him.

As we’ll learn, this is a family who have lived off the grid since the eldest 
of six children – the blooded one – was three, 15 years ago. Patriarch Ben Cash 
(Viggo Mortensen) has raised them to fend for themselves and each other, to 
grow and hunt their own food, to protect themselves with or without weapons, 
and to question conventional wisdom.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAL2roIsRz5A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAL2roIsRz5A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAL2roIsRz5A&media=>
So far, so survivalist/Swiss Family Robinson/Republican nightmare; but no, Ben 
is actually a Chomskyan libertarian leftist, and he puts no less emphasis upon 
his children’s intellectual development, educating them with everything he says 
and does. In one calm early moment that almost made me want to stand up and 
cheer, the whole family sit in silence around the fire, intently reading their 
books – hard books such asMiddlemarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/10/100-best-novels-middlemarch-george-eliot>
 andThe Brothers Karamazov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/29/fiction>. And it works: the kids 
are bright and curious, and the eldest, unbeknownst to his father, has 
acceptance letters from fourIvy League colleges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/24/why-are-so-many-missing-out-on-ivy-league-schools>
 hidden away, a ticking time-bomb for the family.

Why the young cast of Captain Fantastic had to learn how to track a deer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/captain-fantastic-film/2016/aug/26/why-the-young-cast-of-captain-fantastic-had-to-learn-how-to-track-a-deer>
The first hour of Captain Fantastic keeps us in the idyllic forests of the 
Pacific Northwest, almost persuading us that Ben has done great work for his 
children, but there is a growing sense that he has taught them everything 
except how to live in the real world. When bad news arrives about the 
children’s mother, whose puzzling absence has been glancingly noted, the family 
must board their converted school bus and return, for now, perhaps for longer, 
to suburbia, to family, and to “responsibility”, however it’s defined. In the 
process, all the family’s contradictions and strains rise to the surface.

Captain Fantastic hangs on its central character – tough, wise, charismatic, 
arrogant, possibly deluded – and Viggo Mortensen, usually a very contained 
performer, is magically effervescent in his chieftain-patriarch role. But his 
stellar work is underpinned by a marvellously organic ensemble. Writer-director 
Matt Ross (who playsnerd-mogul Gavin Belson on Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/14/silicon-valley-mike-judge-google-geek-cult-tech>
) has pulled off something remarkable here, a funny, clever, moving family 
drama with not one whit of cuteness or preciousness and no selling its 
characters short. I will watch absolutely anything Ross chooses to make next: a 
fine director is born.
 