
Cardinal Paulo Evaristo Arns, who has died aged 95 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2016/12/14/cardinal-who-stood-up-to-brazilian-dictatorship-dies-aged-95/>
, used to tell a revealing story about his final interview withPope John Paul II
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/02/guardianobituaries.catholicism>
. It was 1998, and Dom Paulo, as he was known affectionately to his flock in 
São Paulo, which claims to be the largest Catholic city in the world, was about 
to retire as an archbishop after 28 years in post. The two senior churchmen 
were in a room in the Vatican and had been getting on famously when John Paul 
suddenly produced out of his pocket a farewell letter for Arns, pre-prepared by 
his officials. “They gave me the text,” he explained, “and I only had to sign 
it.”

With long experience of the machinations of Vatican bureaucracy, Arns 
suggested they should look over the text together. “It was very critical of 
me,” he recalled in a 2002 newspaper interview. “I started to read it to him. 
When we got to the third paragraph, the pope became indignant and said, ‘I am 
not going to sign this. I never said this about you, Paulo, and neither do I 
want it stated in a document.’ He then threw the paper on the floor.”

The incident reveals the high personal esteem in which John Paul held Arns, 
and hardly fits with the image often presented of the Polish pontiff as hostile 
to progressive Latin American clerics. But it also illustrates the deep 
hostility within the Curia to Arns and his ilk. Such hostility was scant reward 
for their tireless championing of the poor and the marginalised, in line with 
gospel imperatives, but had its roots in Rome’s dislike for“liberation theology”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/11/vatican-new-chapter-liberation-theology-founder-gustavo-gutierrez>
 and its model of a participatory church that dominated Latin American 
Catholicism in the 1970s and 80s.

When Arns was a young boy, growing up in a humble home in the state of Santa 
Catarina in the 1920s and 30s, the church inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, one of the most economically 
divided countries in the world, had always sided instinctively with the ruling 
elite. As archbishop, then cardinal archbishop, of São Paulo from 1970 onwards, 
Arns reversed that.

In the Colombian city of Medellín in 1968, at the Conference of Latin American 
Bishops <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conference_of_Latin_American_Bishops>, 
he was one of those who signed up for the “preferential option for the poor” 
that lay at the heart of liberation theology. “I was never,” Arns once said, 
“in favour of communism or capitalism. [I wanted] a social system where all 
would have what is sufficient for a decent life and where there would be 
justice and equality. In our country 2% of the population has more wealth than 
the other 98%. This is a scandal.”

In his huge, sprawling São Paulo diocese of 15 million souls, Arns set to work 
with gusto to practise and preach the Medellín message. He horrified 
traditionalist Brazilian Catholics when he sold the city’s ornate Pope Pius XII 
archiepiscopal palace, found other employment for the 25 servants he had 
inherited, and moved instead into a modest couple of rooms behind a monastery, 
where he would greet visitors, not in his cardinal’s finery but in slippers and 
a cardigan.

He spent the money raised by the sale on projects to tackle poverty, 
overcrowding and poor healthcare in the favelas of São Paulo. In his relentless 
pursuit of justice, Arns quickly became one of the most prominent critics of 
the military governments of generals Geisel and thenFigueiredo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/dec/29/guardianobituaries2> over their 
use of torture, their denial of human rights and their role in the murder of 
trade union officials. At one pointArns braved a military squadron surrounding 
the city’s medical institute to retrieve the body of the labour leader Santo 
Dias da Silva, and witness the bullet holes in his side 
<http://www.thetablet.co.uk/news/6516/0/-leader-of-the-people-of-brazil-cardinal-arns-dies-age-95>
. He spoke up fearlessly on workers’ pay and conditions, backed strikes that 
aimed to achieve a living wage, and pressed for the return to democracy that 
finally came, after 21 years, in 1985.

While his outspokenness made him a hero of the masses and, for many, the most 
inspirational figure in the Latin American church, it drew a more mixed 
reaction in Rome. Initially it seemed that John Paul II, elected in 1978, 
thoroughly approved of Arns. On avisit to Brazil in 1980 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/1980/0714/071444.html>, the pontiff joined the São 
Paulo cardinal at a football stadium to urge striking metal workers (who 
included the future leftist president,Lula da Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva>) to continue 
their fight for justice, to cries of “liberdade, liberdade”. When John Paul 
addressed the union leader, Waldemar Rossi, as “Comrade Worker”, many noted the 
clear parallels with the pope’s support for theSolidarity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/jun/12/eu.thefarright> trade union in 
his native land.

But as the decade progressed, the pope allowed his right-hand man (and 
ultimately his successor),Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/20/catholicism.religion3>, to rein 
in proponents of liberation theology on the grounds that they were mixing up 
the gospel and politics. In 1984, Arns was publicly humiliated by Ratzinger 
when the latter refused to allow him to attend a Vatican dressing-down to be 
given to the Brazilian liberation theologianFather Leonardo Boff 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonardo_Boff>. Arns had wanted to defend his 
fellow Franciscan, but Ratzinger let him into the room only at the end of the 
interview.

In 1989, Rome further punished Arns by breaking up his power base. His 
archdiocese was split. He was left with authority only over the middle-class 
and financial heart of the city – the section of the community most suspicious 
of his work – while his natural home, the outlying favelas, were reorganised 
into five new dioceses, each with its own independent bishop.

The collegial model that Arns had implemented in São Paulo archdiocese – with 
everyone having an equal voice and a vote in deliberations – was abandoned in 
the new set-up. While Rome realised that Arns was too formidable and celebrated 
a figure to cross directly, it signalled its disapproval of his work by 
targeting those close to him, removing his confessor, the Dominican biblical 
scholar Frei Gilberto Gorgulho, from his posts at the archdiocesan seminary.

In spite of such treatment, Arns pointedly refused to waver in his loyalty to 
the papacy. In retirement, he confined himself to warnings about the growth of 
power of the church’s bureaucrats. “The Curia,” he said, “is governing the 
church.” And, by implication, ruining it.

Born in Forquilhinha, Santa Caterina, Paulo was the fifth of 13 children of 
poor German immigrants, Helena (nee Steiner) and Gabriel Arns. His first 
language in childhood was German and it enabled him to later give the German 
Cardinal Ratzinger as good as he got.

Three of his sisters became nuns and he was one of two of the brothers who 
joined the Franciscan order. After ordination in 1945, he was sent to the 
Sorbonne in Paris. There, he studied alongside many who had been detained and 
tortured by the Nazis. On his return to Brazil, he worked in education – as a 
professor at the Franciscan seminary at Agudos, which served São Paulo, and 
then at the Catholic University of Petrópolis – but also ran slum parishes. He 
was consecrated an assistant bishop in 1966, in time to participate 
enthusiastically at the Medellín conference.

Soon after his appointment by Pope Paul VI to São Paulo as archbishop in 1970 
(he was given his cardinal’s hat in 1973), he was shocked by the arrest and 
torture of a young diocesan priest. His “crime” had been to write in favour of 
better wages for workers. When Arns was refused permission to visit the priest 
in prison, he used church radio stations, newspapers and the pulpit to 
highlight the activities of the secret police. He was a great believer in the 
need to communicate effectively the church’s message, writing more than 120 
books and building a small radio studio next to his home.

His fight to free one priest broadened into a high-profile campaign against 
torture. His book on the subject –Brasil, Nunca Mais 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=8oP8AwAAQBAJ&pg=PT13&lpg=PT13&dq=CARDINAL+ARNS+NUNCA+MAIS&source=bl&ots=zcdf6vq1Ir&sig=dNHkY1FzUiYgegnxIno3NxQX8BA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjijueL0vbQAhWqB8AKHYr8DYYQ6AEIKDAC#v=onepage&q=CARDINAL%20ARNS%20NUNCA%20MAIS&f=false>
 (Brazil never again, 1985) – was translated into English as Torture in Brazil 
and widely read.

His good personal relations with John Paul II saw him appointed in 1983 as 
secretary to thesynod of bishops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/catholic-bishops-rome-synod-family>
, the regular gathering of the world’s Catholic prelates in Rome. At that 1983 
meeting, Arns made headlines by insisting that the theme – Reconciliation and 
Penance – be taken as indicating not just the need for individuals to confess 
their sins, but for the church to ask “who confesses the economic sins 
committed against the third world?”.

Social sin 
<http://www.catholicculture.org/culture/library/dictionary/index.cfm?id=36530>, 
as it is called, was a key theme of John Paul II, and one of many areas where 
the two men shared similar views. But the crucial difference was that the 
Polish pope believed that evangelisation of the marginalised must always come 
before fighting for their political and social wellbeing.

In retirement, as the resident chaplain at an old people’s home north of São 
Paulo, Arns continued to speak out – notably for reform of the rule demanding 
that all priests be celibate. It should simply be an option, he told the 
newspaperO Globo <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/O_Globo>, since clerical 
celibacy had little basis in the Bible.

A tumour on his eye and the onset of Parkinson’s disease slowed him down, but 
he carried on working, holding the Unesco chair for peace education, human 
rights, democracy and tolerance at São Paulo State University before finally 
retiring from the public eye into a life of prayer.

The Vatican may have been successful in stripping Dom Paulo of the trappings 
of power in the church – his suggestions for his successor in São Paulo when he 
retired were rejected – but no bureaucracy could take away the authority of his 
prophetic voice in Brazil and in internationalCatholicism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism>.

• Cardinal Paulo Evaristo Arns, priest, born 14 September 1921; died 14 
December 2016
 