
What happened with Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds>? Granted, there were real, 
unexpected events at the ends of their lives, yet still we must recognise that 
a thing one can only call a “story” has closed in on them. A tidiness is now 
being constructed about them online, where there is hysteria for having stuff 
fit together in ways that are cliched, unreliable and lifeless – yet urgent. 
The project we might call history can hardly survive such pressures.


Debbie Reynolds, according to her son Todd, said, “I want to be with Carrie”, 
and in a matter of moments, she was – if dead people are capable of being 
together anywhere other than in the annals of a story.

If you go back to the beginning, something happened to Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> on that aircraft getting 
ready to descend on LAX. She had a “massive” heart attack.

She was coming back from a tour to promote a book, and authors will tell you 
that such tours can be exhausting and crushing. Her mother was not with her. 
And you only have to read Fisher’s earlier book,Postcards from the Edge 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/postcards-from-the-edge.html>, to realise 
that a younger woman trying to exist in show business might have been relieved 
not to have her unstoppable, unsinkable, never-say-die mum with her on the trip.

 Carrie Fisher may have dreaded the landing ahead of her, and she did not know 
that, as Princess Leia, she would be obited as “iconic”, “beloved” and an 
institution in the house of popular culture. But I don’t think she ever felt 
secure there, so much as trapped. In fact, she had made sarcastic jokes about 
her Star Wars history, and was hip enough to have had enough of Leia, even if 
she was attached to the sequels still being made, because that pert princess 
with the weird hair was a meal ticket for her. When you are unsure of what 
happened, the financial interpretation of events can be surprisingly helpful.
 Todd Fisher, Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher. Photograph: Fisher Family 
Archives/Courtesy of HBO 
 So, after a few days in hospital, Carrie died, and her mother was diminished. 
That’s not hard to believe or understand: having to bury your own child is one 
of the nightmares of our existence. At the level of medicine, or the history of 
an organism, we’ll never know what happened – and the exact sequence of events 
hardly matters. Todd says she did notdie of a broken heart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/you-can-die-of-a-broken-heart-study-indicates>
. I can accept that, but I have to say, “She wanted to be with Carrie”, does 
sound like a movie line. That is not to discredit the reality of the sentiment 
– and Debbie Reynolds was all her life an eager servant of a show business 
story. What’s more, I think she believed in those stories more than her ironic 
daughter.

Related: Debbie Reynolds did not die of a 'broken heart', says her son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/31/debbie-reynolds-did-not-die-of-a-broken-heart-says-her-son>

So what happened? Well, I’d say that her organism weakened, her will ebbed, 
and she “gave up the ghost” – which is just another line from a cultural 
interpretation that I don’t actually belong to. Carrie died, and then Debbie 
died. It was all understandable, tidy, and very touching. It was like an ending 
from an old movie, and Reynolds had tropes alive in her head, behind her grin, 
just as she collected the costumes from classic films to keep their romance 
alive.

 In our lifetimes, we have been irradiated by story – not just the movies, or 
the television narratives, but now the onslaught of the internet and items such 
as, “Everyone’s talking about the dress malfunction that hit … ” Fill in the 
name and flick through the shabby snaps of a glimpse of skin – and then wonder 
if the nameless beauty arranged the nip-slip just to keep “current” and exposed.

 If that sounds cynical, suppose it’s simply an admission that we have more 
and more trouble believing in things just “happening”, in the way of 
spontaneity, chance and passing time.

 I know when this mood set in for me: 22 November 1963. When President Kennedy 
was assassinated, there were immediate tremors of suspicion. Even then it was 
tempting to believe that America was not just a universe of random happenings, 
but a noir system. I resisted that for a few days. I thought well, why not a 
lone, deranged gunman, lax security and a few lucky shots? I didn’t want to get 
lost in the tunnels of “conspiracy theory” because that seemed too easy and 
pessimistic. Weren’t America, and Texas, places where wayward souls might just 
pick up a gun and fire it off in a mood of unstoppable speculation? I know I 
was reminded of Frank Sinatra trying to shoot a president in 1954’s Suddenly – 
which was a warning of innocence not lasting.
 ‘His name was Jack Ruby and in the tide of paranoia and plot that swept in, 
everyone seemed to have shady connections.’ Photograph: Bob Jackson/AP 
 It needed just a few more days before I was watching live coverage of the 
basement of a police station in Dallas, with Lee Harvey Oswald– a pale guy in a 
black sweater (the costume was right) – being shifted. Then, lo and behold and 
as if at fiction’s bidding, a man in a hat stepped forward – in a police 
station! – and shot Oswald dead. His name was Jack Ruby and in the tide of 
paranoia and plot that swept in, everyone seemed to have shady connections.

You want more? One night in May 1956 there was a dinner party in the Los 
Angeles hills. A man there left early, so drunk that people were worried. He 
followed a friend in another car down the hill. But something happened: our 
hero crashed into a telephone pole and was badly hurt. The other driver hurried 
back to tell the party and soon there were several people at the crash site. A 
woman, who was fond of the hurt guy, crawled into the wrecked car and did what 
she could to comfort him. It was his face that was ravaged. There would be 
blood on her dress. A doctor arrived and, with the help of a big strong man who 
had been at the dinner party, the damaged body of Montgomery Clift was eased 
out of the wreckage. The woman wasElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor>. The big strong guy was Rock 
Hudson, who had attended the party with his “wife”, his agent’s secretary who 
had entered into the marriage to help mask the “dangerous” story that could be 
pinned on the closeted actor.
 Clift and Taylor in A Place in the Sun. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Paramount
 I was 15 and in anguish – I wanted to be “with” Clift and Taylor, for a 
powerful reason. I had seen them in A Place in the Sun, that aching love 
tragedy, in which a shy, impoverished young man goes to a swank party where he 
feels an outcast. So he finds a pool table in an empty room and starts to play 
alone. He pulls off a tricky bank shot and a young woman who has slipped into 
the room says, “Wow!” It is a magic meeting and Taylor then was one of the most 
glorious, if unlikely, 18-year-olds ever seen, while Clift was radiant, lovely 
and emotionally deserving. He needed a story, and he had it in that film. His 
character was doomed, but he was in ecstasy, and that scene never stopped 
filling my head with daft hopes. (I prefer parties with pool tables.)

 That’s what happens with story. It’s what 100 years of vividly filmed plots 
has done for us. And that set of fictions makes a net in which we are 
struggling fish. The characters are a strange family of celebrities: they may 
be degrees apart, but they are not separated. Just a few years later in 1958, 
when Debbie Reynolds was married to Carrie’s father, Eddie Fisher, her husband 
was friends with Mike Todd. (Their son Todd may have been named after him.) But 
when Mike died in a plane crash, Fisher wanted to comfort his widow, someone 
named Elizabeth Taylor. There must have been story hawks who sighed, and said, 
“I can see where this is going!” Soon enough, Carrie’s dad had left home and he 
was number four in Liz’s list of husbands. Not that I’m knocking her. It was 
said she loved every guy who liked her. For a while, at least, she just had to 
be with them, and all her life she needed to feel the wings of story, or plot, 
were there to lift her up and let her fly. But the skies are so crowded now 
with dreamers.
 