
Carsten Kengeter is used to extremes in both personal and professional life. 
On his time off, he runs marathons, takes part in ski races and practises an 
ancient martial art.

In a career which has spanned Goldman Sachs, UBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs> and currently Deutsche Börse – which 
he heads – he has navigated the peaks of corporate finance but also been 
witness to some of the most controversial scandals that have dogged banking in 
the past decade.

LSE chief Rolet to retire after Deutsche Börse merger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/lse-chief-rolet-to-retire-after-deutsche-borse-merger>
Now the chief executive in waiting of the proposed merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/lse-chief-rolet-to-retire-after-deutsche-borse-merger>
 between the London Stock Exchange (LSE) and Deutsche Börse, the 48-year-old 
German’s new position will add to a lengthy CV.

Educated at Middlesex University and the London School of Economics, Kengeter 
joined Goldman Sachs in 1997 and progressed to partner by his mid-30s.

When he moved to UBS in 2008, he again rose through the ranks and was 
identified by the group’s then chief executive Oswald Grübel as a possible 
successor.

After that series of progressions, however, he became tarnished by the UBS 
rogue trader scandal. Kengeter was in charge of UBS’s investment banking 
operations whenKweku Adoboil  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/kweku-adoboli>racked up eventual losses 
of more than £1.5bn.

Last year the trial of Tom Hayes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/03/libor-fraudster-tom-hayes-describes-prison-life-letters>
, the former UBS trader sentenced to 14 years for fraud for his part in 
manipulating the Libor rate, heard Kengeter had been at a meeting where plans 
to manipulate the market were discussed.

Hayes told prosecutors that Kengeter was present along with other senior UBS 
executives at a meeting in Tokyo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/03/former-ubs-investment-bank-co-chief-present-libor-rigging-meeting>
 where Hayes discussed how he was going to influence submitters setting the 
rate.

LSE and Deutsche Börse: an Anglo-German pact in the shadow of Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/feb/23/lse-and-deutsche-borse-an-anglo-german-pact-in-the-shadow-of-brexit>
Kengeter left UBS in 2013 and was appointed chief executive of Deutsche Börse 
in 2014, a position he took up last June and to which he commutes from the west 
London home he shares with his wife and three children.

While at UBS 
<http://news.efinancialcareers.com/uk-en/8225/who-is-carsten-kengeter/>, he 
said he liked to be at his desk by 7am but tried to fit in sports activitiesat 
weekends. In his case, this means running marathons and taking part in skiing 
competitions across mountains.

He has been reported to have registered for the Patrouille des Glaciers 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9e7c67a4-dafd-11e5-98fd-06d75973fe09.html#axzz41HWFSQV7>
, a race organised by the Swiss army from Verbier to Zermatt.

These extreme sports are apparently balanced out by his passion for yoga and 
neigong, a Chinese breathing and meditation discipline he became familiar with 
while working in Hong Kong.
 