
In less than a week I will start the Cent Cols Challenge – a bike ride of 
frightening proportions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/apr/19/cycling-up-100-pyrenees-climbs-in-10-days-how-can-i-do-it>
.

Over 10 days, with around 20 like-minded cyclists, I will climb more than 
50,000 metres, cover more than 2,000km and summit 100 French cols (mountain 
passes). We will travel west from Perpignan, across the Pyrenees and back, 
riding for up to 10 hours a day in a near permanent state of ascent or descent.


Cycling up 100 Pyrenees climbs in 10 days: how can I do it? | Oliver Duggan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/apr/19/cycling-up-100-pyrenees-climbs-in-10-days-how-can-i-do-it>
Only a handful of riders have ever completed the ride, and they tell me the 
gradual but constant assault on mind and body is hard to foresee; not quite 
like anironman triathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/11/rise-of-ironman-the-global-triathlon-brand-worth-650m>
 or an ultra-marathon, but a slower, more drawn out exhaustion that requires 
constant attention. By day three, they say, it is an almost entirely mental 
endeavour.

That said, there is much that can be done in the weeks or so before a major 
event. Tapering has long since entered the vocabulary of professional and 
amateur cyclists, but there remains little agreement on how best to achieve the 
perfect start-line condition. Most agree that the training load should diminish 
significantly in the days before a sportive orgran fondo, but for a multi-stage 
event is there a risk that slowing up could shock the body into lethargy?

Alex Dowsett, the former world hour record holder on the track and 
professional rider for Movistar, says the key to successful tapering is honing 
the “top end”.

“The majority of the work’s been done and it’s time to fine-tune,” explains 
the 27-year-old who runs his own training programme calledCyclism 
<http://www.cyclism.com/>. “The strength and endurance phases should be done, 
and in weeks three and two there’ll likely be fewer hours spent in the saddle 
but much more quality within what you do; so shorter, sharper but harder 
intervals with bigger rests between them.”


As the workload reduces, he says, so too should food intake. This view is 
supported by Charlotte Kennedy, a nutritionist with Etixx, the sports nutrition 
company that works with a host of pro-teams. She says tapering riders’ training 
should be matched by a slightly reduced intake of carbohydrates, and a 
dramatically reduced intake of all things on the treat list. Alcohol, she says, 
should be wholly eschewed for the final fortnight, if not before, and now is 
the time to sacrifice that slice of cake on the weekly cafe ride.

Maratona dles Dolomites: fighting 'the fear' in face of daunting challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bike-blog/2016/jul/29/maratona-dles-dolomites-fighting-the-fear-in-face-of-daunting-cycling-challenges>
Dowsett says: “Your food intake should reduce a little, but don’t overdo it; 
you need to make sure you’re well fuelled to make the most of these sessions 
but not too much that you’re gaining weight, considering the mountains you have 
ahead of you.”

In the final week, it is all about rest. “The last week is where you won’t 
gain anything but can certainly ruin it all. This is really the taper week,” he 
says. “It should be a mix of easy rides and a few leg-loosener intervals in 
there, just to maintain what you have.

“This is where you really freshen up for the event. Train too hard and you’ll 
enter the event tired, so you may as well not have prepped so well. People 
often panic-train in this instance but remember, it’s always better to do less 
than more. This also applies to your weight and everything, nothing radical 
should be done in this week and certainly nothing you’ve not tried and tested 
before.”

Example taper sessions

Three weeks to go


 * Warm up (up to 20 minutes through zones 1-6) 
 * 30-sec all-out sprint 
 * 3 mins 30 secs at zone 4 (should feel like a 7.5/10 difficulty) 
 * 10-sec maximum-effort sprint 
 * 6-min recovery spin

 * Repeat steps 2 to 5 six times 
 * Warm down (up to 10 mins recovery spin) 

Two weeks to go


 * Warm up (up to 20 minutes through zones 1-6) 
 * 5 mins of 20-sec hard sprint, 40-sec recovery 

 * 5-min recovery spin 
 * Repeat steps 2 and 3 five times 
 * Warm down (up to 10 mins recovery spin) 

Final week 


 * Warm up (up to 20 minutes through zones 1-6) 
 * 8-min ramp efforts (from zone 1 to zone 5 or 6 in the last 30 secs) 
 * 10-min recovery spin 

 * Repeat steps 2 and 3 
 * 6-sec max-effort sprint 
 * 1-min recovery spin 
 * Repeat steps 5 and 6 three times 
 * Warm down (up to 10 mins recovery spin) 
 * Follow daily updates from Oliver Duggan on the Cent Cols Challenge 
<https://www.instagram.com/oliduggan/> from 14 September
 