
Until a few months ago, Carlos Hernández was a government health promoter in 
centralEl Salvador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador>. His job was 
to visit poor families and ensure their children attended school and received 
health checks, in exchange for modest cash benefits.


One day in March, on his way to visit a family in a neighbourhood controlled 
by the Mara Salvatrucha (MS13) gang, Hernández witnessed a beating by gang 
members. Too scared to intervene, he hurried past, completed his visit and 
started his long walk home.

The four assailants were waiting for him. 

“I pleaded with them to let me live. I said I had children, that I’d say 
nothing,” said Hernández, 31. “They agreed to spare my life but told me never 
to return.”

The victim was found dead three days later – one of 611 homicides in the tiny 
Central American nation that month.

Hernández was scared, but couldn’t find another job. So when he returned to 
visit the same family a month later, he took a different route and left his 
uniform at home in hope of going unnoticed.

But he was spotted by gang informants, and the same four youngsters confronted 
Hernández with baseball bats, accusing him of spying for a rival group.

“They took down my address from my identity card, and threatened to kill my 
whole family if they ever saw me again. We left El Salvador five days later,” 
said Hernández, now living with his wife and two children in a sparsely 
furnished room in Tapachula, in southernMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, where they are seeking asylum.
central america map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/central-america-map/> 
The Hernández family are part of an alarming exodus of entire families forced 
to flee widespread violence in Central America’s northern triangle, the world’s 
most dangerous region outside an official war zone.

As huge numbers of Syrian and African refugees risk their lives crossing the 
Mediterranean Sea to escape war-torn states, advocates say a parallel refugee 
crisis has unfolded on America’s doorstep amid an undeclared but increasingly 
brutal war between criminal groups and security forces.

An estimated 80,000 people from El Salvador, Guatemala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala> and Honduras, mostly families and 
unaccompanied children, are expected to apply for asylum overseas this year – a 
658% increase since 2011, according to the UN refugee agency (UNHCR). Tens of 
thousands more will be forcibly displaced, but not seek international help.


During the 1980s, the three countries known as the northern triangle were 
blighted by vicious civil wars between US-backed military dictatorships and 
leftist guerrilla groups. But even after ceasefires were agreed, peace never 
came to the region as unresolved inequalities and amnesties which let war 
criminals escape justice fuelled a new wave of violence and corruption.

This toxic mix of warring gangs and corrupt security forces is driving one of 
the world’s least visible refugee crises,Amnesty International will say in a 
new report on Friday <https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/amr01/4865/2016/en/>.

“What is shocking is the absolute lack of protection their governments are 
providing their own people,” Salil Shetty, Amnesty’s general secretary told the 
Guardian.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fcentral-american-refugees-us-mexico-border-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20you%20come%20back%2C%20we'll%20kill%20you'%3A%20Central%20Americans%20seek%20refuge%20in%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20home%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fcentral-american-refugees-us-mexico-border-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20you%20come%20back%2C%20we%27ll%20kill%20you%27%3A%20Central%20Americans%20seek%20refuge%20in%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20home%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fcentral-american-refugees-us-mexico-border-video&media=>
‘If you come back, we’ll kill you’: Central Americans seek refuge in US only to 
be sent home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/04/central-american-refugees-us-mexico-border-video>
In El Salvador, people are fleeing – and dying – at the same rate now as they 
did during the country’s 12-year civil war in which 1 million were forcibly 
displaced and 75,000 were killed. Last year, 6,657 people were murdered and 
violence forced at least 23,000 children to abandon school, in a country of 6 
million people.

“The current internal displacement and forced migration is the same human 
drama we saw during the war,” said Celia Medrano from the Civil Society 
Roundtable against Forced Displacement in El Salvador.

Often the same weapons are doing the killing: many gangs are assault rifles 
left over from the civil war 
<http://www.elfaro.net/es/201609/salanegra/19208/Las-maras-se-arman-con-fusiles-de-la-guerra-civil.htm>
.

Mexico's migration crackdown escalates dangers for Central Americans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/mexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown>
While reaching the US remains the primary goal for most Central Americans in 
flight, Mexico is an increasingly popular final destination.

In Tapachula, the largest city near the Guatemalan border, shelters which once 
served transient migrants hoping to find work in the US are now full of 
frightened asylum seekers.

“Before, people left home in search of a better life – now they’re fleeing 
overnight to save their lives,” said Olga Sánchez Martínez, founder of Jesus 
the Good Shepherd shelter.

The shift is in large part down to the Southern Border Plan: the US-instigated 
immigration crackdown on Central American migrants, launched in June 2014 after 
a surge of unaccompanied minors that year, which has made it much harder to 
traverse Mexico.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec2bf39f37cc75176353ab2081efb305cbcf3756%2F0_295_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Central%20America's%20rampant%20violence%20fuels%20an%20invisible%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Central%20America%27s%20rampant%20violence%20fuels%20an%20invisible%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec2bf39f37cc75176353ab2081efb305cbcf3756%2F0_295_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Children eat at a shelter for migrants in Chauites, Oaxaca. Shelters for 
migrants have tripled in population since the Southern Border Plan started in 
2014. Photograph: Encarni Pindado for the Guardian 
The Republican presidential candidate, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, has pledged to build a wall 
on the US-Mexican border to keep migrants out. But the proliferation of 
immigration checkpoints and bandits who prey on migrants has already created a 
formidable barrier,forcing people to risk clandestine new routes through even 
more isolated regions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/15/migrants-mexico-human-trafficking-us-immigration-crackdown>
 – or to stay in Mexico.

In the first six months of this year the Mexican refugee agency, Comar, 
received 3,486 asylum applications – a 150% rise compared to same period in 
2015. More than 8,000 are expected by the end of 2016.

But despite a significant rise in approval rates over the past year, activists 
say too many asylum seekers are rejected or simply drop out because of long 
delays in processing.

The Hernández family are such a case: their application for asylum was 
rejected on the grounds they could return to El Salvador and move to a district 
designated as a safe space after a gang truce was brokered in 2012.

But the truce – which initially reduced murders by almost 50% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/15/el-salvador-gang-truce> – was 
abandoned in 2014. Since then, gang warfare, organised crime and police 
brutality have intensified across the tiny country.

One murder every hour: how El Salvador became the homicide capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/22/el-salvador-worlds-most-homicidal-place>
“The gangs are stronger than ever, it’s a national problem. If you move to a 
community controlled by a rival gang, you’re suspected of being an informant 
–which is enough to get you killed too,” said Hernández.

His wife Elizabeth Portillo, 24, said: “We left everything we had, our beds, 
cots, fridge, our families, to come and sleep on the floor in this room. We 
didn’t want this, we left because we had to.”

Rejecting asylum claims on the grounds people can relocate within their own 
country violates national and international protocols, according to Perrine 
Leclerc, director of UNHCR in Tapachula.

“Internal relocation as a safe alternative to asylum should only be used in 
very specific circumstances and not in small countries like those in Central 
America where violence is generalized,” she said.

The family is challenging the decision, but appeals are rarely successful; in 
the meantime they cannot legally work and are reliant on stipends from UNHCR.

Comar did not respond to questions from the Guardian. But strong refugee laws 
coupled with pressure from activists means a small but growing number of 
families are being granted asylum in Mexico.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e231217573b288aaa5080f8210ba841ba2d8490%2F0_138_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Central%20America's%20rampant%20violence%20fuels%20an%20invisible%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Central%20America%27s%20rampant%20violence%20fuels%20an%20invisible%20refugee%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fcentral-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e231217573b288aaa5080f8210ba841ba2d8490%2F0_138_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Janet Machado, center, fled Honduras with her family after her 14-year-old 
daughter Gabriela, right, was shot in the shoulder and left paralysed. 
Photograph: Encarni Pindado for the Guardian 
Janet Machado, 48, fled the city of La Ceiba in northern Honduras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras> after her youngest daughter was 
shot and paralysed by a neighbourhood thug in January.

Machado travelled overland to Mexico with two wheelchair-using children 
–Gabriela and son Eric, 30, who is severely physically and learning disabled as 
a result of childhood meningitis – as well as her 17-year-old daughter Maholy 
and grandson Donavon, aged two.

Gabriela, 14, was shot in the left shoulder on her way to buy tortillas at the 
corner shop, following an argument with a male classmate. The boy’s father, who 
was under the influence of drugs or alcohol, shot her at close range and kicked 
her unconscious body. The bullet damaged the spinal cord and remains lodged 
between her lungs.

“My life completely changed, just like that. I spent three months in hospital, 
I haven’t been to school since January,” Gabriela told the Guardian after a 
rare physiotherapy session. The family struggle to pay the taxi fair to the 
rehab clinic and do not qualify for UNHCR cash benefits.

After four months living in a crowded shelter in Tapachula, the family were 
recently granted refugee status by Comar. Eventually they hope to make it to 
the US to join Donovan’s mother, an undocumented migrant working as a cleaner 
in Texas.

Going home isn’t an option.

The migrants who fled violence for the US only to be sent back to their deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/deportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador>
“Security in Honduras is getting worse, and you cannot trust the authorities. 
Everyone knows who shot my daughter, but he’s still free. Even if they arrest 
him, it could make it things worse for us. We can’t go back,” said Machado.

A blend of organised crime, state brutality and deep-seated impunity left 
8,035 people dead in Honduras last year, which has a population of 8.5 million.

In reality, those receiving international protection are a tiny proportion of 
those who would qualify.

Less than 1% of those crossing Mexico’s southern border – or 3,423 people – 
sought asylum here last year. In comparison, 170,323 Central Americans were 
detained by Mexican immigrations agents, and most were immediately deported 
home.

In addition, more than 100,000 families and unaccompanied children from 
Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala were detained at the US southern border in 
the past year.

Nevertheless, neither the US, Mexico nor the northern triangle countries have 
acknowledged the escalating refugee crisis despite warnings from the UN and 
rights groups.

Meanwhile, many people are too scared to apply for asylum or are simply 
unaware of their rights, said Fermina Rodríguez, from the Fray Matías Human 
Rights Centre in Tapachula.

“People are fleeing Central America to save their own lives, to save their 
children’s lives, in need of help. Yet Mexico’s main policy – which is always 
directed from Washington – is to detain and deport them, to stop them reaching 
the US, rather than offering them protection,” she said.

Leclerc, the UNHCR official, said: “The American dream still exists – but now 
most people are just looking for a safe place to live with their families; 
they’re searching for a normal life.”
 