
Paul Nicholls has broken his silence over the plans to close Kempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
 and build on the famous racetrack, expressing “dread” at the prospect and 
pressing the Jockey Club to explain its thinking. Nicholls, the champion jumps 
trainer in 10 of the past 11 years, went on to insist that Ascot, rather than 
Sandown, should be the home of theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
 if Kempton does eventually close.

“Like everyone else … I was shocked when the news broke in midweek,” Nicholls 
said on Sunday, adding that shock had since given way to confusion.

Related: Horse racing tips: Monday 16 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/horse-racing-tips-monday-16-january>

“At first, it sounded as though the decision to build up to 3,000 houses on 
the track was a done deal. But as the days have passed it has become clear that 
there is massive opposition to the plans in plenty of quarters including, 
crucially, the councillors on the local authorities.

“Will building really take place, was a secret deal agreed behind closed doors 
before the announcement or could this be a white elephant? At this stage it is 
impossible to say.”

Nicholls sounded frankly sceptical on the subject of the investment the Jockey 
Club says it plans to make over the next decade, which it put at the top of its 
Tuesday press release containing the bad news aboutKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>. “We’ve been told that £100m will 
be raised from the sale, yet that is balanced by the Jockey Club’s current debt 
of £115m. Yet in the next breath, their group chief executive, Simon 
Bazalgette, is promising an investment of £500m in our sport over the next 
decade.

“That type of mega funding for jump racing from the bottom upwards sounds 
terrific to me but I surely cannot be the only one wondering where all this 
money is coming from … I feel strongly that, to have a balanced view, I need to 
know a lot more detail about these startling proposals before making up my 
mind.”

Nicholls is by no means alone in his call for more information, though the 
Jockey Club has repeatedly insisted its decision to sell Kempton has nothing to 
do with its level of debt, which its officials describe as manageable for a 
group with its enormous asset base. There appears to have been no consultation 
with jumps trainers in advance of the announcement on Tuesday and the first 
that any of them knew of it was when Club staffers made courtesy calls less 
than an hour beforehand.

Nicholls, who was taking a short holiday abroad at the time, declined requests 
for comment until he could return to Britain and consider the proposals. He 
finally spoke through his Betfair column.

Related: Protests over Kempton sale fail to materialise during Lanzarote 
Hurdle day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/kempton-lanzarote-hurdle-nicky-henderson>

“I have had so many magical days at Kempton,” said the 54-year-old, whose nine 
wins in the King George amount to a record, outstripping the five achieved by 
Fulke Walwyn and François Doumen. “So, obviously, I dread the thought of the 
doors at Kempton closing for the final time and hope it doesn’t happen.”

While the Jockey Club is determined to keep the King George at one of its own 
tracks and favours Sandown, Nicholls is among those who would prefer to see the 
race moved to independently run Ascot. The Queen’s track would, he said, be “a 
much more suitable venue … as it is an outstanding jumps track with excellent 
facilities and the necessary infrastructure to accommodate a large crowd.

“Just imagine more than 30,000 jumping enthusiasts at Ascot on Boxing Day for 
the most important jumps race in midwinter. That would be superb, much better 
than the race being held at Sandown, which would be packed out with half that 
amount of people. Plus the fact that the ground is almost always bottomless 
there at that time of year.”

Meanwhile, Nico de Boinville is nearing a return to action, having been 
sidelined for two full months by the Cheltenham fall that broke his right arm. 
“We’re nearly there,” said the 27-year-old jockey, principally employed by 
Nicky Henderson. He nevertheless declined to put a timescale on his return. “I 
spent last week in France, riding out for Emmanuel Clayeux and I’ve been doing 
a bit of schooling as well.”
 