
There was a veneer of discipline in the chancellor’s handling of the UK’s 
public finances, after he ditched his predecessor’s strict target of balancing 
the budget in 2020 with three looser targets to be met in the next parliament.

Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> opted to 
set a cap on welfare spending, but only applied the new rule from the 2021/22 
financial year. He also said the government’s new aim was to bring down debt as 
a proportion of GDP by 2021, which George Osborne had hoped would happen under 
his watch.

The targets are more than five years into the future, and confirm it will take 
three parliaments tonurse the public finances back to health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/boost-uk-public-finances-philip-hammond-autumn-statement>
, after it became clear that a weaker economy, and not just the Brexit vote, 
had hit the exchequer hard.

City analysts said the looser targets were sensible when the chancellor faced 
a challenging two years while Brexit negotiations dominate the headlines and
possibly push the economy into recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/uk-economy-economists-brexit-watch-bank-of-england>
.

The government’s decision to trigger negotiations with the European Union in 
March and begin two years of talks is built into thelatest forecast by the 
Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-will-hold-uk-gdp-growth-back-says-obr>
.

The OBR, which produces twice yearly forecasts of the economy and public 
finances, said the talks could result in several outcomes for trade with the 
European Union and GDP growth,adding huge uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-could-hit-investment-in-uk-warns-german-car-chief>
 to an economic outlook that runs until 2021.

Move over Jams, next year this time the focus may be on PGPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/move-over-jams-next-year-this-time-the-focus-may-be-on-pgps>
Nevetherless, it estimated the Brexit vote would make the hole in the 
government’s finances much larger than its previous forecast in March.

The OBR heaped much of the blame for its forecast of a widening deficit on a 
dip in GDP growth next year and 2018, higher inflation and weaker earnings.


In its lengthy report, it also explained how a shift by thousands of workers 
into low-paid self-employment and the UK’s continuing story of low investment 
and low productivity had denied the Treasury vital tax revenues.

Productivity and investment were both downgraded, though remained above the 
levels forecast by more conservative City analysts.

The deterioration in the forecast since March this year will increase 
borrowing by £84bn between today and 2020/21, the OBR said, with £59bn of that 
related to the decision to leave the EU. A further £14bn of infrastructure 
spending and other measures will push the overall total of extra borrowing to 
£122bn.

At the heart of the infrastructure plan was a new national productivity 
investment fund to provide £23bn of spending over the next five years on areas 
such as transport, digital communications, research and development and housing.

Hammond earmarked £1.3bn for road improvements over the next five years, 
primarily to reduce bottlenecks, £1bn to enhance the digital infrastructure, 
£2bn a year in spending on R&D by 2020/21 and £2.3bn for infrastructure 
projects that make more land available for the building of 100,000 new homes 
“in areas where they are needed most”.

Whitehall spending was maintained with inflation-linked rises, though that 
kept in place huge cuts scheduled for local government and unprotected spending 
departments.

The schools budget and the NHS remain protected, though both are due to make 
large efficiency savings and take on extra responsibilities as part of the 
overall spending plan. Calls for extra cash to prevent local government 
services from falling over went unheeded. Likewise, cuts to further education 
colleges, the police, the courts service and many other public services remain 
in place.

Some analysts said they were surprised the chancellor chose, in the face of 
significant extra borrowing, to loosen fiscal policy further by funding a 
series of infrastructure projects.


Torsten Bell, director of the Resolution Foundation, said: “The big picture 
today is the new chancellor accepting a major increase in borrowing, partly off 
the back of the Brexit vote, and choosing to increase it further with an 
expensive but welcome increase in capital spending.”


The Guardian view on the autumn statement: half right, half wrong | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/the-guardian-view-on-the-autumn-statement-half-right-half-wrong>
Bell said that while the forecasts were “highly uncertain”, the falls in tax 
receipts related to broader issues that just Brexit point to a structural 
deterioration in the public finances.

There was a possibility an export surge or a steep rise in wages could come to 
the chancellor’s rescue, but analysts said it was more likely the economic 
situation would deteriorate and he would need to borrow extra funds to maintain 
government spending.


Howard Archer, chief European and UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: 
“The UK GDP growth forecasts for 2017 and – especially 2018 – contained in the 
autumn statement are on the optimistic side. In particular, we are sceptical 
that business investment will pick up as much as the OBR expects in 2018 as we 
suspect that uncertainty will still be extremely high as difficult negotiations 
with the EU continue over Brexit.”

Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the OBR was 
also optimistic that inflation would remain well below 3%, “which we do not 
share”.

“The OBR thinks that CPI inflation will average 2.3% next year, lower than our 
3% expectation. The OBR therefore expects a smaller squeeze on real earnings 
than we anticipate,” he said.


Bell argued that the focus on infrastructure overshadowed the chancellor’s 
decision to maintain almost all the welfare cuts put in place by his 
predecessor and steep cuts to vital services.

Hammond bust through Osborne’s welfare cap to achieve a small giveaway to 
universal credit claimants, but kept in place the freeze on payments that will 
hit the poorest much harder.
 