
David Cameron has admitted that a change in the coalition relationship is 
"inevitable" after tensions surfaced in the run-up to last week's elections and
AV referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>.

But the prime minister stressed his commitment to the coalition as 
Conservative and Liberal Democrat ministers prepared to meet across the cabinet 
table for the first time since the Lib Dems suffered severe losses in the local 
elections and saw voting reform decisively rejected by the public.

In an interview with the Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/3571555/David-Camerons-first-year-as-Prime-Minister.html>
, Cameron insisted he was still committed to a five-year term in coalition to 
deliver a "very strong" programme.

He said the coalition government had "chalked up a lot of achievements", 
adding: "The challenge for the next period is going to be – how do you have two 
parties perhaps wanting to make their voices heard more clearly, but still 
achieve that coherence?

"I think the Lib Dem top team and the Conservative top team will still work 
together very well. But that is going to be the challenge.

"There will be more noise, there will be more debate, there will be more 
public airing of differences. I think that is inevitable."

Cameron also denied Lib Dem claims that he had betrayed the spirit of the 
coalition by allowing the No to AV campaign to attack Nick Clegg's broken 
promises, but admitted that he ended up playing a "greater part" than he had 
first anticipated when it became clear it was going to be a much more political 
campaign.

The last cabinet meeting saw tense exchanges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/03/av-referendum-row-cabinet-smears>
 when the Liberal Democrat energy secretary, Chris Huhne, confronted Cameron 
and George Osborne over No to AV campaign leaflets that he believed smeared 
Clegg.

The dire election results for the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> – in contrast to a 
stronger than expected performance for the Conservatives in the local elections 
alongside a resounding win for the retention of first past the post in the 
referendum – did little to improve relations.

In the wake of the results, Vince Cable, the business secretary, accused the 
Conservatives of being"ruthless, calculating and thoroughly tribal" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/07/vince-cable-attacks-ruthless-tories>
 and claimed that "some of us never had many illusions about the Conservatives".

Cameron insisted the no campaign had been cross-party, despite being funded 
almost exclusively by Tory party donors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/02/no-to-av-vote-tory-party-funding>
.

Defending his role in the referendum campaign, he told the Sun: "If I had gone 
in and told them 'you can do this and you can't do that', the whole thing would 
have broken up acrimoniously."

Asked whether he had ever promised Clegg that he would not campaign strongly 
against AV, Cameron said: "No. I wanted Conservative party supporters, who at 
the start were a little uncertain about what they thought about AV, to be clear 
about what my view was. But the bosses – the British people – have made their 
decision, and I think we should now move on."

Clegg has signalled his intent to demonstrate more Lib Dem muscle as deputy 
prime minister, notably on the Conservative-led NHS reforms.

He has threatened to veto the reforms unless they are substantially improved 
as part of attempts to reassert his party's independence after last week's 
events.

Cameron also used his interview to signal that there would be no reshuffle 
this year, saying: "I'm not a great believer in endlessly moving people between 
different jobs. I like to think I have put in a good team of Conservative and 
Liberal Democrats and they've a lot of work to do."

He criticised predecessors Tony Blair and Gordon Brown for creating insecurity 
by making constant team changes.

"We had 12 energy ministers in nine years," he said. "And the tourism minister 
changed more often than people got off planes at Heathrow. It was hopeless. I 
think you've got to try to appoint good people and keep them."

Downing Street said that on the eve of the coalition marking a year in power, 
more than a quarter of the commitments in the coalition agreement have been met.

A spokesman said that, of the 355 commitments in the overall coalition 
agreement, more than a quarter – 26% – had already been completed, 64% were in 
progress and 10% had yet to be started.

No 10 also released figures showing that, of 1,276 specific "actions" set out 
in the business plans of individual government departments for completion 
within the first year, 66% had been completed, 31% were in progress and 3% were 
overdue.
 