
How do you celebrate the important anniversary of an iconic figure in the 
British cultural landscape? Apart from the usual TV drama-docs, the radio 
programmes, the plays, the biographies and novels, the exhibitions? With 
quilts, is one answer. With knitting, another. Throw in some tiny books, a tea 
party and a quiet wreath-laying at Westminster Abbey.

Are we talking about the 400th anniversary of William Shakespeare’s death on 
23 April? Like hell we are. Or maybe the Queen’s 90th birthday on 21 April? No, 
but the date is right. The Queen shares her birthday with one of the UK’s most 
feted authors:Charlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> will be 200 this 21 April.

For the past 18 months I have been working with the Brontë Parsonage Museum 
<http://www.bronte.org.uk/> in Haworth as a creative partner to find ways to 
celebrate Charlotte’s bicentenary, trying hard to ignore the anniversaries that 
surround and threaten to engulf her. Charlotte was famously shy and unflashy. 
At a dinner party Thackeray threw for her, she was unable to speak – except to 
the governess. What kind of celebration makes sense in light of her 
skittishness at the trappings of fame?

I have long been drawn to Charlotte Brontë, and in particular to her most 
famous heroine, the “poor, obscure, plain and little” governess Jane Eyre. As a 
writer myself, I admire Jane’s surprisingly strong voice. Written in the first 
person – unusual enough at the time, especially for a woman writer – Jane Eyre 
pulls me in and keeps me at her side in a way that David Copperfield, and Pip in
Great Expectations, don’t quite manage, though they too tell their own stories. 
Self-possessed and fierce when she needs to be, Jane is the voice of the 
disenfranchised, speaking out while maintaining her dignity 
and ultimately triumphing.

It was only on rereading Jane Eyre last year that I recognised something of my 
own heroine Griet inGirl With a Pearl Earring; she too comes from nothing and 
quietly stands her ground. This is a common enough trope in writing now, but it 
was groundbreaking whenJane Eyre was published to instant acclaim in 1847.

While working towards the bicentenary, I often pondered why the Brontë sisters 
(Charlotte, Emily and Anne) are so popular and revered in the UK. I grew up in 
the US, not readingJane Eyre until I was at university, so did not imbibe 
Brontë mania with my mother’s milk. It was only after living here for years 
that I began to understand that the Brontë family – in particular the novels 
Jane Eyre and Wuthering Heights – are part of the furniture of the house that 
makes up Britain.

We may admire Shakespeare and respect the Queen, but I suspect most of us 
relate more naturally to Charlotte

Partly they are famous because of the sheer improbability of what they 
accomplished. Picture your siblings: how likely is it that you could all 
produce novels within the same year, which are still classics 150 years later? 
Not only that, but they were all women, at a time when women were not 
encouraged to write, much less publish. Charlotte didn’t even tell her father
Jane Eyre had been published until six weeks after the event.

Then there are the characters in the novels. Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights 
and Rochester inJane Eyre certainly fall into the Byronic category of “mad, bad 
and dangerous to know”. The passion between Heathcliff and Cathy is the kind of
amour fou car crash we can’t take our eyes from. And Jane Eyre is exactly 
the kind of underdog – the opposite of the tall poppy syndrome – that the 
British love to support.

For Charlotte’s bicentenary I had to be reined in a little. When first meeting 
with the Brontë Parsonage Museum team, I threw all sorts of ideas at them. The 
world’s largest Apple Charlotte. Special Brontë brews named after Brontë 
characters. AVanity Fair photoshoot of all the actors who have played Jane 
Eyre. The Brontë staff managed to keep straight faces in front of this 
onslaught. Luckily sense – and budget – prevailed, and the results are suitable 
to Charlotte’s character.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcharlotte-bronte-great-small-parsonage-haworth-splendid-shreds-silk-satin-bankfield-reader-married%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb142d5607a7e4c68d164ac2ba38c85a8b80944%2F0_0_2000_1391%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20national%20treasure%20for%20200%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcharlotte-bronte-great-small-parsonage-haworth-splendid-shreds-silk-satin-bankfield-reader-married%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%3A%20national%20treasure%20for%20200%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fcharlotte-bronte-great-small-parsonage-haworth-splendid-shreds-silk-satin-bankfield-reader-married%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb142d5607a7e4c68d164ac2ba38c85a8b80944%2F0_0_2000_1391%2F2000.jpg>
 The earliest known piece of writing by Charlotte Brontë, part of Charlotte 
Great and Small at the Brontë Parsonage Museum, Haworth. Photograph: Brontë 
Parsonage Museum/British Library 
(I did manage to achieve one of my more far-flung ideas: a gloriously bonkers 
Knitted Jane Eyre by Denise Salway – AKAthe Knitting Witch 
<https://twitter.com/KnittingWitchUK> – who brilliantly captures in wool the 
famous burning bed scene inJane Eyre.)

In the end I have curated two Charlotte exhibitions in Yorkshire. Charlotte 
Great and Small 
<https://www.bronte.org.uk/whats-on/225/charlotte-great-and-small/232> is at 
the Brontë Parsonage Museum all this year and explores the tiny objects and 
fragments of her life – little books, shoes, watercolours, fragments of love 
letters – contrasted with her huge ambition, as displayed in quotes such as “I 
hardly know what swelled to my throat – such a vehement impatience of restraint 
and steady work – such a strong wish for wings…”

At the Bankfield Museum in Halifax, from 16 April to 11 June, Splendid Shreds 
of Silk and Satin 
<http://museums.calderdale.gov.uk/whatson/exhibitions/splendid-shreds-silk-satin-celebration-charlotte-bront%C3%AB-quilts>
 is a collection of miniature quilts made by Yorkshire quilters responding to 
that line fromJane Eyre, alongside a patchwork quilt the Brontë sisters made 
and a spectacular modern reinterpretation of that quilt by 
several Sheffield quilters.

Of course you can’t celebrate a writer without producing a book. In Reader, I 
Married Him: Stories Inspired by Jane Eyre, 21 women writers take the book’s 
most famous line and run with it. Some use the Jane Eyre story, retelling it 
from a different angle, while others explore the nature of marriage and 
relationships in the wider world, from Texas to Zambia. Charlotte would be 
amazed and amused by the breadth and depth of the response.

Amid these April anniversary celebrations, we may admire Shakespeare the 
colossus, and respect the Queen for her longevity and stability, but I suspect 
most of us relate more naturally to the understated, quietly ambitious 
Charlotte.

Tracy Chevalier’s latest novel is At the Edge of the Orchard 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378889/s/at-the-edge-of-the-orchard/>
 (Borough Press). Reader, I Married Him: Stories Inspired by Jane Eyre, is 
edited by Chevalier and published by Borough Press (£12.99).Click here to order 
a copy for £10.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385524/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 