
Charlie Kaufman scripted and co-directed Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> – his second film behind the 
camera after 2008’sSynecdoche, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/synecdoche-new-york>. Anomalisa 
is a stop-motion existential breakdown about a depressed customer-service guru, 
Michael (voiced byDavid Thewlis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/david-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary>
) who is spending a night in Cincinnati. The film won raves at the autumn 
festivals last year and was Oscar nominated, but wound up only taking around 
$3.8m worldwide. Kaufman, 58, spoke to us by telephone from Pasadena, in 
California

The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK: No 1 Anomalisa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-1-anomalisa>
Congratulations! You’re our No 1. How do you feel about Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> now? 

It feels pretty far away now, I guess. I’m really happy with the way it came 
about, the way we sort of made it happen without any help from the studio [it 
was funded by Kickstarter]. We forged ahead and did something and I’m proud of 
that. I haven’t looked at the film recently so I hope my feelings are still 
positive.

Why do you think it didn’t make more money? 

Oh boy, I don’t know. Of course, I think about stuff like that because it’s so 
important, if you want to get something else going, you have to have that on 
your track record. We were surprised. I don’t think we thought it would be a 
monster hit, but we went from being invisible, through Telluride and Venice and 
Toronto getting thesereally great reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
, and then Paramount picked it up [for $5m] so we thought: ‘OK, this is gonna 
happen,’ and it didn’t. I have no idea. People said to me: ‘Oh well, it doesn’t 
have a happy ending and people need that,’ and ‘Maybe, because it’s animation, 
and people don’t think they want to see that.’ But it’s all speculative. I 
know, in general, this type of small movie is not doing well in terms of box 
office. It’s just not happening any more. It could just be that? I don’t know. 
It’s a head-scratcher. I feel bad about it not only for us, but Curzon [who 
released in the UK] and Paramount, and people who put their money and faith in 
it and everything. You want them to get rewarded for that.

Did it change your opinion of audiences?


No, I don’t think it does. I feel like it changes my opinion of myself a 
little bit. Early on, when I started making movies, it was a different time. 
Being John Malkovich was kind of a similar sort of thing: we were under the 
radar until Venice and got a lot of attention and then it made a fair amount of 
money for a small movie. It certainly made people their money back and then 
some. And after that I had a pretty good track record of movies making their 
money back; none of them were giant but … And so then I’m thinking, ‘I’m not 
part of that. Now, I’m not culturally relevant. Who am I in this business?’ But 
what can you do? You sort of go ahead. You keep trying to get things made.

You’ve said the film was partly informed by a fear of things like social 
media. Have the events of the past month or two confirmed your opinions about 
that?

Boy, who knows what’s going on now? I think some of that inability to see each 
other is probably attributable to social media and the new way that we interact 
with each other. It’s much easier to hate people, to feel alienated. I also 
think the echo chamber does not only exist among liberals. People go to sites 
that confirm their bias, and that happens across the political spectrum.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F8%2F1457440237667%2FKP_1823535_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F8%2F1457440237667%2FKP_1823535_crop_640x360.jpg>
Charlie Kaufman on Anomalisa: ‘The internet is a terrible danger’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/08/charlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
Could the triumph of Trump be ascribed to a growing lack of empathy?

Of course, but this election is complicated. It isn’t only that. It has to do 
with gerrymandering and questionable practices the system has sort of been 
rigged for. It isn’t obviously a fair representation of what’s going on in the 
country; people are not given a voice in an equitable way. The difference 
between the popular and the electoral vote is interesting. I feel like there was
a Black Mirror episode 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/09/black-mirror-makers-confirm-the-us-election-is-not-an-episode-of/>
 that pretty much pegged it -the one with the cartoon character 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Waldo_Moment>.

The odd thing is that so much of what Trump said that is inconsistent, and 
that inconsistency was irrelevant to his supporters. The idea he wouldn’t be 
able to implement the things that he said he was going to implement; they knew 
that and it didn’t matter. That’s bizarre. I think it just comes down to people 
feeling – justifiably – that they’re being lied to, that things aren’t real and 
they’re being manipulated and controlled.

Do you subscribe to the idea of a post-truth world?

I saw this little documentary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tyop0d30UqQ> on 
Charlie Brooker’s show, by Adam Curtis, about this Russian guy, Putin’s advisor 
[Vladislav Surkov]. And it was all about creating so much distortion and 
various different kinds of social and political movements that are at odds with 
each other, and also throwing into the mix that all of it is a lie. And so 
you’re just sort of scrambling with the impossible task of figuring out what is 
true and that is calculated. And I thought: ‘Holy cow, that’s right. That’s 
what’s going on.’ I guess that’s post truth. But the thing that’s really awful 
is the people who are engaged in that are screwing themselves as well as 
everybody else. It’s just going to be a confused, chaotic mess of media 
manipulation, and it’s terrifying and destructive and dehumanising and tragic.

Have you seen HyperNormalisation? 

I saw a little bit of it online. I really loved it. I think [Adam Curtis] is 
amazing and I loved the poetry of it, too. A really interesting way of doing 
documentaries.

Where do we go next if we’re all in this unspoken conspiracy where the 
politicians are lying and everyone knows they’re lying and they know we know 
they’re lying?

With Trump, people don’t care. They like his personality and he’s an outsider. 
Which is, of course, a lie. He’s been manipulating politics and regulations his 
entire career. And he’s very wealthy, he’s not down there in the coalmines. 
It’s not one of those people; he’s never been close to anything like that. He’s 
never had to work at all in his life. Which is kind of ironic: if he’s going to 
do the job he’ll have to work.

But, surely, if he fails to fulfil certain promises people will be angry? 

The people who are supporting the Hillary conviction are going to find ways to 
blame their opponents. Would that he did have the power of the monarchy! There 
are going to be people who are maybe going to turn against him. Maybe, if the 
economy goes south, people will have a hard time sort of figuring out who else 
to blame, but my guess is it will be spun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e5341fdc5bbc1678c7fb30de05d68bcf25fff56%2F814_0_2150_1291%2F2150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20terrifying%20and%20destructive%20and%20dehumanising%20and%20tragic'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20terrifying%20and%20destructive%20and%20dehumanising%20and%20tragic%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcharlie-kaufman-anomalisa-interview-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e5341fdc5bbc1678c7fb30de05d68bcf25fff56%2F814_0_2150_1291%2F2150.jpg>
As Michael asks in the film: what is it to be human, to ache? 

I don’t know. It’s hard to be human. I get angry at being human and at humans 
and I wish there was more kindness and I could be more kind and other people 
could be more kind. I get very rattled just in traffic. On the road, a certain 
combination of selfishness and aggression exists. I think it’s analogous to 
look at people in cars and people online because it is an anonymous situation 
where you get to act on these impulses without repercussions - unless you’re in 
an accident - and just to be mean. I just find it so upsetting.

I was driving last night on this quiet road and this person was driving 
towards me and had their lights on. I flashed them to let him know, not in a 
rude way, that I couldn’t see. And he or she turned her brights off immediately 
and then turned them right back on. It was like: ‘Screw you. Don’t tell me what 
to do. Fuck you.’ I can’t really figure out any other version that makes sense. 
It just puts all of my cortisol or some sort of adrenalin nightmare stuff 
coursing through my veins.

The converse is true too. When I see something that’s just kind, I find it the 
most incredibly moving thing. It just makes me relax and tear up. When someone 
looks at you warmly for a second as you pass them on the street – rather than 
just an obligatory nod – it gives you some sort of renewed faith.

Do you do that? 

I try to. Sometimes I force myself because I feel like I’m very focused on 
what people think of me so I let it happen to me first, which is not correct. 
It’s an insecurity. But I don’t want to put myself out there and say hello to 
somebody and then have them ignore me. Which happens often and I feel bad 
afterwards. But I try to tell myself that I need to not be attached to their 
response. That the correct thing is for me to just do that in the world, and 
let what they do be what they do.

David Thewlis on Anomalisa: 'The world is enormously dangerous and scary'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/david-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary>
Do you find you take the initiative more as you get older? 

It depends on my mental state. It’s like any kind of discipline, like 
meditation or whatever; it’s something I have to keep sort of practising and 
reminding myself of. It isn’t my nature not to care and it’s also habituated. 
It is the way I’ve always been, so I have to force myself to. And if I’m in a 
better state of mind, where I don’t give a shit, or I’m feeling more warmly 
towards people or less worried, then I try to do it. On occasion somebody will 
recognise me and talk to me, and I very much try to remember how impossible it 
would have been for me to do something like that to somebody I admired and how 
much courage it takes, and how I need to be gracious and responsible and make 
them comfortable, and that’s on me. I think I’m pretty good about that.

Michael tells people that a smile’s free.


But he doesn’t mean it. And I don’t think it is free, in reality. I think it 
costs, but not in a bad way. It costs courage. It costs the possibility of 
rejection.

• Anomalisa is out on DVD and Blu-ray now
 