
Kurdish authorities have shut down a key charity that was supporting women and 
children from the Yazidi minority who survived Isis sexual slavery.

The decision to abruptly close Yazda leaves more than 1,200 women and children 
without material, psychological or social support, charity officials and human 
rights activists warn.

It may also complicate a programme to take some of the most vulnerable women 
and girls to Canada for resettlement, because Yazda was expected to be involved 
in the screening and identification of those in greatest need of protection,
Canadian media reported 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/yazda-shutdown-yazidi-1.3923272>. 

The shutdown at the start of the year also leaves thousands of other Yazidi 
refugees, one of the most vulnerable minority groups in the region, without 
education, medical care or other basic support.

Related: 'You will stay here until you die': one woman's rescue from Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/26/arezu-yazidi-woman-rescued-isis-neighbours-raqqa>

Hundreds of thousands of Yazidis were driven from their homes in 2014 when Isis
swept through the Sinjar region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/07/40000-iraqis-stranded-mountain-isis-death-threat>
, their historic homeland.

They were targeted by the militants for even more brutal treatment than 
Christians or Shia Muslims. Thousands were killed, sometimes buried inmass 
graves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/up-to-15000-bodies-may-be-buried-in-mass-graves-in-syria-and-iraq-survey>
, thousands more taken captive and oftensold into sexual slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/17/kidnapped-by-isis-at-15-i-never-thought-id-see-the-day-when-i-was-free>
, and hundreds of thousands were forced to flee into the mountains near their 
home.

The regional government said the charity, which began operating in Sinjar soon 
after Isis captured the region, was being shut down because of a long list of 
offences including encouraging Yazidis to leaveIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, becoming involved in politics and 
failing to renew its license.

Local security forces arrived at the charity’s compound on 2 January, 
disrupted a meeting with a recently escaped survivor and ordered everyone 
present to leave before padlocking the gates of the offices. Field projects 
were closed down at the same time.

Staff at Yazda – whichprovided a copy of a license valid until November 2017 
<http://www.yazda.org/yazdaclosure/> and strongly rejected all other government 
allegations – and said they were trying to speak to authorities about the 
charges.

“We’ve been trying to open a dialogue with the government, to resolve these 
issues and get back to work helping survivors badly impacted by this shutdown,” 
said Abid Shamdeen, a member of the Yazda board.

Yazda provides schooling for more than 200 children and healthcare for 15,000 
people living in refugee camps, and thousands more who have been driven from 
their homes but not officially registered as displaced.


It also provides jobs, livestock and practical support for people in the 
Sinjar region, where homes and livelihoods were badly damaged by the Isis 
occupation.

Yazda is run and staffed largely by Yazidis, unlike most other charities in 
the region, and has been particularly important in supporting women survivors 
of captivity.

Human Rights Watch described the charity’s support as “vital” 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/01/03/kurdish-officials-shut-down-group-aiding-yezidis>
 not only for those who have escaped and were trying to rebuild their lives, 
but for hundreds more being held captive in nearby Mosul, hoping to be freed as 
Iraqi forces push into the city.

“When they escape to safety it is crucial that organisations are in place to 
provide them with support,” said senior Iraq researcher Belkis Wille. The 
charity has also played a key role in raising awareness of Yazidi suffering 
beyond Iraq, and boosting international support for survivors, she added.

“Yazda has advocated for Yezidi victims by encouraging more international 
support for assistance and by supporting the work of the UN goodwill ambassador 
for the dignity of survivors of human trafficking, Nadia Murad, a Yezidi woman 
abducted by Isis.”
 