
Many working on the issue of girls’ education are concerned about talk of a 
job well done on millennium development goal two:achieve universal primary 
education <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/education.shtml>. While primary 
enrolment figures may have reached reassuring rates in many countries, levels 
of school completion, transition and the quality of education still needs to be 
addressed.

In response to such concerns, Hillary Clinton and former Australian prime 
minister Julia Gillard announced the launch ofCollaborative for Harnessing 
Ambition and Resources for Girls’ Education (Charge) 
<https://www.clintonfoundation.org/press-releases/no-ceilings-announces-charge-collaborative-harnessing-ambition-and-resources-girls>
 last September. The initiative emerged from theBrookings Center for Universal 
Education <http://www.brookings.edu/about/centers/universal-education> and its 
global partners and commits over $600m (£403m)to reach 14 million girls over 
five years.

Charge seeks to tackle the “second generation issues” of girls’ education, 
whichBrookings describes as 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/education-plus-development/posts/2014/05/15-girls-education-progress-winthrop-robinson>
: the 30 million girls who are still not in school; beyond parity – a quality 
education for girls; school violence - girls should not have to risk their 
health and their lives to get an education and livelihoods and leadership – 
education should lead to decent employment.

Charge is concentrating on sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and south Asia and it involves more 
than 30 companies, civil society organisations, multilaterals and governments 
to improve learning and leadership opportunities for young women and girls.

Girls' education: 'Policymakers are hardwired to look for low-hanging fruit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/01/girls-education-secondary-school-malawi>
For the NGO Brac, the world’s largest private, secular education provider 
<http://www.brac.net/node/1656>, the Charge commitment is an opportunity to 
bring all of its girls’ education initiatives under one roof. “The Charge 
mega-commitment gave us a chance to lay out our ambitions to reach millions 
more, some with tried-and-tested means, others with more innovative 
programmes,” explains Brac USA’s Scott MacMillan.

As well as access to funds (the Mastercard Foundation have committed $30m 
<http://www.mastercardfdn.org/the-mastercard-foundations-commitment-to-charge-collaborative-for-harnessing-ambition-and-resources-for-girls-educatio>
), being part of the coalition provides partners with a forum in which to share 
notes about what is working and what is not. “As we move from quantity to 
quality, this [information sharing] will be incredibly important,” says 
MacMillan.

However Khadim Hussain, the chief executive of Grace Association 
<http://www.grace.org.pk/> in Pakistan, which is part of Charge, says that he 
doesn’t feel enough has been done to help local grassroots organisations to 
offer their unique expertise. “Small organisations can work well on ground,” he 
says. “But they are not necessarily that capable or strong in proposal writing 
and reporting like mega-organisations.”

Hussain suggests that the initiative should offer greater support to small 
organisations and community groups so that they, rather than international 
NGOs, can sustain girls’ education programmes and projects at the local level.

Nigeria: Child brides facing death sentences a decade after child marriage 
prohibited
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/11/the-tragedy-of-nigerias-child-brides>
The director of the Nigerian development Research and Projects Centre 
<http://www.drpcngr.org/> (dRPC), Judith-Ann Walker believes the initiative has 
prioritised local-level leadership. “Charge has brought together leading local 
and global voices in girls’ education to create a movement of change agents 
committed to the completing the unfinished work in girls’ education through 
projects that let communities lead,” she says. “I would not be a part of the 
Charge movement if my voice, as a local level actor was not valued and 
respected.”

Girls and media: how TV chat shows and soaps can have a positive influence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/girls-and-media-how-tv-chat-shows-and-soaps-can-have-a-positive-influence>
Over the years, dRPC has worked with unlikely girls’ education champions – 
such as the Emir of Anka in Zamfara, the first state in Nigeria to launch 
sharia law, and the Federation of Muslim Women Association ofNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> – to provide religious precepts and 
to build schools so that girls can remain in education.

How the initiative’s resources are allocated to nurture local empowerment that 
can drive progress on girls’ education is an issue which, according to Walker, 
needs more conversation within the Charge movement. “That means empowering all 
actors in the global south,” she says “not just the girls, but also community 
leaders and resistant voices so as to persuade them that girls education is 
good for all of us.”

• This article was amended on 29 April 2015 to more accurately represent 
Judith-Ann Walker’s point of view.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 