
As a result of public scrutiny, the way charities explain how they spend their 
money is changing. From raising funds to running an office, many end-of-year 
reports now offer a fuller picture of an organisation – rather than just what 
is spent on providing a service for beneficiaries. The new accounting regime (
SORP 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/Our-Work/Codes-Standards/Accounting-and-Reporting-Policy/Statements-of-recommended-practice-(SORPs).aspx>
) will also mean that this trend will continue.

Reporting will become even more focused on what charities have done, why they 
have done it and how this is making a difference. This impact-focused reporting 
will justify why organisations exist and will mean that the days of charities 
stating that they spend 100% of public donations on charitable activity will, 
hopefully, soon be over.

It isn't true or fair to claim charities spend less than half of income on 
good work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/14/true-fair-claim-charities-spend-less-income-good-work>
The reality is that any organisation, including a commercial company, needs to 
spend money on running its operations. This means that a charity really does 
need a head office to control the organisation, as well as ensuring compliance 
with laws and regulations. Even volunteers cost money: they need to be trained, 
coordinated and supported, and that all requires resources. The myth that 
charities can operate with zero overheads is utterly misleading and creates the 
illusion in the public’s mind – and it damages the rest of the charity sector.

I am in no doubt that this myth was at the centre of the charity sector’s 
recent criticism, with much of the media examining their finances – from how 
much organisations pay the chief executive to their level of reserves. While it 
can feel impossible for organisations to get it right when it comes to 
financial management, all charities must be honest about what it costs to 
operate, otherwise the criticism will continue.

For instance, over the past six months the True and Fair Foundation 
<http://www.trueandfairfoundation.com/index> has published two contentious 
reports that reviewed the costs incurred by charities and the proportion of 
their income spent on frontline services. One report, which argued that only a 
small amount of charities’ income went on frontline services, resulted in a 
media furore and wasrejected by the sector as misleading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/14/true-fair-claim-charities-spend-less-income-good-work>
 because it failed to account for things like trading costs.

While much as the analysis conducted by the True and Fair Foundation may have 
been misguided, there are still some organisations that claim that 100% of 
every pound raised by their charity is used exclusively for charitable 
purposes. But this is only an illusion, made possible because other costs 
incurred are covered by other income sources – such as grants. These claims are 
unhelpful for the sector because they perpetuate the myth that charities have 
no management and administration costs.

We need to tackle myths around charity pay and how we spend our income
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/14/myths-charity-pay-staff-income-sun-alzheimers-society>
We need to stop communicating on what we have spent and concentrate on the 
difference it has made – and how we know. Some charities are getting it right, 
and learning the importance of being honest and open. Action on Hearing Loss 
did this from an early stage and charities such as Great Ormond Street hospital 
have followed in their footsteps.

Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> must move away from 
a headline percentage of what’s been spent on charitable expenditure and 
instead show what it costs to make change happen and, by doing so, get to the 
bottom of what charities are about: making society better. Only by being honest 
and open about how much it costs to improve society can we start to move away 
from the media and government’s obsession with management and administration 
costs.

Helena Wilkinson is head of charities and not-for-profits at accountancy firm 
Price Bailey LLP.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
 