
"You should do Three Sisters as the Brontës," the Observer theatre critic 
Susannah Clapp <http://twitter.com/#!/susannahclapp> suggested to me, 
half-jokingly, about 10 years ago. She had seen a couple of adaptations I'd 
done for Northern Broadsides – adaptations which take classic European plays 
and resituate them closer to home. One of them was Kleist's Der Zerbrochene 
Krug (The Cracked Pot, as it became <http://www.blakemorrison.com/plays/cp.htm>
), which I reset in my birthplace of Skipton, north Yorkshire. But Natasha, 
Masha and Olga asCharlotte <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/charlottebronte>, 
Emily <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/emilybronte> and Anne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/annebronte>? A trio of Russian aristocratic 
women as the tragically short-lived authors of Jane Eyre, Wuthering Heights and 
The Tenant of Wildfell Hall? Wasn't that just nuts?

In fact, Donald Rayfield's biography of Chekhov 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/work/anton-chekhov/9780571253739/> tells us that he'd 
read a life of the Brontës in 1896, four years before writing the play. And at 
least one British director has drawn inspiration from the Brontë connection: 
Katie Mitchell, for herNational theatre production of Nicholas Wright's 
translation in 2003 <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/download.php?id=244>.

As far as I know, however, no one has yet reworked Chekhov's play so that it 
reflects life in Haworth Parsonage in the 1840s. Perhaps that's because it 
would seem like sacrilege. But the parallels are undeniable:

• Three sisters;
• A temperamental artistic brother (Andrei/Branwell);
• An old servant;
• A preoccupation with love and marriage;
• A belief in the value of work;
• Stoicism;
• A tragic ending.

Unfortunately for any would-be adapter, the differences are undeniable, too. 
Masha seems the obvious role for Emily, for instance – butin Chekhov's play 
Masha is married <http://www.oxquarry.co.uk/threesis.htm> and as far as we know 
there was no man, let alone a husband (or a Vershinin), in Emily's life. 
Similarly, in Chekhov the father is dead, whereas Patrick Brontë outlived all 
his children and can't just be cut from the story. Then there are the military 
officers hanging round the Serghyeevnas' house – since no soldier, to our 
knowledge, ever visited the Parsonage, what was to be done with them?

For a time I gave up trying to make things fit. Then Barrie Rutter 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/features/my_yorkshire_barrie_rutter_1_2334012>
 – actor, director and founder of Northern Broadsides – urged me to have 
another look. And this time, after re-reading the Brontës' novels, poems and 
letters, I began to explore a further connection. Branwell had a married lover 
15 years older than he was, Mrs Robinson (a gift of a name), whose affair with 
him was cataclysmic – much as the arrival of the "fourth sister", the vulgar 
Natasha, Andrei's wife, is a source of disruption in Chekhov's play. There was 
a plotline to work with here. I could make a start.

A year and several drafts later, the casting is well-advanced, the designer 
Jess Worrall <http://www.absolutetheatre.co.uk/profiles/jessica.htm> (a Brontë 
fanatic) is busy on the set and costumes, and a tour is in place for the 
autumn. I'm well aware that not everyone will approve – that Chekhovians may 
hate the way scenes have been added and characters subtracted, and that 
Brontëites may object to the liberties I've taken with chronology. But I hope 
the play will also offer insights into the place of love and passion in the 
Brontës' lives. And also that by drawing on Chekhov, I can banish the gloom 
surrounding the Brontës and reveal their resilience, their radical thinking and 
(yes, amazing though it might seem) their humour.

The text isn't set in stone, and I've still to decide how to handle the 
sisters' famous yearning for "Moscow, Moscow, Moscow". Should it be "Keighley, 
Keighley, Keighley", "Scarborough, Scarborough, Scarborough", or "London, 
London, London"? We'll have to see.
 