
José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> is working 
on the reasonable assumption Chelsea have changed. “I know the history of this 
club,” he had conceded this month. “Every time the results are not good, there 
was a change of manager. But when I was contacted to come back, I was told: ‘We 
had so many managers, and we know you are the best.’ So I think it’s time for 
the club to act in a different way, to mark a position of stability, a position 
of trust.” Where once the default was to mobilise the lawyers with compensation 
packages to discuss, and turn to an interim, now the Premier League champions 
are supposed to be about continuity.

José Mourinho praises Chelsea’s quality effort despite defeat by Stoke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/28/jose-mourinho-chelsea-quality-performance-stoke>
The vote of confidence offered to the management staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/05/chelsea-outline-full-support-jose-mourinho-bad-start-season-season>
 after thedefeat by Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/03/chelsea-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 this month suggested that remained the case. Mourinho, who has no intention of 
resigning, is understood to retain support of influential members of the board, 
not least the director Marina Granovskaia, who was instrumental in his original 
reappointment. There is no real appetite for change among the hierarchy given 
that, only five months ago, the Portuguese hadclaimed his third Premier League 
title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/03/premier-league-chelsea-crystal-palace-match-report>
 for the club.

Yet Chelsea find themselves in uncharted territory. For all their improved 
display indeparting the Capital One Cup at Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/27/stoke-city-chelsea-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 on Tuesday, Chelsea are 15th in the Premier League with five losses from 10 
games. Liverpool visit Stamford Bridge on Saturday in a fixture that will again 
test the team’s ability to revive their campaign. No side have recovered from a 
points tally this low at this stage to qualify for the following season’s 
Champions League. They are a squad flirting with disaster.

And then there is that unnerving history of mid-season upheaval. Retreat into 
the recent past, not least when Mourinho’s relationship with the owner, Roman 
Abramovich, fractured back in 2006-07, and the sight of the London club 
languishing even slightly off the pace would render the manager’s position 
increasingly untenable. Roberto Di Matteo, André Villas-Boas andLuiz Felipe 
Scolari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luiz-felipe-scolari> were 
dismissed with their team – albeit sides benefiting from the strong and 
influential backbone established properly by Mourinho during his first spell in 
charge – hovering on the fringes of the title race. The current crop are 11 
points adrift of the summit.

The scenario is very different these days. This Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> side lack the experienced core 
of previous teams, sides crammed with big characters who responded to 
managerial upheaval by reimposing some order on ailing campaigns. The manager 
in the centre of the storm is an established winner at the club he calls home. 
But if results continue to stagnate this time around, might the hierarchy not 
be tempted to consider how mid-season change instigated an upturn of sorts on 
previous occasions?

José Mourinho, September 2007
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e4014b619cb044eeb39f748213fdbd360affe9%2F0_0_1620_972%2F1620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e4014b619cb044eeb39f748213fdbd360affe9%2F0_0_1620_972%2F1620.jpg>
 José Mourinho was sacked after results dipped and with the hierarchy feeling 
the Portuguese acted as if he owned the club . Photograph: Scott Heavey/Action 
Images 
The scenario The Portuguese had delivered a first league title in half a 
century, and followed it up with another, and had claimed the FA Cup and League 
Cup the previous season. Yet tension had been mounting behind the scenes over 
that third season, his relationship with Abramovich increasingly fractious. 
There were ructions over the roles afforded to Frank Arnesen as the club’s head 
of youth development, and Avram Grant as a director of football. The latter’s 
appointment had initially been opposed by Mourinho. Similar disagreements had 
flared over transfer policy, with Mourinho having been denied the centre-half 
he had thought was necessary to maintain a title challenge. He had claimed to 
be “mellow Mourinho” on the pre-season tour of the United States, but talk of 
reconciliation with the owner was a facade. The hierarchy were infuriated that 
Mourinho acted as if he owned the club and, with Chelsea fifth but only two 
points off the top and six games into the new campaign,he was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/sep/20/newsstory.sport13> after a 
disappointing Champions League draw against Rosenborg.

How it panned out Grant, a close ally of the owner, took over and lost his 
first game at Manchester United, but would only lose one more in his 32 Premier 
League matches in charge. Furthermore, Chelsea finally overcame their hoodoo 
against Rafael Benítez’s Liverpool in the Champions League to reach the final, 
wherethey lost on penalties to United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/22/championsleague.chelsea>. 
Yet, while Grant did enough to earn himself a three-and-a-half-year contract as 
manager, the sense lingered that strong characters in the dressing room were 
propelling the team rather than leadership from on high. He was offered his 
previous role as a director of football in the wake of the loss in Moscow, but 
refused. He lasted eight months in the job.

Where they finished Second in the Premier League, beaten finalists in the 
League Cup and the Champions League.

Luiz Felipe Scolari, February 2009
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4aee9daada40a973bbc97a1ce4be53930996bc%2F0_244_2676_1605%2F2676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4aee9daada40a973bbc97a1ce4be53930996bc%2F0_244_2676_1605%2F2676.jpg>
 Luiz Felipe Scolari lasted barely seven months at Chelsea after losing the 
support of key players. Photograph: Steven Paston/Action Images 
The scenario The World Cup-winning Brazilian had been appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jun/11/chelsea.portugal> amid much 
fanfare during the previous summer’s European Championship butended up lasting 
barely seven months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/feb/09/chelsea-luiz-felipe-scolari-sacked-football-premier-league>
 in the position. Scolari never really got to grips with club management in the 
Premier League. Frank Lampard and John Terry requested more intensity in 
training and others within the squad were far more deeply sceptical about his 
methods. He may not have been helped by an inability to master the language, 
and pointed to a lack of investment in the transfer market as a mitigating 
factor. The final straw was a goalless home draw with Hull City, which left 
Chelsea with only six wins in 13 matches at Stamford Bridge and, while fourth 
and still in the FA Cup and Champions League, a distant seven points from the 
leaders. Yet Terry’s subsequent admission that only “two or three players” 
shared his own support for the manager seemed telling, suggesting Scolari had 
lost the faith of the vast majority.

How it panned out Abramovich turned to Guus Hiddink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/feb/11/guus-hiddink-confirmed-chelsea-manager>
, coaching the Russia national side at the time, as an interim replacement with 
the Dutchman taking on a dual role for the remainder of the season. His 
experience and approach served to galvanise the dressing room, with Chelsea 
losing only once in 23 matches under his stewardship. There was frustration in 
theChampions League semi-finals against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/06/chelsea>, with the second leg 
now infamous for the performance of theNorwegian referee Tom Henning Ovrebo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/05/referee-chelsea-2009-barcelona>
, butsilverware in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/30/chelsea-win-fa-cup-everton-frank-lampard>
. The players, relishing life under the Dutchman, clubbed together to buy him a 
limited edition Rolex watch worth £200,000.

Where they finished Third in the Premier League, FA Cup winners, Champions 
League semi-finalists.

André Villas-Boas, March 2012
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7158d65405da3c68c17f3dfbc273fcdeca1d7635%2F0_334_3963_2379%2F3963.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7158d65405da3c68c17f3dfbc273fcdeca1d7635%2F0_334_3963_2379%2F3963.jpg>
 André Villas-Boas cost Chelsea £13.3m to secure from Porto but was sacked 
after 40 matches with the club fifth in the league. Photograph: Mike 
Hewitt/Getty Images 
The scenario The inexperienced Villa-Boas, secured on a three-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/22/chelsea-confirm-andre-villas-boas>
 worth £4.5m a season, had been charged with overhauling the London club having 
been prised from Porto for £13.3m in compensation in the summer of 2011. In the 
end, he lasted only 256 days and 40 games. The demand to conduct that revamp 
while maintaining challenges on all fronts had proved too much for the 
34-year-old. Senior players had quickly become disaffected by his methods, the 
team’s performances too often flat and lacking zest, with the manager bristling 
at criticism from outside. As results deteriorated on the pitch, the other 
contenders overtook his team. They were fifth in the Premier League, and 3-1 
down from the first leg of a Champions League knockout tie against Napoli where 
Frank Lampard and Ashley Cole had been dropped, whenthe axe was wielded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/mar/04/chelsea-andre-villas-boas> 
after an anaemic 1-0 loss at West Bromwich Albion. The board, along with the 
owner, were unanimous in their belief that Villas-Boas could not turn the 
campaign around.

How it panned out The board spoke initially to Rafael Benítez about taking 
over on an interim basis but when the Spaniard suggested he was seeking a 
longer-term arrangement, turned instead to Villas-Boas’s assistant, Di Matteo, 
hoping the close relationship he enjoyed with the senior players might help 
heal some of the wounds at the club. The move did, indeed, have a restorative 
effect as that familiar senior core of players, so criticised by the hierarchy 
for their part in Villas-Boas’ failure, responded. The league form was 
relatively patchy, with three defeats in 11 games seeing Chelsea finish in 
their lowest position under Abramovich. But the FA Cup run and, most 
remarkably, the club’s passage to Munich and their first European Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/19/bayern-munich-chelsea-champions-league-final>
 more than compensated.

Where they finished Sixth in the Premier League, FA Cup winners, Champions 
League winners.

Roberto Di Matteo, November 2012
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F359b1296d87fc6f1e6b7806a7cb58ed3deccc8d0%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%20keen%20to%20stand%20by%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%20but%20history%20shows%20their%20sackings%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fchelsea-jose-mourinho-sackings-roman-abramovich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F359b1296d87fc6f1e6b7806a7cb58ed3deccc8d0%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Roberto Di Matteo won the Champions League for Chelsea but was sacked six 
months later after a 3-0 thrashing at Juventus. Photograph: Darren 
Walsh/Chelsea FC via Getty Images 
The scenario The board had always doubted whether Di Matteo had the right 
level of experience to take on the position long term. It worried how he would 
revive them should form slump, and whether he had the tactical and strategic 
acumen to succeed. The owner eventually offered the Italian a two-year deal 
largely because it had become clear Pep Guardiola would elude him, while 
publicly doffing a cap to that achievement in Munich. But their concerns had 
resurfaced in pre-season, when they had not seen enough evidence of the team 
shaping up, and even with the loss of the Community Shield and the Uefa Super 
Cup. Some within the set-up suggested the side’s fine start to the Premier 
League campaign owed more to individual brilliance than sound teamwork. Then 
came the blip. Abramovich wanted to sack Di Matteo after another loss at West 
Bromwich Albion – they had won twice in seven matches at that stage, but were 
still third in the table – but the manager limped to Turin for a Champions 
League group game, dropped Fernando Torres, and effectively signed his own 
suicide note. The3-0 thrashing by Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/20/juventus-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
, a 10th game without a clean sheet, all but ensured the holders’ defence would 
not extend beyond the group stage.Di Matteo was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2012/nov/21/chelsea-sack-roberto-di-matteo> 
at 4am upon returning to the training ground, six months after winning London’s 
first European Cup.

How it panned out Benítez steadied the ship, ensured Chelsea were tighter 
defensively, and would go on to enjoy some success in the domestic cup 
competitions whilewinning the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/15/benfica-chelsea-europa-league>
. Yet the appointment of the former Liverpool manager, whose rivalry with 
Mourinho a few years previously had been regular and infamous, infuriated the 
support and an air of disgruntled protest had tainted the entire campaign. A 
permanent appointment always seemed unlikely, even if Benítez had hoped he 
might be granted the opportunity for a while, with Mourinho’s return mooted 
long before the end of the campaign.

Where they finished Third in the Premier League, semi-finalists in FA Cup and 
League Cup, and Europa League winners.
 