
A year after being sentenced to a 35-year prison term for giving secret 
documents to WikiLeaks, US army privateChelsea Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chelsea-manning> says the military is 
continuing to deny her gender-reassignment treatment.

In a letter sent to NBC news and released on Friday, Manning says the Defence 
Department has not followed through with its promises after the defence 
secretary, Chuck Hagel, approved a treatment plan that includes allowing her to 
dress as a woman.


“Unfortunately, despite silence, and then lip-service, the military has not 
yet provided me with any such treatment,” Manning wrote in a statement sent to 
NBC from Fort Leavenworth prison in Kansas. “However, prisons – and especially 
military prisons – reinforce and impose strong gender norms – making gender the 
most fundamental aspect of institutional life.”


Manning was sentenced as Bradley Manning in August 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison-wikileaks-sentence>
 for leaking nearly 700,000 documents to the site WikiLeaks. The documents 
revealeda 38-minute video of an American airstrike in Baghdad that killed two 
Reuters journalists and wounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/05/wikileaks-us-army-iraq-attack> 
children, as well as embarrassing diplomatic cables. Shortly after the sentence 
was handed down, Manning went public with her gender dysphoria.

“Despite having received at least four diagnoses of gender dysphoria, Chelsea 
has received no treatment,” Manning’s attorney, David Coombs, toldNBC News 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/chelsea-manning-says-military-still-denying-gender-treatment-n185981>
. Manning’s requests for hormone therapy and amended grooming and clothing 
standards have all been denied, Coombs said.

“If the military does not do the right thing, we are prepared to pursue 
litigation to vindicate her constitutional rights,” Coombs said. Earlier this 
month, Coombs threatened to file a lawsuit iftreatment did not begin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/chelsea-manning-lawyers-gender-identity-treatment>
 by 4 September.

Manning said in her letter to NBC that the prison’s gender norms make it hard 
to “feel comfortable in my own skin”.

“For example, in my daily life, I am reminded of this when I look at the name 
on my badge, the first initial sewed into my clothing, the hair and grooming 
standards that I adhere to, and the titles and courtesies used by the staff. 
Ultimately, I just want to be able to live my life as the person that I am.”

“The continued failure to provide Ms Manning with this treatment is 
inconsistent with well-established medical protocols and basic constitutional 
principles,” Chase Strangio, attorney for the ACLU’s Lesbian Gay Bisexual and 
Transgender Project, said in a statement to the Associated Press earlier this 
month.

Strangio said refusing to treat Manning is “cruel and unusual punishment,” and 
advocates for Manning stressed that “there is a clear medical consensus that 
gender dysphoria is a serious medical condition,” which, left untreated, “can 
lead to severe medical problems”.

The army declined to tell NBC if treatment would begin soon.

“The Department of Defence has approved a request by army leadership to 
provide required medical treatment for an inmate diagnosed with gender 
dysphoria. I can’t discuss the medical needs of an individual,” an army 
spokeswoman, Lt Col Alayne Conway, told NBC.

Calls from the Guardian to Fort Leavenworth were directed to the military’s 
chief public information office. Calls to that office were not immediately 
returned.
 