
Don Cossack 3-1 
<http://www.oddschecker.com/cheltenham-festival/cheltenham-gold-cup/winner>

Rather like Annie Power, his two previous visits to the Festival have not 
ended well. He fell in the RSA of 2014 and ran as if the Ryanair was too short 
for him last year, sticking on into third after traffic problems under a ride 
that the trainer has since criticised. His only defeat in six starts since that 
day was when falling in theKing George on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
, when he was staying on into the argument despite another troubled passage. 
It’s impossible to know whether he’d have won, as some claim, or whether the 
fall was a symptom of fatigue. Clearly a major player and should be hard to 
stop if he jumps cleanly.

Cheltenham Festival 2016: Gold Cup Day – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/18/cheltenham-festival-2016-gold-cup-day-live-victoria-pendleton>
Djakadam 7-2

Beaten just a length and a half when second last year in a high-quality Gold 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/coneygree-wins-gold-cup-cheltenham-festival>
. Showed himself to be just as good this winter when landing a Grade One at 
Punchestown in December by 12 lengths. Fell at Cheltenham in January for the 
second time in three visits here, causing a delay in his preparation. It was 
only recently that his trainer was satisfied he could be brought to peak 
fitness in time.

Cue Card 9-2

Seeking a £1m bonus from the Jockey Club after winning the Betfair Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/23/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-joy>
 and the King George. Unbeaten in three starts since an operation to assist his 
breathing during the summer and now looks a thorough stayer at three miles for 
the first time in his life. Has shown amazing durability, having won Grade Ones 
at the Festival in 2010 and 2013. Represents a yard that does not often get 
top-class material and would be an enormously popular winner.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fcue-card-the-jockey-club-chase-triple-crown-contender-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cue%20Card%3A%20the%20Jockey%20Club%20Chase%20Triple%20Crown%20contender%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fcue-card-the-jockey-club-chase-triple-crown-contender-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cue%20Card%3A%20the%20Jockey%20Club%20Chase%20Triple%20Crown%20contender%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fcue-card-the-jockey-club-chase-triple-crown-contender-video&media=>
Cue Card: the Jockey Club Chase Triple Crown contender - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/mar/17/cue-card-the-jockey-club-chase-triple-crown-contender-video>
Don Poli 9-2

The subject of much rudeness, despite having won eight of his 12 career 
starts, and nicknamed “Don Slowly”. He certainly doesn’t make any sudden moves 
but his remorseless grinding has been very effective, including at the past two 
Festivals. Pulled six lengths clear in last year’s RSA andwas a convincing 
winner of the Lexus at Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/28/don-poli-willie-mullins-lexus-chase>
 when last seen. Neither of those bits of form looks like the best on offer in 
this race, so must do better again, but might be the kind to raise his 
performance as he faces better opposition.

Smad Place 10-1

Like Cue Card, has benefited from a midsummer wind operation, with the result 
that he has won three of his four starts this winter. He was impressive in 
landing the Hennessy and again in beating Many Clouds here in January. Looked 
outclassed when adistant fourth behind Cue Card in the King George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
, when not getting his own way in front. 0/11 in Grade Ones, though he was only 
beaten a neck here in the 2014 RSA. Should bounce off this ground and seems 
sure to do better than last year, when stuffed in eighth place.

Road To Riches 12-1

Ran a huge race to be third in this last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/coneygree-wins-gold-cup-cheltenham-festival>
 but not quite at that level in subsequent efforts and now expected to contest 
Thursday’s Ryanair Chase instead.

Carlingford Lough 25-1

Twice a winner of the Irish Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/06/carlingford-lough-irish-gold-cup-tony-mccoy-leopardstown-ruby-walsh-willie-mullins>
 but his forays to Cheltenham have been much less successful. He was sixth in 
the 2014 RSA, nine lengths behind Smad Place, the runner-up, and was a distant 
ninth in last year’s Gold Cup, making mistakes both times. This drying ground 
seems against him.

O’Faolains Boy 66-1

Looked a likely type for this when winning the RSA in 2014 but missed the next 
season through injury. Poor efforts three times out of four since his return to 
action in November and it was not a strong contest he won at Newbury in 
December. Comes from a stable that has rather lost its way this season.

On His Own 66-1

Came within a short-head of victory in this race two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/14/lord-windermere-cheltenham-gold-cup-stewards-inquiry>
 and should arguably have been given the race by the stewards. Had a hard race 
that day and subsequent record is just 1/14, landing a small-field Grade Three 
at Cork. Jumped right on his way to being a well-held fifth in this last year. 
Stuffed behind Carlingford Lough in the Irish Gold Cup, though he was much 
closer to Don Poli in the Lexus. Now 12 and would be the oldest winner since 
1969.

Irish Cavalier 100-1

From the same troubled stable as O’Faolains Boy, he won the novice handicap 
chase at the last Festival and ran to a high level four more times by November. 
But he was a distant last of five finishers in the King George and toiled under 
top weight in a handicap here in January. Heavy going may have been an excuse 
that day but he has masses to prove in this company.

Nicky Henderson on Sprinter Sacre: ‘It’s probably given me the most pleasure’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/nicky-henderson-sprinter-sacre-queen-mother-champion-chase-cheltenham> 