
Chelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> has made 
her first public statement since she required hospital treatment last week, 
confirming that she tried to take her own life.


The US army private, who is serving 35 years in military custody for leaking 
US state secrets to WikiLeaks, has let it be known through her lawyers that she 
attempted suicide.

“She knows that people have questions about how she is doing and she wants 
everyone to know that she remains under close observation by the prison and 
expects to remain on this status for the next several weeks,” the attorneys 
said in a statement.

The comments bring to an end several days of uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/chelsea-manning-hospitalized-secrecy>
 in which the US military kept silent about Manning’s condition while she was 
under medical observation and her lawyers were also unable to clarify what had 
happened for privacy reasons.

Manning’s lawyers, Chase Strangio of the American Civil Liberties Union, 
Vincent Ward and Nancy Hollander, said they had spoken to her after several 
days in which she was not in contact with anyone outside the military prison.

“Hearing Chelsea’s voice was incredibly emotional,” the attorneys’ statement 
said. “She is someone who has fought so hard for so many issues we care about 
and we are honored to fight for her freedom and medical care.”

But the lawyers expressed their dismay that news of the suicide attempt had 
leaked out of the military prison without Manning’s permission. “Though she 
would have preferred to keep her private medical information private, and 
instead focus on her recovery, the government’s gross breach of confidentiality 
in disclosing her personal health information to the media has created the very 
real concern that they may continue their unauthorized release of information 
about her publicly without warning,” the statement said.


The soldier’s medical crisis comes amid ongoing legal action between her and 
military authorities. In May, Manning filed an appeal against her“unprecedented”
 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/05/19/chelsea-manning-appeals-unprecedented-conviction/>
 and“grossly unfair” 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=5&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjUnLLLoezNAhULcj4KHYksAxUQFgg_MAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fchelsea-manning-files-appeal-against-conviction&usg=AFQjCNHOWEa5ER2AlY9fyCdf1HcWCzdYCQ&sig2=g_Mxu2huic_dKSms35kECg>
 sentence for the transmission of hundreds of thousands of classified documents 
to the open information group WikiLeaks.

Manning, who is a Guardian columnist, also has a running legal suit in which 
she is pressing to be allowed to live according to her gender identification, 
as opposed to the gender she was assigned at birth.

She has been given access to hormones and cosmetics while being held captive 
in a male military prison at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, but is being required 
against her will to wear her hair cut short, according to male military 
standards.

 * In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255 <>; 
Trans Lifeline runs a phone hotline staffed by trans people for trans people on 
1 877 565 8860. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email
jo@samaritans.org <mailto:jo@samaritans.org>. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.  