
March’s Cheltenham Gold Cup will take place without either of the past two 
winners after Don Cossack was retired on Wednesday. The 10-year-old had not 
been seen since coming home four lengths clear of his rivals inlast year’s Gold 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
. He suffered a tendon injury the following month.

Don Cossack wins Cheltenham Gold Cup under Bryan Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
The news that he will not race again is a second blow in the space of a few 
days for this year’s running of the race, asConeygree, the 2015 winner, has 
also been ruled out by injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/coneygree-miss-cheltenham-gold-cup-injury-horse-racing>
. As a result, the Gold Cup has an odds-on favourite in Thistlecrack, now on 
offer at no bigger than 10-11 for the race on 17 March.

Gordon Elliott, the trainer of Don Cossack, had hoped to return him to the 
track at Gowran next month in a prep-race for the Cheltenham Festival. But the 
horse has once more been found to have heat in his injured leg and a scan 
showed what has been described as a 15% tear to the affected tendon.

“It’s a real sickener for Gigginstown, myself, Bryan Cooper and the whole 
yard,” Elliott said. “We knew it was never certain we would get him back to the 
racecourse and, even after that, to get him back to his best, but we were 
hopeful and he was on track for a run.

“ He’s a horse of a lifetime and he owes us nothing. I said all season that if 
he had any sort of setback at all we would not abuse him and retire him 
straight away.

“He’s won Grade Ones at Cheltenham, Aintree, Punchestown, Fairyhouse and Down 
Royal. He was the top-rated horse in Britain and Ireland for the last two 
seasons running and we’d have loved to see him take on Thistlecrack in the Gold 
Cup. It would have been a cracking race. That’s racing, as they say, and we 
have to let that go now and find something else to take on Thistlecrack.

“It was one of the highlights of my career when Don Cossack won the Gold Cup 
for us last year and he retires a champion. A peaceful retirement awaits him 
out in Gigginstown.”

Gigginstown is the stud owned by Michael O’Leary, whose maroon colours have 
been carried by Don Cossack. O’Leary said the horse’s retirement would be “well 
earned and very well pampered”.

The main challenge to Thistlecrack is expected to come from Native River, his 
stablemate at Colin Tizzard’s yard and a 6-1 shot. Willie Mullins’s Djakadam is 
now third-favourite on 12-1.
 