
Vautour (5-1 Gold Cup, 9-2 Ryanair Chase)

He had a nice gallop yesterday at Leopardstown and he’s in the Ryanair and the 
Gold Cup. There was an interesting article in the Racing Post this morning 
suggesting his pedigree might not have enough stamina in it, we’ll have to see, 
but I think he has enough stamina anyhow and at the moment he’s going for the 
Gold Cup.

We asked Vautour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/12/vautour-races-to-head-cheltenham-gold-cup-betting>
 a big question [in theKing George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
] at Kempton, going on that far out [before he finished second behind Cue 
Card]. Traditionally, our horses wouldn’t be as fit at Christmas as they are in 
March, and he’s never shone at Christmas all through his novice hurdle and 
novice chase years, and been way better at Cheltenham.

I think with different tactics he should easily stay. We’re happy that he’ll 
stay on his homework. We decided that we would stay at home [after Kempton] and 
get him ready at home. If he got a nick or anything like that [in a race], like 
we did with Djakadam, I’d have been snookered with him.

Djakadam (6-1 Gold Cup)

I must complement the vet at Cheltenham, when he got his cut [after falling in 
the BetBright Chase in January]. He did a fantastic job on stitching him.

I was worried at the time, I thought we might not have enough time to get 
Djakadam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/djakadam-cheltenham-gold-cup-rich-ricci-vautour>
 ready, but the way the stiches healed up … I think he missed less than a week 
and we can make that up easily. He would have been having a week off afterwards 
anyway. Getting him there now is the main thing, he’s doing plenty of work and 
I’m happy with where I am with him.

Don Poli (6-1 Gold Cup)

He’s in good order, he worked yesterday and he’s fine. He loves Cheltenham, 
he’s won there twice, he loves that hill. [In last year’s RSA Chase] Bryan 
[Cooper, his jockey] never dreamed that he would have that much speed. I think 
that [the Gold Cup trip] will be exactly what he wants.

Annie Power (2-1 Champion Hurdle)

I’d imagine that Vroum Vroum Mag would look a possible for the Mares’ Hurdle, 
and if that’s the case, I’d I’d imagine thatAnnie Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/10/annie-power-fall-bookies-50-million-cheltenham-festival>
 would probably go for the Champion Hurdle.

She was a short price for the Champion Hurdle two years ago, we thought she 
was a Champion Hurdle horse then but we had others in it. You’d have to think 
maybe it could be the year that she should run in theChampion Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/champion-hurdle>.

I don’t think the trip will be any problem. There are at least six horses here 
that if they were in another yard could be in the Champion Hurdle, and she’d be 
as fast as any of those. I think it could be easier to ride her over two miles, 
with the sort of pace they will be going. It’s lovely when you have mares’ 
races to aim for with nice prize money, but her ratings suggest she’s well able 
to take the geldings on.

She’s only had one run this season, but plenty of horses have won the Champion 
Hurdle with one run. She’s hard on herself [at exercise] but I think that’s 
good for her at this stage. I think she’ll wear a hood, it will certainly make 
her easier to ride, but at the pace they will be going, she might not need to 
have it.

Nichols Canyon (11-2 Champion Hurdle)

We’ll have another think about the World Hurdle for him but I think everyone 
is keen that he runs in the Champion Hurdle, connections-wise. He disappointed 
me a little last time, but he seldom disappoints, so you have to forgive a bad 
run every now and then.

Un De Sceaux (4-5 Queen Mother Champion Chase)

He seems in great form, and I’d love it if the race was tomorrow, we’re just 
counting down the days with him and he’s in terrific order. We’ll probably 
school him somewhere before we go, at a racetrack probably.

What I loved about him at Ascot last time was the manner of his racing. He 
switched off and settled and looked at the fences and jumped them, rather than 
going down and just flying out over them. I thought it was the most mature 
performance I’ve ever seen him put in, measuring everything, and he had plenty 
in the tank to pull away at the end.

Sometimes with a horse like him, they just get faster and faster until they 
blow a lid, but he seems to be coming around now, which is good.

Min (7-4 Supreme Novice Hurdle)

I don’t think he’s as good as [last year’s winner] Douvan, and it’s hard to 
think he might be as good as [the 2014 winner] Vautour, though I hope he is. He 
looks very decent, but until after Cheltenham we won’t know.

He’s a lovely horse at home, and fine in the parade ring, but he seems to take 
a really good grip when they start to race. I’d imagine that there will be a 
lot more pace at Cheltenham than his last race, so hopefully he will just blend 
in. I don’t think it will be a problem.

Why is he so short in the betting? When I came into the winner’s enclosure 
after a winner at Galway [in July] someone asked me about Min, and there just 
seems to have been an undercurrent of Min, Min, Min from very early. His 
reputation is certainly bigger than what he has done, and I certainly hope he’s 
as good as his reputation, but he has to go and do it yet. What he’s done at 
home couldn’t lead you to believe that he could be that short, but all the 
horses that ran in his races have come out and advertised the form. Ball D’Arc 
[third behind Min at Punchestown in early January] came out and won the other 
day. He might be improving but certainly Min made him look very ordinary when 
he beat him.

Yorkhill (14-1 Supreme Novices’ Hurdle, 8-1 Neptune Novices’ Hurdle)

I think he’s plenty fast enough to go for the Supreme. His pedigree suggests 
he could go three miles and he’s won a point-to-point, but he’s sharp enough 
for two. He’s won a Grade One and the horse that came third came out and won 
the Betfair Hurdle.

Douvan (4-9 Arkle Trophy)

This time last year I couldn’t believe what I was seeing with Douvan out there 
on the gallops, then we got to Cheltenham and he showed what he’d been showing 
me at home. It’s good that he did, because it doesn’t always happen.

It would have been nice to give him another run, but our season was very short 
this year. He looks like our best prospect of the week. I don’t know if we’ve 
ever had anything as good.

Black Hercules (9-1 National Hunt Chase, 12-1 JLT Novice Chase, 14-1 RSA 
Novice Chase)

He’s the one that I’m thinking most about. I’m actually thinking of changing 
[from the National Hunt Chase], I thought he was very keen last time and I’m 
wondering, if he’s that keen in the four-miler, he’s not going to get home. I 
haven’t mentioned it to [the owner] Mr Wylie yet but we could take him back to 
the RSA or even the JLT, and I actually think he might be suited to going back 
there.

Vroum Vroum Mag (5-4 Mares’ Hurdle)

I’d imagine at this stage that she will go for the Mares’ Hurdle, to step into 
other company she has to take on Grade One horses at level weights, which would 
be a big jump up for her.

It was a very good performance [at Ascot last time], I’ve been very taken with 
her performances and how she’s done it rather than what she’s beaten. She’s 
going along and Ruby just gave her a squeeze and the next thing, she moved up 
two gears.

Bleu Et Rouge (25-1 Supreme Novices’, 20-1 Neptune Novices’, 25-1 Albert 
Bartlett Novices’)

He could go for any of the novice hurdles, he has plenty of speed to run in a 
Supreme but I’m not sure he has the jumping ability to keep up with them in 
that. The connections have [strong favourite] Yanworth in the Neptune, and so 
I’d imagine they would want him to run in one of the other two. I’m just 
worried about his ability to jump at speed in the Supreme, but he’s a nice 
settled horse who could go around in the Albert Bartlett, and jumping a bit 
slower would probably suit him.

Limini (evens, Mares’ Novice Hurdle)

She’s got a fantastic pedigree and her Flat form in France has worked out very 
well, horses that were around her have gone on to win Group races. She’s way 
better than she was [jumping]. She’s come back way better this season.

Footpad (12-1 Triumph Hurdle)

We have Footpad, Let’s Dance and Apple’s Jade to run in the Triumph, but I 
can’t get past Footpad. What he did the other day [at Leopardstown] was very 
good and in a true-run race.

Willie Mullins anxious to curb huge Cheltenham Festival expectations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/willie-mullins-cheltenham-festival-team-annie-power-champion-hurdle> 