
Hatlebakk-Karpov, Stockholm 1966. Black to play. 

RB The devilishly labyrinthine process to select our book of the year 
continues, with the judges so far deadlocked. In the meantime I've gone back to 
one ofmy nominations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/oct/03/chess-ronan-bennett-daniel-king>, 
Karpov's Strategic Wins 1 
<http://www.qualitychess.co.uk/products/2/65/karpovs_strategic_wins_1__the_making_of_a_champion_by_tibor_karolyi/>
 by Tibor Karolyi (Quality Chess), to find a position with which to test Dan. 
Don't look for a dazzling combination, you won't find one. Instead, find a plan 
for Black.

DK I like Black's active pieces, but White is a pawn up so it would be good to 
get something more tangible than vague "activity" as compensation. White 
threatens to take on b5, winning another pawn and at the same time liberating 
knight and bishop, so Black's first move looks obvious: 1…b4, exploiting the 
pin on the long diagonal and threatening to capture on c3. White's reply seems 
forced: 2 Nd1 to protect c3.

Now I'm not sure. I certainly wouldn't exchange on c3 – I want to keep White 
bottled up. 2…a5 is possible, but after 3 Ba1 I don't know how much 
compensation Black has for the pawn. My gut instinct tells me to exchange 
knight for bishop (even though it's a dreadful piece): 2…Nxb2 3 Qxb2 and now 
3…a5. I love playing with the two bishops. The queen can move to a great 
blockading square on c5 and Black has excellent control of the dark squares. 
Meanwhile White's knight is miserably placed on d1 and the bishop blocked in by 
its own pawns.

RB Karolyi gives 1…b4 an exclamation mark and declares it "A wonderful idea! 
Karpov paralyses his opponent on the queenside." Dan says the move is obvious, 
but I know I would never have found it. Dan also spotted White's response 2 
Nd1, but where he wanted to exchange knight for bishop on b2 before advancing 
the a-pawn, Karpov played the immediate 2…a5. After 3 Ba1, he followed up with 
the rather mysterious but entirely characteristic 3…Rfd8 before going on to win 
through a series of similar moves, all designed to prevent harm to his own 
position and gradually undermine his opponent's. Pure Karpov.

Next week, the judges deliver their long awaited verdict. chess@guardian.co.uk 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/chess?INTCMP=SRCH>
 