
Karpov-Smyslov, Moscow 1972. White has come out of the opening with a certain 
spatial advantage. Now he has to find a plan. Warning: you're not looking for a 
sacrificial combination – this is Karpovian, it's all about subtlety and 
strategy.

RB I've nominated Karpov's Strategic Wins 1 
<http://www.qualitychess.co.uk/products/2/65/karpovs_strategic_wins_1__the_making_of_a_champion_by_tibor_karolyi/>
: The Making of a Champion by Tibor Karolyi (Quality Chess) for our book of the 
year award. It's a year-on-year account of Karpov's career from 1961 to 1985, 
nicely laid out and well annotated. Karpov's style is positional, unhurried and 
exceptionally deep. Constantly alert to the counter-stroke, he likes to make 
small improving moves. Some of Karpov's choices remain, even with the help of a 
computer, mysterious, as Karolyi occasionally acknowledges. Though he could and 
did produce attacking masterpieces, slow strangulation is more his style, 
leaving defeated rivals shaking their heads in stunned disbelief. They'd lost? 
How?

Here, White's advantage is obvious. He has more space, and his pawn on a5 
prevents Black from making a break on the queenside: …b7-b5 would be answered 
by axb6, leaving the a6-pawn weak. White, however, has the possibility of a 
queenside attack with c4 followed by b4. But before Karpov commits to anything 
as decisive as an advance, he manoeuvres, getting his pieces exactly where he 
wants them, neutralising his opponent's chances of counterplay.

The game went: 1 Bf1 h6 2 Bf4 Bf8. Already Black's position is cramped. He 
knows the attack will come and in the meantime all he can do is wait. Now 
Karpov exchanges along the e-file – 3 Rxe8 Qxe8 4 Bh2 Qd8 5 Nd2 Qc7 6 Nde4 – in 
order to exchange Black's most effective piece – 6…Nxe4 7 Nxe4 Bf5 8 Nd2. From 
here it takes Karpov another 10 moves of manoeuvring and astute exchanges 
before he is ready to advance the b-pawn and break open Black's queenside. Even 
those who prefer fireworks will find much to enjoy in this book and its 
companion volume The Prime Years. Next week Dan picks our third title.
chess@guardian.co.uk <http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/chess?INTCMP=SRCH>
 