
Most things in chess  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess>need to be seen 
through the prism ofReykjavík 1972 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/jul/12/archive-fischers-late-opening-gambit>
, when AmericanBobby Fischer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bobby-fischer> 
played againstBoris Spassky 
<http://www.chessgames.com/player/boris_spassky.html> of the Soviet Union in a 
title match which gripped the world. It was front-page news for weeks, and the 
eccentric Fischer's triumph produced a chess boom in the west that lasted for a 
decade.

Since then the world has generally been ungripped by chess. The title match 
between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi in 1978 and the closely fought 
battles between Karpov andGarry Kasparov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov> in the mid-1980s just about 
kept the game in the public eye, but interest waned with the end of the cold 
war, and since Kasparov retired in 2005 chess has struggled for attention. The 
world title match in Moscow in May between Vishy Anand and Boris Gelfand,which 
the holder Anand narrowly won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/30/viswanathan-anand-crowned-chess-champion>
, was largely ignored by the mainstream media.

Andrew Paulson 
<http://www.dld-conference.com/speakers/digital-business/andrew-paulson_aid_609.html>
, a 54-year-old American businessman who has spent most of the past 15 years in 
Russia, is committed to reversing this decline. In a remarkable financial coup, 
he has persuadedFide <http://www.fide.com/>, the international governing body 
of chess, to hand him the media and marketing rights to the world championship 
for the next 10 years.

Suddenly, this chess enthusiast who admits to being a "patzer" – a player of 
no great ability – has become the game's potential king. "The characters in the 
chess world are fascinating," he says at Simpson's in the Strand, a famous 
chess coffee house in the 19th century and a possible venue for a new grand 
prix tournament to be staged in London next year. "When I first dove into the 
chess world, I felt incredibly comfortable with these people. It was like being 
back in college. These were passionate, eccentric, but deeply committed. They 
see themselves as the keepers of the holy grail."

Paulson, who ran publishing businesses in Russia and remains a director of an 
internet company based in Moscow, did not set out to become a major player in 
the chess world. He met Fide's controversial president,Kirsan Ilyumzhinov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/sep/21/russia.chess>, by chance last 
September, and says he immediately realised chess had huge untapped commercial 
potential.

How did he convince Fide to let him take over marketing of the game? "Their 
fundamental error was that they were trying to get sponsors for [single] 
events. I said to them, 'No. If you give me all of the events connected to the 
world championship, I can reconceive this as a whole.' Then we're not selling 
an event, we're selling chess. We're selling chess as an idea, as a symbol, as 
a metaphor."

His company, Agon, is about to release the results of a YouGov poll on chess 
in the US which he says proves how extensive is the interest in the game. 
Fourteen per cent of adults play at least once a year; and the percentage is 
higher if you add the number of children playing regularly. Even more striking 
is the fact that two-thirds of American adults have played chess at some point 
in their lives.

Design group Pentagram <http://www.pentagram.com/work/#/all/all/newest/> is 
developing a new visual identity for the world championship, using the tagline 
"The best mind wins", and Paulson has commissioned a short film drawing on 
footage from the Fischer-Spassky match and from movies which have featured 
chess, notablyFrom Russia with Love <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dq-aeaami7c>
. He wants chess to be seen not as some nerdy pastime, but as central to the 
culture of both east and west.

Paulson claims he will shortly be unveiling long-term sponsorship deals with 
half a dozen companies in different sectors. They will provide the €6m (£4.8m) 
a year it will cost to finance the new biennial world championship series, 
which will incorporate grand prix events in leading cities, a world cup, a 
candidates tournament between the top eight players emerging from those earlier 
competitions, and then an extended title match between the challenger and the 
holder.

In the past, big tournaments have been organised on a largely ad hoc basis and 
too often played at obscure locations in Siberia or the Caucasus. Moreover, 
there has been no regular schedule for world championship matches, which have 
been played when individual cities stumped up the millions needed to satisfy 
Fide and the two contenders.

Paulson is attempting to create a structure which is comprehensible to 
players, chess aficionados and casual onlookers alike. If he can achieve it – 
and it's a very big if, not least as the powerfulRussian Chess Federation 
<http://russiachess.org/> already appears to be distancing itself from his 
efforts – he will have done chess a considerable service.

Paulson is allowed to choose one wildcard entry to the candidates tournament, 
and it is a testimony to the fact he intends to reintroduce some showmanship 
into chess that he has already sounded out Kasparov for what would be a 
sensational comeback. Kasparov, who will be 50 next year, has so far rejected 
the idea, but Paulson hopes he can be persuaded to change his mind.

As his play in exhibition matches shows, he remains a formidable opponent, and 
his return to competitive chess would generate widespread interest. "I see one 
of my goals as making chess a spectator sport," says Paulson. "You can make it 
interactive now. There are so many resources that can be brought to bear to 
make the watching of a chess event fun for individuals and for groups."

He also hopes to get chess back on television – The Master Game 
<http://www.chessvibes.com/reports/bbcs-the-master-game-on-youtube/> was highly 
successful when it ran on the BBC in the late 1970s, tapping into the Fischer 
boom and helping to create a generation of players who briefly propelled the UK 
to the top tier of world chess. Only if the mainstream media cover the game 
will a wider audience start to distinguishCarlsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/05/chess-ronan-bennett-daniel-king> 
fromCaruana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/mar/16/chess-fabiano-caruana-reykjavik>,
Kamsky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/may/27/chess.gdnsport3> from 
Karjakin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/blog/2009/dec/11/leonard-barden-chess-column>
,Gelfand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/01/chess-vishy-anand-boris-gelfand> 
from Grischuk.

Every sport depends on having a narrative – a story non-experts can follow. 
That is what made theFischer-Spassky match 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6WsuBZfr10> unforgettable – the personality of 
Fischer set against the backdrop of the cold war. Paulson can't recreate the 
cold war, but he hopes to allow us to identify with the people behind the 
moves, and thus rescue the game from the obscurity in which it has languished 
in recent years. "We have a great product and a huge potential audience," 
Paulson insists. Now he has to connect them.
 