
One of the fiercest and most politically charged rivalries in world chess 
resumed today when former world champions Anatoly Karpov andGarry Kasparov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov> arrived in the Spanish city 
of Valencia for a rematch.

The two Russian grand masters will play 12 games starting tomorrow. The 
rematch renews a battle that began in 1984 in an epic series of world title 
games that lasted five months and came to symbolise the competing forces then 
at play in the Soviet Union.

The Valencia rematch is being held on the 25th anniversary of that match, 
which ended in a draw because officials feared for the health of both 
competitors.

Kasparov, who is now 46 and a vocal opponent of the Russian prime minister and 
former president, Vladimir Putin, went on to beat Karpov in 1985 to become the 
youngest chess world champion.

At the time Karpov, now 58, was a darling of the Soviet establishment. 
Kasparov's youth and energy made him unpopular with the party leadership, but 
he did not become a dissident until after the collapse of communism.

Kasparov's eventual victory came to symbolise the triumph of youthful energy 
over the creaking Soviet empire.

Karpov regained his world crown between 1993 and 1999, but by then Kasparov 
had broken away from the chess governing world body, Fide, to form the rival 
ProfessionalChess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> Association.

Karpov and Kasparov have played each other in a record 144 games, including 40 
drawn games in their world title bout between September 1984 and February 1985. 
The two last played each other in 2002.

In the 1984 match Kasparov was losing five games to nil after his aggressive 
starts were effectively countered by Karpov. But Kasparov made a gruelling 
comeback, first drawing numerous games and then winning three, before the match 
was bought to a halt, with Karpov, who had lost 20lb in the contest, on the 
verge of a nervous breakdown. Both competitors said they were prepared to fight 
on.

Kasparov conceded to the Spanish newspaper El Pa√≠s that the quality of the 
chess is unlikely to match the standards they set 25 years ago. "In this case, 
nostalgia will be a positive thing, and the duel will serve to put a spotlight 
on chess again, just like 25 years ago. In any case, we're both capable of 
playing high-quality chess."

He said it would be to his advantage that he is 12 years younger than Karpov, 
but his opponent had "stayed active as a player, even if the results aren't 
that great now, whereas I have not played a serious game for five years, which 
makes me doubt that I will be capable of recapturing my instinct".

Kasparov added: "As well as being the most important rival in my sporting 
career, [Karpov] is my grand master, from whom I have learned the most, as much 
in chess as in life."
 