
Dr Short and I are looking at a game Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov> played against Robert HÃ¼bner 
in Montreal in 1979. Our starting point was the position shown right. Karpov, 
as white, played Qc4 at this point, which appears logical and strong but failed 
to produce a decisive advantage, and led to an endgame which, to us amateurs, 
looked like it had a long way to go but to two grandmasters was deemed a 
theoretical draw. Karpov, then world champion and joint winner with Mikhail Tal 
of the Montreal tournament, had missed something far stronger. Short gives me 
10 minutes to find the winning move.

"It is quite difficult," he admits, as I sit there trying to make my brain 
work. "Though not that difficult - the variations are not so long." Having 
discounted Qc4, I am looking at the possiblities that flow from Rg8. But what 
does white play after black's Kh7? I suddenly see that if I could check with 
the bishop, I'd win his queen, but how can I lure his king to a white square?

"What about Rg8+ and then, after black's king goes to h7, Rxg6?" I say 
tentatively. Then again, with more confidence. If black takes with the rook, 
Bg8+ wins the black queen; if he takes with the king, Bf7+ brings the same 
result; if he moves his king to a black square to avoid check, I win the rook.

"That is absolutely brilliant," says Short, "because I didn't see that at 
all." My God, this is working - I'm better than Karpov! "Actually," adds Short, 
"I'd seen something stronger. But your way works, too. It's good ... excellent."

So what had Short seen? Having found one way to win, perhaps I was lazily 
refusing to find a second. He had to show me. Rg8+ again begins the sequence, 
but this time, after black's Kh7, it's followed by Qe3, threatening the rook on 
b6 and, more to the point, Rh8+, with immediate mate by Qxh6 if the king 
captures the rook and a slightly slower death if he doesn't (do let me know if 
you see a way out for black). Once it's been demonstrated, you can't believe 
that Karpov missed it.

Qe3 is not, pace Karpov, a difficult move to find. The rook sacrifice on h8 is 
harder but by no means impossible, and, in retrospect, I realise that even 
after finding a move I thought strong, I should have kept looking. If I'd found 
both ways to win, Short really would have thought I was making progress.

Even now, he doesn't seem unduly bothered that I missed the strongest move. 
I'd spotted that the queen was vulnerable to a discovered attack and found a 
way to exploit it. "I'm impressed with Rxg6," he says warmly. "I'd got fixated 
on the other idea. They're both very nice." Anatoly, I'd just like to say that 
I am available to give instruction at very reasonable rates.
 