
Mexico rode into Saturday’s Copa América quarter-final with Chile on a wave of 
mounting momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/14/mexico-copa-america-javier-hernandez>
, unbeaten in 22 games and with thebiggest support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/05/mexico-fans-usa-home-advantage-copa-america>
 of any team in the competition. They left shellshocked, struggling to make 
sense of their worst ever defeat in a major tournament. Their fans were fleeing 
Santa Clara’s sold-out Levi’s Stadium in droves long before this eviscerating 
7-0 humiliation was over. Those that stayed took to ironically cheering every 
Chilean pass with cries of “olé!” while one Mexican journalistdescribed it 
<https://twitter.com/huerta_cesar/status/744377647988248577> as “the blackest 
night in the history of Mexican football”.

It was also a night of vindication for Chile’s Juan Antonio Pizzi, who had 
overseen just one win in his first five games after replacing Jorge Sampaoli in 
January, but has now masterminded three consecutive victories in the last eight 
days. His side pressed relentlessly and they repeatedly ripped Mexico’s defence 
apart, with Eduardo Vargas claiming four goals and taking his tally in the 
tournament to six in four matches. La Roja’s title defense remains alive and 
they now face Colombia in Wednesday’s semi-final, with a repeat of last year’s 
final against Argentina looking increasingly likely.

Lionel Messi equals record as Argentina thump Venezuela to set up USA clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/lionel-messi-argentina-venezuela-copa-america-usa>
Ahead of the match, players from both teams predicted that this would be a 
high-octane, end-to-end affair between two attack-minded sides. In reality, it 
proved as one-sided a game of football as you are ever likely to witness.

Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> manager Juan Carlos 
Osorio had sought to reaffirm his side’s underdog status in the pre-match press 
conference by praising Arturo Vidal as one of the top three players on the 
planet and emphasising that Chile are reigning champions and the fifth-ranked 
team in the world. The harrowing eventual outcome suggested that, if anything, 
he had underestimated his opponents.

Yet Mexico did come into this game with a strong record against Chile, having 
won seven and lost just three of their previous 14 encounters. El Tri had also 
prevailed when the two sides met in a pre-tournament friendly earlier this 
month, withChile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> carving out the 
best opportunities but failing to score before Javier “Chicharito” Hernández 
netted a fine late header. Yet if that result had given Mexico any 
psychological advantage going into this game it evaporated within seconds of 
the kick-off.

Chile made the more aggressive start, driving forward relentlessly and 
smothering every opposition attack before a hint of danger could develop. 
Vargas will take the plaudits with his four-goal haul but Arsenal’s Alexis 
Sánchez, who struggled for fitness at times last season, proved he is back to 
his best, while Edson Puch, who had only come into the side to replace the 
suspended Mauricio Isla, justified his inclusion with an unlikely brace. The 
only negative for Chile was the needless yellow card that Vidal picked up for a 
late challenge in the first half, meaning he will miss Wednesday’s semi-final. 
On this evidence, the Bayern Munich midfielder’s absence will be keenly felt.

Mexico 0-7 Chile: Copa América – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/18/mexico-v-chile-copa-america-live>
As for Mexico, the inquests will be as drawn-out and painful as that brutal 
second half in which they shipped five goals and not once looked like 
threatening a comeback.

A tactically flexible coach, Osorio had made it clear in recent weeks that he 
does not believe in maintaining a fixed starting eleven and would continue 
changing his lineup in order to utilize the players that he believes have the 
right characteristics for each game. After rotating heavily in the draw with 
Venezuela on Monday, and making the unusual decision to give a start to each of 
his three goalkeepers during the group stage, Osorio recalled Javier Hernandez, 
Jesús Corona, Miguel Layún, Nestor Araújo and Guillermo Ochoa against Chile, 
although captain Rafael Márquez had to settle for a place on the bench after 
taking a brief leave of absence during the week to attend the birth of his son 
in Guadalajara.

In retrospect, questions will be raised about whether Márquez could have 
provided the nous and experience to keep Mexico from capitulating after they 
fell behind. Andrés Guardado, deputising as captain in his absence, and Héctor 
Herrera failed miserably to impose themselves in midfield and let Chile dictate 
the pace of the game, with Herrera in particular often guilty of losing 
possession at the most inopportune of moments. Jesús “Tecatito” Corona, the 
hero of Monday’s draw with Venezuela, showed flashes of his quality but 
Mexico’s forwards seemed to be on different wavelengths. They lacked composure 
in the final third and had to wait until the 55th minute before registering 
their one and only shot on target.

Mexico should have been the fresher of the two sides, having made greater use 
of their squad, travelled shorter distances between games, and benefitted from 
an extra day’s rest since their last match. Yet Chile, who made just one change 
to the side that beat Panama on Tuesday, were indefatigable. They swarmed all 
over Mexico, harrying their defenders into mistakes and following up without 
mercy on any rebounds or loose balls that came their way.

The mood among the partisan crowd and those watching back in Mexico quickly 
turned mutinous. Observers on Twitterquestioned 
<https://twitter.com/jlcubria/status/744374694367764480> whether this was karma 
for the Mexican fans stubbornly refusing to cease theirhomophobic chanting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/14/after-orlando-attack-end-puto-chant-mexico-football-fans>
 every time the opposition goalkeeper kicks the ball.Another joked 
<https://twitter.com/edpazsoldan/status/744372100266332160> that Mexico’s 
players were stoned, while the Chileans were on speed. Dozens said Mexico 
should have built Donald Trump’s wall across their own goal line. With 20 
minutes to go those left in the stadium even turned the controversial “puto” 
chant on their own goalkeeper.

Having comprehensively failed his biggest challenge to date and proven unable 
to meet the Mexican Football Federation’s stated aim of reaching the 
semi-finals, Osorio will now come under increasing pressure. His position 
should still prove tenable given his stellar record of nine wins, one draw and 
zero defeats prior to this game, but the humiliating nature of this loss will 
sting. Moreover, his standoffish tone with the media and his constant tinkering 
were always likely to invite criticism if and when his side stumbled.

After the game, Osorio offered his “most sincerest apologies to the Mexican 
fans” and admitted that it had been “an embarrassment, a very poor 
performance”. The Colombian said he accepted full responsibility for the 
outcome, having “erred in the selection of the starting lineup and in the 
tactical part”. He would not be drawn on his future, conceding only that he and 
his players would take time to reflect on what went wrong and draw conclusions.

Pizzi, meanwhile, was left to bask in one of the greatest nights of his 
managerial career.

“We didn’t give Mexico a chance. We were the winners by far in the individual 
duels,” he said. “These players are writing the most brilliant pages in the 
history of Chilean football. I hope we can keep adding to it.”
 