
A teenage girl threatened with the death penalty for murdering her 35-year-old 
husband inNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, faces an 
uncertain future after being released from prison.

15 year-old Wasila Tasi’u was accused of killing Umar Sani and three other men 
with rat poison shortly after they were married. She has spent the last 10 
months locked up as her case dragged on, held up by judicial staff strike 
action and administrative delays.


Nigeria urged to act as child bride languishes on death row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/01/nigeria-urged-to-act-as-child-bride-languishes-on-death-row>
Speaking to the Guardian, Tasi’u’s lawyer, Hussaina Ibrahim from the 
International Federation of Women Lawyers <http://www.fidafederation.org/> 
(FIDA), said her client has no hope of returning home, such was the publicity 
garnered by the case.

With Ibrahim’s help, a foundation has taken on Tasi’u’s case and the hard work 
of returning her to normal life. TheIsa Wali Empowerment Initiative 
<http://iwei-ng.org/> which aims to get young girls into education, will 
support Tasi’u in the months to come. She will live with a foster family, for 
the foreseeable future.

Maryam Uwais, a lawyer based in Nigeria who has been following the case 
contacted the Guardian to say she had spoken to Tasi’u shortly after her 
release, who is “overjoyed” at her new found freedom.

“Apprehension, relief and then gratitude were emotions that were manifest 
today, upon the release of Wasila,” she said.

“An entirely avoidable tragedy, leaving in its wake four dead men and a 
thoroughly traumatised little girl. Poison – the only feasible escape to 
freedom – devised from the wild imagination of a naive, depressed little girl 
caught up in a painful forced marriage to a much older man. A tough lesson for 
families, communities and a government that is still ambivalent about 
sanctioning the perpetrators of child marriage.”

Ibrahim says her client, bubbly and full of life when she met her for the 
first time, has become more withdrawn, quiet and even depressed during her time 
in jail. Educational opportunities are limited in the prison in Kano city where 
she has been held, and to this day Tasi’u can neither read nor write.

Throughout her trial, which was conducted in English meaning the defendant 
could not understand a word, Tasi’u was threatened with execution. Reporters in 
court described her struggling to control her emotions during proceedings, 
frequently breaking down in tears.

In the weeks since Prosecutor Lamido Abba Soron-Dinki asked the high court in 
Gezawa, Kano state, to “terminate the case” of culpable homicide against Tasi’u 
in May, her visitation rights have been limited with even her family prevented 
from seeing her. Ibrahim’s lawyer has been stopped from taking her young 
teenage daughter to see Tasi’u, depriving the child of one of her few regular 
interactions with people her own age.

“I think they were worried that she would try to escape,” said Ibrahim, when 
trying to offer an explanation for the cut in visiting rights, in the weeks 
after her release was first mooted.

The case has drawn international condemnation from rights groups, who say the 
decision to pursue the death penalty against a teenager violates international 
law. Others have characterised Sani and Tasi’u’s relationship as one
characterised by “systematic abuse” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/27/wasilat-tasiu-death-sentence_n_6233832.html>
.

After a presentation was made to the court by Kano’s attorney general on 
Tuesday, calling for the defendant to be released, Judge Mohammed Yahaya agreed 
to drop the charges and allow Tasi’u to be free.

In Nigeria, child marriage is common, despite national laws prohibiting it.

The Child Rights Act, introduced in 2003, raised the minimum age of marriage 
for girls to 18, but the legislation has not been ratified by states in the 
Muslim-dominated north of the country where child marriage is common, with 
nearly half of girls married by the age of 15 and78% 
<http://nigeria.unfpa.org/nigeirachild.html> by the time they hit 18. In the 
country as a whole, 7% of girls in the country are married before the age of 
15, according to the charity Girls Not Brides.

Nigeria: Child brides facing death sentences a decade after child marriage 
prohibited
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/11/the-tragedy-of-nigerias-child-brides>
The Kano state government has agreed to offer compensation to Sani’s family, 
according to local reports 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-21/nigerian-child-bride-rat-poison-murder-charge-dropped/6485458>
.

The charity Girls Not Brides <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org>, which has 
campaigned extensively on the issue of child marriage in Nigeria and beyond, 
issued this statement on Tasi’u’ release.

“Wasila’s case reflects some of the impossible situations that child brides 
face. Wasila is one of 15 million girls a year who are married as children, a 
practice that is not limited to any one region, culture or religion. Her case 
demonstrates the importance of not only preventing child marriage but also 
ensuring that child brides receive the support and services they need.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 