
This was to have been the match that sealed Lionel Messi’s legacy. The one 
that silenced the doubters, that killed off the question mark hanging over his 
greatness, that gave him his place in the pantheon next to Diego Maradona and 
showed he could achieve the same success withArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> that has become so 
staggeringly routine at club level. Instead, it became The Night Messi Missed.

Lionel Messi says he is quitting Argentina team after Copa América final defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
Goalless after 120 minutes, a game that during the first half looked on course 
to be decided by over-zealous officiating instead had to be settled by 
penalties. This wasn’t the first time the stomach-churning lottery of spot 
kicks has been needed to separate Argentina and Chile, of course. Last year, it 
was the heroics of Claudio Bravo and Alexis Sánchez’s ice-cool Panenkathat 
clinched the Copa América forLa Roja 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/chile-argentina-copa-america-final-match-report>
.

This time, with Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> shooting 
first, a save by Sergio Romero to thwart Arturo Vidal handed Argentina the 
early advantage. Messi stepped forward. After a game in which he’d been 
consistently excellent but struggled to apply the finishing touch, destiny 
surely awaited. He appeared calm. There were no deep breaths, no tics to betray 
nerves. The run-up was clinical, short and confident. But the shot was blasted 
high over the bar. High over the bar, and well into the stands. Once again at 
an international tournament, Messi had missed. The agony was written all over 
his face.

What followed from there seemed almost inevitable, given the way everything 
about this match had been set up as the final, coronating chapter in the saga 
of young Leo: the two sides traded successful spot kicks, then Bravo – that man 
again – saved Lucas Biglia’s effort. Francisco Silva, brought on late during 
extra-time for Sánchez, proved a perfect proxy for the hero of the 2015 
shootout. He shot hard; Romero dived the wrong way; the Copa was Chile’s once 
again.

As jubilation broke out on the Chilean bench and among the swatch of red 
behind the goal, Messi slumped to the ground, stunned. After the bitter 
consolation, in a losing cause, of the 2014 World Cup Golden Boot, here again 
we witnessed the cruel spectacle of this generation’s greatest player stumbling 
with the finish line in sight. But take nothing away from Chile; at times they 
have been exceptional in this tournament, no more so than whenthrashing a 
highly fancied Mexico side 7-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/chile-humiliate-mexico-7-0-quarter-final>
 in the quarter-finals. If the GOAT is to be a loser, would that it be to a 
team of Chile’s quality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe926fdf35156be3d6e45ab83bd0d5bf543377d3a%2F0_102_4365_2621%2F4365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chile%20win%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20once%20again%20as%20Argentina%20title%20drought%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chile%20win%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20once%20again%20as%20Argentina%20title%20drought%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe926fdf35156be3d6e45ab83bd0d5bf543377d3a%2F0_102_4365_2621%2F4365.jpg>
 Lionel Messi contemplates another painful defeat in a Copa América final. 
Photograph: Julio Cortez/AP 
Chile beat Argentina on penalties to win Copa América – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/26/copa-america-2016-final-argentina-chile-live-score>
On a perfect summer’s night, under clear skies and with the wind blowing fair 
and mineral off the industrial lagoons of New Jersey, a boisterous but friendly 
crowd took their seats early and the stadium was full by the time play got 
under way. But if the fans were well behaved, the players soon revealed 
themselves to be anything but. The spectators had come expecting a feast of 
attacking football – the high press and relentless movement of Chile versus the 
effortless mastery of Messi and friends. When these two teams met in the group 
stages, they tore at each other with vicious intensity from the opening minute, 
but the selections here hinted, perhaps, at a more tempered, cautious encounter.

Chile were unchanged from their comfortable victory over Colombia in the 
semis, but Tata Martino, perhaps mindful thatLa Roja have vaulted onto a new 
plane of attacking intensity as the tournament has progressed, made room for 
Biglia next to Javier Mascherano and Éver Banega – a more defensive-minded 
midfield trio than we’ve seen from theAlbiceleste in this tournament. Ángel Di 
María, meanwhile, returned and slotted into the place left behind after 
Ezequiel Lavezzi’s injuryduring the semi-final victory over the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
.

Copa América 2016: Guardian writers pick their highs and lows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/copa-america-2016-highlights-lionel-messi>
We knew it would be intense, but what we got for the first 45 minutes was 
something closer to straightforward violence. A wild lunge from Marcelo Díaz on 
Messi at the quarter-hour mark set the tone, and from there the teams went at 
each other with brutal, percussive, at times reckless physicality. Even when 
they weren’t flying into challenges, players seemed intent on causing 
themselves harm: Chile’s street warrior Sánchez, darting down the left flank 
with customary all-or-nothing intensity, rolled awkwardly on his ankle within 
the first five minutes, while Gary Medel had a particularly unfortunate 
encounter with the left upright on 20 minutes after racing to clear a goalbound 
Gonzalo Higuaín chip.

Moments of quality were rare, and by the half-hour mark, with seemingly every 
challenge threatening to boil over into a major diplomatic incident, referee 
Héber Lopes appeared to be on the verge of losing control. But Lopes has shown 
himself to be unafraid to reach into his pocket this tournament, and he soon 
had the opportunity to burnish his growing reputation as world football’s 
enforcer-in-chief. Díaz appeared to do little more than get beaten for pace 
when the masterly Messi va-voomed past him on the edge of the area, but the 
resulting collision justified a second yellow, in Lopes’s eyes, and Chile found 
themselves down to 10 men. Díaz’s first booking was uncontroversial, but this 
felt harsh.

A red card is always a shame but doubly so when it comes less than half an 
hour into a showpiece final between two of the world’s most thrilling attacking 
ensembles. Perhaps Lopes rued the decision to hand Díaz a second yellow because 
a few minutes later, he evened things up by sending Marcos Rojo off for a 
challenge on Vidal. The Argentinian defender appeared to gather the ball as he 
scythed through Vidal, though things looked much worse when viewed at normal 
speed. Either way, it was another harsh decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e7a8669d3ac8b4415f280ac5df64826385993b%2F0_224_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chile%20win%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20once%20again%20as%20Argentina%20title%20drought%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chile%20win%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%20once%20again%20as%20Argentina%20title%20drought%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fchile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e7a8669d3ac8b4415f280ac5df64826385993b%2F0_224_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Referee Heber Lopes hands out a red card to Chile midfielder Marcelo Diaz. 
Photograph: Adam Hunger/USA Today Sports 
The sniping, the elbowing, the arguing all continued once the teams returned 
for the second half. Neither side appeared able to get into rhythm; passes went 
astray, play became congealed around the centre circle, and the game’s 
attacking aristocrats struggled to rise above the fray. For a brief period it 
seemed Nicolás Otamendi would emerge as the game’s dominant figure. Gradually, 
however, Chile began to assert their control through the middle of the park; 
having one less Argentinian defender to deal with opened the channels up and it 
wasn’t long before the front triangle of Sánchez, Eduardo Vargas and Charles 
Aránguiz was working its magic.

Argentina, meanwhile, saw their output dwindle to a handful of forward darts 
by Messi and the occasional remonstration with Lopes for going longer than 10 
minutes without producing a straight red. Martino hauled off the largely 
ineffectual Di María and replaced Higuaín, who had spurned a couple of decent 
half-chances around the hour mark, with Sergio Agüero – not a bad option to 
have off the bench. The game began to open up; Vargas shot straight at Romero 
from a tight angle after a bobbing, jagging run down the right, while Agüero, 
put through clean on goal after Messi drew three defenders, snatched a golden 
late chance horribly wide. Messi appeared frustrated; this was not the way his 
night was supposed to go. But nothing he tried was working; a long-range shot 
as the clocked ticked down to extra time summed it all up, the maestro well off 
target with the final ball after a typically magnetic 50-yard run. Was he 
trying too hard?

Both sets of players appeared physically destroyed as the game headed to extra 
time, but there was no let-up in the intensity once they reconvened on the 
pitch. If anything, the game got better. First Vargas headed weakly at Romero, 
then Bravo pulled off a superb, balletic, swan-diving save to push a looping 
header from Agüero over the bar. Chile came back at Argentina, Argentina came 
back at Chile. At one moment Argentina looked the side more likely to score, 
the next they were a nervous defensive wreck. There was no notion of playing 
for the shootout, no question of leaving the result to chance. After a turgid, 
ugly first half, suddenly we had the game we’d wanted all along.

There was just one thing missing: a goal. Thirty breathless, desperate minutes 
later, it came down to penalties. Chile, who looked ragged and there for the 
taking in the final 10 minutes of extra time, showed their nervelessness when 
it mattered most. Having been crowned champions of South America last year, 
they now take their place as the best team in the western hemisphere.
 