
Children in England consume half their recommended maximum daily intake of 
sugar at breakfast, and by the end of the day have had more than three times 
the healthy limit, according to research fromPublic Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england> (PHE).

The study, based on the annual National Diet and Nutrition Survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-diet-and-nutrition-survey>, 
found that on average children have the equivalent of three cubes – about 11g – 
of sugar before they go to school, mainly in sugary cereals, drinks and 
spreads. Despite this, researchers found that eight out of 10 parents believed 
their children’s breakfast was healthy.

Sugar is the ‘alcohol of the child’, yet we let it dominate the breakfast 
table | Robert Lustig
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/sugar-alcohol-child-breakfast-diabetes-liver-disease-corporate>
PHE is launching a campaign to raise awareness of health problems linked to 
excessive sugar intake. It has developed an app that allows people to scan 
products’ barcodes to see how much sugar, saturated fat and salt they contain.

“Children have far too much sugar, and a lot of it is before their first 
lesson of the day,” said Alison Tedstone, PHE’s chief nutritionist. “It’s 
crucial for children to have a healthy breakfast, but we know the mornings in a 
busy household can be fraught. That’s why we’ve developed our Be Food Smart 
app, taking some of the pressure off parents and helping them to choose 
healthier food and drink options for their children.”

The recommended maximum daily sugar intake for four- to six-year-olds is five 
cubes of sugar, and for seven- to 10-year-olds it is six cubes.

The PHE study based on a representative survey of 1,000 people found that 
children under 10 consumed on average more than three times those quantities.

Sara Stanner, science director at the British Nutrition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/nutrition> Foundation, said: “When 
analysing a number of breakfasts from families across England, we were 
concerned to see the high amount of free sugars and low amount of fibre in many 
of these.

“We know a healthy breakfast can make an important contribution to children’s 
vitamin and mineral intakes and its consumption has been linked to many 
positive health outcomes. There are plenty of healthier options available so we 
need campaigns like Change4Life to help busy parents make the right choices for 
their families.”

The Obesity Health Alliance <http://obesityhealthalliance.org.uk/>, a 
coalition of more than 30 leading charities, medical colleges and campaign 
groups, also welcomed the move, saying online tools that allowed people to 
check sugar and fat in products could help parents and families make better 
food choices.

More than one in five children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/26/fewer-obese-children-starting-school-but-third-leave-overweight>
 are overweight or obese when they start primary school, rising to more than a 
third when they leave.

Theresa May’s government was widely criticised in 2016 after it watered down 
previous commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/21/theresa-mays-first-test-was-obesity-strategy-and-she-has-failed-health-experts-say>
 to place restrictions on junk food advertising and on unhealthy product 
placement in supermarkets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchildren-consume-half-of-daily-sugar-quota-at-breakfast-alone-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd16b1a1d6ac02006784882eb3aef8bb34a82e388%2F0_0_4528_2716%2F4528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Children%20consume%20half%20of%20daily%20sugar%20quota%20at%20breakfast%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchildren-consume-half-of-daily-sugar-quota-at-breakfast-alone-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Children%20consume%20half%20of%20daily%20sugar%20quota%20at%20breakfast%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fchildren-consume-half-of-daily-sugar-quota-at-breakfast-alone-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd16b1a1d6ac02006784882eb3aef8bb34a82e388%2F0_0_4528_2716%2F4528.jpg>
 Chef and healthy eating campaigner chef Jamie Oliver. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
The chef and campaigner Jamie Oliver accused ministers of letting down young 
people, and parents describing the childhood obesity strategy as “the same old 
bull [that] hasn’t worked for 20 years”.

As part of the strategy, the government is expected to bring in a sugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/sugar-tax-industry-opponents-launch-campaign-levy-soft-drinks-obesity>
 from April 2018, which will put up the price of sugary soft drinks. It has 
faced pressure from the soft drinks industry to reduce or scrap the levy.

The Obesity Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Alliance said 
it was important that the government pursued a robust obesity strategy. “The 
healthy choice isn’t always the easy choice, so it’s important that we have 
measures like the soft drinks industry levy and the sugar, salt and fat 
reduction programme to help create a healthier environment overall,” it said.

The PHE campaign will launch with television, digital and outdoor advertising 
and updated web content from Tuesday. More than 4.5 million free Be Food Smart 
packs will be given away to primary-age children and their families via schools 
and local authorities, and a roadshow will tour England from 9 January.

 