
China Miéville <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/china-mieville> 
joins SF heavy-hitters Charles Stross, Greg Bear and Sheri S Tepper on the 
shortlist for the 2012 Arthur C Clarke award, putting him in line to win the 
prize an unprecedented fourth time.

Miéville – who won the prize in 2001 with Perdido Street Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780330534239/perdido-street-station>
, in 2005 withIron Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780330534208/iron-council>
 and in 2010 withThe City & the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9781405000178/the-city-and-the-city>
 – is nominated forEmbassytown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/08/embassytown-china-mieville-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
, a deep-space exploration of language, truth and identity which was 
shortlisted for the British science fiction awards earlier this year. His 2002 
novelThe Scar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fantasy/9780330534314/the-scar> 
was also nominated for the prize, which is awarded to the best science fiction 
novel first published in the UK in the previous calendar year.

According to the chair of the judges, Andrew M Butler, there's no reason why 
the prize shouldn't be awarded to Miéville again.

"There's no rules against it," he said, adding that Miéville is the only 
author to have won the prize more than twice. "Embassytown is a great book, 
it's getting great reviews. If the judges say it's the best book, it's the best 
book. We're not judging on track records, we're not judging on whether it's 
someone's turn, we're judging the best book."

He laughed off the suggestion that the prize would have to be renamed the "C 
Miéville award" in the event of a fourth win, and paid tribute to the strength 
of the other books on the shortlist.

"It's got something for everyone: alien contact, post-apocalyptic disaster, 
near future cyberpunkish police procedural," he said, adding that the variety 
demonstrates the health of the SF scene. "It's exciting because you can't fit 
it in a box."

The other representative for hard SF on the list is Greg Bear's Hull Zero Three
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575100930/hull-zero-three>
, which opens with a man waking up bereft of his memories in a chaotic 
spaceship filled with killing machines and hurtling towards some unknown 
destination.

Jane Rogers <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/jane-rogers> makes 
the shortlist with her dystopian novelThe Testament of Jesse Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781905207589/the-testament-of-jessie-lamb>
, which waslonglisted for the 2011 Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jul/26/booker-prize-longlist-surprises>
, whileDrew Magary <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/drew-magary> 
conjures up a nightmarish world in which ageing can be cured inThe End 
Specialist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780007429080/the-end-specialist>
.Sheri S Tepper <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/sheri-s-tepper> 
gives the apocalypse an environmental twist withThe Waters Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575094932/the-waters-rising>
.

Charles Stross <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/charles-stross> 
completes the shortlist withRule 34 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9781841497730/rule>
, a thriller written in the second person that riffs off the internet meme that
"pornography or sexually related material exists for any conceivable subject" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/11/rule-34-charles-stross-damien-walter>
.

The list is "pretty bleak", admitted Butler, but said that this only reflects 
the world around us.

"We're in a dark place at the moment and SF writers are responding to that," 
he said. "These are not books to turn to for escape – they're not afraid to 
confront the dark side of life."

Things will turn brighter for at least one of the shortlisted writers on 2 
May, at an award ceremony due to be held in London. The winner will receive a 
cheque for £2,012 and a commemorative bookend.
 