
All happy Christmases are the same, but all unhappy Christmases are unhappy 
after their own fashion. We can put up with the festive good cheer of the 
Cratchits inA Christmas Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/17/christmas-carol-charles-dickens-classic>
 or Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy inLittle Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/18/review-little-women-louisa-may-alcott>
, but what a discerning reader relishes is a really hellish Christmas. Writers 
know this perfectly well and have always revelled in Christmases gone badly 
wrong. What better occasion could there be for the release of long-suppressed 
resentment or anger or despair that make for satisfying drama?

The mismatch between merry pretensions and grim reality is often comic. No 
wonder thatBridget Jones’s Diary begins in the aftermath of one Christmas and 
heads towards a second, even worse, Christmas, in its last chapter. (Though no 
sooner has Bridget opened the damning maternal gift of a slow cooker for one, 
than Helen Fielding saves her from the family Christmas by having Mark Darcy 
appear to whisk her away.) In John Lanchester’s 2012 novelCapital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/24/capital-john-lanchester-review>, 
Christmas is the beginning of a hubristic descent from monied complacency for
banker Roger Yount 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/11/digested-read-capital>. It all 
begins when he finds that his Christmas bonus is a mere £30,000 (he had hoped 
for a million). Then his trophy wife, Arabella, walks out on him on Christmas 
Eve, forcing him to look after their two small children while the au pair is 
away. Arabella is not leaving him, you understand, just teaching him a lesson: 
she has absconded to a spa hotel (charged to his account) while he learns to 
appreciate her. Christmas for Roger means that the nanny agency is closed and 
no help is at hand.

The man who we thought was going to be the novel’s villain is condemned to an 
ordeal that humiliates but oddly humanises him. OnChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> morning, the two small 
boys are up by six and have ripped open their presents five minutes later. 
Infant Lego and bits of Brio litter the floor. Roger has to smash a racing car 
that won’t stop beeping. The instructions for assembling a remote-controlled 
robot utterly defeat him. He discovers that his sons’ eating habits are weirdly 
demanding. He discovers that they are clamorous rivals for his attention. And 
he discovers the horrors of toddler poo, much of which ends up on his expensive 
dressing gown. At this moment the new sofa ordered by his wife arrives at the 
front door.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0094fbff24cfcb1e64c25ea6a2b1266f9be9f845%2F0_0_2400_1602%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0094fbff24cfcb1e64c25ea6a2b1266f9be9f845%2F0_0_2400_1602%2F2400.jpg>
 The horrors of toddler poo … Roger Young (Toby Jones) with his young sons in 
the adaptation of John Lanchester’s Capital 
Some of this must be based on Lanchester’s own experience of the levelling 
effects of childcare. (The narrator’s observation that Roger sits his restive 
children in front of the television “too soon”, not realising that if watched 
first thing in the morning it makes them “febrile and listless”, sounds like 
authorial worldly wisdom.) Even the materialistic Roger is half-appalled by the 
consumer frenzy that he and his wife have instilled in their progeny. Perhaps 
he might feel a tweak of sympathy for Edmund Gosse’s widower father as depicted 
in his classic study of a Victorian childhood,Father and Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview35>
. Gosse senior, a Protestant fundamentalist, is convinced that Christmas is 
unchristian – a feast “adapted from horrible heathen rites, and itself a soiled 
relic of the abominable Yule-Tide”: “He would denounce the horrors of Christmas 
until it almost made me blush to look at a holly-berry.”

Gosse’s father decrees that Christmas Day be treated as the same as any other 
day, and that “no difference whatever was to be made in our meals on that day”. 
The servants, however, would secretly make a Christmas pudding and take the 
eight-year-old Edmund down to the kitchen for a delicious slice of it. After he 
has eaten, he is tormented by his conscience and eventually bursts into his 
father’s study to confess. “Oh! Papa, Papa, I have eaten of flesh offered to 
idols!” Gosse père is outraged: he drags his son down to the kitchen, seizes 
the remains of the pudding and runs out to the dust heap. There “he flung the 
idolatrous confectionery on to the middle of the ashes, and then raked it deep 
down into the mass. The suddenness, the violence, the velocity of this 
extraordinary act made an impression on my memory which nothing will ever 
efface.”

I found my mother crying and running the turkey under the hot tap. ‘The bloody 
thing won’t thaw out, Adrian.'

This has many of the ingredients of comedy, but in fact it is terrible. 
Terrible too isAdrian Mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/16/true-confessions-adrian-mole-addict>
’s Christmas in the Midlands in the 1980s, but this is also comic. Adrian has 
invited the malodorous old Bert, and his companion Queenie, for Christmas Day. 
“My mother doesn’t know yet but I’m sure she won’t mind, we have got a big 
turkey.” His mother’s ghastly relatives, the Sugdens, turn up, while Adrian and 
his father carry in the obese Bert and Queenie. Then the Mole relatives arrive, 
meaning that at least Auntie Susan can entertain the company with anecdotes of 
life in prison while they await the meal. But where is that meal?

“I went up to the bathroom and found my mother crying and running the turkey 
under the hot tap. She said, ‘The bloody thing won’t thaw out, Adrian. What am 
I going to do?’ I said, ‘Just bung it in the oven.’ So she did.” The meal is 
four hours late, Adrian’s father sinks further into dumb inebriation and the 
Sugdens, it seems, will never go.

Drink is essential to the grim comedy of Christmas. In Jane Austen’s Emma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/05/jane-austen-emma-changed-face-fiction>
 the apparently charming but in fact thoroughly nasty young vicar, Mr Elton, 
plans to use Christmas festivities to pop the question to the novel’s eponymous 
heroine. We can see what’s coming, but she can’t. Opportunity knocks when he 
arranges to share a carriage with her on the way back from the Westons’ jolly 
Christmas party. There, as Emma observes, he has been “drinking too much of Mr 
Weston’s good wine”. She does not realise that he is priming himself for one of 
those Christmas declarations familiar to the viewers of TV soap operas. No 
sooner is the snugly upholstered carriage making its way through the dark, 
snowy Surrey lanes than Emma finds that he is “actually making violent love to 
her” (gentle readers can be reassured that this meant something different in 
1815 from what it means now).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62bd79f1d6c0ba7ea8bd5906a333f8efc38d3400%2F0_0_1822_1195%2F1822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62bd79f1d6c0ba7ea8bd5906a333f8efc38d3400%2F0_0_1822_1195%2F1822.jpg>
 Immodest proposal … Gwyneth Paltrow and Greta Scacchi in Emma. Photograph: 
Allstar/Miramax 
It is a terrible Christmas for Emma, but is it really so bad for the rest of 
us? Well, it can be. Research in the US shows that death rates are at their 
highest on Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year’s Day (even though suicide 
rates are at their lowest in December). Deaths from “natural causes” peak at 
Christmas. The current NHS information bulletin “Keep safe at Christmas”, 
describing Yuletide health risks – traffic accidents, falls, alcohol poisoning 
– makes dispiriting reading: “Every year, about 1,000 people are injured by 
their Christmas tree, usually while fixing stars, lights or other decorations 
to the higher branches.” And yes, over the Christmas period there is a marked 
increase in the number of murders.

The writers of murder mysteries must have always known this in their bones. 
There is indeed a special subgenre of whodunits featuring Yuletide violence. 
Among recent surprise bestsellers have been Francis Duncan’sMurder for Christmas
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/murder-for-christmas.html> and J Jefferson 
Farjeon’sMystery in White, A Christmas Crime Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mystery-in-white.html>, reissued books first 
published in 1949 and 1937 respectively. The doyenne of the genre knew the 
appeal of Christmas very well.Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie> was in the habit of 
publishing a new novel in November, ready for the festive season. This was not 
just commercial nous: it seemed that Christmas was a good time for murders. 
Some of these whodunits were themselves set at Christmas. In4.50 from Paddington
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/4-50-from-paddington.html>, for instance, an 
old friend of Miss Marple comes to visit her for Christmas and witnesses a 
murder out of her train window. InHercule Poirot’s Christmas, a millionaire is 
found murdered on Christmas Eve, in a locked room in his country house. The 
suspects are the members of the victim’s family who have gathered for this 
seasonal celebration.

Over Christmas there is a marked increase in the number of murders. Mystery 
writers must have known this in their bones

It is not just genre fiction. One of the great Victorian novels features a 
Christmas murder. We can console ourselves this Christmas that our domestic 
celebrations, however undermined by rows or culinary disasters, will at least 
end less catastrophically than Christmas in Weatherbury inFar from the Madding 
Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/24/far-from-the-madding-crowd-hardys-novel>
. The wealthy Farmer Boldwood throws a grand Christmas party for the locals in 
order to celebrate the promise that he has extracted from Bathsheba that she 
will eventually marry him. Roasting and basting take place all day. 
Preparations for dancing are made. The mistletoe is carefully hung. “That the 
party was intended to be a truly jovial one there was no room for doubt.” 
Bathsheba still wears black, in mourning for her husband, Sergeant Troy, who 
disappeared, apparently drowned, a year earlier.

Troy of course is not dead but in the local inn, priming himself with brandy 
ahead of a surprise return. The publican divines that this will be a Christmas 
to remember. “My eyes and limbs – there’ll be a racket if you go back just now 
– in the middle of Boldwood’s Christmasing!” But a racket is exactly what Troy 
intends. He arrives just after Bathsheba has accepted the ring that marks her 
engagement to Boldwood. In his elevated spirits her successful suitor does not 
at first recognise the mysterious visitor, wrapped against the cold, and 
invites him in to “drain a Christmas beaker with us”. When Troy reveals himself 
and summons his wife to leave with him, the despairing Boldwood ends the party 
with a bang. He shoots Troy with one barrel of his shotgun and is only just 
prevented by a servant from using the other barrel on himself.

It is a seasonal catastrophe worthy of EastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders>, where Christmas is 
invariably the season of violent amorous strife and unwelcome reappearances. It 
is at Christmas that the fissures in relationships open wide, in Albert Square 
as in Henrik Ibsen’sA Doll’s House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/10/dolls-house-henrik-ibsen-relevant>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff675179d8f14054a936328a6aa9436cbf571cf76%2F0_0_3200_2128%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff675179d8f14054a936328a6aa9436cbf571cf76%2F0_0_3200_2128%2F3200.jpg>
 Christmas murder … Carey Mulligan as Bathsheba Everdene in Far from the 
Madding Crowd (2015). Photograph: Allstar/Fox Searchlight 
When the play begins, Nora Helmer is returning home with Christmas presents, 
accompanied by a porter who carries a Christmas tree. It will be hidden from 
her children until the evening, when it will be decorated. Yet Christmas brings 
guests with every kind of unwelcome news, including (it beingIbsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen>) revelations about Nora’s past: for 
the sake of her husband’s health, she has obtained money by forgery and one of 
the employees at her husband’s bank is blackmailing her. When act two opens, 
the tree is in the corner of the room, but “stripped of its ornaments and with 
burnt-down candle-ends on its dishevelled branches”. It is Christmas Day, but 
any conventional jollity is over. Nora is tormented by the crisis in her life 
and the children are somewhere offstage, playing with their presents.

Festive celebration is a kind of descant to domestic tragedy. Nora’s husband, 
Torvald, who treats her as a child or a pet in the first act, discovers her 
crime and condemns her. When the evidence of what she has done is destroyed and 
he hypocritically “forgives” her, she decides to leave him – and her children. 
“I set you free from all your obligations,” she says. “You are not to feel 
yourself bound in the slightest way, any more than I shall.” She hands back her 
wedding ring and exits. Famously, the play ends with the sound of a slamming 
door. Audiences and reviewers were shocked at Nora’s desertion of her children, 
made deliberately more shocking by having her do so at Christmas.

Things go wrong at Christmas – the year has been saving them up and knows 
hospitals are operating with skeleton staff

The special gathering of the family makes for satisfying conflicts and 
disasters. Things go wrong at Christmas, as if the year has been saving them up 
and knows that now defences are down and the hospitals operating with skeleton 
staff. Kingsley Amis’s beyond-dark depiction of old age in the English 
countryside,Ending Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/06/kingsley-amis-irritation-ending-up-martin-craig-brown>
, takes us to the extremes of comic Christmas catastrophe: visiting relatives, 
Christmas pranks and an accelerated intake of booze brings death (farcically) 
to all the occupants of Tupenny-hapenny Cottage. In Jonathan Franzen’sThe 
Corrections <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/09/fiction.reviews>, a 
Christmas family gathering is more subtly but no less inevitably disastrous. 
Early in this story of the Lambert family, Enid Lambert announces to her 
daughter, Denise, that she has planned “one last Christmas” all together at the 
family home in the midwest. Her tone is cheery, but the grim fact is that 
Alfred Lambert, the paterfamilias, is suffering from the early symptoms of the 
dementia that will before long make him oblivious to any such gathering. You 
can hear the gruesomeness of the oncoming festivities in Enid’s ruthlessly 
wheedling tones:

I need to know if a Christmas in St Jude is something that you really, really 
want for yourself. Because if all the rest of us are agreed that it’s important 
to be together as a family in St Jude one last time –

The promise of this family Christmas hangs over the novel like a dark cloud. 
Before it comes to pass, we follow the stories of the Lambert children: Chip, 
sacked from his academic job after a disastrous liaison with a student; Gary, 
affluent but depressed and alcoholic, in a battle of wills with his wife; 
Denise, pursuing a tormenting secret affair with her boss’s wife. Enid sends 
out hundreds of cards with her not entirely artful summary of family news, 
where she tries to turn all the Lambert failures and miseries into some sunnier 
narrative.

At the end of this long novel they do all dutifully, if resentfully, return to 
their childhood home for Christmas – and for the tragicomic reckoning we always 
knew was coming. Briefly they are all in the same room together on Christmas 
Day, and fury and mutual accusation duly ensue. Gary reveals Chip’s criminal 
activities in Lithuania. Alfred stands up – and collapses. Nobody opens their 
presents.

Anne Enright’s 2015 novel The Green Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/14/the-green-road-anne-enright-review-kate-clanchy>
 uses the same device of ominous Christmas reunion that Franzen exploited. The 
four adult Madigan children are to be reunited with their widowed mother at the 
family home in the west of Ireland. The narrative takes us over the course of 
25 years of the siblings’ backstories, ending at one climactic Christmas. They 
are drawn back from different parts of the world by their mother, Rosaleen, who 
both needs and exploits their affections. Rosaleen needles her children; 
tempers fray. Constance, the only Madigan who has stayed close to home, hears 
her mother announce that she is selling her house and moving in with her. And 
Constance shouts “Jesus!” because she has just realised that the sprouts are 
burning. Of course we are heading for a histrionic maternal meltdown, which is 
what Christmas is for.

It was a Christmas like the ones they remembered from the old days – and how 
could they forget how the dinner always ended? It was traditional, you might 
say. Rosaleen got upset.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308d2ea6a63b9d7d79f6567011279d686ec218e5%2F176_0_1489_1679%2F1489.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20chaos%20in%20literature%2C%20from%20Emma%20to%20Adrian%20Mole&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchristmas-chaos-in-literature-from-emma-to-adrian-mole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308d2ea6a63b9d7d79f6567011279d686ec218e5%2F176_0_1489_1679%2F1489.jpg>
 Trouble with the turkey … Alison Steadman as Pauline Mole with Stephen Mangan 
as Adrian. Photograph: Robert Hind/BBC1 
Constance announces that she will not have her mother to live with her, so 
Rosaleen seals Christmas by staging a suitably dramatic disappearance. Her 
truculent children will be taught a lesson. “They would be sorry to find her 
gone. They would be very sorry. These people, who spent their entire time 
leaving her … Well two could play at that game.” Christmas brings relations 
together so they can tear each other apart.

But then the lonely Christmas is also a fertile literary theme. The student 
narrator of Donna Tartt’sThe Secret History 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/18/donna-tartt-secret-history-modern-classic>
 has to move out of his New England college during the Christmas vacation and 
ends up lodging in an unheated room in a warehouse, open to the winter 
elements. We know how isolated and desperate he is when we hear that he can 
only keep warm by going to church, where he dreams of the Christmases of his 
youth, “oranges, bikes and Hula Hoops, green tinsel sparkling in the heat”.

It is not surprising that Anita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner>, a great analyst of 
solitariness, should use Christmas to dramatise aloneness. InLook at Me, her 
protagonist, Frances, a librarian, is proud of her ability to conceal her 
feelings from those she meets (while not quite concealing them from the 
reader). It is the loneliness of others that appals her. On Christmas Day she 
looks through the window of a local launderette and sees “three men and one 
woman, quite well-dressed, reduced to spending their day like this, and finding 
what company the desperation of others afforded them. I never wanted to see 
that again.” The “desperation” is entirely hers, of course.

Less weird yet more haunting than either of these is the isolation of Rosamund 
Stacey, the narrator of Margaret Drabble’s brilliantly spare novelThe Millstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/05/book-club-margaret-drabble-millstone>
. Drabble’s clever, self-contained heroine becomes pregnant after her first 
ever sexual encounter; the father of the child knows nothing of the pregnancy 
and she has not seen him since they slept together. She now lives with her baby 
daughter, Octavia, who is discovered to have a heart defect. 
Characteristically, Rosamund declines invitations from family and friends to 
spend Christmas with them. On the night of Christmas Eve, her baby develops a 
cough and she leaves a neighbour to look after her while she goes to the nearby 
all-night pharmacist. It is, you might think, a lonely experience, yet 
Drabble’s narrator, changed by motherhood, rather relishes its purposefulness. 
In the chemist’s she meets George, her child’s unknowing father, and invites 
him back to see her child. She lies about her age so that he will remain 
deceived. And then he leaves, none the wiser, the fact of Christmas focusing 
her solitariness. “Love had isolated me more securely than fear, habit or 
indifference.”

Dickens is able to see through the falseness of some seasonal jollification. 
Perhaps hell is other people, making merry

Perhaps hell is those other people, making merry. Scrooge’s discovery of 
“humbug” all around him at Christmas has a touch of shrewdness in among all his 
self-tormenting misanthropy. Dickens is perfectly able to see through the 
falseness of some seasonal jollification. While he is remembered as the man who 
invented a merry and sentimental Christmas, he knew about nightmarish 
Christmases too. When Pip sneaks into the pantry at dawn inGreat Expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-great-expectations>
, to steal food for Abel Magwitch, the escaped convict he has encountered in 
the churchyard out in the marshes, he finds it peculiarly well stocked because 
it is Christmas. And Christmas means the compulsory company of Mr Wopsle, Mr 
and Mrs Hubble and the utterly insufferable Uncle Pumblechook. Every Christmas 
Day this is the gathering – and every Christmas Day, Uncle Pumblechook says the 
same things.

Pip, squeezed into an angle of the table with “the Pumblechookian elbow in my 
eye”, is condemned not only to the worst cuts of meat but also to the jibes of 
the company (with the exception of gentle, silent Joe Gargery). They tell him 
that he should be grateful and that he never is. They lecture him on gluttony 
as they stuff their faces. They wonder what he would have been like if he had 
been born a pig. Mrs Joe’s guests for Christmas dinner each year manage to be 
at once boring and cruel. But this particular Christmas is worse than any 
other, for Pip is tortured by his terror at the impending revelation of his 
pilfering. That huge pork pie, intended as the pièce de résistance of the 
Christmas feast – “such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle 
Pumblechook’s!” – has in fact been given to the convict. Discovery is 
inevitable. The moment approaches. This Christmas is a child’s nightmare, both 
frightening and banal. Dickens knew that we will always remember our childhood 
Christmases – especially the worst ones.
 