
Dark Eden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874633/dark-eden>, 
the story of an alien planet where the incestuous offspring of two stranded 
astronauts struggle to survive, has won the UK's top science fiction prize, the 
Arthur C Clarke award.

Author Chris Beckett, a part-time lecturer in social work, beat some of 
science fiction's best-known writers, includingKim Stanley Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/kim-stanley-robinson> and Ken 
MacLeod <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/ken-macleod>, to take 
the prize. Given to the year's best science fiction novel, the Arthur C Clarke 
has been won in the past byMargaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/margaret-atwood>, China Miéville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/china-mieville> and Christopher 
Priest. Dark Eden is only Beckett's second novel, but the British author is no 
stranger to awards: in 2009 he beat Anne Enright and Ali Smith towin the Edge 
Hill short story prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/06/sf-outsider-edge-hill-award>.

His winning novel, described in the Guardian's review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/13/science-fiction-fiction> as 
"both properly alien and properly probable", is set on the planet Eden, a 
faraway world with no natural light source. One hundred and sixty three years 
ago, its discoverers crash-landed on its surface, and Tommy and Angela's 532 
descendents – the Family – are still waiting for the return of the fabled 
"Landing Veekle" to take them back to Earth.

"Dark Eden fuses rich biological and sociological speculation," said chair of 
the judges Andrew M Butler. "Beckett really makes you care for characters who 
are stranded light years from an Earth they have never really known. It's a 
great book, and this is a well-deserved win for Chris Beckett."

Tom Hunter, director of the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward>, said the winning novel 
"wraps a subtle and slyly contemporary narrative around a classic science 
fiction concept".

"The idea of an abandoned colony on a distant planet is a great SF trope, and 
Chris Beckett is unflinching in answering the challenges posed by his original 
'what if?' concept," said Hunter. "The world of Dark Eden is also fascinatingly 
rich, both in terms of the tiny sliver we originally see through the eyes of 
the main characters, and also through the powerful sense of a perpetual unknown 
that lies in the dark beyond and is left to the reader to imagine. Ultimately, 
for all its alienness, this is a book about being human, our drive to tell 
stories about ourselves and our world, and a testament to the enduring power of 
the human imagination."

Beckett was presented with his award – and a prize cheque for £2013 – at a 
ceremony on Wednesday evening.
 