
There's talk of a strike. Racing folk are not happy about getting paid less 
each year by the bookmakers and now it seems they may respond by downing tools 
and walking out, lighting up the braziers and manning the barricades.

The sport of kings was always a hotbed of lefty insurgents, so it should have 
come as no surprise when Paul Dixon, president of the Racehorse Owners' 
Association, said last week: "Racing should organise to exert maximum harm on 
the bookmakers. This would require non-racing days." As he noted, sensibly, 
there was little point in boycotting a single race meeting when this would 
leave at least two others for the bookies to take bets on, so any action will 
have to be directed against the entirety of a day's action.

"The bookmakers like to tell us that racing is far less important to them than 
it used to be,"roared Dixon from his platform 
<http://www.racehorseowners.net/presidents_blog.html>. "We shall see. Horse 
racing remains very important to bookmakers and its withdrawal would inflict 
significant harm on their businesses."

Can this be a good idea? I doubt it and I'm generally inclined to feel 
sympathy for strikers. I respect anyone's right to withdraw their labour and 
I'll never cross a picket line, an attitude which seems to be more and more out 
of step with popular thinking each year. So you might think I'd be right behind 
Dixon in his determined attempt to part the bookies from their gold, yet I 
foresee nothing but problems with his plan. Here's five for starters.

1) Racing isn't ready


After Dixon's pronouncement, I rang some racing professionals to ask what they 
thought of a possible strike. Strong opinions were in short supply. People were 
unhappy about the status quo but unsure if any kind of strike was the way 
forward.

I went to Newmarket on Friday and collared eight to 10 trainers, all 
successful and with large strings, to ask their views. A couple thought a 
strike seemed a bad idea but most said they would consider supporting it, if it 
seemed to have majority support. None of them had been asked for their views by 
Dixon, the ROA or anyone else in a position of authority in the sport.

Dixon appears to have issued his rallying cry without bothering to sound out 
the people whose support he will need if his strike is to stick. I'm not 
talking about small-timers with five or six boxes in the yard, these are people 
with plenty of horses and lots of influence, people who will feel the direct 
effects of any reduction in prize money. If they're not convinced about the 
need for a strike, then who is?

The president of the ROA might be tempted to say that the views of trainers do 
not matter if the owners, who employ them, choose not to run their horses. But 
there are many more owners than trainers and they presumably represent a very 
broad spectrum of opinion. By no means all of them are even members of the ROA. 
Getting them all on the same page is going to be enormously difficult. It would 
be much easier to persuade the trainers and then have them persuade their 
owners.

A strike can be justified and can succeed only if those organising it have the 
full support of the workforce. Dixon may feel strongly on the subject but that 
counts for little if the sport does not line up behind him. He does not appear 
to have made so much as a start on the necessary spadework.

2) Someone will break this strike


In March 2008, trainers tried to organise a boycott of a maiden race at 
Yarmouth in protest against low prize money. There was a respectable entry at 
the five-day stage but the plan was for all those involved to withdraw at the 
final declaration stage. When the entries were published, there was still one 
horse in the list. Southwark Newsboy was gifted a walkover, earning Â£2,300 for 
no work.

His owners donated the money to charity and issued this statement: "We 
objected to the boycott as a matter of principle. We weren't going to be pushed 
about. We are only small owners who run a racing club for 200 ordinary, 
working-class people. Some trainers are in the Premiership and we are in the 
Conference. We are resigned to that, but Christine [Dunnett, trainer of 
Southwark Newsboy] enables us to enjoy the sport for the joy of participation. 
We'd race for a tenner."

If it was too hard to organise a complete boycott of a single race, how much 
harder will it be to black out a whole day, with at least 18 races and perhaps 
as many as 30?

Owners and trainers are involved in the sport for different reasons. A 
financial return is important for some, an unexpected bonus for others. Those 
in the latter group are unlikely to have much interest in racing politics and 
may not take kindly to being told not to turn up. Some may jump at the chance 
to pocket a bit of hard-to-get prize money when everyone else is holding back.

Even if Dixon had made strenuous efforts to get everyone on board his ship, 
the odds are that some would opt to remain onshore. There may be a surprising 
number of runners when his "non-racing day" comes around.

3) The bookies are well placed to hold out


I can remember a time when a bookies' shop would be a dull and desolate place 
on a winter's afternoon when the racing had been abandoned, with next to 
nothing on offer as an alternative distraction. This is no longer the case.

There is plenty of greyhound racing, as ever, as well as horse racing from 
France and South Africa. Sports betting is so much bigger than it used to be 
and great efforts are made to induce you to bet on football, in particular.

And then there are the numbers games. You can bet on actual number draws, or 
you can bet on a number draw as represented by a "virtual" race involving 
cartoon dogs or horses. Or you can bet on the machines offering casino-style 
games, provided that they are not all being played by other people when you 
arrive in the shop. One of the most depressing things about any bookies' these 
days is how often the chairs are arranged around these machines.

I'd never play them and I don't suppose you would either, but somebody does 
and the bookmakers are coining it off them. I have been told there are shops 
that remain viable solely because of those machines.

Yes, it would hurt the bookies if there was no horse racing for a whole day, 
but they have plenty of other products to offer their regulars and, since they 
don't have to pay a levy on the profits they make from those other games, they 
are only too keen to divert horseplayers on to them. Will those horseplayers 
come back when the strike is over?

Bookmakers will be at least as determined as Dixon if it comes to any 
confrontation. A single non-racing day will not make them cave in, even if it 
works brilliantly. I dread to think how many blank days it might take before 
they even begin to consider offering some kind of concession, or how much 
damage racing may have done to itself in the process.

4) Who are you trying to impress?


Any amount of bombast will not change the fact that racehorse owners are 
widely seen as being among the most privileged people in our society. The idea 
of them going on strike because their hobby is not so well-funded as it should 
be will seem laughable to those ill-versed in the subtleties of racing 
politics, and Dixon should be worried about that.

Public perception matters because, in the long term, the sport will live or 
die by the number of people prepared to support it. If an activity is popular, 
then other businesses will want to do business with it and politicians will be 
inclined to stick up for it. As its popularity declines, so will its influence.

Racing's influence is not what it should be, considering the number of 
spectators it attracts each year and the number of MPs who take an interest. 
How is that situation going to be improved by a botched strike for which there 
was no clearly articulated justification in the first place? Those who follow 
the game will be disappointed and dismayed, while potential followers will be 
turned off by what looks like a car crash.

Dixon needs a really good PR adviser with the strength to say no to him.

5) Maybe we could try a change of tack


Racing's leaders, it seems to me, have long lacked a fundamental grasp of 
realpolitik. In order to protect the sport's future, it would surely have been 
a good idea, at some point, to make friends with those who have power or those 
who have money. Both would have been ideal.

Instead, it seems we have achieved neither. The bookies are encouraging their 
customers to risk their money on other sports and then withdrawing offshore 
with the profits. Politicians moan when we ask them to play referee over the 
question of what bookies should pay to the sport in levy and demand that we 
find an alternative system, but make no offer to draw up supportive legislation.

If you have no friends, you are unlikely to make any by shouting or crying 
over your predicament. My suspicion is that the worst effects of the present 
crisis may have been avoided or at least alleviated if the sport had been 
prepared to foster a happier, healthier relationship with the betting industry 
over the past 30 years, though I recognise that that would have required an 
equally willing attitude from the other side.

Many are understandably sceptical on this point. I tried it out on the trainer 
William Haggas last week and was met with scorn. "Don't give me that," were his 
exact words. He'd once been told that racing and bookmaking should be like fish 
and chips but the reality, as he sees it, is that bookmaking is the fish and 
chips while racing is the tartar sauce.

I'm not ready to share his despair quite yet. I think many who work in the 
betting industry are fans of racing and would like to see it thrive. I think 
that an honest attempt at building bridges with bookmakers might be well 
received and it is not as though the sport has nothing to learn from them in 
terms of commercial savvy.

Of course you'd want your wits about you when you do business with someone 
like William Hill's chief executive, Ralph Topping, who seems almost as 
pugnacious as Dixon. The threat of exploitation will always be there and racing 
will always seem, to the purist, in danger of selling its soul. But the body 
needs to eat.
 