 The first episode of The Alan Clark Diaries delivered a record 1 million 
viewers for BBC4, providing a fillip for the corporation at the end of a 
bruising week.
John Hurt's portrayal of the womanising former MP drew more viewers than 
watched the first episode of the new series of ER on E4. The adaptation's 
popularity meant that in homes with digital television, more people were 
watchingBBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> at 10pm on Thursday night 
than every other channel except BBC1 and ITV1.

BBC executives could barely conceal their delight. Roly Keating, the 
controller of BBC4, said: "We're very proud of TheAlan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries and it's fantastic 
that so many people came to it on its first episode. This is a real milestone 
for BBC4 and further proof that digital television is coming of age with great, 
intelligent, homegrown programming."

It was a boost for the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which has 
spent most of the week defending its digital channels after figures showed many 
programmes are seen by so few viewers that they can not be measured and the 
claim it spends disproportionately large amounts of money promoting channels 
that only half the country can watch.

The marketing budget for The Alan Clark Diaries was said to be Â£1m, far more 
than the production budget for each half-hour episode. But the PR blitz paid 
dividends and the ratings were also boosted by the coverage of the digital row 
much of which was accompanied by stills from the series. The first episode will 
be shown again on BBC4 at 11.10pm tomorrow and the second on Thursday at 10pm. 
It will be repeated on BBC2 in March.
 