
How did you come up with the idea for ClassPass?

I was searching the web for a ballet class and I ended up spending two hours 
trying to find one. That made me realise there was an information gap.

I spent the next six months talking about the idea [of a platform for booking 
exercise classes], researching it and looking at other similar models like 
OpenTable. The biggest moment for me was when I quit my job [in digital 
strategy at Warner Music Group in New York] in the January of 2011; sometimes 
you have to put it all out there.

When I quit I didn’t have a plan B. But, within two weeks, I just knew the 
business would go somewhere. I’ve never looked back.

Flexible fitness taps into on demand trend among millennials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/25/startup-flexing-muscle-fitness-industry>
ClassPass is now in 37 cities in the US, UK and Australia, and has been 
likened to a cult. Why do you think that is?

We’ve made it easy for people to find time to exercise, and they go to these 
classes and feel better for it. It makes people happy. Working out is so 
mentally and physically important.

It’s also part of a broader trend where people are investing in experiences 
more than physical goods. Time is the currency of ClassPass. It becomes this 
place where people get excited about what they could do.

You’ve changed the business model several times, including ditching your 
popular unlimited membership plan and increasing prices. How challenging was 
it, knowing that the changes would upset your members?

It was tough but one of the things that keeps me going is that I know what 
we’re building and what the future holds for ClassPass. We’re putting in the 
investment for the customer. Although I can’t show them that today, it’s 
important that you stick with your vision. Every business needs to keep 
evolving and that’s especially important when you’re a marketplace, where you 
have the additional complexity of managing two sides [the studios and the 
customers].

As one side is working, you’ve got to make sure the other side’s working too. 
Whether [you tweak] cost or product, you’ve always got different variables. As 
we’ve got more data and ClassPass has grown, we’ve had to change rather than 
have a one-size fits all approach.

Is it worth it? Multi-gym membership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/03/are-multi-gym-memberships-worth-it-stuart-heritage>
What business lessons have you learned along the way?

What’s crucial is to never get stuck. Making hard decisions is such an 
important part of being a startup in order to keep moving forward. You have to 
get on the other side of fear. Also, it’s important to find the right people 
[to work with].

But I don’t think there’s anything I’d do differently. There’s always things I 
can improve on but I’d rather spend my energy focusing on the things that I’m 
going to do in the future.

What advice would you give to budding entrepreneurs?

Focus on your product. A lot of people focus on the name of their brand or the 
legal aspects, but it’s more important to create your product. It’s why people 
join. It’s your vision. Without your product, nothing is going to happen.

What advice would you give to entrepreneurs who find it difficult to switch 
off?

I live by my calendar. Every Sunday I plan out my free time. It’s important to 
know yourself too. A lot of people don’t know if they’re a morning or night 
person, so I’d say get to know yourself and work to your rhythm. I also work 
out every day, which can range from going for a run to a 20-minute abs workout. 
My favourite ClassPass workouts arebarre 
<http://www.fitnessmagazine.com/workout/pilates/exercises/barre-beginners-guide/>
 classes.

Who do you admire in the business world?

Steve Jobs comes to mind. He was someone who cared about customer design and 
that’s really important. I also really respect Daniel Ek [founder and CEO] of 
Spotify; I’ve known him for eight years. He’s such a visionary and cares about 
customers at the same time.

Do you have any mentors?

I have a tonne. You need to have people to support you and have a range of 
them. One person is ClassPass’s executive chairman, Fritz Lanman. It’s 
important to seek those people out. I always ask people to introduce me to 
others. I hustle for introductions.

Slack co-founder on the happy accident that led to his $1bn startup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jul/18/slack-co-founder-happy-accident-1bn-startup>
What’s next for ClassPass?

We have a social feature that will launch in a few weeks, where you’ll be able 
to see what your friends are doing on the ClassPass schedule. We’ll also launch 
video on-demand, at-home workouts.

We’ve seen so many members become experts [in exercise], so we’re helping them 
organise workouts such as leading a run in their city. ClassPass is about 
earning the right to book time in your life and we know that can be applied to 
so many categories. We’re focused on fitness next year but after we’ll be 
looking at different experiences to add to the business.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 