
Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> – and their parents 
– ask some funny things. Even the most experienced admissions tutors have been 
temporarily floored by some queries during Clearing. “I’m worried my son will 
not be able to use a tin opener – could you help him?” asked one parent of 
staff at the University of Greenwich. “Could I bring my gerbil/snake/dog?” is 
another perennial favourite – and the answer is almost always no.


“What course do you think I should do?” is the question no would-be 
undergraduate should ask, but that doesn’t stop them. Other students are more 
particular about their surroundings. “Can I have a room with a view?” one 
student asked staff at Greenwich, following it up with: “And what colour will 
my curtains be – I want to buy a matching bedspread.” Another simply wondered: 
“Who will cook my meals?”

Satisfy your curiosities

But don’t be put off by these examples: it always pays to ask. A basketball 
player applying to Loughborough University asked about the length of his bed – 
and was duly given a bed extension.

And really, there’s no such thing as a silly question, says Jessica Bearne, 
Enquiry Unit manager, University of Greenwich – it’s natural to ask about all 
sorts. “So whatever your question, do ring in. Universities have teams of 
people waiting to help – many of them students who were in your position just a 
year or two ago.”

Clearing debunked

Many sixth-formers are hazy about how Clearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> actually works, according to a 
survey by Leeds Beckett University.

More than a quarter of A-level students think they need to accept an offer by 
the end of results day (they don’t), and three quarters think there’s a limit 
on how many offers can be held (there isn’t).

Nearly one in five thinks Clearing closes at the end of results day (it 
actually closes on 20 September).
 