
Mental health experts are warning of the risks of the increasingly popular 
“clean eating” dietary trend, which is leaving a growing number of teenagers 
very thin and even at risk of dying when taken to extremes.

One nutritionist said she had been contacted by a girl as young as 12 and 
people had got in touch on social media saying they wanted to be healthier, 
giving details of their existing diets.

I had heard clean eating made you feel better – but for me it went wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/01/clean-eating-went-wrong-for-me-anorexia-depression-food-bloggers>
Rhiannon Lambert, a registered associate nutritionist <http://rhitrition.com/> 
in Harley Street, London, has encountered people who obsess over where food 
comes from and some clients who will not drink water from a tap, because they 
normally stick to a brand of bottled water.

“They develop particular habits, or won’t eat food when walking, because they 
think that food can only be processed when they’re sitting down,” she said. 
“All this interferes with general life and becomes an obsession.”


Lambert, who treats about 180 clients a year with various kinds of eating 
disorders, says has seen the number of those presenting due to “clean eating” 
double in the last year.

The extreme form of this is a psychological condition known as orthorexia 
nervosa <https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/orthorexia-nervosa>, the 
Californian doctor Steven Bratman has said. Experts have described it as a
“fixation with righteous eating” 
<https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/orthorexia-nervosa>.

Clean eating is promoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/03/clean-eating-diets-chrissy-teigen-juice-soulcycle>
 by some food bloggers, who are increasingly felt by a number of medical 
experts to be having a negative impact on certain vulnerable young people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fclean-eating-trend-dangerous-young-people-food-obsession-mental-health-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36e94acbfa5576dde6dedc8b06698c3092e3a0f%2F0_832_2044_1226%2F2044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clean%20eating%20trend%20can%20be%20dangerous%20for%20young%20people%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fclean-eating-trend-dangerous-young-people-food-obsession-mental-health-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clean%20eating%20trend%20can%20be%20dangerous%20for%20young%20people%2C%20experts%20warn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fclean-eating-trend-dangerous-young-people-food-obsession-mental-health-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36e94acbfa5576dde6dedc8b06698c3092e3a0f%2F0_832_2044_1226%2F2044.jpg>
 Having strict rules can mean that some people ‘worry all day about eating a 
biscuit,’ one expert says. Photograph: Catherine Shaw for the Observer 
“Young people lose sleep over this and cannot afford the lifestyle needed to 
maintain it,” Lambert said. “Health bloggers can be unqualified and offer 
dangerous advice. Not all of them want to impose their lifestyle on others, but 
lots of them do and they often give advice on clean eating with no scientific 
backing.

“The books come along, the products come along and these people are now role 
models whose every word will inspire impressionable young people. I have 
clients who think they have to be vegan to be successful.”

There are no official figures for the number of children and young people 
following a clean eating regime, because orthorexia is not recognised as a 
clinical diagnosis. But psychologists and nutritionists have reported a recent 
surge in the phenomenon among younger clients, especially girls, and believe 
that it is gaining in popularity.


The eating disorders charity Beat told the Guardian that it had recently seen 
a rise in the number of calls to its helpline from young people who have 
experienced problems as a result of following the trend.

Ursula Philpot, a dietitian at the British Dietetic Association, said a 
fixation with eating healthily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/17/clean-eating-dirty-burgers-food-morals-julian-baggini>
 had been a noticeable route into eating disorders for vulnerable individuals 
in the past couple of years.

She identified social media and the rise of healthy food trends and blogs as 
key drivers of the trend, but said it is difficult to blame them completely. 
“If it wasn’t health bloggers, then it could be something else that becomes the 
inroad, but it seems to be the route in now,” she said.

Orthorexia affects girls more than boys, although boys are much more affected 
than previously, she added.

The range of foods that people worry about eating has changed, Philpot said. 
“At the top of most people’s lists [of bad foods] is gluten and dairy. When you 
talk to young people more, you find out about their stringent rules – some will 
worry all day about eating a biscuit,” she said.

How clean eating devoured the diet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/03/clean-eating-diets-chrissy-teigen-juice-soulcycle>
 The condition starts out as an innocent attempt to eat more healthily, but 
those who experience it become fixated on food quality and purity, according to 
experts.

A Beat spokeswoman said: “We are concerned by the rising trend of ‘clean 
eating’ and the impact it could have on young people vulnerable to the 
development of an eating disorder. We are aware that contacts to our helpline 
are raising issues around orthorexia and clean eating.”

There may be several reasons for someone to take up clean eating, the 
spokeswoman said.

“Eating disorders are serious mental illnesses and their causes are many and 
complex. Research is telling us that they may be more biologically based than 
we previously thought, but social and environmental factors will also play a 
part in their development,” she said.

“Orthorexia does not have a clinical diagnosis and it would be for clinicians 
to determine whether it should, which may be helpful, because then it would 
have a clear clinical pathway of treatment.

“There is a view that it may be more closely connected to OCD due to the 
nature of the illness, although it does also share behavioural traits with 
anorexia.Anorexia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> has the 
highest mortality rate of any mental illness.”

Deanne Jade, the founder of the National Centre for Eating Disorders, a 
counselling network, said the number of cases of orthorexia that she dealt with 
had more than doubled over the last five years.

She said: “A lot of younger people don’t think they need therapy and that the 
solution to bulimia and anorexia is to eat clean, but this can become an 
obsession and there’s now more pressure than ever to be healthy.

“There are too many messages in the media and especially social media. What 
worries me is that a lot of people promoting these ideas have no knowledge of 
nutrition.

“I don’t know what the solution is, but a lot of the time getting people to 
recover from an eating disorder means getting them to relax their ideas about 
clean eating.”
 