
The short film I’ve made with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/07/naomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
 stars my son, Toma, aged four years and five months. That’s a little scary for 
me to write, since, up until this moment, my husband, Avi, and I have been 
pretty careful about protecting him from public exposure. No matter how damn 
cute we think he’s being, absolutely no tweeting is allowed.


So I want to explain how I decided to introduce him to you in this very public 
way.


For the past eight years, I have been writing and speaking about climate change
 <http://www.naomiklein.org/main>pretty much around the clock. I use all the 
communication tools I can — books, articles, feature documentary, photographs, 
lectures.


Yet I still struggle with a nagging feeling that I’m not doing justice to the 
enormous stakes of this threat. The safety and habitability of our shared home 
is intensely emotional terrain, triggering perfectly rational feelings of loss, 
fear and grief. Yet climate discourse is usually pretty clinical, weighed down 
with statistics and policy jargon.


All that information is important, of course. But I have started to worry 
that, by being so calm and clinical, we may be tacitly sending the message that 
this isn’t really an existential emergency after all. If it were, wouldn’t the 
people raising the alarm sound more … alarmed? Wouldn’t we share more of our 
own emotions?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Naomi%20Klein%20at%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20what%20have%20we%20left%20for%20our%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Naomi%20Klein%20at%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%3A%20what%20have%20we%20left%20for%20our%20children%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnaomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface&media=>
Naomi Klein at the Great Barrier Reef: what have we left for our children? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/07/naomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
I was thinking a lot about these questions when the Guardian approached me 
about making a short film at the Great Barrier Reef while I visited Australiato 
receive the Sydney peace prize 
<http://sydneypeacefoundation.org.au/events/2016-city-of-sydney-peace-prize-lecture-and-award-ceremony/>
. I initially refused. I had already decided to travel to Queensland and see 
the bleaching and die-off for myself. But I was planning to go with my family 
and saw our visit as a very personal experience. Precisely because I knew I 
would be overwhelmed by seeing this tragedy through my son’s eyes, I didn’t 
want cameras around.


Naomi Klein criticises lack of global action on climate change after Sydney 
Peace prize win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/15/naomi-klein-gives-australian-climate-policy-a-serve-after-sydney-peace-prize-win>
A few days later, the Guardian asked again. And I started thinking: maybe this 
was a chance to get at aspects of climate disruption that scientific reports 
and political arguments just can’t convey. Perhaps it could communicate, in a 
visceral way, the intergenerational theft at the heart of this crisis.


There is no question that the strongest emotions I have about the climate 
crisis have to do with Toma and his peers. I have flashes of sheer panic about 
the extreme weather we have already locked in for them. But even more intense 
than this fear is the sadness about what they won’t ever know. These kids are 
growing up in a mass extinction, robbed of the cacophonous company of being 
surrounded by so many fast-disappearing life forms.


According to a new WWF report 
<https://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/living-planet-report-2016>, since I was 
born in 1970 the number of wild animals on the planet has dropped by more than 
half – and by 2020 it is expected to drop by two-thirds. What a lonely world we 
are creating for these kids. And what more powerful place to illustrate that 
absence than the Great Barrier Reef, on the knife-edge of survival?


 So this film shows the reef through Toma’s eyes. He’s too young to understand 
concepts like coral bleaching and dying – it’s tough enough for him to 
understand that coral was ever alive in the first place.

Let’s make this a real ‘leap’ year, and go fossil fuel-free | Naomi Klein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/leap-year-fossil-fuel-leap-maifesto-naomi-klein>
It also shows the Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef> through the eyes 
of his mother: moved by the beauty that remains, heartbroken and infuriated by 
what has been lost. Because what has happened to this wondrous part of the 
world is not just a tragedy, it’s a crime. And the crime is still very much in 
progress, with our respective governments busily clearing the way for new 
coalmines and new oil pipelines.

In a way, that’s the good news: we still have both the time and power to force 
our politicians to change course. It’s too late for most of the world’s coral 
reefs but it’s not too late for all of them. And it’s not too late to keep 
temperatures below levels that would save millions of lives and livelihoods.

For that kind of rapid change to happen, however, we are all going to have to 
stop being so impeccably calm and reasonable. We’re going to have to find that 
part of ourselves that feels this threat in our hearts, as well as our heads.


So meet Toma, who just discovered that there is a magical world beneath the 
waves.


• Naomi Klein will accept the 2016 Sydney Peace Prize later this week. Details 
of the event arehere <http://sydneypeacefoundation.org.au/events/>.
 