
Climate scientists have denounced the House committee on science, space and 
technology after the Republican-held panel promoted a misleading story 
expressing skepticism that the earth is dangerously warming.

On Thursday afternoon, the committee tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/HouseScience/status/804402881982066688> a Breitbart 
article alleging: “Global Temperatures Plunge. Icy Silence from Climate 
Alarmists”. The story linked to a British tabloid, the Daily Mail, which 
claimed that global land temperatures were plummeting, and that humans were not 
responsible foryears of steadily increasing heat 
<http://arctic-ice-melt-trigger-uncontrollable-climate-change-global-/>.

Trump to scrap Nasa climate research in crackdown on ‘politicized science’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
The Daily Mail story cited “Nasa satellite measurements of the lower 
atmosphere” without specifics, exaggerated the degree of the fall and left out 
three important points of context: how El Niño systems affect oceans and 
atmosphere, how ocean temperatures are rising, andthe clear upward pattern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/global-temperature-climate-change-highest-115000-years>
 of year-on-year changes.

“They’re not serious articles,” said Adam Sobel, a Columbia University climate 
scientist. “They paint it as though it’s an argument between Breitbart and 
Buzzfeed when it’s an argument between a snarky Breitbart blogger and the 
entire world’s scientific community, and the overwhelming body of scientific 
evidence.”

Sobel said the articles “grossly misinterpret” a few accurate details, for 
instance that El Niño and La Niña systems play a large role in single-year 
fluctuations. “The temperature goes up for a couple of years and we have the 
largest year on record, then it goes down and it reaches a level that’s still 
well above 20th-century historical averages,” he said. “That in no way 
disproves anything about the causes of the long-term temperature trends.”

Sobel called the committee’s use of Breitbart “distressing”. “If the House 
science committee wants to understand science they should talk to climate 
scientists.”

Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University, noted that 2016 
would soon be the hottest year on record, “by a substantial margin” over 2015,
which took the record from 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/20/2015-smashes-record-for-hottest-year-final-figures-confirm>
.

“Three consecutive record-breaking warm years, something we’ve never seen 
before, and a reminder of the profound and deleterious impact that our 
profligate burning of fossil fuels is having on the planet,” he told the 
Guardian.

“For anyone, least of all the House committee on science, to at this 
particular moment be promoting fake news aimed at fooling the public into 
thinking otherwise, can only be interpreted as a deliberate effort to distract 
and fool the public.”

Promoting the articles, Mann said, “is beneath the dignity of anyone holding 
higher office”.

“This is an astounding example of cherry-picking the data,” said Kerry 
Emanuel, a professor at MIT. “Global land temperatures fluctuate significantly 
from one month to the next, and the article in question appears to have 
cherry-picked a drop on globalland temperatures (not including the ocean, which 
covers 70% of the globe) for asingle month.”

Emanuel left politics to the committee, adding: “You may draw your own 
conclusions as to motives.”

On their blog,  
<https://tamino.wordpress.com/2016/11/28/how-stupid-does-david-rose-think-you-are/>
a prominent climate writer who goes by the pseudonym Tamino, was less 
circumspect, saying the articles insulted readers by denying themelting ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/25/arctic-ice-melt-trigger-uncontrollable-climate-change-global-level>
,rising sea levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/climate-change-hurricane-matthew-sea-level-rise>
 and floods andincreased droughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/19/tree-death-california-hawaii-sudden-oak>
 around the world. “How stupid does he think you are?”

A spokesperson for the committee did not return emails or phone calls 
requesting comment about whether anyone vetted the articles. Since 2010, the 
Republican chairman of the committee, Lamar Smith, has writtenfive op-eds 
<http://www.breitbart.com/author/rep-lamar-smith-r-tx/> for Breitbart, the 
far-right website witha record 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/14/media/breitbart-incendiary-headlines/> of 
denying climate change and racist and misogynistic writing. A spokesman for 
Smith, Nick Cartwright, said “there is not a relationship” between the 
congressman and the site.

The former chairman of Breitbart, Steve Bannon, was named by president-elect 
Donald Trumpas his “chief strategist” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 in the Republican’s incoming administration.


Democrats on the committee berated their colleagues for the tweet, with 
ranking member EB Johnson saying it reflected a longer trend of anti-science 
action. Republicans, she said, had “attempted to intimidate NOAA’s scientists 
over climate change research results that they didn’t like, put forth a Nasa 
bill that gutted Earth science, and continuously attacked any effort on the 
part of the administration to deal with climate change”.

“This isn’t factual, it’s embarrassing, and Breitbart is not a credible news 
source,”wrote <https://twitter.com/RepDonBeyer/status/804418814507188224> 
representative Don Beyer. “We need to bring *science* back to the Science 
Committee .”

Representative Zoe Lofgren wrote 
<https://twitter.com/RepZoeLofgren/status/804450592957468672>: “Sign these guys 
up for the flat earth society.”

Fake news detector for Facebook leads to fake news story about who made it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/02/facebook-fake-news-flag-techcrunch-bs-detector>
Senator Bernie Sanders, who has said he intends to fight Republicans who would 
dismantle climate change measures, mocked the committee by alluding to the 
president-elect’s defunct real estate school, which closed andwas accused of 
fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-university-settles-president-lawsuit-25-million>
. “Where’d you get your PhD?” Sandersasked 
<https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/804432339640037376>. “Trump University?”

Several leading Republicans on the committee did not reply to requests for 
comment.

Democrats and Republicans each have their own teams of staffers for the 
committee, but share a news clipping service for providing information to 
elected officials. Since their party holds a majority in the House, the 
Republican team controls the search terms for what news clips are culled, said 
Kristen Kopshever, a spokeswoman for the Democrats’ office.

“It’s constantly like the the Daily Caller and Texas GOP Vote Blog and just 
these random conservative publications that have made it into our clips,” she 
said. Kopshever echoed the representatives, noting that Smith had aggressively 
pursued investigations:intervening 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/06/01/environmental-groups-reject-rep-smiths-request-for-information-on-exxon-mobil-climate-case/?utm_term=.21ab2ddb24ad>
 ina fraud case 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/20/science/exxon-mobil-fraud-inquiry-said-to-focus-more-on-future-than-past.html?_r=0>
 against ExxonMobil andthe inquiry into Hillary Clinton’s email server 
<https://science.house.gov/news/press-releases/smith-statement-company-warning-hillary-clinton-s-private-server-vulnerability>
, for instance.

Kopshever said her office tried to rely on apolitical sources, such as Science 
Magazine and the academic journal Nature, and that she could not speak for her 
Republican counterparts. “I don’t know what their process is,” she said. “We 
don’t work a lot together.”

 * This article was amended on 3 December to correct a misstated attribution 
of a blog post, which was written by a pseudonymous writer, Tamino, not by 
climate scientist Roy Spencer.  