
It seems an age ago now, and it was. Between 1972 and 1982, I wrote a weekly 
column about television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/24/clive-james-tv-critic-donald-trelford>
, and by the end of my stint I preened myself as being fairly clued up on the 
subject. I signed off with a confident prediction that the droll sarcasm of the 
desk sergeant Phil Esterhaus (Michael Conrad) inHill Street Blues 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hill_Street_Blues> was about as clever as 
American television would ever get. For a couple of decades it looked as if I 
might be right – and then the cable channels, arising out of nowhere, suddenly 
outflanked the networks, which, in their turn, were obliged to raise their game.

Since my polite but insidious form of leukaemia was diagnosed in early 2010, 
it has been more often dormant than not. Early on, a programme of chemo sent it 
into remission for nobody knew how long; perhaps months, perhaps more. The 
mystery span of time turned out to be a full five years, during which the 
doctors worked with some success on subsidiary problems, and I was able to 
function professionally almost as well as President Bartlet inThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>, whose undeclared 
disease did not inhibit him in his capacity to bomb the Middle East, outfox 
Chinese diplomats, or deal with the frightening facial mobility of Stockard 
Channing in a fit of anger.

In the five years before the latest crisis, I used up a lot of my blessed 
supply of extra time by reading. But I was also viewing, and I mean viewing 
everything. You might ask how a man who spent his days with the major poems of 
Browning could wish to spend his evenings with the minor movies ofChow Yun-Fat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jun/09/culture.features1>, but I could 
only reply that it was a need buried deep in my neural network. Even in my 
weakness, my habit (once a VHS habit, but the dealers re-upped with some great 
new stuff) had not grown less.

There was a time when the instruction Play All didn’t even exist. But now it’s 
in our lives, and especially it’s in the lives of those of us who have run so 
short of time that time no longer matters, and who are thus able to choose 
exactly what we want to see next. Shall I spend the better part of tomorrow 
afternoon making further inroads into the novels ofSir Walter Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sir-walter-scott>? Or shall I join my 
daughter in watching four episodes ofDexter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jun/19/your-next-box-set>? All right, 
five.

The West Wing: ‘The most elaborately eloquent dialogue since the great 
screwball comedies’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63ba8bc239dd3fb0565a252e63bc84aaff5d1cb4%2F0_0_3000_2447%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63ba8bc239dd3fb0565a252e63bc84aaff5d1cb4%2F0_0_3000_2447%2F3000.jpg>
 Left to right: Martin Sheen, Richard Schiff and Rob Lowe in season one of The 
West Wing. Photograph: Rex Features 
The word “created” always looks excessive when it pops up among the titles on 
a screen, but inAaron Sorkin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>
’s case it fits. Working on his own, he could seldom do structure: he has a 
frat-house penchant for slapstick, and his idea of a climax can be a ceiling 
falling on the hero’s head. But The West Wing had so much potential that there 
was very soon no question of Sorkin working alone. Though he did much of the 
writing (possibly too much for his health) there was a whole organisation 
toiling to keep him on the racing line, and he was left free to exploit his 
best gift, which is for the most elaborately eloquent dialogue since the great 
days of Hollywood screwball comedy.

Before The West Wing started, I had laughed at Allison Janney 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005049/> in Drop Dead Gorgeous 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0157503/>, noticed her gangly pathos in Primary 
Colors <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119942/>, and put together a mental 
collection of cameos that added up to a favourable impression; but the 
impression was the merest hint of the display of virtuosity she would unfold as
CJ Cregg <http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/C.J._Cregg>, and could give not even a 
token of its depth. WhenDanny <http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/Danny_Concannon> 
brings the wrong goldfish to CJ’s office and gets himself kissed at long last, 
it is one of the great love scenes in the American hall of heroic imagery; and 
when she mourns for her demented father, and seethes against the policy of 
affirmative action, it is, on its quiet and contained level, great tragedy. 
After the show ended Janney was back to doing cameos, and on the right night, 
with the right accidental click on the remote, you can see her swapping quips 
with Charlie Sheen in a rerun ofTwo And A Half Men 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0369179/>. Wrong Sheen.

This is the way America would like the occupant of the Oval Office to be: 
omniscient, an ethical giant, a poet king

The show’s heroes and heroines are all given their stature by the words Sorkin 
gives them to say. It’s an elementary point that should need no emphasising, 
but it needs to be hammered home. On the page, a Sorkin speech already includes 
most of the timing required for its delivery. This remained true for the 
dialogue even after Sorkin left the show, having written every episode of the 
first four seasons. He had created a style, and his producer, John Wells, took 
it from there.

For any viewer the age of me or my wife, the only problem with the 
slow-burning romance ofJosh Lyman <http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/Josh_Lyman> 
andDonna Moss <http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/Donna_Moss> was the high speed of 
what they said, often during long walking talks down corridors. (Luckily we had 
two keen-eared daughters to translate.) But none of the quick talk would have 
seemed in keeping if the president had spoken like Eisenhower or George Bush. 
The tone and the pace are set byJed Bartlet 
<http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/Josiah_Bartlet>, an exemplary use of the 
charismatic central hero, a phenomenon which some stories can do without, but 
without which this story would be dead.

Bartlet is an intellectual president. In other words, he is really Aaron Sorkin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin> himself, correctly 
intuiting that this is the way America, and indeed the whole free world, would 
like the occupant of the Oval Office to be: omniscient, energetic, an ethical 
giant, a poet king.

It is almost impossible to portray a political hero without romanticising him. 
Sorkin came close, making a questioning, troubled intellect seem a desirable 
quality for a politician to have, even in an era where the soundbite had come 
to power. With its probing, dialectical treatment of every liberal issue, 
including race,The West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing> reminded the world 
that America had intellectual capacity behind its economic muscle, and surely 
helped prepare the way for Barack Obama’s election.

Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> v Weeds 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0439100/>: ‘Gus Fring gives us one of the most 
stunning images in any drama’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2957651065d1de6acc5522caa27cb7ae14f7af8%2F0_100_2994_1796%2F2994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2957651065d1de6acc5522caa27cb7ae14f7af8%2F0_100_2994_1796%2F2994.jpg>
 Aaron Paul and Bryan Cranston in Breaking Bad. 
My daughter Lucinda sat through the whole of Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> with me and agreed 
perhaps too readily with my laughing suggestion that cooking crystal meth might 
have been one of the ways I could have gone; but my wife gave up watching, 
unable, much to my relief, to find the character plausible. Perhaps her opinion 
was a tribute to the NHS, which ensures that no man stricken with a terminal 
illness need find a way of raising a quick few million.

I found Walter White <http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Walter_White> 
plausible but dull. Failed chemists in America no doubt turn into drug 
overlords every day, but do they walk around in their underpants with their 
mouths open? It was that last part that set me nodding. Even my granddaughter 
gives me credit for the work that goes into myBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> impersonation: it’s 
quite a strain on the corners of the mouth, pulling them down like that without 
using your fingers. But nobody gave me credit for my impersonation of Walter 
White. I would keep my mouth sagging open for 10 minutes at a time, but nobody 
gave me an Emmy. I should be more reverent, because the show was a huge hit. 
Bryan Cranston, who had to outdoSpencer Tracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jan/27/4> in transforming himself from 
mild to monstrous, was much praised for carrying the show, along with Anna Gunn 
as his wife,Skyler <http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Skyler_White>, bravely 
adjusting herself to the realisation that her husband is a lying head case, as 
so many wives must.

I found Walter hard to sympathise with even when he was reduced to his 
underpants, and I speak as someone who has done unspeakable things to stay in 
business: I once voluntarily interviewed the Spice Girls. Luckily White has a 
brother-in-law, the DEA agentHank Schrader 
<http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Hank_Schrader>, played by Dean Norris, who 
is marvellous at inhabiting the mental territory somewhere between implacable 
detective and plodding knucklehead. Another plus is the secretive drugs 
mastermindGus Fring <http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Gustavo_Fring> 
(Giancarlo Esposito), who proves that a black criminal kingpin can be as smart 
asStringer Bell <http://thewire.wikia.com/wiki/Russell_Bell> in The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> and still live. Or almost proves it: 
in the end he presents us with one of the most stunning images in all the box 
set dramas when he walks toward us through a doorwaywith one side of his head 
missing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FM1gEZXzunI>. There is also Saul 
Goodman <http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Saul_Goodman> (Bob Odenkirk), a 
fast-talking shyster who looked set from the start to have his own series one 
day, asFrasier <http://frasier.wikia.com/wiki/Frasier_Crane> did after his 
first few speeches inCheers <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083399/>.

Walter’s apprentice cook, Jesse Pinkman 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesse_Pinkman>, was played by Aaron Paul as the 
most unbearable punk sincethe one Clint Eastwood blew away in Dirty Harry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ky7rHZmk9Yw>. Unfortunately, from my 
viewpoint, nobody blew away Jesse Pinkman before my patience was exhausted. 
Lucinda, who quite liked him, told me to stop being irrational, but I would put 
a cushion over my face rather than watch those unnaturally perfect teeth bared 
at me again. Why Walter didn’t upend his rebarbative assistant into a vat of 
bubbling acid was a mystery.

Vince Gilligan <http://www.amc.com/shows/breaking-bad/cast-crew/vince-gilligan>
 almost ditched Breaking Bad when he heard that HBO was going to make Weeds. He 
would have been wrong to do so – hundreds of millions of dollars wrong – but 
there is a case for Weeds being the better product. It has a better subject, 
simply because the central figure is a law-abiding woman, not a law-abiding 
man, turning criminal to cope with adversity: we don’t expect it (perhaps it is 
patronising of us not to). In Breaking Bad, Walter copes by dispensing chemical 
danger to thousands of people. In Weeds,Nancy 
<http://weeds.wikia.com/wiki/Nancy_Botwin> copes by doing nothing worse than 
growing the soft and fragrant high that got so many of us through our belated 
adolescence, back there when the guitar licks ofJefferson Airplane 
<http://www.jeffersonairplane.com/> floated sweetly over a crowded field of 
smoke. In fact Mary-Louise Parker looks a bit likeGrace Slick 
<http://www.jeffersonairplane.com/the-band/grace-slick/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03f9dd81d81561b121904c5433836dbe659341bd%2F0_0_2972_1931%2F2972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03f9dd81d81561b121904c5433836dbe659341bd%2F0_0_2972_1931%2F2972.jpg>
 In the course of seven seasons of Weeds, Mary-Louise Parker’s Nancy gets 
through three husbands and leaves every male in the cast looking like an 
appendage. Photograph: Allstar 
I soon got past my idée fixe that Parker was really the girlfriend Josh might 
have married instead of Donna. In The West Wing she was just another knockout 
female highbrow with a fistful of PhDs, but in Weeds she copes in the way that 
so many of us fatherless ones learned to admire in our youth. A lasting tribute 
to the female showrunnerJenji Kohan 
<http://gb.imdb.com/name/nm0463176/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm>, Nancy is a heroic 
figurehead for womanly competence, a Florence Nightingale with incense in her 
lamp. In the course of seven seasons she gets through three husbands and leaves 
every male in the cast looking like an appendage.

The show is vast in emotional scope and I still haven’t finished watching it, 
but nor have I quite dealt with its basic proposition that integrity can be 
maintained in a criminal context. Would the story work at all if it paid due 
attention to the insistence byJohn Phillips 
<http://www.biography.com/people/john-phillips-490872> that pot was the gateway 
to hard drugs and grim death? Phillips loved the sweet music, too (as a member 
of the Mamas And The Papas he created more than his share of it) but he wasn’t 
fooled by the notion that a tie-dyed T-shirt was an expression of wisdom, and 
his argument – backed up by his glittering track record as someone who tried to 
kill himself with every known substance – that marijuana is the enticing 
entrance to needle park has yet to be answered.

The Scandinavians: ‘It is hard to get a job as a cop unless you are as boring 
as hell’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82da8f67be1ac5facfa3368d9164d31266ab126%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82da8f67be1ac5facfa3368d9164d31266ab126%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 The Bridge’s Saga Norén (Sofia Helin) has a case of near-autistic 
something-or-other which would make any hetero male viewer think twice about 
angling for a lift in her Porsche. Photograph: BBC 
Throughout the box set years, the Swedes, Danes and Norwegians have done their 
best to keep crime ugly. Sarah Lund (Sofie Gråbøl), the head girl inThe Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-killing>, is not Mary-Louise 
Parker from any angle. Lund is a thin bundle of neuroses plunged into the gloom 
of a bad sweater. InThe Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-bridge>, the head girl Saga Norén 
(Sofia Helin) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/feb/15/scandi-crush-the-bridge-sofia-helin-saga-television>
 has a case of near-autistic something-or-other which would make any hetero 
male viewer think twice about angling for a lift in her Porsche, although it’s 
probably true that any hetero male viewer would think of it once. At one point 
we see her having sex and she is under him, over him and off him in a matter of 
seconds, like the Scandinavian version of the female black widow spider, the 
one that carries a textbook on how to form normal relationships.

And these are just the cops. The criminals really get you down. Most of them 
are serial killers spreading terror in the standard Scandinavian ambience in 
which the lights are turned off even indoors, so that sometimes you have to 
search for the little green diode to make sure your TV set is still on. Sarah, 
don’t go into that Stygian stairwell! You might shoot your partner 
accidentally! Oh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487193aa289ab96d79184cf1c821260e5f5d6e23%2F0_198_2976_3716%2F2976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F487193aa289ab96d79184cf1c821260e5f5d6e23%2F0_198_2976_3716%2F2976.jpg>
 Sofie Gråbøl as Sarah Lund in The Killing. Photograph: BBC 
Even in the dark, however, it is made clear that a serial killer is a rare 
event, just as it is a rare event for someone to drop litter or travel without 
a ticket. This is Scandinavia, after all, and the scene is basically clean. 
Basically but not reassuringly. Far from it: under the cleanliness there is a 
current of angst, like someone weird softly reading aloud fromKierkegaard’s 
Fear And Trembling <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_and_Trembling>.

And there is also the boredom. It is hard to get a job as a cop unless you are 
as boring as hell. (Saga is the spectacular Scandi cop because she not only 
stares at the wall, she occasionally stares at the wall for a long time.) I 
blameWallander <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_Wallander>, who has been 
boring the world for so long that three actors have played him if you count
Kenneth Branagh <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh>. Of the 
two Swedish Wallanders,Rolf Lassgård <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0489858/> 
tries to make the character interesting by looking around a lot, often 
approaching the looking-around record thatBen Kingsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-kingsley> established in Species 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0114508/>; but the other, and by far preferable, 
Wallander,Krister Henriksson <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0377631/>, accepts his 
northern destiny and just looks worried, like your dull cousin fretting about 
his tax return. Fretting away during the slow solution of a not very 
interesting crime, Henriksson will stare out to sea as if wondering why 
Scandinavian waves are so small and dull.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV99NfEwrV9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV99NfEwrV9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV99NfEwrV9A&media=>
 Krister Henriksson’s worried Wallander. 
Scandi politics is different. Though the level of lighting is still not high, 
Borgen <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/borgen> seems designed to get 
you running to the airport for a standby flight to whichever of those 
double-glazed countries has the greatest number of female politicians. The 
central character,Birgitte Nyborg 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/4f9GcSWMR3lvdBJ3LWHKR9R/birgitte-nyborg>
, is fascinating not just because of her situation – how can she keep her 
family life together while being prime minister? – but because she is played by 
Sidse Babett Knudsen. With the radiantly intelligent Knudsen in the picture, 
Birgitte’s headquarters generates something of the same witty tempo as The West 
Wing. Her brilliant but twisted young adviserKasper (Pilou Asbæk) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/05/pilou-asbaek-borgen-eurovison-2014-party>
 could be Josh Lyman with his anxiety neurosis not yet diagnosed, and the media 
darlingKatrine (Birgitte Hjort Sørensen) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/16/birgitte-hjort-sorensen-borgen-interview>
 is a combination ofAinsley Hayes <http://westwing.wikia.com/wiki/Ainsley_Hayes>
 and Donna Moss, with enough teeth for both. Call the show The North Wing in 
conversation and people will know what you mean.

It all sounds vaguely as if Aaron Sorkin had dictated it into a tape recorder 
while imitating a drunken German officer with a speech impediment, but one puts 
one’s trust in the subtitles and tunes in for every episode, even after 
Birgitte falls from power. She suddenly then seems much more ordinary, although 
the women in my family assure me that I’m a clear case of what Birgitte was up 
against all along.

Homeland and House Of Cards: ‘Danes seizes the challenge with knotted hands 
and tossing head’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd650e4b85ac034cfa873d37c0ed7bdbd2025df12%2F0_113_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd650e4b85ac034cfa873d37c0ed7bdbd2025df12%2F0_113_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Through more seasons than seems possible, Claire Danes has been devouring the 
screen as Carrie Mathison in Homeland. Photograph: Showtime 
None of us predicted that Homeland <http://www.sho.com/homeland#/closed>, 
after its huge initial impact, would be reduced to triviality in little more 
than a single season, although we should have. At first blush, the story had 
everything, including a supremely irritating daughter. But when the hero
Sergeant Brody <http://homeland.wikia.com/wiki/Nick_Brody> (Damian Lewis) came 
back to the US from his tortured imprisonment in Afghanistan and slowly 
revealed himself as a convert to Islam programmed to stage a suicide bombing, 
even the most riveted viewers realised that this might be a neat variation on
The Manchurian Candidate 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-the-manchurian-candidate-1962> 
but that Brody, win or lose, would be either blown or blown up. He could 
therefore have only a limited future as a character.

This having proved true, beautiful, bipolar CIA officer Carrie Mathison 
(Claire Danes) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/17/claire-danes-profile-homeland>
 became the centre of interest. (CIA veteran sageSaul Berenson 
<http://homeland.wikia.com/wiki/Saul_Berenson>, played by Mandy Patinkin, did 
noble work in the wise-man tradition of Gandalf and Obi-Wan Kenobi.) Plotwise, 
all depended on Carrie focusing her scrambled brains in the interests of world 
peace. Danes seized the challenge with knotted hands and tossing head. Through 
more seasons than seems possible she has been devouring the screen, looking 
into every corner of it while speaking compulsively even when she is supposed 
to be inconspicuous in a crowded Arab market, nodding her head to mean no, 
shaking her head to mean yes. By now she has to do it without me watching, but 
I know she will bravely continue.

The British House Of Cards is big in my family, but I’m the dissenter. I find 
Ian Richardson too obviously machiavellian

To be persuasive on screen, the covert personality needs a capacity for cool. 
The arch-exponent of this for our time isKevin Spacey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey>. In The Usual Suspects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/04/how-we-made-the-usual-suspects-bryan-singer-gabriel-byrne>
 he looked like Kevin Spacey with a limp, but perhaps he was really Keyser 
Söze. InK-Pax <http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/k-pax-2001> he looked like 
Kevin Spacey with a phenomenal ability to chalk equations on a blackboard, but 
perhaps he was really from a faraway galaxy. So when he arrived in the leading 
role ofHouse Of Cards <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>
, he already had a solid track record of perhaps being someone else. He was 
immediately credible as a careerist politician because he didn’t look like an 
actor: he never has. Most leading men have sculpted features. Spacey’s features 
just happened, like aRorschach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/08/hermann-rorschach-google-doodle-inkblot-test>
 blot.

In the BBC’s original 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_of_Cards_(UK_TV_series)>, Ian Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/10/guardianobituaries.broadcasting> 
looked and spoke exactly like an actor: the eagle’s profile, the cultivated 
voice that projected itself to the gallery of the Old Vic even when he 
murmured. The British House Of Cards is big in my family, but I’m the 
dissenting vote. I find Richardson too obviously machiavellian, his female 
victims insufficiently alluring to attract his fatal attentions, and the rats 
too symbolic: they get a walk-on role once per episode. The American version I 
found a smoother ride, and thus more convincing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3783600251bee4e9ee69d37c266268e1466d00dd%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20adventures%20in%20box%20sets%2C%20from%20The%20West%20Wing%20to%20Weeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fclive-james-adventures-box-sets-west-wing-weeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3783600251bee4e9ee69d37c266268e1466d00dd%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright in the US House Of Cards. Photograph: Patrick 
Harbron 
As Frank Underwood <http://house-of-cards.wikia.com/wiki/Frank_Underwood>, the 
ruthless Democrat working his way to the top by all means however illegal, 
Spacey is mercifully not obliged, as Richardson was, to hum The Ride Of The 
Valkyries as an indication that he is gripped by the will to power. Instead he 
is given an even more lavish supply of knowing asides in which to transmit to 
us the thinking behind his evil. Add all these asides together and you would 
get a treatise comparable withThe Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/mar/26/machiavelli-prince-power-good-evil>
, plus a long free lesson in what a great screen actor can do by seeming to 
interiorise his emotions when in closeup. If the scene has already made the 
point, Spacey will underline it with no more than a millimetre of raised 
eyebrow – and nil by mouth. (Bad actors try to attract attention to their 
mouths; good ones know our attention is already there.)

Another strength of the show is Robin Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/22/robin-wright-house-of-cards-congo-rare-earths-minerals-womens-rights>
 asClaire Underwood <http://house-of-cards.wikia.com/wiki/Claire_Underwood>, 
Frank’s wife. She starts off as passive-aggressive, escalates to 
active-aggressive, and finally soars into the range of aggressive-insane; and 
all the way up the scale her smooth cool is playing against her behaviour and 
therefore helping to define it. If, like Lady Macbeth, she ended up jumping 
from the battlements, she would fly like a bird.

For anyone who started following Wright’s performances with The Princess Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/24/princess-bride-review-derek-malcolm-1988>
 – my daughter Claerwen, when very young, used to make me watch it until I, 
too, could recite Mandy Patinkin’s thrilling speech in the role of Inigo 
Montoya, and “Prepare to die!” is still a code phrase for the two of us – this 
is the apex of her beauty, even though (or perhaps partly because) it is 
accelerated by the burning internal fire of psychopathy that she somehow 
manages to convey by a hard stare, or an unexpected silence.

The mark of a great show is that every leading character is your favourite, 
and my favourite of favourites is Frank’s aide de camp,Doug Stamper 
<http://house-of-cards.wikia.com/wiki/Doug_Stamper>, played by Michael Kelly in 
full grimness mode: a reformed alcoholic, this guy is never off the alert. The 
enabler is a strong role in any gangster plot, but Doug is the perfect 
instrument: an expression of Frank’s will at its lethal worst. For American TV, 
for anybody’s TV, this is amazing stuff.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DULwUzF1q5w4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DULwUzF1q5w4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DULwUzF1q5w4&media=>
 The trailer for season one of the US House Of Cards. 
The whole show feels like a realistic antidote to romanticism, right up to the 
moment when Frank becomes president, after which an incurable decline sets in. 
Previously, House Of Cards was The West Wing dissolved in acid. Then it was The 
West Wing all over again. Having attained the top role, Frank began playing the 
part straight, because there was no other way to play it. To operate plausibly 
on the international stage, he had to do the best that was in him. He was Jed 
Bartlet reborn, just a bit tougher on his staff.

***

My 10-year-old granddaughter has a box set of all 10 seasons of Friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/friends>, and I am allowed to watch 
along with her as she ploughs through the whole thing yet again. She doesn’t 
seem even slightly fazed by the mentions of sex. I could wish that she were 
more bothered by the laugh track, which is, in my professional experience, a 
bad thing to have around even when comedy has been genuinely achieved: 
mechanical laughter is a false intensifier. But she seems to understand that 
instinctively, and brush it off. The next generation, and then the next 
generation after that, are always more technically sophisticated than you 
expect.

My granddaughter understands how Basil Fawlty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
 gets his laughs. When Basil instructs Manuel to hide behind the reception 
desk, she knows that Basil is sure to forget Manuel is there, and will later 
trip over him. When we watch the sushi bar scene inJohnny English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/apr/11/artsfeatures3> yet again, she 
knows that Rowan Atkinson is looking knowledgeable about Japanese food only to 
multiply the effect when he gets his tie caught in the conveyor belt. It is a 
language: the language of setup, structure, development and fulfilment. She 
speaks it already.

I took a long time to learn it, and soon I will speak it no more. But it will 
go on being spoken for as long as all these marvellous people are free to 
create. What a festival they have given us, and how hard it is to leave.

 * This is an edited extract from Play All by Clive James, published by Yale 
University Press on 20 August at £14.99. To order a copy for £12.29, visit the
Guardian Bookshop. <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/play-all.html>
 