
My copy of the 2012 Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> 
movieArgo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review> lay around 
unwatched for a long time. A few nights ago, I fought my way in through the 
shrink-wrap and took a look. It revealed Affleck to be a terrific director as 
well as a fine actor.

That latter quality was probably the reason I had left the shrink-wrap intact 
for so long. InPearl Harbor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/jun/01/1>, 
Affleck had overcome the handicap of his absurd good looks and done a 
creditable job of bringing to life his role as a brave young pilot, instead 
of doing what the script deserved and setting fire to it before placing himself 
under citizen’s arrest for having signed the contract in the first place.

The movie was such a dog’s dinner that I couldn’t stop blaming Affleck for 
being in it. Though he had acted superbly as a has-been B-movie superhero in
Hollywoodland <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/24/benaffleck.drama>, 
I still had to be persuaded at gunpoint to watchGone Baby Gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/06/drama.thriller>, which proved 
that he had immense talent as a director. But, for me, Affleck was still 
the too-handsome actor who had been in that awful movie where a thousand 
Japanese aircraft tried to destroyKate Beckinsale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,45359,00.html>’s 
career. The only reason I finally took a look at Argo was that I was planning 
to write an article aboutAlan Arkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-arkin>.

Take a look at Arkin in Argo (so my article might start), and you’ll see what 
a great screen actor can do. You will also see (so my article might go on) why 
a great screen actor is not necessarily a bankable film star.Robert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford> at his peak was more bankable 
than Lassie, but he could never act like Arkin. He didn’t have to. All he had 
to do was stand there being gorgeous. He’s still doing it, looking a bit 
crinkled at the edges.

In the 1990 movie Havana <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TtzbXW0_7yo>, you 
can see Arkin and Redford on screen together. Arkin convinces you he is 
a thoughtful expatriate whose complex soul has been eaten away by corruption, 
and Redford convinces you that he has a profile on each side of his face.

Clive James: ‘A misprint in my new book made me feel I was contemplating the 
ruins of 60 years’ work’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/23/clive-james-misprint-poem>
Occasionally, Redford got so bored by his own beauty that he would go off and 
direct something. Affleck probably has the same motivation, but he has a lot 
more directorial flair.

You can already see what this critical article of mine is up to. I might not 
get the chance to write it, but the theme is set to go. The theme is that it 
takes a lot of luck to defy expectations. Right now, I’ve gottwo new 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387104/s/collected-poems/>
poetry books <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387103/> 
out and I should count my blessings if a camera crew turns up at my door. They 
might have thought I was just a pretty face and stayed away.
 