
The concept of first contact with extraterrestrial life has been a recurrent 
theme in 20th- and 21st-century science fiction. Will aliens look like us? Will 
they think like us? Will we be like children to them? Will they exhibit what 
our own race rather conceitedly labels “humanity”, or will they wrench this 
sublimely beautiful planet from our grasping hands and grind us mercilessly 
into the dust?

Terminated: James Cameron's lost vision of brutal blue-collar sci-fi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/terminated-a-lament-for-james-camerons-lost-vision-blue-collar-sci-fi>
Denis Villeneuve’s latest film, Arrival, the first teaser trailer for which 
debuted this week, looks likely to take a new approach to the theme. When we do 
eventually meet aliens, how will we work out how to converse with them? 
Especially as Star Trek’s rather useful universal translator has not yet been 
invented.

The trailer introduces Amy Adams’ Dr Louise Banks, a language expert, 
mathematician Ian Donnelly (Jeremy Renner) and military man Forest Whitaker (as 
Colonel Weber). The aliens have landed, or, more precisely, are hovering above 
the Earth in a monolithic ship and now await the humans who will be among the 
first to encounter extraterrestrial life.

If Villeneuve manages to successfully expand the conversation, his achievement 
will be up there with the moon landings. For while the promise of these films 
is that we’ll get to see what alien life might look like, how its societies 
might function and how that might affect mankind’s own future evolution 
(providing we are not exterminated), it’s rare that we ever get to see behind 
the conjuror’s curtain. And that means these “first contact” films are, on one 
vital level, always bound to disappoint.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwqSi_ToNPs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwqSi_ToNPs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgwqSi_ToNPs&media=>
 Arrival trailer 
Many film-makers get around the problem by deliberately keeping the details of 
extraterrestrial life pretty nebulous, while blinding us with smoke and 
mirrors. See2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001-a-space-odyssey>’s black monoliths and 
floating orbs. The worst examples – I’m thinking the odious Jodie Foster vehicle
Contact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/08/why-i-love-jodie-foster-contact>
 – have shown us almost nothing at all by the time the credits roll, their 
alien entities dressed sumptuously in the cosmic equivalent of the emperor’s 
new clothes.

Even when we do get to see the aliens, in movies such as Ridley Scott’s 
uber-portentousPrometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review> or M Night 
Shyamalan’sSigns <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/sep/13/artsfeatures>
, we are conveniently told little or nothing about where they came from or what 
their motivations might have been. Film-makers take all our wonder and awe, but 
give us very little to show for it in return. And most of the time, especially 
if the movie has thrilled on other levels, we don’t even notice.

Is Ridley Scott making up Alien: Covenant as he goes along?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-reboot-script-filming-troubles>
Steven Spielberg’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/close-encounters-of-the-third-kind> is the 
textbook example here. We are so stupefied by all the flashing lights and music 
of the early scenes that by the time we get to see an alien up close, we’re 
ready to scream at the screen in astonishment. When Francois Truffaut uses sign 
language to communicate the movie’s famous five-note refrain, and the little 
green man signs back, corks are popping in every seat of the auditorium. And 
yet, the champagne turns out to be of an ersatz variety, for once again, the 
film has told us precisely nothing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJeeZA4B1qyI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJeeZA4B1qyI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJeeZA4B1qyI&media=>
 Close Encounters of the Third Kind trailer 
Even when alien movies fully succeed, they often do so by looking inwards 
rather than outwards. ET is Spielberg’s vision of how an evolved being might be 
manifest, as a symbiotic creature of infinite kindness, minimal ego and 
childlike curiosity. Big thinkers in ancient times had a similar idea and 
called it Jesus.

You would have to read ET’s companion novels (as I did as a child) to find out 
more about the alien’s own society. All we know from the movie is that the 
guy’s a proper dude, can survive on sugary confectionery, and likes plants a 
lot.

Then there’s Neill Blomkamp’s District 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/03/district-9-review>, which gave us 
aliens based on the experience of the black underclass in apartheid-era South 
Africa. With such fascinating layers of allegory in place, no one bothered to 
complain that the details of the alien “prawn” society are thinly sketched.

Perhaps movies are simply too limited a form to fully explore such grandiose 
matters, leaving film-makers to dip their toes in the sea of possibility, 
rather than risk drowning by rushing headlong into the waves. We don’t know 
what alien life will look like, should it ever reach us, so film can only hope 
to play on our sense of wonder at the prospect of discovering we might not be 
alone in the cosmos. A glimpse of reality is all we are ever likely to see, and 
the most intelligent sci-fi film-makers know that will be more than enough to 
sate our appetites.
 