
"They played footsie for a little bit, until we basically got on our knees, 
begged them and crapped our pants in front of them, you know: 'Look into your 
heart!'"

That's Andy Wachowski's account – given to Deadline Hollywood 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/11/oscars-qa-wachowskis-and-tykwer/#more-374132> 
– of trying to get Warner Brothers on side for his and sister Lana's adaptation 
ofCloud Atlas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148731/cloud-atlas>. Not 
what you think you'd have to do for a studio for whom you've made in excess of 
a billion and a half dollars. Warner eventually signed on, coughing up around 
$20m of the $102m budget – but their indecision has echoed through the film's 
marketing and release stages, hobbling one of the most ambitious and globally 
oriented projects of the decade on the first leg of its journey. Its US release 
last October – in third place, with a dodgy $9.4m (£6m) opening weekend – saw 
the tag officially slapped on: flop!

It was never, it must be said, an easy sell. David Mitchell's novel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/cloud-atlas> – six interlinking stories 
spanning the planet and time frames from 1850 to 2321 – is as 
adaptation-resistant as they come. Andthe Wachowskis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wachowskis>, co-scripting with Run Lola Run 
directorTom Tykwer <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0878756/>, arguably made it even 
more complicated: instead of simply nesting the stories in a controlled order 
as Mitchell did, their screenplay chopped and changed antically between.

"The script was not user-friendly," actor Tom Hanks later told the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2012/09/10/120910fa_fact_hemon>. "The 
demands it put upon the audience and everybody, the business risk, were off the 
scale." That was Warner's judgment, too; after projecting the box office take, 
modelling their estimate on Darren Aronofsky's similarly flighty and 
multi-strandedThe Fountain 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116779/fountain>, it refused to commit 
all the way.

Cloud Atlas was eventually financed, appropriately, with a patchwork of 
international capital: part-Warner, part-German Federal Film Fund 
<http://www.dfff-ffa.de/content_dfff/dfff_leitfaden.phtml?language=en>, 
part-Asian investors, part-preselling distribution rights to territories around 
the globe. The latter push was overseen by Focus Features, whose CEOJames 
Schamus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Schamus> had once sewn a quilt of 
similar deals forCrouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/86383/crouching.tiger.hidden.dragon>.

But the fragmented nature of this arrangement caused problems, beginning with 
a haphazard release schedule trailing over six months that means Cloud Atlas, 
arriving in the UK this week, has the air of yesterday's news. "Our plan in the 
beginning was to have a much more coordinated release," says producer Stefan 
Arndt. "But what happens if you have 20 territories with 20 investors with 20 
opinions – in the end you cannot force your distributors to follow one 
strategy."

One key problem, amid the babble, is whether the enigmatic Cloud Atlas ever 
had a chance to build a clear identity with audiences. Warner, who retained the 
rights in core territories such as the US, UK, Japan, France, Spain and 
Australia, were in the best position to set the tone, but have dropped the 
ball. The material wasn't easy, granted, but the studio failed to encapsulate 
it appealingly. "Everything is connected" was the flat tagline, a default 
globalisation slogan more suited to a mobile-phone campaign than a quixotic, 
pioneering blockbuster. They could have homed in on more specific themes – "The 
weak are meat, and the strong do eat" is one resonant catchphrase – that might 
have dredged up more protein from the zeitgeist. Or how about mining the 
shapeshifting feats performed by the cast, who take on multiple roles across 
the six stories, for their visual potential?

But the main poster is a mess. 
<http://jimsturgessonline.com/images/albums/userpics/10001/CLOUD_ATLAS_poster_7.jpg>
 A six-minute trailer dropped last July, but thisheavy-handed approach 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hWnAqFyaQ5s> only highlighted that Warner were 
struggling for ideas. Cloud Atlas's treatment feels like a failure of nerve – 
irrecoverably so, once the film clocked up a middling C+ CinemaScore with US 
audiences, opened in the middle of Hurricane Sandy, and was thenblown on to the 
rocks by Typhoon Skyfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/25/skyfall-review>.

Arndt stresses that the marketing was a joint affair between the producers and 
the studio, and that wide release couldn't have happened without a partner of 
Warner's clout. He also says that the original push focused too much on 
filmgoers over 30, and adjustments were made to target the youth demographic on 
the later international releases. But the piecemeal strategy – buttressed by 
Warner's odd decision to schedule their other openings on the other side of 
Christmas – killed off the possibility of Cloud Atlas being any kind of global 
event; far-removed from the simultaneous worldwide release (the first of its 
kind) rolled out by Warner for the Wachowskis'The Matrix Revolutions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95856/matrix.revolutions> a decade ago.

The studio is, of course, under no obligation to continue bankrolling careers 
that look to some sceptics like meandering philosophy postdoctorates, with the 
odd pop-culture-fetish interlude such as Speed Racer thrown in. But it does 
like to cultivate a reputation for maintaining strong, long-term relationships 
with directors: Clint Eastwood, Stanley Kubrick, Christopher Nolan, Ben 
Affleck. So it feels like a failure of duty of care towards the directorial 
team that cashed in so emphatically for them in the early noughties – 
especially with the Wachowskis still admirably keen on expanding cinema's 
parameters at a time when that's sorely needed.

Arndt is philosophical about Cloud Atlas's breech birth – casting such issues 
as part of the dance between major "pipeline" studios and independent producers 
that is replicating itself across the global film landscape: "We support them 
by saving money, they support us by releasing movies with the strength they 
have." But he also believes "in the end, next time, the producer should have 
the last say in how to bring everything together".

It's a shame because a global event is exactly what the film should have been. 
It has its flaws (the siblings' ongoing love ofSpiral Tribe-esque wardrobe 
choices <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spiral_Tribe>, for one), but it is a 
staggering feat of adaptation with an uncompromising line of attack, 
shouldering the very biggest themes: history, morality, racial identity, 
religion, storytelling. It picks up one point the Wachowskis' Matrix trilogy 
was concerned with: the relationship between oppressor and the oppressed – and 
refracts it elegantly through the six stories into a compelling demolition of 
Nietzschean "might is right".

Happily, its spirit of humanity-sans-frontières looks like being its saving 
grace. It is crawling into profit, thanks to strong showings in Russia ($17m), 
Brazil ($4.6m), Germany ($12.6m) and China ($21.6m). Each territory had its own 
decisive factors: the home crowd for Tykwer in Germany; the fact that 
"intellectual" movies aren't as offputting to Russian audiences as they are to 
US ones, as Cloud Atlas'sCIS distributor diplomatically put it 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/european-distributor-says-cloud-atlas-was-too-intellectual-for-american-audiences-20121101>
; Chinese marketing that emphasised the action content, as well as local actor
Zhou Xun <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhou_Xun>, who has a decisive role in 
the neo-Seoul timeline. (Some online wags have suggested the 23-minute cut 
imposed by the Chinese censors has improved the film.)

Could one sole entity – studio or producers – have taken all these variables 
on board? That's the world we now inhabit; this is one endeavour where the 
centre would always struggle to hold, but you get the feeling the Wachowskis 
knew that going in.

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at how Turkey is coming up with its 
own answer to Monument Valley. What global cinematic stories would you like to 
see covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 