
The federal government is confident that changes to the Senate voting system, 
passed on Friday, will withstand a high court challenge, the special minister 
of state,Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, said.

Family First senator Bob Day and Liberal Democrat senator David Leyonhjelm 
will on Monday lodge proceedings with thehigh court to challenge the voting 
changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/19/senate-voting-changes-day-and-leyonhjelm-to-launch-high-court-action>
, which would make it harder for minor parties like theirs to be elected.

Senate crossbenchers turn up heat on Coalition and Greens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/15/senate-crossbenchers-in-bid-to-disrupt-government-program>
“We are very confident that the reforms passed by parliament are consistent 
with all the relevant requirements in the constitution,” Cormann said. “The 
whole purpose of the reforms is to empower voters to directly determine where 
their preferences go and hence who they ultimately end up helping to elect to 
the Senate.”

“Under our system the voter has control of what he or she wants to do with 
their vote all the way through and who they help elect to the Senate. In our 
opinion that is as it should be.”

The Coalition struck a deal with the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/02/coalition-deal-with-greens-paves-way-for-double-dissolution-election>
 and independent senator Nick Xenophon to pass the voting changes this week. 
The legislation was finally passed after amarathon 40-hour debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/marathon-senate-debate-ends-with-bill-on-voting-changes-passing-36-votes-to-23>
.

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, downplayed Day 
and Leyonhjelm’s high court case.

“That’s their right to do that. I suspect it will fail and we’ll move on,” Di 
Natale told Sky News on Sunday. “I don’t think there’s much prospect of the 
high court challenge being successful, but if they feel they’ve got a case then 
it’s their right to be able to pursue it.”

Voting changes need to be in place for three months before a federal election. 
Their passage on Friday paves the way for a double dissolution election in July.

Di Natale said it would be a “mistake” for the government to go to the polls 
early.

“There’s a sense of panic now within the Coalition,” he said. “The government 
does look very divided, it looks very shambolic at the moment and to sort of be 
panicking and running to an early election, particularly as it would be such a 
long campaign, I don’t think would be a good look for them.”

Dissolving both houses of parliament, as would happen under a double 
dissolution, would mean twice the number of senators being elected. Senators 
serve six-year terms and are therefore usually elected every second federal 
election under a normal half-Senate election.

Di Natale has warned that the new Senate rules were as yet untested, and could 
result in more independents and minor parties.

“We know under a double dissolution election we will end up with a number of 
crossbench senators most likely under these new rules, so it’s a case of be 
careful what you wish for,” he said. “You might find that under a new set of 
voting rules with a double dissolution election you end up with a Senate that 
has more diversity rather than less.”

The latest a government can call a double dissolution election is 11 May, 
which is a day after the budget is due to be handed down. That gives the 
government little time to pass crucial supply bills before heading to the polls.

Cabinet secretary and key Liberal strategist, Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, stuck by the 
existing timeline when asked on ABC’s Insiders program when the budget would be 
held.

“That will still be 10 May. Tuesday, 10 May,” he said. “Now, there’s been a 
lot of speculation about that but that’s the date that the treasurer’s got 
firmly fixed in his diary and that’s the date he’s telling everybody.”

But he refused to rule out bringing it forward to 3 May.

“The treasurer said 10 May. The prime minister said we’re working towards 10 
May,” Sinodinos said.

The Senate on Friday passed a motion making it harder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/labor-and-crossbenchers-make-double-dissolution-option-harder-for-coalition>
 for the government to recall the upper house.

Proposed Senate voting rules legally vulnerable and incoherent – experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/01/proposed-senate-voting-rules-legally-vulnerable-and-incoherent-experts>
“The only reason that the Senate would have to come back early would be to 
make life easier for the prime minister to go to an earlier election,” Di 
Natale said. “Our inclination is certainly that the hours have been set [to 
sit], we should stick to those hours, and if the government has been unable to 
manage its agenda that’s a problem for the government.”

The government can still recall the House of Representatives, where it has the 
majority, and pass supply bills in that house first.

Labor has promised not block supply bills, and on Sunday, Di Natale made the 
same promise on behalf of the Greens. But he left the door open to take his 
time in considering them.

“We’re in uncharted territory here. It may be that the Senate wants more time 
to consider the bills before us. It won’t be a question of not facilitating 
supply, it won’t be a question of blocking supply. It’ll be a question of 
whether or not the Senate wants a day or two to consider those bills,” he said.
 