Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLVr4UP9ntLs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLVr4UP9ntLs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLVr4UP9ntLs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Coldplay are among the acts to have paid tribute to the Beastie Boys' Adam 
Yauch <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-yauch>. At a gig at the Hollywood 
Bowl in Los Angeles, singer Chris Martin performed a version of (You Gotta) 
Fight for Your Right (To Party!) as a piano ballad.

At the end of the song, Martin added a line, saying: "We're sending all our 
love to theBeastie Boys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys>." The 
band have posted a video of their performance on their website.

Meanwhile, an unreleased Beastie Boys video posted online as a tribute to 
Yauch, who died from cancer at the age 47 on Friday, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/04/beastie-boys-adam-yauch-dead?newsfeed=true>
 has been pulled following a copyright complaint. Although posted by one of 
clip's original producers, Viacom ordered YouTube to remove video pending an 
agreement with EMI.

Neal Brennan, aka YouTube username nealbfree, was a co-creator of the 
acclaimed American TV series Chapelle's Show, starring comedian Dave Chapelle. 
After Chapelle withdrew from shooting, the show's third season – including a 
taped appearance by the Beastie Boys – never aired. But after hearing of MCA's 
death, Brennan found the clip and put itonline 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cPLLEIUYnlk&feature=youtu.be>. "Rest in Peace, 
Adam Yauch," he wrote. "You were excellent." Dated 4 December, 2004, the video 
shows the Beasties on a boat in New York's East River, playing their single The 
New Style.

The surviving Beastie Boys have issued statements thanking fans for the 
outpouring of love following their bandmate's death. "As you can imagine, shit 
is just fkd up right now,"wrote Adam Horovitz 
<http://blog.beastieboys.com/post/22552107608/as-you-can-imagine-shit-is-just-fkd-up-right-now>
, known as Ad-Rock, on the band's website. "But i wanna say thank you to all 
our friends and family (which are kinda one in the same) for all the love and 
support. i'm glad to know that all the love that Yauch has put out into the 
world is coming right back at him.

"Honestly the last few days have just been a blur of deep emotions for our 
closest friend, bandmate and really brother,"wrote Mike D 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10150889667668945&set=a.139327313944.104644.18279403944&type=1&theater>
 on the band's Facebook page. "I miss Adam so much. He really served as a great 
example for myself and so many of what determination, faith, focus, and 
humility coupled with a sense of humour can accomplish. The world is in need of 
many more like him."

• Tell us about any other notable tributes to musicians that you remember.

 