
For Colin Tizzard, the Cheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> on 18 March will be a 
£1.3m horse race, but the money seems to be the last thing on his mind. “It’s a 
lovely idea to do it, for the owners and everyone else,” he said here on 
Thursday, referring to the £1m bonus that will be paid out if his Cue Card wins 
at the Festival next month. “But money goes, doesn’t it? If I could win the 
Gold Cup, it would be the pinnacle of my training career and it would be with 
us for ever.”

For Tizzard, it is all about the race and all about Cue Card, a horse who does 
it the hard way.When Kauto Star won the same races  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/mar/17/horseracing.cheltenhamfestival>
that comprise the new Chase Triple Crown back in 2006-07 and picked up an 
earlier £1m bonus in the process, he was a short-priced favourite for all 
three. Cue Card was not the market leader for either theBetfair Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-vautour-willie-mullins-ascot-cheltenham-gold-cup>
 or theKing George VI Chase at Kempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
, yet here he is, one race away from hitting the jackpot — in another contest 
for which he is unlikely to start favourite.

Colin Tizzard: Horse by horse guide to his Cheltenham Festival team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/25/colin-tizzard-horse-guide-cheltenham-festival-2016>
“You could write a book about this one,” Tizzard said as Cue Card completed a 
parade of a dozen Festival contenders at his Dorset stable. “It’s been 
brilliant getting him back this year. Everyone who watches racing thought we’d 
seen the best of this horse. He’s the horse of a lifetime and he’s been doing 
it for six years now. That, for me, is the biggest pleasure. We’ve pushed him 
for years and he still loves doing it every day.”

Tizzard’s team for Cheltenham also includes Thistlecrack, the season’s 
outstanding staying hurdler and the 11-10 favourite for the Ryanair World 
Hurdle, but Cue Card, who won the Festival Bumper at 40-1 back in 2010, remains 
the undisputed stable star.

He has missed the last two Festivals, first with a pulled back muscle and then 
following the wind operation 12 months ago which has given him a new lease of 
life. Cue Card has also looked like a horse who should stay the Gold Cup trip 
rather than a flamboyant front-runner more suited to the shorter Ryanair Chase, 
a race he won in 2013.

“I think we’ve got a better chance of winning the Gold Cup than we had going 
into the King George,” Tizzard said. “He likes Cheltenham, he’s brilliant 
around Cheltenham, he can come down the hill and have a breather and then go 
again. He’s shown that he’s a stone better around Cheltenham than he is around 
Kempton. He doesn’t owe us anything, to be fair, but he’s got a really good 
chance of being in the first three.

Paul Nicholls: Horse-by-horse guide to his Cheltenham Festival team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/paul-nicholls-horse-by-horse-cheltenham-2016>
“He needed three miles at Kempton to get past Vautour [in the final strides]. 
That day, if you didn’t know his history, you would have said he’s a stayer 
because he was off the bridle and Paddy [Brennan, his jockey] was bumping him 
back into it. Once he got there, he stayed on brilliantly, and for me he looked 
like a real stayer.”

Even with the Cheltenham and Aintree Festivals still to come, Tizzard has 
already passed his previous best total for prize money in a season and, with 
£821,980 banked already, seems certain to reach seven figures for the first 
time in his 21-year career. His record-breaking year also follows a decision to 
separate his racing stable from the 700 dairy cows that are now based at his 
former stable, Venn Farm.

“What we wanted to do was get away from people saying that I’m a farmer who 
trains a few horses,” Tizzard says. “So now we’ve made a statement that we’re a 
training yard and we have another business, which is fantastic for me because 
it’s a very fickle job, training racehorses. You’re either on the up or you’re 
on the down, you’re never on a level plane.”

Thistlecrack has contributed about £100,000 to the trainer’s prize-money total 
with three wins this season and seems likely to be the only British-trained 
favourite for one of the Festival’s four feature events.

“When he races there doesn’t seem to be a bottom to him,” Tizzard said. “He 
just powers away at the end and he’s just looked better than anything else over 
three miles this season.

“Looking at it, can you see anything getting near him at the moment? It’s a 
very bold statement, but his form at the moment looks as though they’ve all got 
to pick up a bit to get near him. I probably shouldn’t be saying that, but 
that’s what it looks like to me.

“He looks like a chaser and he might well be chasing next year but there’s 
plenty of big hurdles for him yet. He’ll be eight in the autumn and that’s not 
a time to go novice chasing for a season, you’d [aim to] step him straight into 
a Gold Cup.”
 