
It counts as the best of omens for Colin Tizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard> that such a critical week for 
his West Country yard should begin with a notable victory by Third Intention. 
This nine-year-old has long established himself as a talented chaser who hardly 
ever wins, leading many to question his resolution, often through the means of 
abusive language on social media, but he looked game in landing the biggest pot 
of his career here, the Old Roan Chase.

Andrea Atzeni wins fourth successive Racing Post Trophy as Rivet impresses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/andrea-atzeni-racing-post-trophy-rivet>
Tizzard, who also had a double at Wincanton, plans to send out all three of 
his Grade One winners from last season in the next week, starting with the most 
high-profile of them. Thistlecrack is expected to make his chasing debut at 
Chepstow on Tuesday, having somehow become favourite for theCheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> without jumping a fence 
in public.

If he is to put his talent for steeplechasing to the test, Tizzard must first 
be satisfied that the ground has enough juice in it to be safe, which can 
hardly be taken for granted after such a dry spell. “We want a good amount of 
rain tonight,” the trainer said on Sunday, “enough to make it genuine good 
ground. We’ll make a decision Monday morning.”

The initial plan had been to run Thistlecrack at Chepstow’s last meeting but 
the ground was judged too quick and the trainer said here that that proved a 
blessing, as the horse is much closer to peak fitness now. “I’m glad we’ve had 
another fortnight with him. He’s ready now, he’s working really strong.”

No one who saw Thistlecrack bolt up in the World Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/thistlecrack-wins-world-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 in March will doubt that he has the necessary engine to win a Gold Cup. His 
trainer is also satisfied that he will be able to clear the fences. “Yeah, he’s 
good at it,” Tizzard said. “He’s done a lot in the school.”

Tizzard expects to wheel his other two big guns up to Wetherby on Saturday, 
Cue Card for the Charlie Hall Chase and Native River for the West Yorkshire 
Hurdle. Cue Card is the horse who should perhaps have given his trainer a first 
Gold Cup success seven months ago but fell at the third-last instead.

The betting market seems to feel he will be too old, at the age of 11, to 
redeem himself in the Cheltenham race in the spring but he retains enough 
vitality to be impressing in his home work ahead of this return to action. “He 
had a racecourse gallop last week,” Tizzard said. “Joe [the trainer’s son] rode 
him on Saturday morning in a piece of work and said his work is a class above 
the rest. We’ll see, won’t we? He is in cracking form.”

Dual Champion Chase winner Moscow Flyer dies aged 22
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/21/champion-chase-winner-moscow-flyer-dies-horse-racing>
While gratified by Third Intention’s success, Tizzard was not quite sure how 
to explain it, especially in light of a shuddering blunder at the third fence 
that took the gelding back to last place. A wind operation on his soft palate 
this summer may have helped, though he has had a similar procedure in the past.

God’s Own, twice a Grade One winner in the spring, made a fair return to 
action in second place, while Vibrato Valtat was third, tiring after seeming to 
make a race-winning charge to the front at the second-last. Sire De Grugy, a 
formerchampion two-miler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/12/sire-de-grugy-champion-chase-cheltenham-festival>
, was well held in last place of the seven but he ran a similarly poor race on 
his reappearance last autumn beforewinning the Tingle Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/05/sire-de-grugy-tingle-creek-gary-moore-sandown-cheltenham>
 next time.

Ian Williams, who came here to work some horses after racing, said he was 
“quite likely” to appeal against Saturday’s decision by the Doncaster stewards 
not to award the opening handicap to his Banditry, who was beaten a head by 
Laurence after being hampered by that rival just inside the final furlong. “We 
were definitely impeded and it definitely, in my mind, cost us the race,” the 
trainer said.

He added that it was “quite interesting” to learn that the stewards’ 
explanation for that verdict was modified some time after being published on 
Saturday. In the original the stewards said Laurence “appeared to always be 
holding Banditry”, whereas in fact Banditry was closing dramatically all the 
way to the line. The later version described the interference as “minimal” and 
added that the winning margin was sufficient to suggest Laurence would have won 
in any case.

Robin Mounsey, a spokesman for the British Horseracing Authority, said: “After 
reviewing the initial enquiry notice, the stewards considered that it didn’t 
accurately reflect the reasoning behind the decision, so decided it should be 
altered.”

Mounsey added that it was rare but “not unheard of” for such changes to be 
made after publication of stewards’ decisions. The incident will be reviewed at 
the BHA this morning, when one of the issues to be discussed is whether there 
should be some acknowledgement within the stewards’ notice if such changes are 
made in the future.
 