
Despite much anticipation before a media event at Colin Tizzard’s stables here 
on Wednesday, the trainer had not, in fact, assembled the country’s racing 
reporters in order to disclose whetherThistlecrack will line up in the King 
George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sara-bradstock-coneygree-not-afraid-thistlecrack-king-george-vi-chase-horse-racing>
 on Boxing Day. The discussion, not to say the agonising, continues and Tizzard 
seems minded to do the Willie Mullins thing and leave a final decision to the 
last possible moment, which would be declaration day on the 23rd.

Reading the runes in such a situation can be dangerous and there was mention 
of it being a “50-50” decision but there were also signs Tizzard is leaning 
towards the cautious option of runningThistlecrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> instead in the Kauto Star, a 
race for novice chasers on the same card at Kempton.

Sara Bradstock not frightened if Thistlecrack lines up for King George VI Chase
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/sara-bradstock-coneygree-not-afraid-thistlecrack-king-george-vi-chase-horse-racing>
If that is the way the trainer jumps it will have nothing to do with what many 
imagine to be the prime consideration, which is the presence in the King George 
of his other established star, Cue Card. This veteran chaser needs to win on 
Boxing Day to keep alive hopes of a £1m bonus, which would be his if he 
followed up in the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsjV7yQwJaPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsjV7yQwJaPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsjV7yQwJaPY&media=>
“That’s not part of the equation,” Tizzard insisted. “We’ve got to do the best 
by two sets of owners.” The main concern for Thistlecrack, he said, is pace. 
“He’d probably be odds-on in a Kauto Star against half a dozen. And they will 
go a furious gallop in the King George, much more than they will in the Kauto 
Star.

“While Thistlecrack would be comfortable racing at speed, it may lead such an 
inexperienced fencer into making mistakes. We just want to make sure it’s right 
for him. A flat-out gallop round Kempton, he could easily sit third or fourth, 
pick ’em up and beat ’em all. Or it could take him out of his comfort zone. We 
had a long discussion about it with Tom Scudamore [Thistlecrack’s jockey]. It’s 
not straightforward.”

To illustrate how finely balanced this debate is, Tizzard suggested he would 
commit to the King George with Thistlecrack if the race were run around a more 
galloping circuit like Newbury. Soft ground would make the horse a more likely 
runner because it would take the emphasis off speed, but the long-term forecast 
is dry.

The trainer emphasised the final decision rests with Thistlecrack’s owners, 
John and Heather Snook, though he expects them to be guided by his views, 
whatever they end up being. One happy byproduct of the continuing doubt is that 
potential rivals, fearful of meeting Thistlecrack in the King George, may 
commit to alternative targets, so there is no incentive to make an early 
announcement. But a man who has expressed the doubts voiced here by Tizzard 
appears, on the face of it, unlikely to make the swashbuckling decision to 
attack the main event.

Native River and Thistlecrack are Colin Tizzard’s Newbury playmates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/native-river-thistlecrack-colin-tizzard-newbury-hennessy-toys-horse-racing>
He described Cue Card and Thistlecrack as “bloody lovely at the moment”, so 
there is a real chance of Tizzard landing two Grade One pots on Boxing Day, 
maintaining his fine run in what is already a superlative season. Native River, 
his Hennessy winner, is still being aimed at the Welsh National and all three 
horses have the Gold Cup as their March targets.

By then, it will be 10 years since Tizzard sent a 100-1 shot to the Gold Cup 
just for the sake of having a runner in steeplechasing’s blue riband. 
Incredibly, he may have four runners this time, as he now trains Alary, bought 
out of France last month by the owner Alan Potts. “He’s a proper horse and he 
works beautiful, as well,” Tizzard said. “Now, he does, anyway. He couldn’t get 
up the hill to start with.”

The trainer was more coy about another Potts-owned prospect as he named the 
horses coming up his gallop. “Royal Vacation, Alary, best young horse I got … 
can’t remember his name. I’ll tell you when he’s won.” Tizzard was teasing but 
it required another source to provide the name of Finian’s Oscar.
 