
Irish-trained horses dominate the betting for the King George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> at Kempton on Boxing 
Day but there is growing confidence that Cue Card, the shortest priced of the 
home defenders, can provide a 10th successive English-trained winner.

Colin Tizzard’s stable star has been beaten in each of his three attempts to 
land the Christmas feature, but the Dorset handler suggests there have been 
good reasons for each defeat and believes he has him in the best shape ever for 
his festive assignment.

Speaking at Fakenham on Sunday, where he watched his young chaser Bears Rails 
win, Tizzard said: “There have been excuses every time we have been to the King 
George with him, but there will be no excuses this time.”

The explanation for Cue Card’s return to top form was the discovery that he 
had a trapped oesophagus which was blocking his whole windpipe, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/cue-card-paddy-brennan-wetherby-charlie-hall-don-cossack-down-royal>
 but surgery has remedied that problem.

The son of King’s Theatre, who will celebrate his 10th birthday on New Year’s 
Day and is a 4-1 chance for Saturday’s big race, has been pleasing connections 
at home and will do a fast bit of work on Tuesday as he continues his 
preparation for his weekend appearance.

Thistlecrack’s Long Walk stroll lifts Colin Tizzard’s King George hopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/19/thistlecrack-long-walk-colin-tizzard-king-george-ascot>
This year’s renewal looks the strongest for some time with Don Cossack and 
Vautour heading the market, yet Tizzard believes despite his three failures Cue 
Card can come good at the fourth time of asking.

He said: “We have him just where he was at Haydock [when he won the Betfair 
Chase by seven lengths from Silviniaco Conti], but he will need to be against 
this strong opposition on Saturday. If he sits second, third, fourth or fifth 
it won’t make any difference as he has loads of pace.”

Twenty four hours earlier Tizzard had watched in awe as his rising star, 
Thistlecrack, put up a remarkable performance to win the Grade One Long Walk 
Hurdle at Ascot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/19/thistlecrack-long-walk-colin-tizzard-king-george-ascot>
.

He observed: “The way he had been working I thought he would be hard to beat, 
but the way he waltzed away with it in the end was mindboggling.”

Cue Card will not be the only Grade One challenger making the journey up from 
Milborne Port on Boxing Day as Native River is being aimed at the Kauto Star 
Novices’ Chase.

Native River has progressed with each of his three runs over fences this 
season, culminating with an impressive victory over Un Temps Pour Tout in the 
Grade Two Worcester Novices’ Chase at Newbury’s Hennessy meeting in November.

His last outing in Grade One company came on his final start over hurdles when 
finishing ninth in the Albert Bartlett Novice Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival.

Tizzard said: “He will jump [some fences on] Tuesday morning and be entered 
for the Kauto Star Novice Chase. I’m sure there will be half a dozen strong 
stayers in the race, but he is in good form and looks a strong stayer himself.”

Smad Place’s participation in the King George VI Chase hinges on a piece of 
work he will do at Barbury Castle on Monday morning.

Alan King’s grey, who put up a memorable front-running performance to win the 
Hennessy Gold Cup last month, is a general 14-1 shot forKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>, but the sponsors, William Hill, 
are offering 8-1 “with a run” about him.

Racing was in mourning after the news of the death of journalist Alan Lee, who 
had been racing correspondent of the Times since 1999, and prior to that had 
been the newspaper’s cricket correspondent for 11 years.

Lee, who was 61, had undergone heart surgery in November but had been fit 
enough to attend Ascot’s meeting on Friday, but died on Saturday.

The BBC racing correspondent, Cornelius Lysaght, said: “He was just the most 
brilliant and most natural writer.” The former England cricket captain Michael 
Atherton called Lee “a superb journalist and a good friend”.
 