
Though its name has become synonymous with illegal downloading, BitTorrent is 
no more responsible for your little brother’s dodgy Game Of Thrones bootlegs 
than TDK was for the home taping your mum did in the 80s. Still, things rarely 
go well for organisations closely associated with copyright infringement (just 
ask Napster), which might explain why the company is so keen to talk about
BitTorrent <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bittorrent> Now, its 
collection of legally sanctioned download “bundles”.

Until now, the most successful bundles have been musical offerings from the 
likes of Thom Yorke, but finally it seems the film industry is waking up to the 
mainstream potential of a technology that helped 47 million people pirate 
Interstellar last year. This week, BitTorrent Now released a pay-what-you-want 
bundle containing the omnibus festival hitcollective:unconscious – in which 
five indie film-makers adapt one another’s dreams into short films – a few 
months after its SXSW debut.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcollectiveunconscious-bittorrent-sxsw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdabe37f64795f0906e2571a4bad11d8101f29f11%2F76_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collective%3Aunconscious%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20flick%20helping%20BitTorrent%20escape%20its%20pirate%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcollectiveunconscious-bittorrent-sxsw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collective%3Aunconscious%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20flick%20helping%20BitTorrent%20escape%20its%20pirate%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fcollectiveunconscious-bittorrent-sxsw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdabe37f64795f0906e2571a4bad11d8101f29f11%2F76_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Collective: unconscious - still from “Black Soil, Green Grass” by Daniel 
Patrick Carbone. Photograph: Nick Bentgen 
It’s a truth universally acknowledged that nothing is more boring than hearing 
about other people’s dreams, an issue that collective:unconscious neatly 
sidesteps by encouraging its film-makers to obey the spirit but not the letter 
of their source material. In bringing the inevitably unstructured and illogical 
patterns of unconscious thought to the screen, the film’s best shorts apply a 
structure and logic that is all their own.

The standout, Josephine Decker’s First Day Out, is built around a series of 
audio interviews with former prisoners, in which they describe their first 
impressions of the world they found upon release. From these, Decker builds a 
flowing, free-associative dance sequence that seems propelled forward not by 
any apparent narrative but by sheer audiovisual energy. Based on a lyrical but 
vague “dream statement” by fellow film-maker Lily Baldwin – also available as 
part of the BitTorrent bundle – it’s a dazzling and thought-provoking piece of 
work that easily transcends its abstract origins.

Likewise, Decker’s own dream statement reads like a faintly baffling 
surrealist word salad but, in the hands of film-maker Frances Bodomo, becomes 
Everybody Dies! – an eerie treatise on America’s race issues in which an 
increasingly demoralised Grim Reaper takes to public access television to warn 
black children of the dangers that surround them in contemporary life. Here’s 
hoping collective:unconscious encourages more people to adapt their dreams into 
politically charged art films before they see fit to bother me with them.
 