
James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man begins with the 
confidence, ease and innocence of a story told to a child and ends with a tone 
that is hesitant, suspicious, fragmented and estranged. Between the two comes 
the education of one Stephen Dedalus, as the nets of race, religion and family 
attempt to ensnare his tender soul and complex imagination.

Stephen is a born noticer and an attentive listener. He is also someone who 
can take himself and his experiences with immense seriousness and then, a few 
pages later, put on an ironic disposition, as though his own very thoughts and 
the sufferings he endured were made to be fictionalised. (The earlier version 
of the book was called “Stephen Hero”.) InA Portrait, there is a constant and 
nourishing conflict going on between the artist and the young man, the artist 
concerned with style and texture and the refraction of experience, the young 
man with registering what he saw and remembered, how he grew.

For many Irish male writers who came after Joyce, from Frank O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/23/brief-survey-short-story-frank-o-connor>
 toJohn McGahern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/24/short-story-john-mcgahern> to 
Seamus Heaney <https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney>, the sifting of 
early memory, the detailed description of parents, domestic space, school, 
religious belief, came with the matching account of the young artist’s effort 
to navigate these through solitude and reading, through knowledge and language.

When I read the hell fire sermon, I had heard some of those words, though I 
was born 40 years after the book came out

In an essay written in 1982 to mark the centenary of Joyce’s birth, the Irish 
poetJohn Montague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview22>
, who died earlier this month, a writer who had also mined his own childhood, 
wrote of the influence ofA Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man: “No one could 
overestimate the effects of [the book] on later Irish writers … Or on the 
national psyche: many young Irishmen came to painful consciousness reading 
those corrosive pages. The Dublin of my student days was strewn with versions 
of Stephen Dedalus, including myself, though I wonder what the women thought of 
it!”

“Little failed saints,” Montague wrote, “we knew eternity too early.” Almost 
every section of Joyce’s book belonged to common Irish Catholic experience. 
Aged eight or nine, once a week, inEnniscorthy Cathedral 
<http://www.staidanscathedral.ie/>, with the lights dimmed, we heard the priest 
intone: “Death comes soon and judgment will follow, so now, dear children, 
examine your consciences and find out your sins.” When I read the hellfire 
sermon inA Portrait, I had heard some of those very words, even though I was 
born 40 years after the book came out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b8ed8e2d43a57af68b14e41960a4ae2dd4aff4%2F0_0_2735_3940%2F2735.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%E2%80%8B%E2%80%8B%3A%20James%20Joyce%E2%80%99s%20Portrait%20of%20the%20Artist%E2%80%8B%2C%20100%20years%20on%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%E2%80%8B%E2%80%8B%3A%20James%20Joyce%E2%80%99s%20Portrait%20of%20the%20Artist%E2%80%8B%2C%20100%20years%20on%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09b8ed8e2d43a57af68b14e41960a4ae2dd4aff4%2F0_0_2735_3940%2F2735.jpg>
 The artist as a young man … Joyce aged 22. Photograph: CP Curran/Getty Images 
The Christmas dinner scene, with the bitter argument about Parnell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/parnell_charles.shtml> between 
Stephen’s father and his aunt, could easily have come from many Irish tables in 
the 1970s and 80s as families rowed over what was happening in Northern Ireland.

Since corporal punishment in schools continued until as recently as the early 
80s, anyone who had the misfortune to be educated by priests or Christian 
Brothers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/christian-brothers-make-their-deathbed-confession-1268168.html>
 (or indeed nuns) would have fully recognised the scene where Stephen is 
unfairly punished. It happened to us all.

When I went to work as a language teacher in Barcelona in 1975, with many 
English people among my colleagues, I was constantly aware that how they spoke 
and how they saw language was utterly different from how I did. When there was 
discussion over the pronunciation or meaning of certain words (or the use of 
“bring” and “take”, which are different in Ireland and England), I felt much as 
Stephen did when he met the English Jesuit. “The language in which we are 
speaking is his before it is mine. How different are the words home, Christ, 
ale, master, on his lips and on mine! I cannot speak or write these words 
without unrest of spirit. His language, so familiar and so foreign, will always 
be for me an acquired speech. I have not made or accepted its words. My voice 
holds them at bay. My soul frets in the shadow of his language.”

But, like Joyce, I soon got over this feeling and saw that the best English 
was spoken in Lower Drumcondra. I soon took the view also that received 
pronunciation was, like all language, both a gift and a burden, and the 
distance between us a sort of joke. “It seems history is to blame,” as Haines 
the Englishman says inUlysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/04/100-best-novels-ulysses-james-joyce-robert-mccrum>
.

The later sections of A Portrait, which move between the National Library 
<http://www.nli.ie/> in Kildare Street and the halls of University College 
Dublin, could easily have taken place in the early 70s when I was a student 
there. The fierce debate among young men about poetry and art, the sexuality in 
the air, fervid and repressed all at the time, and the need to make urgent 
plans, as a way of winning the argument, to leave Ireland altogether, belonged 
to the city I knew as much as to the city of Joyce’s book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7557f1ea1b55712df91ed2103efc15ffe71f6ba5%2F578_213_4584_3627%2F4584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%E2%80%8B%E2%80%8B%3A%20James%20Joyce%E2%80%99s%20Portrait%20of%20the%20Artist%E2%80%8B%2C%20100%20years%20on%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%E2%80%8B%E2%80%8B%3A%20James%20Joyce%E2%80%99s%20Portrait%20of%20the%20Artist%E2%80%8B%2C%20100%20years%20on%E2%80%8B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcolm-toibin-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7557f1ea1b55712df91ed2103efc15ffe71f6ba5%2F578_213_4584_3627%2F4584.jpg>
 ‘The best English is spoken in Lower Drumcondra’ … Colm Tóibín. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Joyce’s genius was to make this matter, to get the tawdry, common business he 
called in the book’s last paragraph “the reality of experience” and to make it 
both immensely strange and worthy of the world’s close attention. He set out, 
as he wrote, “to forge in the smithy of my soul the uncreated conscience of my 
race” by finding a tone and a form to suggest that the dull, provincial city we 
lived in could be made the centre of the known universe.

He used the idea of a port city, a place that had once known glory but was now 
down on its luck, as the perfect locus for a modern novel. The unevenness of 
his Dublin would be matched by the mixture of uncertainty and pride he would 
evoke in his prose.A Portrait has elements in common with Thomas Mann’s 
Buddenbrooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/01/great-dynasties-buddenbrooks-effect-ian-sansom>
, another novel set in a provincial city, published in 1901. The dramatisation 
of the early life of a budding artist in Dublin and Lübeck would soon be 
followed by the work ofItalo Svevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview25>
 in Trieste,Fernando Pessoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/30/books-to-give-you-hope-the-book-of-disquiet-by-fernando-pessoa>
 in Lisbon andJorge Luis Borges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/22/short-story-jorge-luis-borges>
 in Buenos Aires, as they attempted not only to remake themselves and their 
cities, but also to refashion fiction itself, to make it new, as Joyce did, so 
that as soon as Ezra Pound saw the first chapter ofA Portrait in January 1914, 
he set about organising the book’s serialisation. Joyce continued to work on 
the book into 1915, but since he liked the idea of a book taking a decade to 
make, he ended it with: ‘Dublin, 1904.’ And then below that the place to which 
he had fled: “Trieste, 1914.”Ulysses, on which he would now embark, would take 
three years less to write.
 