
A Christmas Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/17/christmas-carol-charles-dickens-classic>
 takes the form of a dark journey of the soul from wilfulness, selfishness, and 
miserliness towards redemption, generosity and happiness. The figure of Scrooge 
is initially presented as a man locked into unhappy solitude and petty cruelty, 
someone whose ungiving, unyielding and resolute nature causes him no joy, but 
rather a grim satisfaction at having power over others, a power which he will 
wield in the darkest days of winter with particular determination, a power 
which goes against the very idea of what became known as the Christmas spirit.

This idea of Christmas, which the story itself did much to popularise, was 
already being preached about and written about in newspaper editorials whenA 
Christmas Carol appeared in 1843. Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, in its new manifestation, 
would include the idea of giving as well as receiving, of looking after the 
less fortunate as well as eating well and spending time in good company.

Season's readings: A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/dec/07/season-s-readings-a-christmas-carol-dickens>
For this reinvention of a tradition to become even more popular, an image was 
needed of a man who deliberately excluded himself from the cheer and the 
cosiness that the tradition, in all its fragility, implied. In the story, this 
man would be taken through a personal purgatory in order to emerge purified. He 
would see many things that would horrify him or make him feel guilty and 
unloved, all the more to make the communal cheer of Christmas seem relished by 
those who had begun to enjoy it. The story takes pleasure in the nightmares 
Scrooge must witness; these horrifying visions, the details of their 
descriptions, have richer textures than the subsequent images of Scrooge as a 
man who has learned his lesson and who has resolved to change his life.

Part of the power of the book comes from the grim, unearthly picture it draws 
of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2012/feb/07/charles-dickens-london-simon-callow-video>
. Since London was a collection of villages in which anyone moving from a posh 
square to an important public building could catch a glimpse down the many side 
streets that housed the poor, in which privileged and pauper passed each other 
daily, then the novel itself gained nourishment from the friction between 
classes, from the closeness of the little streets to the great. In the later 
19th century, a number of writers saw the startling possibilities such 
contrasts offered, where the London of Dickens, so sprawling, vast, and filled 
with drama, could be rendered as a ghostly place where substance became shadow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4717e89a07624fb5895ef8657473718a5e25c1d%2F0_0_3701_3840%2F3701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%3A%20The%20nightmare%20before%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%3A%20The%20nightmare%20before%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4717e89a07624fb5895ef8657473718a5e25c1d%2F0_0_3701_3840%2F3701.jpg>
 Jim Broadbent as Ebenezer Scrooge, 2015. Photograph: Johan Persson 
In books such as Robert Louis Stevenson’s Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/13/dr-jekyll-mr-hyde-stevenson>
(1886) or Oscar Wilde’sThe Picture of Dorian Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/06/picture-dorian-gray-hypocrisy-ravage-lives>
 (1891), London could become a place of secrets, a city in which many people, 
otherwise normal and sane, could change their form as they moved from street to 
street, or from drawing room to attic.

Henry James would set his novel of 19th-century terrorism in this London. The 
Princess Casamassima  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jun/28/fromthearchives.henryjames>
(1886) “proceeded quite directly,” he wrote, “during the first year of a long 
residence in London, from the habit of walking the streets. I walked a great 
deal – for exercise, for amusement, for acquisition, and above all I always 
walked home at evening’s end, when the evening had been spent elsewhere, as 
happened more often than not.”

Dickens, too, told a friend that he had composed A Christmas Carol in his head 
as he walked about “the black streets of London, fifteen and twenty miles, many 
a night when all the sober folks had gone to bed”. The images that came to him 
then were of spirits and phantoms, aspects of a dream city in which nothing 
remained stable – least of all the past, the present or the future, which live 
like unearthly protagonists in the story Dickens created. The London he made in
A Christmas Carolis as much haunted by its citizens as inhabited by them.

Some of the images he sees are of comfort and joy, but they are experiences in 
which he cannot share

Dickens takes Scrooge on a journey in which time and space have no solidity, 
through a London of the imagination, using fictional registers that would have 
immense influence on ways in which Christmas is celebrated to this day.

When Scrooge looks out of the window he sees the air “filled with phantoms, 
wandering hither and thither in restless haste, and moaning as they went”. The 
Ghost who propels Scrooge is merciless and relentless, forcing him, at first, 
to live in a time when past and present merge. Some of the images he sees are 
of comfort and joy, but they are experiences in which he cannot share. They are 
disrupted by what he can hear, as the happy people are discussing him. One man, 
for example, who is enjoying domestic bliss, says: “I passed his office window 
... and there he sat alone. Quite alone in the world, I do believe.”

Later, Scrooge will see the abode of the Cratchit family. “They were not a 
handsome family ... but they were happy, grateful, pleased with one another, 
and contented with the time.” The family, once they have said grace, consume a 
goose on Christmas Day. “There never was such a goose ... Its tenderness and 
flavour, size and cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration.” Indeed, 
the Cratchit family themselves, including the doomed Tiny Tim, become the 
subject of universal admiration. But they too, despite their sweetness, discuss 
Scrooge, who has to listen as Mrs Cratchit wishes to drink “the health of such 
an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as Mr Scrooge”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149a05fa4c812293dcd5db1428b528cf31d9e686%2F0_0_2337_2989%2F2337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%3A%20The%20nightmare%20before%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colm%20T%C3%B3ib%C3%ADn%3A%20The%20nightmare%20before%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcharles-dickens-nightmare-before-christmas-colm-toibin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149a05fa4c812293dcd5db1428b528cf31d9e686%2F0_0_2337_2989%2F2337.jpg>
 Bob Cratchit and Tiny Tim inA Muppet Christmas Carol. Photograph: 
Disney/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Later, in Scrooge’s dark night of the soul, he will have also to witness his 
nephew and the nephew’s friends playing a parlour game in which they are asked 
to guess the identity of “an animal, a live animal, rather a disagreeable 
animal, a savage animal, an animal that growled and grunted sometimes, and 
talked sometimes, and lived in London, and walked about the streets.” His name, 
of course, is Scrooge.

Such visions will seem almost innocent compared to the darker ones that are to 
come as Scrooge will be forced to witness his servants selling his clothes and 
his curtains as he lies on his deathbed. They will refer to him as “a wicked 
old screw”. Soon, he will be shown the relief and happiness of those in debt to 
him on hearing of his demise: “The only emotion, that the Ghost could show him, 
caused by the event, was one of pleasure.”

When his redemption comes, as it must, because what happens to Scrooge in the 
night has a moral purpose, then the diction of the story itself will lighten, 
as Scrooge’s meanness lightens. The sentence structure and a generosity in 
rhythm of the prose will reflect the lifting of his burden:

He went to church and walked about the streets, and watched the people 
hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and questioned beggars, 
and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and up to the windows; and found 
that anything could yield him pleasure. He never dreamed that any walk – that 
anything – could give him so much happiness.

The word dream has been transformed, has been taken from its dark, cold, 
lonely, fearful place and, instead of being a watchword for frightful 
imaginings, filled with mockery and unbearable visions, has come to mean an 
opening of the self, a way of reimagining the world. And so, with that change, 
from nightmare to sweet reality, from miserliness to giving, from misery to 
merriness, Christmas came into being. Courtesy of Dickens, we live in its 
shadow still and on one cheery, idealised day of the year, as we force Scrooge 
to appear as merely a distant warning to us all, we become the happy, jolly 
Cratchits.


 * A Christmas Carol: The Original Manuscript Edition by Charles Dickens is 
published by WW Norton and Co.
 