
As immigration from former empires continues to change the west, a polite 
silence has settled in modern cinema regarding colonialism. WithPankaj Mishra 
<http://www.pankajmishra.com/> and Niall Ferguson  
<http://www.niallferguson.com/>just two of the figures from other fields 
currently toiling to rewrite the book of the European powers' past 
(mis-)adventures, film seems content to sit and wait for clear instructions on 
how to proceed.

There's not been much colonially set cinema from the west in the past decade – 
because of what you might call point-of-view difficulties. These stories 
originally existed to bolster a sense of national identity. But even relatively 
balanced accounts taking in the conquerors' perspective, such asZulu 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76474/zulu>, are problematic – and 
commercially unviable – now that some of the descendants of the natives are 
probably British citizens.

So how does colonialism fit in terms of the European story today? Treatments 
zeroing in approvingly on the independence movements, such as, say,Gandhi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/88236/gandhi>, feel more like historical 
records, not corresponding directly to the blurred national borders and 
overlapped cultural interactions of the 21st-century. How can you aspire to be 
British, or French, or Belgian, or Italian, or German without brushing against 
the violence once committed in their name?

Perhaps the answers are audible in Portuguese. A pair of recent Lusophone 
films – appropriately for the language with the longest colonial history – have 
forged ahead in finding new routes for cinema to explore the subject. They deal 
with colonialism not by paving over it with the atonement story of 
multiculturalism, or with the kind ofstern rebuke Michael Haneke delivered to 
that ideology in Hidden <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/108597/hidden>; 
but quietly and intimately – as an invisible pressure that weighs from deep 
inside on present-day society, culture and, ultimately, our inner selves.

The first part of last year's Tabu 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148119/tabu> was "Paradise Lost"; set in 
a forlorn, present-day Lisbon in which a middle-aged Christian, Pilar, takes a 
neighbourly interest in the affairs of Aurora, an elderly gambling addict who 
indulges in mild racism towards her Cape Verdean housekeeper, Santa. When 
Aurora dies, and Pilar tracks down the woman's former lover, the film's 
buttoned-up realism blossoms into "Paradise", a stylised account of the 
couple's days in Portuguese Africa. The affair is conducted against a stylised 
backdrop that is like a cinematic stampede of past-colonial fantasies and 
attitudes, fromFW Murnau <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F._W._Murnau> to Tarzan 
escapades, to the quirk-filtered nostalgia ofWes Anderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/wes-anderson>.
 Style and stealth … Tabu, with Laura Soveral as Aurora 
It's the stealthy approach, suggesting how historical events fade but are 
internalised – both in biological and cultural memory – and involuntarily well 
up again, as postures, styles, stances, fashion, cinema. Or, in last week's 
Brazilian releaseNeighbouring Sounds 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149895/neighbouring-sounds>, in old 
photographs, and the enigma of the early 20th-century montage that beginsKleber 
Mendonça Filho <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2207625/>'s film: shots of colonial 
villas, peasants tilling the land, housing and education for workers. We later 
learn they probably have some connection to the upland sugar mill with which 
Don Francisco, the patriarch who owns most of the Recife street inhabited by 
the film's Short Cuts ensemble, made his fortune.

The estate is alluded to by Don Francisco's family throughout Neighbouring 
Sounds as a place of escape from city pressures. It crosses entirely into the 
realms of reverie during a sequence in which Don Francisco's grandson, João, 
pays a visit. João wanders the countryside with his girlfriend, visiting a 
local school, then playing make-believe usher in an abandoned cinema: organ 
tremors and screams from an antique horror film shriek on Filho's soundtrack. 
They're drifting into the past. Finally, they take a shower under a waterfall 
with his grandfather, and the waters run red over João's head. He wakes with a 
start; it's the bloody deeds of the ancestors, as we later discover. This is 
the sole moment where realism is ruptured fully, and something elemental bursts 
through the film's compartmentalised floorplan.

Produced by the colony, rather than the coloniser, Neighbouring Sounds 
understandably has a more sceptical outlook on history. But it shares the same 
discreet approach to exploring it as Tabu; engaging in internal forensics, 
digging into how the past continues to shape the modern world. There's more 
room for ambiguity: a recognition that colonial identities, and the power 
hierarchies they put into place, can be a source of sustenance, or disgust, or 
sometimes both. Tabu directorMiguel Gomes explains his rationale 
<http://www.hammertonail.com/interviews/a-conversation-with-miguel-gomes-tabu> 
to the film site Hammer to Nail: "Fiction in Portugal in the 1970s – 
literature, but also cinema – tried to have a very didactic approach to the 
topic, wagging a finger at the viewer as if he was a child. I don't think we 
have to do that. For me, I take for granted that by now, people understand that 
colonialism was not a good system."

Perhaps these Lusophone film-makers' more discerning take on colonialism draws 
on even deeper recesses of Portuguese culture. Supposedly entering the national 
character during the age of discovery, when sailors, carving out the first 
colonies, might be away for months or years on end, the notion ofsaudade 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudade> has a similar ambiguity: it means a 
sense of nostalgia or longing for an absent person or time, combining love and 
loss to acknowledge the inescapable pull of the past. That certainly describes 
Tabu, bits of Neighbouring Sounds, and the subdued fatalism they share.

A dose of saudade isn't apt for every film about colonialism, which was 
responsible for plenty of real horrors that should be denounced. In any case, 
cinema – caught in a standoff between old Europe and its modern, multicultural 
face – is shying away from the subject. Feelgood films such asUntouchables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149158/untouchable> make comedy out of 
the divide, but have difficulty boring into the complexities. Isolated 
film-makers such asClaire Denis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/jul/08/claire-denis-david-thomson> still 
make intriguing psychological explorations of this territory, but the Lusophone 
brigade look as if they could be the new innovators, elegantly playing with 
form to spotlight old prejudices, florid fantasies and stubborn regrets. The 
quiet route could prove quickest to new vistas.

• Neighbouring Sounds is out in cinemas now; Tabu is out now on DVD and 
Blu-Ray.

• Next week's After Hollywood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/series/after-hollywood> will examine the MPAA's 
global theatrical statistics report. What global cinematic stories would you 
like to see covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 