
Andrea Arnold's moody adaptation of Wuthering Heights looks set to inspire 
renewed interest in the Brontë sisters when it opens this week. The Brontë 
Parsonage Museum (bronte.info <http://www.bronte.info/>) in Haworth will be 
putting on special events to coincide with the launch, including two evenings 
dedicated to Emily Brontë (16 and 23 November) and a talk by the film's 
screenwriter, Olivia Hetreed (9 December). But for the ultimateWuthering Heights
experience, check out Cowside, the newest self-catering property from the 
Landmark Trust (landmarktrust.org.uk <http://landmarktrust.org.uk/>). Set in 
the Yorkshire Dales north of Haworth, this remote 18th-century farmstead has 
flagstone floors, an inglenook fireplace and a backdrop of rolling hills. A 
more perfect retreat for aspiring Heathcliffs and Cathys would be hard to find.

 Joanne's travel clinic: Christmas gift workshops


The dilemma I'd like to have a go at making my own Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> gifts this year. Can you 
recommend any suitable craft workshops? Tricia 

Jo replies Where once a dash around Debenhams would do, now, thanks 
to programmes likeKirstie's Handmade Britain, nothing less than a hand-knitted 
bobble hat is required to show we care. The creatively challenged should check 
out local National Trust or English Heritage properties, many of which are 
running craft events in the run-up to Christmas. At Saltram (
nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-saltram <http://nationaltrust.org.uk/main/w-saltram>
), a country house near Plymouth, throughout November you can learn to make 
gifts, from a gingerbread house to a frosted vase. The Forestry Commission (
forestry.gov.uk/whatson <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/whatson>) has festive 
classes at some of its visitor centres, making use of natural materials: try 
a wreath-making workshop at Alice Holt Forest in Hampshire (on 6-7 December). 
Other ideas include a felt-making workshop at the London Wetland Centre on 27 
November(wwt.org.uk/london <http://www.wwt.org.uk/visit-us/london/>) and 
stained-glass making at the Museum of East Anglian Life in Stowmarket, Suffolk, 
from 12-13 November (eastanglianlife.org.uk <http://eastanglianlife.org.uk/>). 
And if it goes wrong, there are always gift vouchers.

Three of the best: after-dark tours


The clocks may have gone back, but these magical after-hours tours by lantern 
and candlelight will brighten even the darkest winter evening

1. Sir John Soane's Museum, London On the first Tuesday of each month enjoy a 
candlelit tour of the 19th-century collector's paintings, curios and 
antiquities. Free (soane.org <http://www.soane.org/>)

2. Muncaster Castle, Cumbria Lights, music and special effects transform the 
gardens in December, with candlelit tours on selected dates. Tickets £15/£6.50 (
muncaster.co.uk <http://www.muncaster.co.uk/>)

3. Alwnick Garden, Northumberland Tour gardens and water features by the light 
of a willow lantern from 10 November. Music, food and flowers. £8.50/£6.80 (
alnwickgarden.com <http://www.alnwickgarden.com/>)

If you have a travel dilemma, email Joanne O'Connor at magazine@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
 