
Inquiries into the banking sector have arrived at a rate of about one a year 
for the past couple of decades, but has any been as feeble as this summer’s 
offering from theCompetition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission>? That was the one 
that concluded that a few tweaks, like better price comparison websites and a 
voluntary cap on overdraft charges, might succeed where stiffer remedies had 
failed in the past to boost competition.

Andrew Tyrie, chair of the Treasury select committee, who knows a thing or two 
about banking inquiries (he’s conducted a couple himself), is not the only 
person to thinkthe CMA “dropped the catch” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/mps-bank-reform-competition-and-markets-authority>
, as he put it. But Tuesday’s questioning-cum-torture of Alasdair Smith, who 
chaired the CMA’s investigation, was exquisitely done.

As he waved a copy of Smith’s latest attempt to combat the criticism, Tyrie 
turned his headmasterly scorn to maximum: “This speech has an air of 
complacency greater than ever I have read from a regulator. It seems to say 
‘don’t worry, let time go by, let’s build on existing practices, let’s use 
behavioural remedies of an incremental nature and we’ll be fine.’” Yes, that’s 
a fair summary.

Competition watchdog criticised by MPs over bank reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/mps-bank-reform-competition-and-markets-authority>
The only possible defence of the CMA is that structural remedies – like 
reversing the 2008 merger of Lloyds and HBOS – attract little political 
support. Royal Bank of Scotland, for example, has made the job of splitting off 
300 branches resemble the labours of Hercules. Even so, the CMA could have been 
far bolder.

The shame, as Tyrie argued, is that regulators have rarely had such an 
opportunity to improve the lot of banking customers. After the crash and 
scandals, the balance of power shifted away from the corporate lobbyists. The 
next inquiry – and there’s always another – can’t come soon enough.

Shell dividend still hostage to the oil price

Here’s a group of winners from Brexit: those Shell shareholders who elect to 
receive their dividends in sterling. The oil giant, operating in an industry 
that runs on dollars, has kept its quarterly dividend unchanged all year at 47 
cents a share but, after sterling’s fall, the progress looks much better in 
pennies: 32.9p in the first quarter, 35.3p in the second and, at current 
exchange rates, 38.4p for the third. That’s a handy improvement.

It is also, however, a sideshow to the main event. Can Shell, after consuming 
BG Group at the start of the year, afford to sustain its dividend at such 
levels, in any currency? We’re not talking small change. With BG on board, the 
Shell dividend costs $15bn a year to maintain, which is a reason why many 
investors were sceptical about the £35bn purchase. Some 17% of shareholders 
voted against the deal, which counts as serious dissent.

Shell executive Ben van Beurden has won round one. His gamble is looking 
better than it did in January. The price of a barrel of Brent has improved from 
$32 to $48, allowing Shell to boast that, unlike many rivals,it did not pay 
dividends out of debt in the latest quarter. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/shell-bp-beat-forecasts-oil-price>
 Meanwhile, the company is doing its best to demonstrate that, just as it told 
the doubters, it can duck and dive. Another few billions have been hacked out 
of next year’s spending budget.

Jolly good. But here’s why van Beurden, who staked his reputation on the BG 
deal, can’t relax yet. Debt is a colossal $78bn and financial gearing, at 
29.2%, is bumping up against Shell’s self-imposed ceiling of 30%. Some 
$30bn-worth of assets are due to be sold, but talk of disposals is not the same 
as cold cash.

In short, the dividend still looks hostage to the oil price. If a barrel costs 
$60 a barrel in a year’s time, Shell is out of the woods. But another year of 
sub-$50 prices would test the company’s ability to keep investors sweet while 
investing for the future. There is no point trying to predict the oil price but 
we can say this much: the shares looked a decent bet at £13 in January, as said 
here at the time, but today’s £22 looks too much, too soon. That dividend, 
yielding 7% in sterling terms, is not safe yet.

Saying no to Hargreaves Lansdown’s Lloyds stunt

Publicity stunts masquerading as serious petitions to government are a modern 
irritant. So it is encouraging that only 30,000 people have so far signed 
Hargreaves Lansdown’s attempt to get the government to flog a fewLloyds Banking 
Group <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> shares to the 
general public at a discount.

Chancellor Philip Hammond sensibly reversed his predecessor’s idea of selling 
shares at less than their market price. This annoyed Hargreaves, an investment 
platform, because it had 374,000 potential investors lined up, some of whom 
could become valuable customers for years. But the commercial self-interest 
behind the petition was so blatant it was offensive. If nine out of 10 of 
Hargreaves’s would-be Lloyds punters decline to sign, that’s a good thing.
 