
‘AlphaGo” is the sort of supercomputer name a pulp science fiction novelist 
might come up with. Nevertheless, the achievements of this Google DeepMind 
machine are only too real. It has become the first computer program to beat a 
professional human player of the Chinese strategy game Go, without handicaps, 
on a full‑sized 19×19 board.

It shouldn’t surprise us when computers beat humans at board games. They can, 
after all, store and rapidly analyse hundreds of millions of moves, and work 
out the implications of strategies hundreds of moves ahead, something no merely 
human player can manage. But AlphaGo is different. Experts in Go strategy 
report that it (I initially wrote “he” …) played in non‑obvious ways, making 
unusual, sly and even bizarre moves that only belatedly revealed themselves as 
tactically worthwhile.

It’s this that makes AlphaGo’s achievement so exciting. Being able to crunch 
numbers, even to crunch huge numbers really quickly, is not the same thing as 
intelligence, and certainly not the same thing as sentient self-consciousness. 
The ability to intuit, to make leaps of comprehension – not just to extrapolate 
according to pre-programmed rules but to speculate – is a lot closer to the 
Holy Grail of properAI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/artificialintelligenceai>, and 
AlphaGo’s achievement is more modest. Still, as Arthur C Clarke once noted: 
advances that seem modest and trivial in the short term can lead to drastic 
change in the long.

SF has a long tradition of dramatising artificial intelligence. Sometimes this 
is benign: Isaac Asimov’s self-aware robots are constrained from harming 
individuals by their built-in “three laws”, and eventually intuit an extra 
“zeroth” law that requires them to protect the whole of humanity. But usually 
SF imagines more alarming possibilities.2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001-a-space-odyssey>’s HAL 9000 has no 
qualms in murdering its entire human crew. Alastair Reynolds’sRevelation Space 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/revelation-space-2.html> novels include 
terrifying machine intelligences called The Inhibitors that travel the galaxy 
destroying organic life. If computers become better than us at all games, then 
that peculiar and deadly game we call “war” assumes alarming new dimensions.

In James Cameron’s The Terminator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-terminator> and the Wachowskis’ Matrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-matrix> trilogy, artificial intelligence 
has made apocalyptic war on humanity and enslaved the survivors. But though the 
sentient machines are relentless and brutal, their eventual defeat stems from 
key human players doing something that computers cannot: falling in love, Kyle 
Reese with Sarah Connor, Neo with Trinity. This flatters our sense that there 
is something special about us, slow and squishy though we may be, and that this 
specialness will win out in the end. But perhaps thinking so is just another, 
more deadly sort of hubris. In Alex Garland’s subtle filmEx Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina> the clever AI inside Eva 
manipulates human Caleb into falling in love with “her”, so as to be able to 
kill her human captors and escape.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fartificial-intelligence-we-should-be-more-afraid-of-computers-than-we-are-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20should%20be%20more%20afraid%20of%20computers%20than%20we%20are%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fartificial-intelligence-we-should-be-more-afraid-of-computers-than-we-are-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20should%20be%20more%20afraid%20of%20computers%20than%20we%20are%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fartificial-intelligence-we-should-be-more-afraid-of-computers-than-we-are-video&media=>
 We should be more afraid of computers than we are – video 
Might some future version of AlphaGo decide to play Go on a global scale, with 
bombs instead of black and white stones? It’s doubtful. The great Polish SF 
writer Stanislaw Lem’sGolem XIV concerns a vast military supercomputer that 
achieves self-awareness, but the novel’s twist is that instead of trying to 
destroy us it decides humanity is a cosmic irrelevance and disappears into 
higher dimensions in search of ultimate knowledge. Quite the snub: at least 
Skynet thinks we’re worth attacking! But in another sense it captures a deeper 
truth. Maybe AlphaGo’s descendants, waking into proper self-awareness, will 
find more stimulating and more profound things to do with their vast 
computational powers than blowing up humanity. They may end up playing Go with 
the architecture of reality itself.
 