
Coneygree, the Cheltenham Gold Cup winner, will miss the Hennessy Gold Cup at 
Newbury on Saturday after failing to please his trainer Mark Bradstock during a 
schooling session at his stable on Tuesday morning. Coneygree’s attempt to defy 
top weight in one of the season’s most competitive handicap chases had promised 
to be one of the highlights of the National Hunt season, but he will now be 
aimed instead at either theKing George VI Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> at Kempton Park on 
Boxing Day or the Lexus Chase at Leopardstown on 28 December.

The Hennessy was nominated as a target for Coneygree several months ago, but 
his participation had been in doubt since he lost a shoe and bruised a foot on 
16 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/16/coneygree-doubtful-hennessy-gold-cup>
. He was successfully fitted with a new shoe a few days later, however, and had 
seemed sure to start favourite for Saturday’s big race before the latest 
unfortunate twist in the story of his season so far.

Coneygree doubtful for Hennessy Gold Cup after suffering setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/16/coneygree-doubtful-hennessy-gold-cup>
“I’m afraid we’re not running,” Sara Bradstock, the trainer’s wife and 
assistant, said on Tuesday morning. “He just didn’t school well enough. He 
over-reached, which he’s never done before, which suggests he’s not comfortable.

“He didn’t jump badly but for him, it wasn’t him. We’ve always said if there 
was any residual pain left, we weren’t going to take a risk [and] he definitely 
wasn’t himself.

“I wouldn’t be at all surprised if we haven’t flared it, and he wasn’t lame on 
it again tonight. It’s just his foot, it’s not structural damage.”

Bradstock admits Coneygree left out of King George VI Chase by mistake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/bradstock-coneygree-left-out-king-george-chase-mistake>
The King George VI Chase is the obvious domestic target for Coneygree in the 
weeks ahead, though the choice of his next assignment is complicated by the 
fact thatBradstock failed to enter the Gold Cup winner for the Grade One feature
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/bradstock-coneygree-left-out-king-george-chase-mistake>
 of the Christmas programme as a result of a “computer glitch”.

Coneygree can be added to the field via a supplementary entry of £10,000 a few 
days before the race, but the extra expense could make the Grade One Lexus 
Chase at Leopardstown’s Christmas meeting a more attractive alternative.

“Obviously, the prime thing is to get him feeling absolutely on top of the 
world and not worrying about his foot,” Bradstock said. “We’ve got a month to 
either the King George or the Lexus. I think all will be well. It’s a timing 
thing.”

In Coneygree’s absence, the weights for the Hennessy are due to rise by 9lb, 
with Saphir Du Rheu the new top weight on 11st 12lb. The rise will also bring 
all the remaining 20 entries for the Hennessy into the handicap proper, with 
the bottom weight Theatre Guide now set to carry 10st 2lb.

“The weights have gone up 9lb and a six-year-old I quite like is now going to 
lug around top weight,” Andy Stewart, the owner of Saphir Du Rheu, said on 
Tuesday. “I think the weights now benefit two horses enormously, the Alan King 
horse [Smad Place] and former Gold Cup winner Bobs Worth. Both horses won very 
well last time.”

Willie Mullins, Ireland’s champion trainer, is responsible for four of the 
eight entries for the Grade One Royal Bond Novice Hurdle at Fairyhouse on 
Sunday, including Bachasson and Long Dog, both Grade Three race winners already 
this season.

Gordon Elliott’s No More Heroes, a leading contender for the RSA Chase at 
Cheltenham in March, is among the entries for the Grade One Drinmore Novice 
Chase on the same card.
 