
An explosion in the number of construction workers moved into “umbrella” 
companies to avoid them appearing as full-time employees is undermining auto 
enrolment pensions, say unions.

Many of the more than two million people who work on Britain’s construction 
sites are agency employed, and often “advised” to be paid via an umbrella firm. 
But their use is controversial: unions accuse them of dodging taxes and forcing 
workers to be “self-employed” when in reality they are employees and deserve 
full employment rights, including being enrolled into a pension scheme.

In 2014 the government banned agencies and payroll companies from falsely 
claiming that construction workers were self-employed. In doing so they had 
avoided paying employers’ national insurance contributions of 13.8% per worker.

To get around the new rules, many workers have been required to join umbrella 
companies, which HMRC says is legal for temporary workers. Butto the fury of 
the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians 
<http://www.ucatt.org.uk/umbrella-companies>, which calls umbrella companies 
“the boil on the back of the construction worker [that is] bleeding our members 
dry”, workers end up paying both the employee’s and employer’s NI 
contributions. They also miss out on the employer’s pension contributions 
because they themselves are deemed to be the employer.

“Many construction workers move from job to job and agency to agency every few 
months,” Ucatt says. “Because they will be paid via an umbrella company for a 
period of less than three months before they move on to another agency and 
another umbrella company, they risk remaining in a pensions limbo and never 
being enrolled on auto enrolment.”

How is your auto-enrolment pension faring?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/03/how-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring>
Last year 39-year-old Steve, a general builder, won £3,993 from umbrella firm 
PayStream My Maxafter an employment tribunal ruled that he’d had unlawful 
deductions made 
<http://www.ucatt.org.uk/ucatt-umbrella-company-tribunal-victory>, including 
the employer’s pension contributions.

Steve’s complaint was that he had not agreed for deductions to be made for the 
employer’s NI contributions, pension contributions and a “margin payment” 
(PayStream’s charge), and that holiday pay was “rolled up” into his pay, which 
can mean that when annual leave is taken, the worker is not paid. The judge 
agreed and ruled that Paystream was “not open and transparent”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fconstruction-workers-denied-auto-enrolment-pensions-umbrella-firms-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe41fa7992a02c421464c8fcb32493a61d499a4%2F0_355_5200_3126%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Construction%20workers%20denied%20access%20to%20auto-enrolment%20pensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fconstruction-workers-denied-auto-enrolment-pensions-umbrella-firms-pay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Construction%20workers%20denied%20access%20to%20auto-enrolment%20pensions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fconstruction-workers-denied-auto-enrolment-pensions-umbrella-firms-pay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe41fa7992a02c421464c8fcb32493a61d499a4%2F0_355_5200_3126%2F5200.jpg>
 Unions accuse building companies of dodging tax and denying workers full 
employment rights. Photograph: macana/Alamy 
Steve had begun working at housebuilder Keepmoat in July 2014, but was told 
that for the first 13 weeks he would have a trial period working via employment 
agency Badenoch & Clark. It, in turn, advised that he be paid through 
PayStream. “It wasn’t a situation I was happy with, particularly when I found 
out PayStream was taking deductions for my auto enrolment pension, making me 
both employee and employer – although they were employing me,” he says. “I 
ended up staying with the agency for almost 12 months, but left PayStream after 
seven and went PAYE.”

Steve relocated to Cornwall to avoid being blacklisted by building firms and 
find suitable work. He still works in construction and wishes to remain 
anonymous, and is now employed directly by a firm with whom he has an 
auto-enrolment pension.

Brian Rye, acting general secretary of Ucatt, which helped Steve fight the 
case, says auto enrolment is being undermined for construction workers. 
“Frequently, workers are engaged on projects for less than three months, 
meaning companies are not obliged to offer the worker the opportunity to sign 
up for auto enrolment. This is creating large holes in workers’ pensions and 
creates the impression that it is not worth saving for retirement as the 
rewards are minimal.”

He says the problem is exacerbated if a worker is forced to use an umbrella 
firm and pay both employer and employee pension contributions. “As these 
contributions increase in the next few years workers are going to find the cost 
prohibitive and opt out,” he says.

Commenting on Steve’s case, Keepmoat says: “Steve worked at Keepmoat Property 
Services Limited for a short time and on a temporary basis. He was not directly 
employed by Keepmoat, and Keepmoat was not party to this particular employment 
tribunal case… Keepmoat auto enrols all employees according to the criteria set 
by the pensions regulator.”

PayStream is unrepentant: “We disagree with the outcome of the tribunal and 
remain completely satisfied that no unlawful deductions from pay were made. The 
decision was taken not to appeal the judgment as the cost of doing so would 
exceed the amount in question. We have accurately applied auto enrolment 
legislation to each and every eligible contractor since our staging date and 
remain fully compliant in this and all areas of our business.”

In August Citizens Advice estimated that as many as 460,000 people 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-citizens-advice-works/media/press-releases/bogus-self-employment-costing-millions-to-workers-and-government/>
 could be “bogusly self-employed”– compelled by unscrupulous employers to be 
self-employed when they should have employee status, often so employers avoid 
the costs of pension contributions.
 