
After almost a year’s delay following opposition and outcry from churchgoers 
and rightwing activists, Emiliano Pool Paolini and Marianela Perelli, two 
artists from Rosario inArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>, 
have finally unveiled Barbie: The Plastic Revolution, part of the Saints and 
Sinners exhibition at a small gallery in Buenos Aires’ La Boca district.

The exhibition, which opened on Saturday at Popa Galeria 
<https://www.facebook.com/popa.espaciodearte>, includes various other works by 
the artists. One room is devoted to the Barbie dolls in religious guises, 
another shows a selection of paintings of famous characters who have sinned in 
some way, and a new series, My Own Jesus, has 14 unique depictions of Christ.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445420621063%2F78955839-3620-481b-8cd8-8e494c3423d3-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Controversial%20religious%20Barbie%20doll%20exhibition%20opens%20in%20Buenos%20Aires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Controversial%20religious%20Barbie%20doll%20exhibition%20opens%20in%20Buenos%20Aires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445420621063%2F78955839-3620-481b-8cd8-8e494c3423d3-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Barbie dressed as the Virgin of Lujan, Argentina’s patron saint. Photograph: 
HECTOR RIO/AFP/Getty Images 
In The Plastic Religion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion> room, 33 
Barbie and Ken dolls appear as popular Latin American saints or religious 
figures, from the Virgin of Lujan (Argentina’s patron saint) and Mary Magdalen 
to Moses, Saint George on a plastic horse and the Grim Reaper. Some are 
displayed in customised Mattel packaging, others in illuminated cabinets. 
Crucified Ken is nailed to a wooden cross, complete with flowing locks and 
loincloth, while Buddha Ken sits on the floor in the lotus position.

A large painting on the wall is a tongue-in-cheek representation of the Last 
Supper, with the 12 disciples replaced by celebrities including Johnny Depp and 
Andy Warhol. Bottles of 7Up and Pepsi litter the table and a large Mary in the 
background is clutching a Barbie doll in each hand and has the Mattel logo 
emblazoned on her chest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6d70588da3967b7abfeb60d1495cfc218e920e4%2F0_26_3600_4473%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Controversial%20religious%20Barbie%20doll%20exhibition%20opens%20in%20Buenos%20Aires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Controversial%20religious%20Barbie%20doll%20exhibition%20opens%20in%20Buenos%20Aires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fbarbie-and-ken-religious-art-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6d70588da3967b7abfeb60d1495cfc218e920e4%2F0_26_3600_4473%2F3600.jpg>
 Emiliano Pool Paolini and Marianela Perelli with their painting of The Last 
Supper. Photograph: Hector Rio/AFP/Getty Images 
Each doll’s outfit has been painstakingly made, with Mariela and Pool drawing 
inspiration from the rigorous detailing and perfectionism employed by artisans 
in the past to represent Mary and other saints in statue form. The artists 
argue that there are parallels: these effigies were the Barbies of the 
pre-consumerist era.

The artists, who say they are both religious and spiritual people, were 
surprised and frightened by the controversy their works caused. “We chose 
Barbie and Ken because they’re considered pop icons worldwide,” said Marianela. 
“A year ago, we weren’t ready to deal with how our work was being 
misinterpreted. After much deliberation we felt the need to exhibit the series, 
and we only gave 10 days’ notice to limit the negative repercussions”.

• The exhibition can be viewed every Saturday until the end of November or by 
appointment atPopa Galerian de Arte 
<https://www.facebook.com/popa.espaciodearte>, Calle Gregorio Aráoz de Lamadrid 
882. All of the works are for sale, and dolls are also available to order
 