
Science fiction is not an exact science. When it comes to making a serious 
sci-fi movie, there’s a lot to get wrong: the science will be peer-reviewed by 
the global chatroom; the special effects have to be more special than last 
time; you are expected to capture the zeitgeist and point the way for human 
progress in a way that’s totally mind-blowing but neither too confusing nor too 
obvious – and all without scaring off the China market. Hollywood has spent 
years, and billions, trying to crack this formula, but the variables keep 
changing. It would be easier if audiences were programmable robots, but we 
aren’t. To be totally fickle is to be human, so there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arrival%20trailer%3A%20Amy%20Adams%20makes%20first%20contact%20with%20aliens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Farrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video&media=>
Arrival trailer: Amy Adams makes first contact with aliens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/17/arrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
Arrival, the new sci-fi by Denis Villeneuve, is the perfect example of the 
current formula.Intelligent, accessible and spectacular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
, it is well placed to be this year’sGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity>– though things have moved on even 
since then. You could call Arrival an alien-invasion story, but its aliens 
neither attack nor befriend us Earthlings; instead, their skyscraper-sized 
craft simply hang mysteriously in the air at random points around the planet. 
Who are they? What do they want? How do we find out? Amid the global panic, 
linguist Amy Adams and physicist Jeremy Renner are enlisted to try to 
communicate with these beings, which resemble giant, seven-fingered hands and 
emit undecipherable croaks and clicks. The movie’s close encounters – conducted 
through a glowing screen in an eerie chamber inside the alien craft – deliver 
that sense of otherworldly awe that sci-fi fans crave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee1b08d7667aaea957aaf0a6d778ba22849f5a68%2F0_175_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee1b08d7667aaea957aaf0a6d778ba22849f5a68%2F0_175_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Amy Adams as Louise Banks in Arrival, which is intelligent, accessible and 
spectacular. Photograph: Jan Thijs 
There’s some serious, sciencey meat in Arrival: the nature of language, 
interpretation, communication, time and space, extraterrestrial intelligence. 
But there’s also a second strand running through the movie: Adams’s character 
is haunted by fleeting visions of her dead daughter, somehow triggered by the 
aliens. She is also drawn to Renner’s character, the only other civilian behind 
the security cordon and a soulmate in social awkwardness. Nothing so obvious as 
a romance ensues. To spoil Arrival’s developments would be a crime, but let’s 
just say there’s a man and a woman – and that in itself is a rarity among 
sci-fi movies when you think about it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8143028e37889615b77d3fd7afe3cee6f30fb96b%2F0_41_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8143028e37889615b77d3fd7afe3cee6f30fb96b%2F0_41_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The trailer for the upcoming sci-fi romance Passengers promises ‘Jennifer 
Lawrence and Chris Pratt getting it on. In space’. Photograph: Allstar/Sony 
Pictures Entertainment 
Next month we’ll have another example: Passengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/20/passengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video>
. Directed by Morten “The Imitation Game” Tyldum, it looks big and expensive, 
with cool spaceship sets and a plot suggesting galactic colonisation and its 
perils. But if there’s one thing you’ll take away from the trailer, it’s 
“Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Pratt getting it on. In space”. The actors have 
already been talking about their sex scene together, and the word “chemistry” 
is being bandied about. How’s that for a sci-fi formula?


Could it be that it really wasn’t rocket science all along? The very opposite, 
in fact. Both Arrival and Passengers make a point of what Bruce Lee would have 
called “emotional content <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QU9SsTwY5nU>”. You 
know: feelings, romantic ones, even sexual ones. Such qualities are a given in 
most types of story, but sci-fi can be a sterile sort of place – a realm of 
utilitarian hardware, wipe-clean surfaces, scientific jargon and dark, cold, 
existential nothingness. Human conduct is often accordingly stiff. As a genre, 
it’s a little like the androids in HBO’s newWestworld series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>, who have had their 
emotion settings turned right down.

Arrival review: heartfelt alien-contact movie communicates spectacular ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
Emotion is regularly outlawed in sci-fi scenarios including George Lucas’s THX 
1138, Jean-Luc Godard’s Alphaville, Equilibrium, Equals and The Giver. Many 
classic sci-fi characters don’t really do feelings, either. They are robots or 
aliens or AIs and they either fail to understand this human thing called 
“emotion”, or they regard it as a weakness: Schwarzenegger’s Terminator, or the 
Alien movies’ androids, or Star Trek’s emotionally repressed Vulcans, or the 
Next Generation’s Data (before he got his emotion chip 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4NskjxgyhXI>), or the heartless computer Hal 
in Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey – a sci-fi touchstone whose emotional peak 
is a tersely repeated request to open some doors.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsRPUO6gGSh8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsRPUO6gGSh8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsRPUO6gGSh8&media=>
 Trailer for the movie Contact. 
In recent years, Hollywood has found a simple fix for this glitch: put a 
female in the movie. Arrival’s spiritual predecessor could be Robert Zemeckis’s
1997 movie Contact, starring Jodie Foster 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D7tGBg38rzc>. Like Amy Adams, she’s a 
scientist decoding alien signals and making the introductions on behalf of 
humanity. And like Adams, it’s Foster’s emotional range that carries the story. 
She weeps tears of joy at the beauty of the cosmos, and tears of pain after a 
surreal reunion with her dead father, whose form the aliens decide to take 
(they are emotionally intelligent too, see?). With these emotional women 
around, the men can stay dry-eyed and manly and rational, as the genre demands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcdae6686a31c105ae9d5806803eae976567d1fb%2F0_31_1714_1028%2F1714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcdae6686a31c105ae9d5806803eae976567d1fb%2F0_31_1714_1028%2F1714.jpg>
 Noomi Rapace in Prometheus. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
Even when they are tough women in a testosterone-fuelled world, their 
femininity is called on to represent humanity: Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio in 
The Abyss, Noomi Rapace in Prometheus, Milla Jovovich in The Fifth Element. 
Sigourney Weaver’s Ripley is the most iconically tough heroine of all, but 
let’s not forget, at the climax of the first movie, she’s an all-too-vulnerable 
human body in its skimpy underwear. Perish the thought the film-makers 
shoehorned in some gratuitous lechery there, but it wouldn’t have worked if it 
had been, say, Burt Reynolds.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3d4500aca8d279c8f1525f824fcbd4a16ea437%2F0_224_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3d4500aca8d279c8f1525f824fcbd4a16ea437%2F0_224_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Matthew McConaughey and Anne Hathaway in Interstellar. Photograph: 
Allstar/Legendary Pictures 
But Hollywood has a habit of assembling all the ingredients then stubbornly 
refusing to let nature take its course. In Gravity, you have got Sandra Bullock 
to cry the zero-gravity tears (and do the underwear scene), and George Clooney 
is on board, too – a dream team of romantic leads. But it’s just not that sort 
of movie, is it? In Contact, Jodie Foster has a young, handsome Matthew 
McConaughey – the future king of romcoms – as her co-star. They have a 
blink-and-you’ll-miss-it liaison, then, next time she meets him, he’s a priest! 
McConaughey was also squandered in Christopher Nolan’s overreaching 
Interstellar. To the film’s credit, he gets to be an emotional man in a sci-fi 
movie – the scene of him tearfully watching his children grow up in 
fast-forward on their video diaries was the movie’s highlight – but again, 
you’ve got a widowed McConaughey and Anne Hathaway in a capsule together and 
the world’s about to end, and they just talk about retro-thrusters and event 
horizons. And you might have forgotten The Martian’s big romantic moment, when
Kate Mara kisses Sebastian Stan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iv6h9w9ZTKU> 
on the outside of his space helmet. Nothing says “giant prophylactic” like a 
spacesuit.

If romance is hard to find in sci-fi, sex is barely more than a theoretical 
concept. The big budget-wielders – Spielberg, Lucas, Cameron, Bay, Abrams – 
target family audiences to recoup their huge costs, so shy away from anything 
that might make teenage boys go: “Eeeuw!” Even Han Solo and Princess Leia were 
pushing it. Tom Cruise seems to have a no-romance clause written into his 
sci-fi contract. The only penetration in the Alien movies is of the 
man-xenomorph variety. For all its fetish wear, The Matrix only managed to get 
Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Ann Moss together for a mid-rave quickie in the sequel. 
For some proper sexuality in space you would have to go back to Jane Fonda’s 
sexually liberated Barbarella, or James Bond’s weightless shag at the end of 
Moonraker.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLMQKZZUR3z0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLMQKZZUR3z0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLMQKZZUR3z0&media=>
Then again, turn the dial too far towards “romance”, and you are in the realms 
of the “epic love story”, and pretty much out the other end of sci-fi: The Time 
Traveller’s Wife, Richard Curtis’s About Time, The Lake House, Kate & Leopold – 
they are essentially date movies with a light sprinkling of speculative 
fiction. The Baileys in the sci-fi minibar.


What is the protocol if aliens make contact?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/oct/30/what-protocol-aliens-make-contact-arrival>
It would be over-reductive to express this as a male/female thing, or a 
left-brain/right-brain sort of thing (putting it in such binary terms is so 
left-brain, after all). Or even a formula. Of course, there are women who like 
their sci-fi pure and cerebral, and men left cold by space stories, but 
research suggests that gender is a big factor in genre preference.A 2012 
analysis of BFI statistics 
<http://www.participations.org/Volume%209/Issue%202/4%20Redfern.pdf> found that 
83% of respondents who expressed a preference for romantic films were female, 
72% for romantic comedies. Conversely, 65% of those who liked sci-fi were male. 
It’s like men are from Mars and women are from … Earth.

There have been plenty of movies that we adore because they completely ignore 
any formula – exhibit A:Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/under-the-skin>. There are others that, in 
retrospect, struck the perfect balance. Look at Blade Runner. It’s a film of 
big philosophical questions and brilliant future-world design, as pure, 
profound and prescient a sci-fi as you could wish for. But its characters are 
also wrought with angst and loss and longing and tears in the rain – and 
there’s a proper, adult love story at its core.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F216cc8c42e654c0c3a466b84aeccf6d81f20a23f%2F391_282_2098_1260%2F2098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F216cc8c42e654c0c3a466b84aeccf6d81f20a23f%2F391_282_2098_1260%2F2098.jpg>
 Scarlett Johansson in Under the Skin. Photograph: FILM4/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Arrivals strikes a similar balance. Those two distinct strands to the story – 
the sciencey and the emotional, the cosmic and the personal, the left brain and 
the right brain, whatever – ultimately come together to deliver a satisfying 
conclusion (and a neat metaphor for what we are talking about here). Some might 
see this as sci-fi selling out.Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival> has already been branded as 
“sentimental” and “maudlin”. But you could also see it as sci-fi growing up – 
from a gadget-obsessed kid to a mature, rounded adult with good ideas but good 
communication skills, too.

Some small-scale Indie films have precisely the mix of big ideas and human 
intimacy old-school Hollywood has lacked

More than gender, it could be a generational thing. Ironically, the “young 
adult” genre has been striking this same balance for some time, from the Hunger 
Games onwards, perhaps appealing to younger audiences less hung up on the 
old-fashioned binaries, gender, genre or otherwise. In recent years, we have 
had a steady trickle of smart, fresh emotionally literate sci-fis that do a lot 
with a little. Spike Jonze’s Her, for example, where Joaquin Phoenix falls in 
love with his Scarlett Johansson-voiced operating system. In sci-fi terms, it’s 
as bold and thorny a film about artificial intelligence as we have ever had, 
but that’s the point, it doesn’tfeel like a sci-fi movie – more like a warped 
romance. A similar example would be Michel Gondry’s Eternal Sunshine of the 
Spotless Mind with Jim Carrey and Kate Winslet chasing each other through the 
windmills of their partially erased minds. Is it a sci-fi? Technically, yes. Is 
it a love story? Very much so, but not an obvious one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f007314fe996106a151dedef05420bc10c48cda%2F0_113_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cosmic%20emotions%3A%20why%20Arrival%20and%20Passengers%20feel%20like%20a%20new%20wave%20of%20sci-fi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsci-fi-new-wave-arrival-passengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f007314fe996106a151dedef05420bc10c48cda%2F0_113_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Safety Not Guaranteed: contains the perfect sci-fi meet cute. Photograph: 
Filmdistrict/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
At the even indier end, we have had Rian Johnson’s Looper, which managed to 
tie all manner of time-travel-related knots without losing the viewer, and 
threaded a moving love story through it. Gareth Edwards’sMonsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/27/mosters-gareth-edwards-avatar>, a 
lo-fi indie romance with the sci-fi element ingeniously Photoshopped in on the 
director’s laptop. OrSafety Not Guaranteed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/safety-not-guaranteed>, which begins with the 
perfect sci-fimeet cute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jan/23/clip-joint-meet-cute>: 
Mark Duplass puts in a small ad seeking “someone to travel back in time with 
me”. Aubrey Plaza responds. The list goes on:Midnight Special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/10/midnight-special-review-michael-shannon-kirsten-dunst>
,Another Earth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143611/another-earth>, 
Coherence, I Origins, Shane Carruth’sPrimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/primer> and Upstream Color 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155781/upstream-color>.

This is more than just an interesting subgenre that wins prizes at Sundance: 
these small-scale films possess precisely the mix of big ideas and human 
intimacy old-school Hollywood has lacked. No wonder it is feeding into the 
mainstream. Just look at who’s handling the Star Wars slate (the biggest sci-fi 
property of all) Rogue One: Gareth “Monsters” Edwards; Episode VIII: Rian 
“Looper” Johnson; Episode IX: Colin “Safety Not Guaranteed” Trevorrow. 
Meanwhile, there’s also Denis Villeneuve’s next project to look forward to:a 
sequel to Blade Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/18/ridley-scott-opening-scene-blade-runner-sequel-harrison-ford-ryan-gosling>
.
 