
If you like superhero films, the chances are you’re pretty stoked at the news 
that Spider-Man will soon be joining the same movie universe as Iron Man, The 
Hulk, Thor, Captain America et al. Comic-book fans have always been a little 
confused about why characters such as Wolverine and Magneto never seem to meet 
up with anyone from theMarvel universe  <http://marvel.com/universe/Main_Page>
on the big screen, despite the fact that they regularly do in print. Likewise, 
Spidey never gets to battle the Hulk, and The Fantastic Four are similarly 
trapped in their own bubble.

It all comes down to the fact that Marvel Comics sold off rights to a number 
of its key titles around the turn of the century (prior to forming its own 
independent film-making arm in 2005), but retained others. With Spider-Man and 
X-Men movies performing very nicely indeed for, respectively, Sony and 20th 
Century Fox, there has been little incentive for either to work withMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>.

Spider-Man to join Marvel superheroes in shared movie universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/spider-man-to-join-marvel-superheroes-in-shared-movie-universe>
But with the Disney-owned studio having since proved via the $1.5bn The 
Avengers that it can take the ensemble comic-book movie to hitherto unimagined 
heights of popularity, attitudes have shifted. Now Sony, which has struggled 
with its own superhero saga ever since 2007’s Spider-Man 3 was barracked by 
critics,has struck a deal to allow the masked wallcrawler to appear in a Marvel 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/spider-man-to-join-marvel-superheroes-in-shared-movie-universe>
 without (apparently) undermining its ongoing rights to keep delivering 
separate solo Spidey films.

The best of both worlds for fans, you might think. But Sony’s treatment of 
Spider-Man continues to be so hamfisted (not to mention blatantly fuelled by 
financial motivations) that there will be concerns about whether even Marvel’s 
golden touch can restore Peter Parker’s alter-ego to his rightful place in the 
pantheon of 21st-century comic-book heroes.

First of all there’s the rumour, largely fostered by comments from the 
film-maker himself, thatSony forced director Sam Raimi into including multiple 
villains in Spider-Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/apr/01/spider-man-sam-raimi> – 
ultimately leading to an unbalanced plot that left fans and critics 
unimpressed, even as the movie itself scored a franchise-high $890m worldwide. 
Then there was the move (most likely fuelled by a desire to hold on to the 
rights) toreboot the property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140156/spider-man-reboot> just five 
years later, with Andrew Garfield replacing Tobey Maguire and Marc Webb taking 
over from Raimi; the storyline failed to veer significantly from the origins 
story detailed in Spider-Man just a decade before.

Now, after delivering a much-better second instalment that at least carved out 
its own place in the Spidey mythos by putting the famous Gwen Stacy storyline 
onto the big screen, Sony has decided it’s time for another new actor to strap 
on the web-shooters. And this despiteThe Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2> having begun to 
deliver a sense of a satisfying wider fantasy universe linked to Norman 
Osborn’s evil legacy at Oscorp Industries – not to mention the ongoing enigma 
of Peter Parker’s father, Richard (which will presumably now be left 
unresolved).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F29%2Fthe-amazing-spider-man-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Amazing%20Spider-Man%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F29%2Fthe-amazing-spider-man-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Amazing%20Spider-Man%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fjun%2F29%2Fthe-amazing-spider-man-video-review&media=>
The Andrew Garfield Spider-Man movies may not have been fabulous individual 
properties, but they were doing a great job of building a bigger picture. So 
much so that proposals for aSinister Six <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3402242/> 
movie featuring Paul Giamatti’s Rhino, Dane DeHaan’s Green Goblin, Doc Oc, The 
Vulture et al were beginning to look like a decent path forward.

Sony may of course return to such concepts after Spider-Man turns up in the 
Marvel Universe, most likely in Captain America: Civil War. But it’s just as 
likely that the creative team behind the new Spidey – surely Webb won’t now 
return – will take the character in an entirely different direction. That’s 
surely something of a letdown for fans who have invested their time and energy 
into the current iteration.

What Marvel has achieved with its comic-book universe, which Sony would do 
well to ape, is a kind of synthesis between creative endeavour and smart studio 
deal-making which would once have been thought impossible. With actors such as 
Chris Hemsworth, Mark Ruffalo and Chris Evans tied down to long-term deals to 
play Thor, the Hulk and Captain America, film-makers are able to present nuanced
big-screen superheroes who retain the same appearance and personality from 
movie to movie.

By contrast, Sony now hopes to relaunch Spider-Man with a new actor for the 
third time in a decade. Marvel should tread carefully here, for while it might 
be celebrating the prospect of bringing its comic-book division’s best-known 
property back into the fold, it may not like the baggage that comes with him.
 