 Models prepare for the Bless'ed Are The Meek show at Australian Fashion Week 
2013 Photograph: Marianna Massey/Getty Images 
While another round of shows were only put to bed in mid-March, weary editors 
might not like the news that the so-called fashion month – when they watch 
shows in New York, London, Milan and Paris – could last even longer in the 
future. But the four big fashion cities are no longer quite as rock-solid as 
they once were. Fashion weeks across the globe, from Cambodia to Columbia, are 
exposing local designs to an international audience. As Vice's recentFashion 
Week Internationale series 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/fashion-week-internationale shows> shows, everyone, 
everywhere, wants a piece of the pie.
 A design by Christopher Esber, who will be showing at Australian fashion week 
2014 next week 
While, say, Islamabad's is still in its infancy, one of the more established 
events could feasibly become the world's fifth-biggest fashion week.Australia 
Fashion Week <http://australia.mbfashionweek.com/>, which starts on 8 April in 
Sydney, is a serious contender. Once seen asthe place to find the latest in 
swimwear, Australian designers are increasingly attracting attention for 
clothes that can be worn off the beach. Names to look out for include new talent
Christopher Esber <http://www.christopheresber.com.au/> who makes razor-sharp 
ready-to-wear,Dion Lee <http://www.dionlee.com/> (who also shows at London 
fashion week) and vibrant print maestrosRomance Was Born 
<http://romancewasborn.com/>. "When it launched in 1996, it was sex on legs – 
white leather, cut-away swimsuits," says Edwina McCann, the editor-in-chief of 
Australian Vogue. "Now it's much more sophisticated."

While these labels are on track to follow the international success of 
Australian brands such as Richard Nicoll, Antipodium and Josh Goot, global 
brands are moving in. Asos launched its Australia site in 2011, and the country 
is now the clothing site's second largest market . "We are currently selling 
something every six seconds to an Australian customer, which amounts to around 
four jumbo jets' worth of product being flown to Australia each week," says 
Sally Anne Newson, Australia country manager for Asos.
 Backstage at a show for Australian designer Jenny Kee, who showed at AFW 2013 
Photograph: Stefan Gosatti/Getty Images 
This demand may also be down to the fact that Australia's economy came through 
the global financial crisis relatively unscathed. Growth of 0.6% was reported 
in the last quarter of 2012, and it was recently claimed that the countryhad 
not been in recession for 21 years. 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/06/australia-recession_n_2818610.html> 
Jane Jasper, a former stylist, launched her Sydney boutiqueLand's End 
<http://www.landsendstore.com/store/> in 2008 and counts Céline – a brand with 
four-figure pricetags as standard – as a bestseller. "The strong Australian 
dollar has increased the luxury market here" she says.

And it's not just high fashion. Along with Asos, Whistles intend to expand 
there too. Speaking toThe Business of Fashion last year 
<http://www.businessoffashion.com/2012/10/ceo-talk-jane-shepherdson-chief-executive-officer-whistles.html>
, the company's CEO Jane Shepherdson namechecked Australia as "a huge market 
for us … It just seems to keep on growing."
 