
It’s a decision that prompted howls of outrage at the time, and earnest 
bafflement from critics ever since: Paul Haggis’s multi-stranded LA drama Crash 
beating Ang Lee’s cowboy romanceBrokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brokeback-mountain> to the best picture Oscar 
in 2006. But now, thanks to a survey by the Hollywood Reporter, Brokeback can 
at least be comforted that industry consensus is officially on its side.

Here come the Oscars: still a cruel joke in a cruel town | Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/18/oscars-awards-night-winner-tv>
Oscars 2015: what will win best picture?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/13/oscars-2015-who-will-win-best-picture>
The trade publication polled hundreds of Academy members about controversial 
or close-run decisions, asking them to imagine that they were recasting their 
vote today. Brokeback came out on top, beating Crash as well as fellow nominees 
Munich, Good Night and Good Luck, and Capote.

Other reversed decisions included The Shawshank Redemption – which is 
frequently the top-voted movie of all time on IMDb – beating Oscar winner 
Forrest Gump, whose sentimentality and reduction of history seems a little 
awkward 20 years hence. The same year’s Pulp Fiction still leaves the Academy 
cold however, coming in third place.

Driving Miss Daisy’s treatment of race perhaps now appears clunky to the 
Academy (despite its failure to fully acknowledge Selma at this year’s awards) 
because it now gives 1990’s top prize to My Left Foot. Rocky, meanwhile, loses 
its heavyweight crown, but not to Taxi Driver as you might imagine – instead 
it’s All the President’s Men that gets the nod. Saving Private Ryan also now 
beats out Shakespeare in Love for the 1999 prize.

Marisa Tomei is often cruelly included in “can you believe they won an Oscar?” 
listicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/12/listicles-articles-written-lists-steven-poole>
, for her best supporting actress win in 1992 for My Cousin Vinny. Happily, any 
snark is undermined by the fact that the Academy would still give it to her 
over Vanessa Redgrave, Judy Davis, Miranda Richardson and Joan Plowright. Anna 
Paquin won aged 11 in the same category for The Piano, beating heavyweights 
like Emma Thompson, Holly Hunter and Winona Ryder, but her win is also upheld.

This year’s Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> take place on 22 
February and will hosted by Neil Patrick Harris for the first time. Boyhood, 
Birdman, American Sniper and The Grand Budapest Hotel are among the films 
duking it out for the top prizes.
 