
Marvel is not messing about with Spider-Man. Few were expecting his appearance 
in Captain America: Civil War to be much more than a cameo, perhaps even a 
closing-credits scene in which he’s recruited by Iron Man for the Avengers’ 
next adventure. Butlast week’s final trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dKrVegVI0Us> for the Russo brothers’ upcoming 
superhero smackdown made it clear the studio has grander plans for the 
character.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdKrVegVI0Us&media=>
There was Spidey, pinging Captain America’s shield out of Steve Rogers’ grasp 
as if it were nothing more than a frisbee. He’s only on screen for a matter of 
seconds, but it’s immediately clear this is a version of Spider-Man brimming 
with the arrogance of youth and not at all interested in respecting his 
superhero elders.


Five things we learned from Marvel's final Captain America: Civil War trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/final-trailer-marvel-captain-america-civil-war-five-things-we-learned>
The response from fans has been sizeable, even if some were caught off-guard 
by the new Steve Ditko-inspired “smooth” suit. The promo has now been viewedthe 
most times of any trailer since Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/captain-america-civil-war-spiderman-875799>
, and with the hype surrounding Civil War increasingly stratospheric, it 
suddenly looks likely to behavemore like an Avengers movie than a Captain 
America one at the box office 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=avengers.htm>. 

The decision to allow Spidey to join the Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> mob for the first time already 
looks vindicated, the fan fatigue which damaged both Amazing Spider-Man movies 
instantly jettisoned. You have to feel sorry for Andrew Garfield: an excellent 
Spidey unfortunate to be cast in a premature reboot, he never got this kind of 
chance.

Former cast members, including Garfield himself 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/andrew-garfield-blames-execs-for-amazing-spider-man-2s-1633645894>
, arenow lining up to kick Spider-Man’s previous incarnation while he’s down 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/aunt-may-actor-sally-field-hated-those-amazing-spider-man-films-too-a6934436.html>
, but in truth it was studio politics that did for Marc Webb’s Amazing 
Spider-Man films. With the rights to just one superhero, Sony was forced to 
roll out Spider-Man over and over again in excruciatingly similar movies. 
Imagine Marvel remaking 2008’s Iron Man now, with a new actor and a similarly 
pitched origin story – there would be an almighty fan revolt. That’s almost 
exactly what its rival did with 2002’s Spider-Man and 2012’s The Amazing 
Spider-Man, even regurgitating Uncle Ben’s death and the Flash Thompson fight 
scene.

Robert Downey Jr: there are no plans to make another solo Iron Man film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/robert-downey-jr-no-solo-iron-man-film-captain-america-avengers>
Before Sony struck a deal last year to share Spidey with Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/spider-man-to-join-marvel-superheroes-in-shared-movie-universe>
, it had tentative plans to plunge Peter Parker into a battle with supervillain 
ensemble the Sinister Six, which would at least have been a new direction. But 
how much easier, and fresher, for Spider-Man to take his rightful place among 
the Avengers, and begin an entirely new kind of adventure?

Even better, when audiences do eventually get bored again – and a new solo 
Spidey movie is expected as early as next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/tom-holland-spider-man-marvel-sony>
 – Marvel has enough superheroes in its stable to give the wallcrawler a few 
years off. Something similar is already planned for Iron Man, whoaccording to 
an interview with the Russo brothers in Forbes magazine 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/simonthompson/2016/03/16/russo-brothers-talk-captain-america-civil-war-their-plans-for-spider-man-and-post-credits-scenes/#f35225566df6>
 is likely to be sidelined once his current story arc, as essayed by Robert 
Downey Jr, reaches its conclusion:

I think if and when he is done with the character I think you will find that 
Iron Man might disappear for a while. I think the only way that you could 
reboot that character is to give a generational gap that would allow another 
actor to at least have a chance to redefine that character without the enormous 
spectre of Robert hanging over it. There are so many characters in the Marvel 
universe that can pick up the ball and run with it through the next phase or 
two before you need to see Iron Man again.

The interview also hints at how hands-on Marvel were in the Spidey casting 
process. The Russos, who are also overseeing the next two Avengers movies, were 
able to screen-test British youngster Tom Holland alongside Downey Jr andChris 
Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-evans> (Captain America) to make 
sure the chemistry bubbled.

Guardians of the Galaxy director James Gunn tweeted this week, after watching 
Civil War, that Holland will be to Spider-Man what “Downey is to Iron Man, 
Ledger was to the Joker, Pratt is to Star-Lord”
James Gunn (@JamesGunn) 
Civil War. Yes I swear and promise it really is awesome. 
https://t.co/ipbn4y31aM <https://t.co/ipbn4y31aM>
 <https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707986496314212354> March 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707986496314212354> James Gunn 
(@JamesGunn) 
I think @TomHolland1996 <https://twitter.com/TomHolland1996> is the best 
Spidey/Peter Parker ever by a country mile.https://t.co/SiH9yP8NvW 
<https://t.co/SiH9yP8NvW>
 <https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707989257516765184> March 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707989257516765184> James Gunn 
(@JamesGunn) 
It’s his own thing. He is to Spidey as Downey is to Iron Man, Ledger was to 
the Joker, Pratt is to Star-Lord.https://t.co/uvp9qJb2Cx 
<https://t.co/uvp9qJb2Cx>
 <https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707991288864329729> March 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JamesGunn/status/707991288864329729> 
That’s some praise indeed, but all the signs are good. Spidey looks to be in 
his best shape since Spider-Man 2, and unlike in 2004 there are no signs of 
imminent departure intoemo haircut territory 
<https://secure.static.tumblr.com/1e2b6dc269db4701f9364b8472f5ae89/dodxxkr/cqHnl474w/tumblr_static_tumblr_static_8y6a2rdritwcgwcwo40ggok08_640.png>
.
 