
It’s 40 years since Rocky scrapped its way into cinemas – I’d have added 
“believe it or not”, but when you seeSylvester Stallone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone>’s swollen, fallen, stray 
pug face inCreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/rocky-in-numbers--creed-sylvester-stallone>
(Warner, 12), you definitely believe it. Still, how many film franchises have 
lurched along with the same actor for that long? And how many of those can 
claim to have peaked in their fifth decade? Fine wine analogies don’t apply 
here: theRocky films have been corked since the 1980s. But Ryan Coogler’s film 
– not so much an extension of a franchise as a fresh graft of its mythos – is a 
very robust red: it’s a boxing film alive with bodily tension, social concern 
and, by its roaring climax, genuinely meaningful emotional rescue.

Rocky Balboa isn’t the fighter this time: even Stallone’s bravado has its 
limits. Here, he’s a grizzled, initially reluctant mentor to hard-headed and 
harder-bodied up-and-comer Adonis Johnson Creed (Michael B Jordan) – son of 
Apollo, Balboa’s nemesis over the first fourRocky films. What might seem a 
corny, convenient torch-passing ploy instead yields a weighty, considered 
examination of legacy – professional, cultural, familial – and how it feels to 
carry it. Coogler and Jordan first worked together onFruitvale Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fruitvale-station>, a 2013 film that chimed 
with the rise of theBlack Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
 movement;Creed more tacitly follows suit, as its African American protagonist 
quite literally fights for his standing and status, as well as that of his 
father. It’s a remarkable reorientation of the original film’s socioeconomic 
politics and hero worship, given earthy ballast by Jordan and Stallone’s 
honest, broken-skinned performances; all of a sudden, an eighth Rocky film 
doesn’t sound like the worst idea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcreed-the-danish-girl-when-animals-dream-stallone-redmayne-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff903d0e676bc29a1bb9636145860b81f3ac3edd8%2F264_0_1715_1029%2F1715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creed%3B%20The%20Danish%20Girl%3B%20When%20Animals%20Dream%3B%20Mojave%3B%20The%20Chosen%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcreed-the-danish-girl-when-animals-dream-stallone-redmayne-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creed%3B%20The%20Danish%20Girl%3B%20When%20Animals%20Dream%3B%20Mojave%3B%20The%20Chosen%20Ones%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fcreed-the-danish-girl-when-animals-dream-stallone-redmayne-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff903d0e676bc29a1bb9636145860b81f3ac3edd8%2F264_0_1715_1029%2F1715.jpg>
 ‘Decorous coyness’: Alicia Vikander (Gerda Wegener), left, and Eddie Redmayne 
(Lili Elbe) in The Danish Girl. Photograph: Allstar/Universal 
The Danish Girl (Universal, 15), on the other hand, is as tidily hemmed in and 
fragrantly starched asCreed is swaggering and bloodily bruised: as film-making, 
it’s never naked for a moment. That’s a particular problem when the film is 
about transgender transitioning, a subject that isn’t illuminated by decorous 
coyness, which is what directorTom Hooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hooper> has in sensibly sized spades.

The story of Lili Elbe, a celebrated painter who became better known in 1930 
as one of the first people to undergo sex reassignment surgery, the film charts 
her feminine evolution largely through her succession of richly brocaded gowns. 
Despite the elaborately mannered physical affections ofEddie Redmayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne>’s performance, the film never 
successfully evokes how it might feel to have another person, of a gender 
different from your biological assignment, emerging inside you. Instead, the 
film principally navigates the more familiar emotional territory of dewy-eyed 
marital decline, as Elbe’s comparably free-spirited wife Gerda learns to let 
go. That she’s played as thoughtfully and open-heartedly as she is by an 
Oscar-winningAlicia Vikander <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdlzqmMDF3g> 
makes the film more moving than it might have been otherwise, but it remains a 
thoroughly cautious study of a very brave act.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for When Animals Dream. 
One yearns to see The Danish Girl directed by David Cronenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidcronenberg>; I’d even settle for Danish 
director Jonas Alexander Arnby, who brings a disquieting understanding of 
morphosis to When Animals Dream (Altitude, 18), a sleek, sensitive portrait of 
a teenage girl finding her inner (and eventual outer) werewolf. It aims for the 
ice and blood humanism ofLet the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/let-the-right-one-in>, and doesn’t entirely 
get there, but it’s a sustained, elegant shiver. Also falling short of lofty 
genre aspirations isMojave (Signature, 15), a somewhat mapless thriller with an 
embittered undercurrent of Hollywood satire fromThe Departed writer William 
Monahan. Still, I enjoyed the dark bourbon tone and ambience of its ambling, as 
drifter Oscar Isaac and fizzled film-maker Garrett Hedlund circle each other in 
sexy, shifty style.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCq9VYIrFy3M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCq9VYIrFy3M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCq9VYIrFy3M&media=>
 Watch the trailer for In a Lonely Place. 
As smirking, smoking, showbiz noirs go, it’s no In a Lonely Place (Criterion, 
12), but what is? StarringHumphrey Bogart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/humphreybogart> at his most craggily 
disillusioned,Nicholas Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/08/nicholas-ray-we-cant-go-home-again>
’s once underrated but gorgeously mordant masterwork gets the rerelease it 
deserves from the Criterion Collection, its Indian-ink blacks and shimmery 
silvers sharpened to killer effect. If you’ve never seen it, this is the best 
possible introduction. Not to be outdone by the recentCriterion hype 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/17/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-criterion-collection-the-survivalist>
, meanwhile, the Masters of Cinema label continues to be a treasure trove. 
Josef von Sternberg’s 1928 silentThe Last Command (Eureka, PG) – while noted by 
triviastes for Emil Jannings’s dignified performance, winner of the first ever 
best actor Oscar – is no mere footnote. Threaded with irony and compassion, 
this vast story of a tsarist Russian duke turned Hollywood extra deserves this 
polished revival.

I’m writing this week’s column from Cannes, where Mexican director David 
Pablos’sThe Chosen Ones, a tough, bluntly powerful study of the sex slavery 
racket, left audiences gasping last year. Always a challenging candidate for 
distribution, it has instead been internationally released as aNetflix exclusive
 <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80059440>, and if you can handle its 
hope-deprived worldview, it’s sternly impressive stuff. Taking the perspective 
of a young male employee of a sex trafficking ring, and sketching his moral 
crisis when he falls for one of its kidnapped teenage victims, it’s a film that 
suffuses unremittingly ugly subject matter with sensory clarity. Pablos is a 
name to watch; one wonders if Netflix has other plans for him.
 