
It’s not entirely clear why Woody Allen’s new show for Amazon Studios is 
called Crisis In Six Scenes. Although there are six episodes, each one contains 
multiple scenes taking place in different settings. And though I spent the best 
part of an hour trying to prove that each individual episode consisted of six 
scenes, reaching that number required some very creative accounting.

Woody Allen: 'There are traumas in life that weaken us. That’s what has 
happened to me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>
Allen himself stars as stoic military general Brad Jones. Just kidding: he 
plays a neurotic novelist-turned-TV writer named Sidney J Munsinger. Together 
with his wife Kay, a marriage counsellor, Sidney lives a quiet life in 1960s 
upstate New York, while the social revolution rages on outside.


Two worlds collide with the arrival of Miley Cyrus’s radicalised flower child 
Lennie, on the run from the law after shooting a prison guard. Her embrace of 
violent direct action sits in opposition to Sidney’s preference for passive 
intellectual debate, but any ideological wrangling takes a back seat to the 
show’s all-consuming desire to deliver the kind of gentle, good-natured humour 
that’s sure to play well in various international territories.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0&media=>
After a decade of poorly received contemporary-set projects, Allen has, of 
late, made a habit of retreating into the past, with films such as Café Society 
concealing his inability to write convincingly about the modern world. Allen’s 
feel for the 60s lends Crisis In Six Scenes verisimilitude far in excess of his 
efforts to document the 21st century, not to mention a great running joke in 
which Sidney’s hairstyle is compared to those of mid-century character actors 
such as Percy Helton and Franklin Pangborn, obscure then and entirely forgotten 
now.


From a creepy age gap to an unhappy ending – what to expect in Woody Allen's 
new TV show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/27/crisis-in-six-scenes-woody-allen-amazon-tv>
Unfortunately, if Allen’s ability to write a decent one-liner has endured into 
his 80s, his ability to deliver them has not. Tasked with breathing life into 
his own words, he lapses into the shuffly mannerisms of a theatrical 
grandparent telling jokes over Christmas dinner, or an octogenarian director 
being asked whether he’s past his prime.

More damning is the show’s failure to engage with the medium in which it 
exists. Although its title suggests a playful exploration of TV’s narrative 
quirks, Allen’s first new writing for television in half a century feels more 
like a drip-fed feature film, in which 90 minutes of ideas are needlessly (and 
clumsily) spread across six half-hours. Indeed, the closest Allen has come to 
explaining the title is to say he wanted to make “a movie in six parts”. He’d 
have been better off making Crisis In One Sitting.

 * Crisis in Six Scenes starts on Amazon Prime on 30 September
 