
The former Argentinian president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner> was indicted 
on Tuesday in a corruption case involving public works.

Federal judge Julian Ercolini approved charges of illicit association and 
fraudulent administration against Fernández, and two former aides: ex-planning 
minister Julio de Vido and former public works secretary José López.

Argentina gripped by mystery: the ex-minister, a convent and bundles of cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/17/argentina-ex-minister-convent-cash-jose-lopez>
Also named was businessman Lázaro Báez, whose Austral Construcciones company 
allegedly benefited from irregular contracts.

The judge’s order froze the equivalent of up to $633m of each defendant’s 
assets, though it was not clear they have that much.

The ruling published by official Center of Judicial Information said the 
defendants are accused of associating to illegally take public funds meant for 
public works between May 2003 and December 2015.

Fernández made no immediate comment on the charge, but she has repeatedly 
denied wrongdoing.

Since leaving office in December 2015, Fernández has alleged that she is the 
victim of persecution by her conservative successor,Mauricio Macri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/mauricio-macri-argentina-president-cristina-fernandez>
.

In May, a judge indicted Fernández on charges of manipulating currency 
exchange futures markets, allegedly causing economic damage to the government.

A judge is also seeking to revive an investigation into Fernández 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/argentina-cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner-iran-cover-up-investigation>
 over an alleged cover-up on behalf of Iranians suspected in the 1994 bombing 
of the Argentinian Israelite Mutual Association, which caused its main building 
to collapse and killed 85 people.

No one has been convicted of the crime but in January 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/14/argentina-cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner-jewish-community-centre-bombing>
, an Argentinian federal prosecutor accused Fernández of attempting to cover up 
Iran’s involvement.

The prosecutor, Alberto Nisman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/28/alberto-nisman-death-cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner-argentina-intelligence-agency>
, was found shot in the head just before he was to present the case to congress.
His death remains unsolved. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/argentina-judge-passes-case-of-alberto-nisman-death-to-federal-court>

With reporting by Amanda Holpuch
 