
Scarred, half-blind and fingerless, William Morales has for 40 years obsessed 
Joe Connor.

“I saw Morales’ face back then in the papers, growing up. He was the face of 
evil to me. He was the man who I viewed as responsible for killing my father.”

Morales was a bombmaker for a Puerto Rican nationalist group which claimed 
responsibility for a January 1975 attack on a New York tavern in which Connor’s 
father and three others were killed. Nobody was ever charged over the bombing 
of the Fraunces Tavern, but Morales was eventually convicted on explosives 
charges in 1978.

A year later, he escaped from prison and eventually made his way to Cuba, 
where he has lived freely to this day. But since the US andCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> announced a historic deal to start 
normalising relations in December, that freedom has been thrown into doubt.

Last week the State Department said Cuba had agreed to discuss the status of 
Morales andJoanne Chesimard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/13/assata-shakur-civil-rights-activist-fbi-most-wanted>
 – better known as Assata Shakur – as part oftalks on increasing 
law-enforcement cooperation between the two countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/15/cuban-us-fugitives-open-talks-terror-list-ties-warm>
.

Assata Shakur: from civil rights activist to FBI's most-wanted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/13/assata-shakur-civil-rights-activist-fbi-most-wanted>
Shakur – the godmother of the rapper Tupac Shakur – was sentenced for the 1973 
murder of a New Jersey policeman, in a trial her supporters described as a 
“legal lynching”. She escaped prison in 1979 and fled to Cuba, where she is 
perhaps the most prominent of many American fugitives.

Victor Manuel Gerena is believed to have fled to the island after robbing a 
Connecticut company of $7m;Charlie Hill escaped there in 1971 after he and two 
others were accused of killing a New Mexico policeman 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/04/09/americas/us-cuba-fugitive-charlie-hill/>; 
Ishmael LaBeet hijacked a plane to Cuba after he was arrested for murdering 
eight people in the Virgin Islands in 1973.

But while some estimate 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/storyline/wp/2014/12/20/cuba-still-harbors-one-of-americas-most-wanted-fugitives-what-happens-to-assata-shakur-now/>
 there are about 70 fugitives hiding in Cuba, that number probably only 
represents those responsible for the most high-profile and spectacular crimes 
of decades past.

With neither a formal protocol to track fugitives nor any extradition records 
with the country, law enforcement officials believe theremay be hundreds of 
people 
<http://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/nationworld/fl-cuba-fugitive-us-requests-20150130-story.html#page=1>
who have fled there from more mundane charges of theft, drugs and fraud. US 
marshals in south Florida are now “scrambling to compile a list of people”, 
Florida’s Sun Sentinelreported in February 
<http://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/nationworld/fl-cuba-fugitive-us-requests-20150130-story.html#page=2>
 aftera lengthy investigation 
<http://interactive.sun-sentinel.com/plundering-america/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1d47ebf942ed8d0a231afbc57cb2931aa707ea%2F0_0_3300_4200%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuba-US%20thaw%20brings%20fate%20of%20cold%20war-era%20fugitives%20on%20the%20island%20into%20focus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuba-US%20thaw%20brings%20fate%20of%20cold%20war-era%20fugitives%20on%20the%20island%20into%20focus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1d47ebf942ed8d0a231afbc57cb2931aa707ea%2F0_0_3300_4200%2F3300.jpg>
 The Daily News front page from 25 January 1975 following the bombing of the 
Fraunces Tavern. Photograph: NY Daily News via Getty Images 
Joe Connor remembers 24 January 1975 as a sunny, clear day, his mother 
preparing lasagne to celebrate her sons’ ninth and 11th birthdays, just a week 
apart. That afternoon, the brothers were playing at a New Jersey park when 
their mother heard about the bombing from the radio. It had destroyed a marble 
and cement stairway, blasted through a wall and blew shards of wood and brick 
out windows. She called her husband’s office at the bank nearby, and a man 
picked up.

Relieved, she didn’t wait: “Frank, thank God you’re OK.”

“This isn’t Frank. We don’t know where he is.”

Later that day, as friends started arriving at the house, the two brothers 
learned that their father’s co-workers had identified the body.

The Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN) immediately claimed credit for 
the bombing, in which four people were killed and 63 injured. They lefta 
communiqué 
<http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/puertorico/Fraunces-Tavern-communique.jpg> 
in a nearby phone booth: “We warned the North American government that to 
terrorize and kill our people would mean retaliation.”
 Joe Connor with his father Frank, who was killed in the Fraunces Tavern 
bombing in New York in 1975. Photograph: Joe Connor 
But despite the note and two sketches of suspects 
<http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/fraunces-tavern.htm>, police never charged 
anyone for the Fraunces Tavern bombing, anddozens of FALN attacks 
<http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/puertorico/FALN-incidents.pdf> continued 
in New Yorkand Chicago 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/01/09/nyregion/new-blasts-show-faln-resilience.html>
 over the next few years.

Morales, a native New Yorker who gave up film studies at City College, had 
joined the group in 1970 
<http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/puertorico/morales-entrevista.htm> because 
he felt that Puerto Ricans, alongside black people and other minorities, were 
oppressed in the US.

Puerto Ricans feared speaking Spanish in the street, he told an interviewer  
<http://www.latinamericanstudies.org/puertorico/morales-entrevista.htm>in 2004. 
“They taught us to almost hate ourselves for being Puerto Rican.” He became a 
bomb maker. In June 1978, a device he was building at a Queens safe house blew 
up in his hands.

“His fingers were blown off so badly that they stuck to the ceiling,” said 
Antonio de la Cova, a professor of Latin American studies at the University of 
South Carolina.

Arrest and escape

The apartment where police arrested Morales, without fingers and half-blind, 
also contained the closest physical link between the Fraunces Tavern bombing 
and a member of FALN, said Richard Hahn, a retired FBI agent who pursued the 
group for years around the US. A wet-ink copy machine had survived the blast, 
and imperfections on the communiqué identified the device as its source.

Morales was convicted on weapons charges, but escaped months later from 
Bellevue hospital. One of his lawyerssmuggled wire cutters into the ward 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/06/03/nyregion/court-brief-implicates-lawyer-in-escape-by-william-morales.html>
, according to a FALN source who told Hahn the story. Morales cut the window 
screen at night, tied sheets together, and somehow crawled down a story or 
two’s worth of makeshift rope – and then “slipped and fell and injured himself 
by striking a window air-conditioner”, Hahn said. Radical groups waiting below 
helped him down and ushered him away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e7fce86bd95b6daa7b26a0ef340f512cef7910%2F0_166_2130_1278%2F2130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuba-US%20thaw%20brings%20fate%20of%20cold%20war-era%20fugitives%20on%20the%20island%20into%20focus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuba-US%20thaw%20brings%20fate%20of%20cold%20war-era%20fugitives%20on%20the%20island%20into%20focus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fcuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55e7fce86bd95b6daa7b26a0ef340f512cef7910%2F0_166_2130_1278%2F2130.jpg>
 A New York City police officer calls for help as he kneels near a victim of 
the Fraunces Tavern bombing. Photograph: Associated Press 
Morales rejoined FALN in Chicago, but as his injuries made him recognizable, 
he eventually fled to Mexico, where Hahn and the FBI tracked him down. Morales 
and a bodyguardkilled a policeman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/05/28/nyregion/fugitive-puerto-rican-terrorist-arrested-in-mexico.html>
 there, but after serving five years in prison, Morales walked free and fled to 
Cuba.

Back in the US, Connor and his brother did not let go, and began an 
extradition campaign that continues today. Connor wrote letters to the Justice 
Department, testified before Congress, and made contacts with the State 
Department and Joint Terrorist Task Force. For the majority of his 20-year 
campaign, he saw shrugs: “We have no relations with Cuba.”

Other members of FALN were hunted down – most captured by the FBI in Chicago 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1981/02/12/us/10-convicted-in-chicago-faln-trial.html>, 
aleader killed in a shootout in Puerto Rico 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/id/9522205/ns/us_news/t/fbi-killing-puerto-rican-fugitive-sparks-rage/>
, and some eventuallygranted clemency by the Clinton administration 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/08/23/nyregion/clemency-opens-old-scars-for-sons-of-bombing-victim.html>
. Morales remained at large, a symbol of an era when violent leftist groups 
sowed fear and found sympathizers in the US and Latin America, and when bombs 
and hijackings were not uncommon dangers.

“Clearly, things have changed,” Connor said of the shift in relations between 
Cuba and the US, but he reserved criticisms for how Barack Obama has handled 
normalization, saying the US had “capitulated” too soon to demands.

“I’m not jumping for joy here,” he said. “I’ve worked awful hard at this for 
an awful long time. I want Morales returned and Morales is in his cage. It’s 
not like he has to come to court here; he’s already been sentenced. It’s easy.”

‘Caught in a time warp’

De la Cova briefly corresponded with Morales about a decade ago, when Morales 
contacted him from Cuba to correct a detail on the professor’s website. Morales 
spouted “typical revolutionary rhetoric”, De la Cova said, adding that the 
conversation left him in no doubt that Morales, although battered, was still 
committed to his cause – even though a few years later 61% of Puerto Ricans 
wouldvote for statehood 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/11/07/politics/election-puerto-rico/>.

“He got caught in this time warp,” De la Cova said. “The world is no longer 
the world of the 1970s, and he totally got frustrated, and now it could 
possibly catch up to him. [Cubans] are not committed to this revolutionary 
internationalist fervor of the 60s and 70s. They could be playing these people 
– Morales, Chesimard – off as pawns.”



While Cuba was once an attractive destination for criminals, revolutionaries 
and skyjackers – 34 of 62 American plane hijackers flew to Cuba in 1969 – Fidel 
Castro lost patience with the swarm as early as the 70s. He considered many of 
the fugitives “undesirable malcontents”, according to Brendan Koerner, author 
of The Skies Belong to Us.

Cuba’s secret police often interrogated new arrivals, sending them through a 
decrepit transit house and sometimes to “the gulag system” of sugar farms, 
Koerner said, where “nightmarish conditions” reigned. Morales, once protected 
by his revolutionary bona fides, may now at the age of 65 be vulnerable to 
long-simmering Cuban disillusionment and the push for extradition.

The campaign wears on longest for Connor’s mother, her son said. “She said to 
me around Christmas: ‘I just want to live long enough to see Morales returned.’ 
I told her I can’t be sure that’s going to happen, but I’m sure as hell going 
to try.”
 