
How odd still to be discovering new reserves of talent in Cue Card (3.30) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/cue-card-one-million-pound-bonus-cheltenham-gold-cup>
, a 10-year-old. Being able to breathe all the way through a race has made a 
huge difference to the popular gelding andhe can prove it again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/cue-card-one-million-pound-bonus-cheltenham-gold-cup>
 in Friday’s Gold Cup.

If he bags the week’s biggest prize, Cue Card will become “the horse who wins 
at the Festival every three years”, having caught our attention in the2010 
Bumper <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/12/cue-card-cheltenham> and 
followed up in the2013 Ryanair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/15/five-highlights-2013-cheltenham-festival>
. Back in 2012 he chased home Sprinter Sacre in the Arkle, so his credentials 
for this week are unimpeachable.

Cue Card going for a £1m bonus for win in the Cheltenham Gold Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/cue-card-one-million-pound-bonus-cheltenham-gold-cup>
Such a rosy view could not be taken of his stamina for the Gold Cup distance 
after he was twice stuffed in the King George. But, following an operation on 
his wind last summer, he produced a thundering finish in this season’s race at 
Kempton, looking as though every extra yard was terrific news to him.

The runner-up was Vautour, such an impressive winner here on Thursday and 
otherwise unbeaten in his last five races. Cue Card’s other successes this 
season have been by daylight. Reasons to oppose him are hard to find.

Don Cossack cuffed Cue Card at Aintree last April, though of course that was 
before the other horse had his transformative wind op. Cheltenham may not be so 
suitable for the Irish raider, who ran below his best in last year’s Ryanair, 
possibly under a moderate ride, and fell here in 2014. It is also a concern 
that he did not travel well through the King George, though he still fought his 
way into the argument before falling again.

Djakadam is the other big name and could yet be Willie Mullins’s first Gold 
Cup winner. But he wasn’t quite good enough last year and has fallen on his two 
other visits here, leaving him with something to prove.

1.30 Ivanovich Gorbatov looks unbackably short after his Leopardstown flop 
last month, though God knows his connections are sharp enough.Zubayr, in 
contrast, appears on a strong upward curve after winning the influential Adonis 
Hurdle at Kempton last month and could give Paul Nicholls another four-year-old 
winner at this Festival.

Horse racing tips: Friday 18 March
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/horse-racing-tips-friday-18-march>
2.10 As in many another season, Newbury’s Betfair Hurdle is proving to be a 
strong race, the third horse having since won the Imperial Cup.Starchitect ran 
a huge race to be second at Newbury on his first start for 10 months, his debut 
for David Pipe. He clearly got tired but should fare better on this sounder 
surface and was placed in the Fred Winter at the last Festival.

2.50 For those determined to follow the Mullins bandwagon, the trainer’s 
record here has been disappointing, with three beaten favourites in the last 
four years. Barters Hill could have been more convincing in his latest outing, 
soShantou Village could be the best option, having been bested only by the 
classy Yanworth.

4.10 A top-three finish cannot fairly be expected from the inexperienced 
Victoria Pendleton.Dark Lover could be overpriced at 20-1, having returned to 
action in peak form for a new yard this season. His useful jockey had a couple 
of spins round here on Thursday.

4.50 Third in a hot race at Newbury last month, Flying Angel improved again to 
land the Imperial Cup on Saturday and should get involved here under a 5lb 
penalty. The grey comes from the Nigel Twiston-Davies yard that had a double 
here on Wednesday.

5.30 Third in a handicap hurdle at the last Festival, The Saint James has 
taken time to warm to fences but travelled strongly until taking a tumble at 
Kempton last time. The result is that he gets to run from the same mark here 
and he looks very well treated.
 