
Monday’s King George VI Chase will have a maximum of seven runners, the news 
thatThistlecrack will line up  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/thistlecrack-cue-card-kempton-king-george-colin-tizzard-confirms-horse-racing>
alongside his stablemate Cue Card having perhaps scared away potential 
opposition. Vroum Vroum Mag and Valseur Lido will both stay in Ireland, having 
been withdrawn at Tuesday’s entry stage for the Boxing Day contest.

Thistlecrack and Cue Card to go head-to-head in Kempton’s King George
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/19/thistlecrack-cue-card-kempton-king-george-colin-tizzard-confirms-horse-racing>
The Irish challenge could be weakened still further, as Road To Riches’s 
participation is in the balance.

Noel Meade’s chaser is recovering from an operation to correct his “kissing 
spines” and his work this week will determine whether or not he travels for a 
race in which the bookmakers rate him a 28-1 shot.

“He’s going to work in the morning and we’ll see where we are after that,” 
Meade said. “I’d say it’s 50-50 at this stage and we’ll probably leave it until 
declaration day.”

Meade said he hoped the horse would either run in the King George or the Irish 
equivalent, the Lexus at Leopardstown two days later. “He’s been good and we’ve 
been happy with what he’s been doing at home. There’s not many in it [the King 
George], but there are no bad ones, are there?”

Freddy Tylicki leaves hospital and begins rehab seven weeks after fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/freddy-tylicki-leaves-hospital-seven-weeks-kempton-fall>
Cue Card remains favourite at 11-8 for what would be a second consecutive 
success in the midwinter championship race, withThistlecrack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> just an eighth of a point 
bigger on 6-4. The remaining five are available at 14-1 or bigger, starting 
with Josses Hill, who was supplemented into the race on Monday at a cost of 
£10,000.

Tea For Two is expected to give Lizzie Kelly a ride in the race, a year on 
from their success in the Grade One novice chase on the same card. Silviniaco 
Conti remains in the field but is 25-1, having seemingly lost some ability 
since winning the race in 2013 and 2014. Roi Des Francs, the only other 
potential runner, is rank outsider at 66-1.
 