
What a difference a run makes. That was the lesson to be drawn from the 
outcome of this Betfair Chase, in which Cue Card left behind hisreappearance 
flop of three weeks before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/cue-card-irish-cavalier-charlie-hall-shock>
 and coasted to a 15-length success over Coneygree.

The runner-up suffered his first defeat over fences and will no longer carry 
the aura of invincibility that grew around him after hewon the Gold Cup as a 
novice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/13/coneygree-wins-gold-cup-cheltenham-festival>
last year. But Coneygree had not raced for a full year, following a hock injury 
last autumn, and was returning in a top-class race on heavy going. Any horse 
can be forgiven for getting tired in those circumstances.

“What I’m hoping is that by the time we get to the last, Cue Card will be out 
on his feet,” Sara Bradstock, half of the Coneygree training team, told 
Saturday’sRacing Post. But the really startling thing about this race was that 
Cue Card never really looked tired in the way that staying chasers are entitled 
to look at the end of three miles.

Different Gravey makes impressive winning debut over fences at Ascot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/different-gravey-ascot-nicky-henderson-willie-mullins-annie-power>
The contrast with his previous run could hardly be greater. He was an odds-on 
failure in Wetherby’s Charlie Hall, slowing dramatically on the run-in as Irish 
Cavalier pulled three lengths clear. Here, Irish Cavalier had dropped out of 
sight before pulling up at the top of the straight.

“I hacked him to the start and I knew instantly things were going to be so 
much different today,” said the winning jockey, Paddy Brennan. “He keeps 
surprising me, how good he is. When he’s at the right conditions and he’s got a 
little bit of ease underfoot, it’s dangerous, what he can do.”

Colin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>, Cue Card’s 
trainer, shouldered the blame in the days after the Charlie Hall, saying he had 
been too aggressive in the tactics he had given Brennan. But the jockey 
insisted here that tactics had not been the problem, that “a combination of 
things”, including fitness, had been Cue Card’s undoing.

“He was the Cue Card I know [here] and at Wetherby I never had that. When he’s 
on that form today, you can ride him whatever way you want. He’s different 
class.”

This was a third Betfair success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-vautour-willie-mullins-ascot-cheltenham-gold-cup>
 in four years for the 10-year-old, whose longevity has brought him a 
significant following. The crowd around the winner’s enclosure gave him three 
cheers and there were even chants for his trainer of “Co-lin! Co-lin!”

“You never know with a horse, do you?” Tizzard said. “You get a nagging in 
your mind, he’s coming 11, he might be starting to wane a bit but definitely 
not.

“Three years ago, we’d have worried about this ground but the few times we’ve 
run him on it, he sort of floats on top. He’s got such a low, lovely, 
beautiful, easy action, he doesn’t go in. He didn’t have a hard race at all, 
did he?”

Timeform accuses BHA of 'siege mentality' over Jim Best case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/timeform-accuses-bha-of-siege-mentality-over-jim-best-case>
Cue Card is once more the only possible winner of the Jockey Club’s £1m bonus, 
offered to any horse that can win the Betfair, Boxing Day’s King George and the 
Cheltenham Gold Cup in the same season. Tizzard confirmed that the horse will 
be aimed at the remaining two races and must now consider the implications for 
his other star chaser, Thistlecrack, a novice who is 10-1 for the King George 
and remains the Gold Cup favourite at no bigger than 4-1.

Thistlecrack has won both his races over fences but did not entirely convince 
with his jumping at Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/thistlecrack-cheltenham-festival-colin-tizzard-taquin-de-seuil-horse-racing>
 last time and will seek more experience at Newbury next weekend. Tizzard has 
seemed interested in giving him the experience of tackling the King George but 
that may have less appeal, now that Cue Card has such a clear chance in the 
race.

Bradstock conceded that lack of match practice had found out Coneygree but 
added, combatively: “We’ll be back. He won’t beat us again.” A tilt at 
Ireland’s Lexus Chase may be considered but the King George is a more likely 
target.

“I thought he ran a fantastic race,” added Richard Johnson, who inherited the 
ride on Coneygree from the injured Nico de Boinville and may be aboard again 
next time. “He jumped great, he travelled well and did everything bar win. He 
just got a bit tired from three out but, in that class of race, on that ground, 
and every other horse in the race has had a run this season...

“You’d have to be delighted with that. Hopefully, he comes out of the race 
well and they can look towards the King George.”

Vezelay, a 50-1 shot from France, was a game third. Silviniaco Conti, a dual 
Betfair winner who has not aged so well as Cue Card, was the only other 
finisher. Seeyouatmidnight proved disappointing and was pulled up.
 