
In 1970, rock critic Lester Bangs wrote a review of the Stooges' album Fun 
House 
<http://www.creemmagazine.com/_site/BeatGoesOn/IggyPop/OfPopAndPiesPt001.html> 
in which he spent the first 6,000 words musing on the divide between artist and 
fan. The only real way of judging an artist's worth, he decided, was to fling a 
custard pie in their face and see how they responded.Alice Cooper, he noted, 
had reacted to his own on stage pieing by gleefully rubbing the custard into 
his pores, andIggy Pop would no doubt similarly thrive off the mayhem. Bangs 
predicted that most big stars (George Harrison, Richie Havens, Led Zeppelin), 
however, would simply storm off the stage in a huff.

Pies have been flung in many areas of culture. Thomas Pynchon's Gravity's 
Rainbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099533214/gravitys-rainbow>
 includes a custard pie fight between passengers on a plane and an air balloon.
Terry Johnson's play Dead Funny 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/reviews/review.php/8373/dead-funny> had people 
flinging pies during a wake for Benny Hill, juxtaposing the slapstick with the 
less comical topic of aÂ marriage breakdown.

Just as a well-flung pie could enliven a staid live performance, so pies 
injected new energy into children's TV when thephantom flan flinger ran riot on 
Tiswas <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6baUgSXXpaY>. Comedy is the natural home 
of the custard pie, of course.Laurel and Hardy's Battle of the Century 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDgnqfepRfI>, described by the Guardian's Xan 
Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/xanbrooks> as "the ur-text of 
custard pie movies", could keep Gregg's in business for years, whileBuster 
Keaton worked tirelessly on the art of the perfect pie chuck.

The comedian and budding "entarteur" Jonnie Marbles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jul/20/why-i-foam-pied-rupert-murdoch>
 may have felt he was contributing to this rich tradition when he aimed his own 
foam pie at Rupert Murdoch during this week's select committee hearing. While 
you could argue that it turned attention away from the real issues at hand, the 
fact Marbleshelped write most of the next day's headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/20/1> showed it worked as a 
situationist prank.

Worryingly, though, it almost certainly didn't achieve its true aim, for 
Murdoch hardly failed Bang's custard pie test. Rather than storming out, he 
simply removed his jacket and agreed to continue taking questions. Meanwhile 
his wife, Wendi Deng, passed with flying colours,matching the mayhem with a 
wild right hook that maybe even Iggy himself would have been proud of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/blog/video/2011/jul/19/rupert-murdoch-jamesmurdoch?intcmp=239>
.
 