
Dramatic curbs on the advertising of junk food and drink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/05/junk-food-ads-children-cancer-research-obesity-advertising>
 to children is the policy measure that will be most effective in reducing the 
growing epidemic ofchildhood obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/25/childhood-obesity-commission-world-health-organisation>
, according to a group of more than 70 health experts.

The Food Foundation <http://foodfoundation.org.uk/> group calls for a ban on 
TV advertising of unhealthy food and drink up to the 9pm watershed and on 
sponsorship deals between companies that produce them and sports events like 
the Olympics. The recommendations come after complaintsthe government’s 
recently published childhood obesity strategy did not go far enough. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/18/former-ministers-attack-massive-damp-squib-childhood-obesity-plan>

Anna Taylor, executive director of Food Foundation, a thinktank which led the 
year-long study, said: “While it is good to see concerted action by the 
government on reformulation of processed foods, we must, at the same time, take 
action to help our children eat fewer processed foods.

“Parents are fighting a losing battle if their children are being constantly 
bombarded with advertising which idealises fast food. Other countries have 
managed to control this. Why can’t we?”

Children are targeted in front of family TV programmes like The X-Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> and in their bedrooms 
and outside with friends via cyber games andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> ads on their smartphones, say 
experts.

Modern digital technology allows customised advertising, so that ads for 
snacks pop up at moments of heightened excitement for a child playing an online 
game, while McDonalds restaurants feature as important locations inPokemon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> in Japan. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>

The 73 leading health and obesity experts from 41 organisations will say in a 
report to be launched in parliament next week that greater control of 
advertising and sponsorship by companies selling unhealthy food and drinks is 
the No 1 priority if the UK is to bring down the soaring obesity rate.

At present, advertising of foods described as high in fat, salt or sugar are 
banned in programmes predominately watched by children. But the experts will 
argue for greater restrictions, including a ban on all forms of non-broadcast 
advertising of these food and drinks to children.

The latest figures from the school measurement programme shows that one in 
five children in England is obese in year 6, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/child-obesity-rising-again-nhs-report-reveals>
 the last year of primary school. One in three is either overweight or obese.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fstop-junk-food-advertising-curb-childhood-obesity-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfd7d65a49610b7a98aecf8ae42cdc063342df73%2F0_116_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Curbs%20on%20junk%20food%20ads%20No%201%20priority%20in%20fighting%20childhood%20obesity%2C%20says%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fstop-junk-food-advertising-curb-childhood-obesity-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Curbs%20on%20junk%20food%20ads%20No%201%20priority%20in%20fighting%20childhood%20obesity%2C%20says%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fstop-junk-food-advertising-curb-childhood-obesity-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfd7d65a49610b7a98aecf8ae42cdc063342df73%2F0_116_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
 Experts are blaming high levels of advertising for soaring rates of childhood 
obesity. Photograph: McCrickard/REX Shutterstock 
The experts have assessed the evidence for a large array of policies from 
around the world to develop England’s first food environment policy index, a 
measure of the effectiveness of the actions governments are taking. A similar 
index has already been published for other countries.


The next priority on the experts’ list is the nationwide implementation of the 
sugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-george-osborne-sugar-tax-growth-forecast-falls>
 by 2018. The third priority is an ongoing effort to reduce the sugar, fat and 
salt in processed food. Britain gets credit for thesugar tax, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-george-osborne-sugar-tax-growth-forecast-falls>
 which is the number two policy on the experts’ list and will be brought in 
across the UK in 2018, and also for the work to reduce the sugar, fat and salt 
content of processed foods, which is third on their list.

But controls on advertising and sponsorship are even more urgently needed, say 
the experts, who include academics such as Profs Susan Jebb and Mike Rayner 
from the University of Oxford, Simon Capewell from the University of Liverpool, 
Corinna Hawkes and Geof Rayner from City, University of London, and Harry 
Rutter from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

Dr Tim Lobstein of the World Obesity Federation, <http://www.worldobesity.org/>
 a member of the expert panel, said food companies and advertisers would put up 
strong resistance to the changes, adding: “We know they will use any means to 
weaken and undermine such measures.

“We need stronger regulation to prevent secret lobbying, private political 
funding and pro-business bias at the heart of government”.


The Obesity Health Alliance, <http://obesityhealthalliance.org.uk/> a 
coalition of more than 30 organisations, said: “The food and drink industry 
wouldn’t spend billions of pounds each year on advertising and marketing if it 
didn’t work. We know that the pester power of younger children and the spending 
power of teenagers is influenced by what they see on TV, the internet and on 
their phone.

“Failing to tackle junk food advertising is a failure to acknowledge the very 
real effect the environment has on our children’s habits and ultimately, 
obesity rates.”

Public Health England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/public-health-england>, which was 
commissioned by the government to review the evidence to inform its obesity 
strategy, found that in 2014, the food industry spent £256m promoting 
“unhealthy” products sold in retail alone. One of its key recommendations was 
to “significantly reduce opportunities to market and advertise high sugar food 
and drink products to children and adults across all media including digital 
platforms and through sponsorship”.

But the government ignored PHE’s advice. The childhood obesity strategy, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/20/will-the-governments-new-childhood-obesity-strategy-have-any-effect>
 launched after much delay this summer, omitted any mention of advertising or 
sponsorship by the fast food industry, such as occurred in the UKOlympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> with Coca Cola and McDonalds.

At a childhood obesity summit last week, Richard Dobbs, a senior partner at 
the management consultancy firm McKinsey’s, which produceda major report on the 
interventions that are likely to help reduce obesity 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/how-the-world-could-better-fight-obesity>
 in November 2014, said broadcasters had lobbied against advertising curbs on 
junk food to children being included in the government’s obesity strategy. 
“Media restrictions were going to cost ITV £500m,” he told the meeting. “It is 
not surprising ITV fought this quite hard.”

The World Health Organisation’s Europe office recently warned 
<http://www.euro.who.int/en/media-centre/sections/press-releases/2016/11/new-whoeurope-report-calls-for-urgent-action-to-protect-children-from-digital-marketing-of-food>
 of the increasing sophistication of digital advertising and called on all 
countries to take action to block the promotion of unhealthy food and drinks to 
children. Its report described the use of smartphone games and social media 
platforms to access children.

“Taken together, the creative tactics and analytics … equate to a brand 
appointing a personal marketer to each child, locating and identifying those 
who are most susceptible to their messages, encouraging them to send marketing 
messages to their friends, and following them throughout the day, at moments of 
happiness, frustration, hunger and intent, delivering advertising with the 
maximum impact, and directing them to the nearest place to buy foods to ‘fix’ 
their current emotional state.”

The Committee of Advertising Practice launched a consultation 
<https://www.cap.org.uk/News-reports/Media-Centre/2016/Launch-of-public-consultation-on-new-food-ad-rules.aspx#.WCXAghMqp-U>
 on restrictions on the non-broadcasting advertising of food and drink to 
children, including online, in May and is expected to report next month.

How others are tackling obesity

Other rich countries have taken bold measures to face up to the obesity 
challenge.


Canadian province of Quebec took a tough line on advertising to children as 
early as 1980. All ads for food products as well as toys aimed at under-13s 
were banned from all types of media, including radio, television, the web, 
mobile phones, printed materials, signage and promotional material.

Experts think it paid off. French speaking families in Quebec were 19% less 
likely to eat fast food compared with those living in Ontario and spent 46% 
less on fast food, according to a household expenditure survey in 2007. Quebec 
has the lowest rates of childhood obesity in Canada.

France opted for a “soda tax” which, despite lobbying from industry,was 
imposed on drinks with added sugar and also with artificial sweeteners in 
January 2012. The tax of around 11 cents per 1.5 litres of drink, raises around 
€400m (£344m) a year. Soft drink sales dropped by 3.3% in 2012 and 3.4% in 
2013. The French treasury is now considering whether to introduce a tax on 
fatty foods.

Sweden has taken action on school meals, with legislation in 2011 requiring 
them to be nutritious and free. The nutritional quality of the meals, calorie 
content and portion sizes are laid down for each age group. Water and milk are 
the only permitted drinks.

Schools and local authorities can evaluate the meals through a website called 
SkolmatSverige (School Food Sweden) <http://www.skolmatsverige.se/in-english>, 
where there are also questionnaires for the pupils and staff who eat the 
lunches.

Scotland is planning to introduce a good food nation bill, with a consultation 
in 2017. It promises to address procurement, waste, health, education and 
social justice. Groups are lobbying for farming and fishing to be included too.
 