
The Czech government is to set up a specialist “anti-fake news” unit as 
officials attempt to tackle falsehoods, predominantly about migrants, which 
they claim are spread by websites supported by the government of Russian 
president Vladimir Putin.

The new unit will aim to counteract interference in the Czech Republic’s 
forthcoming general election, to be held in October, amid polling evidence that 
online disinformation is influencing public opinion and threatening to 
destabilise the country’s democratic system, established after the fall of 
communism in 1989.

Although definite links are hard to prove, officials say they are convinced 
the Kremlin is behind about 40 Czech-language websites presenting radical 
views, conspiracy theories and inaccurate reports. The officials believe the 
objective is to transform the Czech Republic’s current status as a 
western-aligned country.

“The key goal of Russian propaganda in the Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> is to sow doubts into the 
minds of the people that democracy is the best system to organise a country, to 
build negative images of the European Union and Nato, and [to] discourage 
people from participation in the democratic processes,” Tomáš Prouza, the Czech 
government’s state secretary for European affairs, told the Guardian.

Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
Part of the interior ministry, the new Centre Against Terrorism and Hybrid 
Threats 
<http://www.mvcr.cz/terorismus/clanek/centre-against-terrorism-and-hybrid-threats.aspx>
 will begin operating on 1 January with 20 full-time specialists. They will be 
based in the building that was used as an interrogation centre by the former 
communist regime’s secret police during the cold war, when the former 
Czechoslovakia was a close ally of the Soviet Union.

The specialists will scrutinise disinformation and attempt to counter it, via 
a dedicated Twitter account and a new section of the interior ministry website 
devoted to communicating the government viewpoint. The centre will also train 
civil servants to avoid blackmail and resist foreign lobbying.

“Ensuring free and fair elections is a basic aim,” said a senior official in 
the unit, speaking on condition of anonymity.

“We will coordinate preparation to minimise the dangers to our elections. We 
will watch closely what happens in France [which votes for a new president in 
the spring] and Germany [where a general election is expected in September] and 
see what we can learn in the Czech Republic.”

The Czech fears echo those voiced by Germany’s domestic intelligence chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
 that Russia-linked “fake news” sites could interfere with its election. Claims 
have also been made of Russian cyber activity aimed atinfluencing last month’s 
US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/qa-russian-hackers-vladimir-putin-donald-trump-us-presidential-election>
 in favour of Donald Trump.

“They will undoubtedly try to influence the upcoming elections by discouraging 
people who would most probably vote for the democratic parties from voting,” 
said Prouza.

In autumn’s election, voters will be deciding the membership of the Czech 
Republic’s chamber of deputies and the make-up of its next government. The 
country is currently governed by a three-party coalition consisting of prime 
ministerBohuslav Sobotka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/czech-politicians-angry-after-president-suggests-removing-pm-with-a-kalashnikov>
’s Social Democrats, Christian Democrats and ANO, a populist party led by a 
wealthy businessman, Andrej Babis. ANO is widely considered the favourite to 
emerge as the biggest party, with Babis, a Euro-sceptic, tipped to become prime 
minister.

The new “anti-fake news” centre has drawn accusations that it will result in 
censorship, spying and a crackdown on free speech – a charge rebutted by its 
supervisors.

“The disinformation campaigns are trying to radicalise society and undermine 
its psyche. And to a certain degree it’s working. You can see it,” said the 
anonymous official. “The parties and forces being supported in these campaigns 
aren’t constructive or democratic. They are critical of the democratic system 
and the elite. Often they don’t say what they mean, but for the first time 
democracy itself is being blamed.”

Online agitation in the Czech Republic has been particularly influential 
during the refugee crisis, coinciding with a spate of anti-Islam rallies 
typically attended by protesters carrying placards denouncing the EU, Nato and 
Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor. It has fuelled public fears of terrorism 
and of an influx of people from the Middle East, even though the Czech Republic 
has only a tiny Muslim population and has been largely unaffected by the 
refugee crisis.




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fczech-republic-to-fight-fake-news-with-specialist-unit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7eeba1a34423cd887899c2ebda2c4aac03421e5%2F0_242_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Czech%20Republic%20to%20fight%20'fake%20news'%20with%20specialist%20unit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fczech-republic-to-fight-fake-news-with-specialist-unit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Czech%20Republic%20to%20fight%20%27fake%20news%27%20with%20specialist%20unit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fczech-republic-to-fight-fake-news-with-specialist-unit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7eeba1a34423cd887899c2ebda2c4aac03421e5%2F0_242_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Miloš Zeman, president of the Czech Republic. Photograph: Petr David Josek/AP 
When a crowd wielding red cards booed the president, Milos Zeman for being too 
close to Moscow at a Prague ceremony in November 2014, marking the 25th 
anniversary of Czechoslovakia’s anti-communist Velvet Revolution, the websiteAE 
News <http://aeronet.cz/news/> claimed – citing flimsy evidence – that Zeman 
had been the victim of a Ukraine-style “Maidan” revolt hatched by the US 
embassy.

Efforts to uncover the origins of sites such as AE News have failed. “It is so 
well secured that Czech journalists have not been able to find out who is 
behind it,” said Jakub Janda, deputy director of the Prague-based European 
Values thinktank, which runs a programme called Kremlin Watch.

But intelligence officials and seasoned politicians have little doubt. They 
blame elements among the Czech Republic’s estimated 45,000-strong Russian 
community and Russia’s sprawling Prague embassy – a legacy of the cold war.

Miloš Zeman: the hardline Czech leader fanning hostility to refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/milos-zeman-czech-leader-refugees>
Moscow provides the “most active foreign intelligence services” on Czech soil, 
according to the Czech Republic’s domestic security agency, BIS, whose most 
recent annual report describes Russian espionage activities as geared towards 
“fabricating disinformation” and promoting the motto that “everybody is lying”.

The agency has complained about the number of Russian diplomats in the Czech 
Republic – estimated at between 130 and 150, double the number of Americans 
present – and says many are operating as undercover spies.

Ivan Gabal, an independent MP and deputy chairman of the parliamentary defence 
committee, advocates expelling Russian citizens convicted of peddling fake news 
and ejecting Moscow’s diplomats suspected of spying.


“This country strived for 20 years after communism to create an open, 
democratic society that’s part of the west, and now we have achieved a 
recognised place in the free world, we’re not going to give it up for some KGB 
guy,” he said, referring to Putin’s past career in the Soviet intelligence 
services.

“He is looking to break Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
up into elementary member states that compete with each other for Russian 
resources and influence. The risk is great. They feel we still belong to their 
sphere of influence. We are a bigger threat to them than Britain, because we’ve 
only been democratic for 25 years and we’re proof that it’s possible to 
transition from totalitarianism to an open society.”
 