
Actor Dame Judi Dench <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/judi-dench>, who 
played the role of Mr Rochester’s housekeeper, Mrs Fairfax, in the 2011 film 
adaptation of Jane Eyre, has been appointed the honorary president of the 
Brontë Society.

Dench was appointed to the role as the organisation prepares to celebrate the 
200th birthday ofCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> on 21 April. The actor said 
she was “delighted” to have been offered the position, and that she would be 
“helping the organisation celebrate this significant and iconic literary 
family”.

Jane Eyre – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/11/jane-eyre-philip-french-review> 
“The Brontës are respected and adored the world over and it will be an honour 
to work with the society to promote their legacy during this important 
bicentenary period,” said Dench, who was born in Yorkshire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjudi-dench-honorary-president-bronte-society-charlotte-bronte-birthday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F310da2914948247f051e50e4a364e72b164ba178%2F0_101_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dame%20Judi%20Dench%20appointed%20honorary%20president%20of%20Bront%C3%AB%20Society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjudi-dench-honorary-president-bronte-society-charlotte-bronte-birthday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dame%20Judi%20Dench%20appointed%20honorary%20president%20of%20Bront%C3%AB%20Society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Fjudi-dench-honorary-president-bronte-society-charlotte-bronte-birthday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F310da2914948247f051e50e4a364e72b164ba178%2F0_101_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Judi Dench as Mrs Fairfax and Mia Wasikowska as Jane Eyre in Cary Fukunaga’s 
2011 film adaptation of Jane Eyre. Photograph: BBC FILMS/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar
The anniversary on 21 April will be marked with the laying of a floral tribute 
at the Brontë Parsonage Museum in Haworth, where Charlotte Brontë spent much of 
her life, along with talks at the Yorkshire museum, a birthday party for the 
local community, and performances of scenes from Jane Eyre by local primary 
school pupils.

Along with exhibitions at London’s National Portrait Gallery and the Sir John 
Soane’s Museum to mark Charlotte Brontë’s contribution to literature, and the 
publication of a short story collection, Reader, I Married Him, edited by Tracy 
Chevalier and inspired by Jane Eyre, the Brontë Society will also hold a 
service in honour of the author on 22 April at Poets’ Corner in Westminster 
Abbey.

Dench’s appointment follows the resignation of former president Bonnie Greer 
from the role last June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/09/bonnie-greer-resigns-bronte-society-yorkshire>
, following disagreements over how the society was being run.

Chair John Thirlwell said he was “thrilled” that Dench was taking up the role. 
“The Brontë Society is embarking on an exciting new chapter in its history and 
I can think of no better person to accompany us on that journey,” he said.
 