
Original Ghostbuster Dan Aykroyd has claimed the controversial new 
Ghostbusters movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/ghostbusters-trailer-slimer-chris-hemsworth-melissa-mccarthy-kirsten-wiig>
 is funnier and scarier than the 1984 film after viewing test footage.

Is Ghostbusters the unfortunate victim of Hollywood hitting peak reboot?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/10/ghostbusters-reboot-hollywood-paul-feig-bill-murray>
Aykroyd played Raymond Stantz in the first Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters> and its 1989 sequel. He also 
came up with the original idea for the spooky saga, and co-wrote the screenplay 
for both earlier movies.

“As originator of the original: Saw test screening of new movie,” the Canadian 
actor wrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/DanAykroyd/posts/1064544476945042>. “Apart from 
brilliant, genuine performances from the cast both female and male, it has more 
laughs and more scares than the first 2 films plus Bill Murray is in it! As one 
of millions of man-fans and Ray Stantz, I’m paying to see that and bringing all 
my friends!”


Aykroyd has been a key supporter of the reboot, which sees Melissa McCarthy, 
Kristen Wiig, Leslie Jones and Kate McKinnon as the new quartet of ghost 
hunters. He is due to take a cameo in the new film alongside surviving fellow 
Ghostbusters Murray (the original film’s Peter Venkman) and Ernie Hudson 
(Winston Zeddemore).

Director Paul Feig has dismissed controversy over the casting of four women in 
the lead roles as “vile, misogynistic shit”, but an early trailer for the 
reboot became themost disliked in YouTube history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/02/ghostbusters-trailer-most-disliked-in-youtube-history>
 last month.

Marketing executives have been called out for apparently spiriting away the 
new female quartet from packaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/ghostbusters-female-leads-spirited-out-of-merchandise-tie-ins>
 for some merchandise tie-ins. Andthere was a separate row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/07/ghostbusters-leslie-jones-defends-remake-racial-stereotyping-criticism>
 over the casting of the African American comic Jones as a supposedly 
stereotypical “street-smart New Yorker” in March.


Ghostbusters opens in the US and UK on 15 July. 
 