
In 2010 I was first approached by the BBC and by Participant Media to adapt 
Deborah Lipstadt’s bookHistory on Trial 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/history-on-trial.html> for the screen. My 
first reaction was one of extreme reluctance. I have no taste for Holocaust 
movies. It seems both offensive and clumsy to add an extra layer of fiction to 
suffering which demands no gratuitous intervention. It jars. Faced with the 
immensity of what happened, sober reportage and direct testimony have nearly 
always been the most powerful approach. In the Yad Vashem Museum in Jerusalem, 
I had noticed that all the photography, however marginal and inevitably however 
incomplete, had a shock and impact lacking in the rather contrived and 
uninteresting art.

Certain things are true. Elvis is dead. The icecaps are melting. And the 
Holocaust did happen

It was a considerable relief on reading the book to find that although the 
Holocaust was its governing subject, there was no need for it to be visually 
recreated. In 2000 the British historian David Irving, whose writing had 
frequently offered a sympathetic account of the second world war from the Nazi 
point of view, had sued Lipstadt in the high court in London, claiming that her 
description of him as a denier in her previous bookDenying the Holocaust had 
done damage to his reputation. In English courts at the time, the burden of 
proof in any libel case lay not with the accuser but with the defendant. In the 
United States it was the litigant’s job to prove the untruth of the alleged 
libel. But in the United Kingdom it was up to the defendant to prove its truth. 
It was in that context that London was Irving’s chosen venue. He no doubt 
thought it would make his legal action easier. All at once, an Atlanta academic 
was to find herself with the unenviable task of marshalling conclusive 
scientific proof for the attempted extermination of the European Jews over 50 
years earlier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff21c9fc023cf96f0b3cc6ab7c4c016ac2b95dcd9%2F0_143_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%20on%20writing%20nothing%20but%20the%20truth%20about%20a%20Holocaust%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%20on%20writing%20nothing%20but%20the%20truth%20about%20a%20Holocaust%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff21c9fc023cf96f0b3cc6ab7c4c016ac2b95dcd9%2F0_143_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Deborah Lipstadt outside the high court, London, in 2000. Photograph: Sean 
Smith for the Guardian 
There were many interesting features to the case – not least the condescension 
of some dubious parts of the British academic community to an upstart American 
– but three aspects appealed to me above all. First, there was a technical 
script-writing challenge. In conventional American pictures, the role of the 
individual is wholeheartedly celebrated. In a typical studio film, even one as 
good asErin Brockovich <https://www.theguardian.com/film/erin-brockovich>, 
there is always an obvious injustice which is corrected by an inarticulate 
person suddenly being given the chance to find their voice. The tradition goes 
back toJimmy Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesstewart> and Henry 
Fonda and beyond. But what was unusual about Lipstadt’s experience was that she 
was an already articulate and powerfully intelligent woman who was ordered by 
her own defence team not to give evidence. The decision was made that her 
testimony would give Irving, conducting his own case, the opportunity to switch 
the focus of the trial from what it should properly be about – the examination 
of how his antisemitism infected his honesty – to an attack on something 
entirely irrelevant: the reliability in the witness box of Lipstadt’s instant 
capacity to command every scattergun detail of history.

It was quite a professional undertaking to make drama out of such a complete 
and painful act of self-denial. One thing for sure: we would not be offering a 
boilerplate Hollywood narrative. At great expense to her own peace of mind, 
Lipstadt had agreed to be silenced. The fascination of the film would lie with 
the personal cost of that choice. What were the implications for someone who, 
having been brought up to believe in the unique power of the individual, 
discovered instead the far subtler joys of teamwork? The book she had written 
turned out to be her complete defence, and the verdict vindicated that book in 
almost every detail. But in order to effect that defence she had to trust the 
judgment of two other people from a country and a bizarre legal system 
different from her own – her Scottish barrister Richard Rampton and her English 
solicitor Anthony Julius. Rampton arrived fresh from defending McDonald’s in 
the McLibel case, the longest trial in English legal history. Julius had 
handled Princess Diana’s divorce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4229c019672358e4753d6505d03e8d428cf6c53d%2F394_83_1321_793%2F1321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%20on%20writing%20nothing%20but%20the%20truth%20about%20a%20Holocaust%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%20on%20writing%20nothing%20but%20the%20truth%20about%20a%20Holocaust%20denier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fdavid-hare-nothing-but-the-truth-about-a-holocaust-denial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4229c019672358e4753d6505d03e8d428cf6c53d%2F394_83_1321_793%2F1321.jpg>
 David Irving. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
Second, it was clear from the start that this film would be a defence of 
historical truth. It would be arguing that although historians have the right 
to interpret facts differently, they do not have the right knowingly to 
misrepresent those facts. But if such integrity was necessary for historians, 
then it surely had to apply to screenwriters too. If I planned to offer an 
account of the trial and of Irving’s behaviour, I would enjoy none of the film 
writer’s usual licence to speculate or invent. From the trial itself there were 
32 days of transcript, which took me weeks to read thoroughly. Not only would I 
refuse to write scenes which offered any hokey psychological explanation for 
Irving’s character outside the court, I would also be bound to stick rigidly to 
the exact words used inside it. I could not allow any neo-fascist critic later 
to claim that I had re-written the testimony. Nor did I want to. The trial 
scenes are verbatim. To say that such fidelity represented an almost impossible 
dramatic difficulty – this trial, like any other, was often extremely boring – 
would be to understate. At times, I would beat my head, wondering why real-life 
characters couldn’t put things in ways which more pithily expressed their 
purposes.

From Trump to Brexit rhetoric: how today's politicians have got away with words
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/27/from-trump-to-brexit-rhetoric-how-todays-politicians-have-got-away-with-words>
But it was for a third overriding reason that I came to feel that a film of 
Lipstadt’s fascinating book cried out to be made. In an internet age it is, at 
first glance, democratic to say that everyone is entitled to their own opinion. 
That is surely true. It is however a fatal step to then claim that all opinions 
are equal. Some opinions are backed by fact. Others are not. And those that are 
not backed by fact are worth considerably less than those that are. A few 
clubby English historians had always indulged Irving on the grounds that 
although he was evidently soft on Hitler, he was nevertheless a master of his 
documents. These admirers were ready to step forward and attack Lipstadt’s 
character and her success in the courts on the grounds that it was likely to 
make others historians more cautious, and thereby to inhibit freedom of speech. 
But far from being an attack on freedom of speech, Lipstadt’s defence turned 
out to be its powerful triumph. Freedom of speech may include freedom 
deliberately to lie. But it also includes the right to be called out on your 
lying.

During the early days of the Renaissance, Copernicus and Galileo would have 
scoffed at the idea that there was any such thing as authority. A sceptical 
approach to life is a fine thing and one which has powered revolutionary change 
and high ideals. But a sceptical approach to scientific fact is rather less 
admirable. It is dangerous. As Lipstadt says in my screenplay, certain things 
are true. Elvis is dead. The icecaps are melting. And the Holocaust did happen. 
Millions of Jews went to their deaths in camps and open pits in a brutal 
genocide which was sanctioned and operated by the leaders of the Third Reich. 
There are some subjects about which two points of view are not equally valid. 
We are entering, in politics especially, a post-factual era in which it is 
apparently permissible for public figures to assert things without evidence, 
and then to justify their assertions by adding “Well, that’s my opinion” – as 
though that in itself was some kind of justification. It isn’t. And such 
charlatans need to learn it isn’t. Contemplating the Lipstadt/Irving trial may 
help them to that end.

 * Denial premieres at the Toronto film festival on 11 September. It will be 
released in the US on 30 September, and in the UK in early 2017.
 