
Jokes about the Queen’s sex life on David Baddiel’s Radio 4 show and Fox News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> host Sean Hannity’s coverage of 
the US election have been found in breach of UK broadcasting rules.

The episode of Baddiel’s Don’t Make Me Laugh, which aired at 6.30pm on the 
Queen’s 90th birthday, included the subject “the Queen must have had sex at 
least four times”. Panelists included Russell Kane, Sara Pascoe, Omid Djalili, 
and Adam Hess, with Baddiel introducing the second round.

The regulator said some of the jokes about the Queen and Prince Philip were 
not justified by the context, and were even more likely to cause offence 
because listeners would have thought they were being deliberately broadcast on 
the Queen’s birthday. The programme was cleared byBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executives before the broadcast date 
was known.

The BBC Trust previously ruled that the segment breached its editorial 
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/30/jokes-about-queens-sex-life-in-bbc-show-ruled-out-of-order>
 and the show hassince been cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/05/bbc-david-baddiel-queen-sex-life-radio-4-dont-make-me-laugh>
.

Ofcom said: “We considered that comments about the Queen and the Duke of 
Edinburgh were made in a mocking way, which would have been perceived by many 
listeners as humiliating and intrusive.Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> took into account that the Queen and 
the Duke of Edinburgh were public figures with wide exposure in the media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdavid-baddiel-bbc-show-breached-code-jokes-queen-sex-life-sean-hannity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cac5f147c4358c025a996bf20d049c83aaf7b6%2F410_0_2150_1717%2F2150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Baddiel%20show%20breached%20rules%20with%20jokes%20on%20Queen's%20sex%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdavid-baddiel-bbc-show-breached-code-jokes-queen-sex-life-sean-hannity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Baddiel%20show%20breached%20rules%20with%20jokes%20on%20Queen%27s%20sex%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fdavid-baddiel-bbc-show-breached-code-jokes-queen-sex-life-sean-hannity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cac5f147c4358c025a996bf20d049c83aaf7b6%2F410_0_2150_1717%2F2150.jpg>
 Fox News presenter Sean Hannity speaks at a Republican campaign rally. 
Photograph: AP 
“Nonetheless, we considered that the mocking and demeaning tone of these 
comments made them capable of causing offence. The potential for offence was 
increased by the fact that these remarks were broadcast on the Queen’s 90th 
birthday.”

Ofcom also censured Fox’s Hannity show over its coverage of the US election in 
three broadcasts in early August, saying it “presented an overwhelmingly 
one-sided view” in favour of Donald Trump’s bid for the White House.

The episodes of Hannity included segments on topics such as the investigation 
into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server – which have not resulted 
in any charges – and an interview with Trump.

The regulator said the programme did not follow due impartiality rules 
requiring it to reflect arguments in favour of Clinton’s bid, despite viewers 
expecting the show to present a more favourable view of a Republican 
presidential candidate.

Hannity has been criticised for his pro-Trump coverage and providing the then 
presidential candidate with free publicity. His Fox colleague, Megyn Kelly, has
implied that Hannity’s show was a safe space for Trump to appear 
<http://www.adweek.com/tvnewser/megyn-kelly-calls-out-sean-hannity-for-trump-support-hannity-fires-back/306867>
.

It is the first time Ofcom has found Hannity in breach of its rules, but Fox 
News has been censured five times over the past five years. Previous breaches 
include airingpro-Brexit views on the day of the UK’s referendum on EU 
membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/22/fox-news-brexit-eu-referendum-bbc-ofcom>
 and claims thatBirmingham was a “no-go zone” for non-Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/21/ofcom-criticises-fox-news-for-calling-birmingham-no-go-zone-for-non-muslims>
.
 