
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has said he 
must take the blame for the way Downing Street handled revelations about his 
interest in his late father’s offshore investment fund, and suggested he will 
imminently publish details of his personal tax affairs.

Addressing the Conservative party spring forum, the prime minister admitted it 
had “not been a great week”, to laughter from the gathered supporters.

Cameron said he would publish details of his tax return “later on” as he 
attempted to assuage calls for further transparency about his financial 
dealings.

“I know I should have handled this better,” he said. “I could have handled 
this better. I know there are lessons to learn and I will learn them. And don’t 
blame No 10 Downing Street, or nameless advisers, blame me. And I will learn 
the lessons.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fhow-david-cameron-dodged-the-panama-papers-questions-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20David%20Cameron%20dodged%20the%20Panama%20Papers%20questions%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fhow-david-cameron-dodged-the-panama-papers-questions-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20David%20Cameron%20dodged%20the%20Panama%20Papers%20questions%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fhow-david-cameron-dodged-the-panama-papers-questions-video-explainer&media=>
How Cameron dodged the Panama Papers questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/08/how-david-cameron-dodged-the-panama-papers-questions-video-explainer>
As Cameron addressed his party’s supporters, thousands of protesters gathered 
outside the gates of Downing Street calling for him to resign.

The crowd then marched to the forum at the Grand Connaught Rooms, in Covent 
Garden, wielding placards and chanting for him to step down.

 Cameron told the forum he was “very angry about what people were saying about 
my dad”.

“I love my dad. I miss him every day,” he said. “He was a wonderful father and 
I’m very proud of everything he did.

“But I mustn’t let that cloud the picture. And the facts are these. The facts 
are I bought shares in a unit trust, shares that are like any other sorts of 
shares, and paid tax on them in exactly the same way. I sold those shares, in 
fact I sold all the shares that I owned on becoming prime minister.

“And later on I’ll be publishing the information that goes into my tax return, 
not just for this year but for years gone past because I want to be completely 
transparent and open about these things. I’ll be the first prime minister, the 
first leader of a major political party, to do that, but I think it’s the right 
thing to do.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fprotesters-call-for-david-cameron-to-resign-over-panama-papers-revelations-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protesters%20call%20for%20David%20Cameron%20to%20resign%20over%20Panama%20Papers%20revelations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fprotesters-call-for-david-cameron-to-resign-over-panama-papers-revelations-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protesters%20call%20for%20David%20Cameron%20to%20resign%20over%20Panama%20Papers%20revelations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fprotesters-call-for-david-cameron-to-resign-over-panama-papers-revelations-video&media=>
Protesters call for David Cameron to resign over Panama Papers revelations – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/09/protesters-call-for-david-cameron-to-resign-over-panama-papers-revelations-video>
After a torrid week, which ended with calls from MPs for his resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/david-cameron-panama-papers-offshore-fund-resignation-calls>
, Cameron aimed to move the focus to his party’s record as he launched the 
Conservative campaign for next month’s local elections.

In his speech at the forum, Cameron said: “One year into our second term and 
no one can deny: we are doing big things.”

The prime minister was accused of misleading the public after he issued 
several statements before finally admitting he had benefited from hislate 
father’s offshore investment fund Blairmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/04/panama-papers-david-cameron-father-tax-bahamas>
. The details of the fund were contained indocuments leaked from the Panamanian 
law firm Mossack Fonseca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
.


The revelation came amid infighting over the forthcoming EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/06/cameron-to-push-case-remain-eu-with-9m-taxpayer-funded-publicity-blitz>
 and just weeks after the work and pensions secretary,Iain Duncan Smith, 
resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
 over proposed welfare cuts. The government is also facing the potential 
collapse of the British steel industry afterTata Steel announced it planned to 
pull out of all its UK operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/tata-set-to-announce-sale-of-uk-steel-business-port-talbot>
, putting 15,000 jobs at risk.

YouGov research released on Friday revealed Cameron’s approval rating was at 
its lowest level since July 2013 and was below that of Jeremy Corbyn for the 
first time. Of those surveyed, 34% said Cameron was doing well as prime 
minister, while 58% said he was doing badly, giving him an overall rating of 
-24. By comparison, the Labour leader’s rating was -22, after 30% said he was 
doing well and 52% that he was doing badly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe303fd1bab2302f0ee61fd52de515205bc2db065%2F0_167_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe303fd1bab2302f0ee61fd52de515205bc2db065%2F0_167_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Demonstrators in London demand: ‘David Cameron: close tax loopholes or 
resign!’ Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
The fallout from Panama Papers revelations so far, country by country
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/fallout-from-panama-papers-revelations-so-far-country-by-country>
Corbyn said on Saturday he would publish his own tax return “very, very soon” 
and insisted there were “no surprises there” as he demanded action to crack 
down on tax havens.

The Labour leader said Cameron had painted a confusing picture over his tax 
affairs and suggested the prime minister should reveal details about the 
Blairmore Holdings trust as well as his own finances.

“He has made a series of statements over the week which are somewhat 
confusing,” Corbyn told Sky News. “We have finally reached a position where he 
is going to publish his tax return, apparently, and also tell us how much money 
was made from this offshore trust, what tax he paid and what tax was paid by 
the trust.”

Corbyn has called on Cameron to address MPs on his private financial dealings 
when they return to parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/08/mps-demand-david-cameron-statement-about-his-tax-affairs>
 next week.


“It is now clear that the prime minister has misled the public about his 
personal involvement in offshore tax avoidance schemes,” he said on Friday. “It 
took five weasel-worded statements in five days for the prime minister to admit 
that he has personally profited from an undeclared Caribbean tax haven 
investment deal.

“After years of calling for tax transparency and attacking complex offshore 
tax arrangements as ‘morally wrong’, the prime minister has been shown to have 
personally benefited from exactly such a secretive offshore investment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d385b4c807b108c56404a7d53e871c0d5f010cc%2F0_192_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d385b4c807b108c56404a7d53e871c0d5f010cc%2F0_192_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Police form a cordon around the Grand Connaught Rooms as protesters gather. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
On the campaign trail in Edinburgh, ahead of the Scottish elections, Corbyn 
reportedly made further remarks about Cameron’s finances.

“I think we also need to look at parliamentary rules on this so it’s 
absolutely clear there has to be a declaration of income from overseas sources 
as well. At the moment, it is slightly blurred,” reported Buzzfeed.

He called on all politicians to publish their tax returns, saying: “You should 
put into the public domain what your levels of income are, where it’s come from 
and the tax that’s paid on them. That’s the correct way of doing it.”

As part of attempts to reconcile the Conservative party, Chris Grayling, the 
leader of the House of Commons, who wants Britain to leave the EU, spoke out in 
support of the prime minister, who is leading the campaign for Britain to 
remain.

“When it’s a matter that relates to your late father, first of all you don’t 
know all the information yourself about what your father’s affairs were and 
secondly you’re very protective of your father,” Grayling told BBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme.


“When the story that’s coming out of Panama is all about how some pretty 
unpleasant international dictators are hiding money inPanama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama>, then it’s a very difficult question 
for a family when frankly nobody’s done anything wrong.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7349ff938dbbf6d3582669766e003293edd926b%2F0_57_4066_2439%2F4066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%3A%20blame%20me%20for%20mishandling%20Panama%20Papers%20news&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fdavid-cameron-to-launch-local-election-campaign-as-panama-papers-row-rumbles-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7349ff938dbbf6d3582669766e003293edd926b%2F0_57_4066_2439%2F4066.jpg>
 Demonstrators hold placards during a protest in Whitehall Photograph: Neil 
Hall/Reuters 
Downing Street’s series of statements denying that the prime minister, his 
wife or children held any shares or would benefit in the future from offshore 
funds or trusts were capped off when Cameron made a fifth statement –in an 
interview with ITV News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/ng-interactive/2016/apr/08/david-cameron-itv-robert-peston-interview-analysis-panama-papers>
 – in which he admitted he had sold his shares in 2010 for £31,000, making a 
profit of £19,000.

It remains unclear whether Cameron’s direct relatives, including his mother, 
Mary, held money in offshore trusts, and whether his £300,000 inheritance 
included money accrued from tax haven investments.


There has been no further clarification from No 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/07/panama-papers-ten-questions-prime-minister-david-cameron-has-to-answer>
 about what investments the prime minister and his family may have held in 
Jersey, following further reports.

Meanwhile, the governments of two tax havens have repeatedly ignored British 
ministers’ requests to discuss cracking down on tax avoidance of the kind 
detailed in thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, according to the 
Independent.

Official letters obtained under freedom of information laws show ministers 
were “disappointed” at being stood up after numerous attempts to meet the 
leaders of the British Virgin Islands and Cayman Islands.
 