
Beware the deadly lure of referendums. In the United Kingdom referendums are 
proposed for the wrong reasons – and even after they have been offered are 
rarely held. Leaders make the offer not because they have discovered a sudden 
passion for new forms of direct democracy. Their motive is the precise 
opposite. They fear losing control and hope that the prospect of a vote at some 
seemingly safe distant point will make life easier for them in the meantime.

Instead they become even more trapped. Leaders are drawn towards referendums 
only to be torn apart the closer they get to a full embrace. They have a 
mountain of evidence to warn them of what will happen, but still they make 
their fatal moves.

David Cameron is the latest to be caught out. In January he offered his "in or 
out" referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/22/eu-referendum-2017-david-cameron>
 – not because he wanted to do so, but because he hoped that his party would 
unite around the policy and that Ukip would be undermined. Predictably, the 
opposite has happened:Ukip soars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/03/david-cameron-tories-supporters-ukip>
 while his party becomes even more worked up. In theory there are four more 
years of this destabilising stirring before the referendum is actually held – 
if indeed it ever is.

Because the zany pattern of national referendums is that they can be proposed, 
but are rarely staged. Before the 1997 election both the Conservative and 
Labour leaderships offered one on thesingle currency 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/labour-referendum-move-turns-single-currency-heat-on-tories-1352954.html>
. The Conservative party calmed down for around half a second when John Major 
announced his reluctant support for one. Soon his MPs were demanding another on 
the next EU treaty. In an eerie echo, Tory MPs have upped their demands on 
Cameron since January, while others are calling for areferendum on gay marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/12/gay-marriage-tory-mps-referendum>
.

After 1997 the referendum on the single currency was never held. Nor was the 
one on electoral reform, another plebiscite that waspromised in Labour's 1997 
manifesto <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/8280842.stm>, and was once 
again the source of endless angst.

On the rare occasions when a national referendum is held it solves nothing. 
The legislation that gave thego-ahead for the referendum on our membership of 
the Common Market in 1975 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/june/6/newsid_2499000/2499297.stm>
 was supposed to be "legally binding" on future parliaments. The then prime 
minister, Harold Wilson, held it for a single reason – to keep his party 
united. It proved to be neither binding nor unifying. Soon after 1975 his party 
fell apart, largely over Europe. By the 1983 election, a mere eight years after 
the binding referendum,Labour was pledged to pull out of Europe 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/8550425.stm>. The SDP was formed partly 
because of Europe.

If she were alive today, Margaret Thatcher – who had campaigned energetically 
for a yes vote in 1975 – would probably emulate Ukip,Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/12/michaelgove-conservatives> 
and othersin wanting to leave the EU 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/10045061/Margaret-Thatcher-wanted-Britain-to-leave-the-EU.html>
, although Gove hides behind the protective shield of Cameron's 
"renegotiation". AsNigel Lawson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/may/07/nigel-lawson-uk-eu-politics-live>
 and others have noted, this is likely to prove a tiny shield. In the meantime, 
Cameron faces the nightmare of being asked whether he would vote to leave the 
EU if there were a referendum now. He will not answer on the basis that there 
is no referendum now. But he will look evasive because he is being evasive.

Let us assume for a moment that a referendum is held in 2017. Once more it 
will solve nothing, whatever the outcome. In terms of party management, the 
Conservatives will have split at least three ways by then, and will not come 
together very easily in the aftermath. If the result of the vote is to stay in, 
the campaign to pull out will revive within a few minutes. If the outcome is to 
pull out, there will be political conflagration, after which calls to go back 
in, or to hold a second referendum in favour of continuing membership once the 
terms have been re-renegotiated, would start to be heard.

The same pattern applies to the Scottish referendum, a potentially explosive 
event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/21/scottish-independence-referendum-date>
 taking place in the autumn of 2014 a few months before the general election. 
Admittedly the context for this poll is different. The SNP rules in Scotland, 
and has in theory wanted this referendum for a very long time. Alex Salmond, 
the SNP leader, will be less keen if the opinion polls continue to show 
majority support for the union. But if he loses, he will argue that the next 
stage should be "devo max 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jan/12/david-cameron-scottish-referendum>
", bigger powers for the Edinburgh parliament. Senior members of the SNP tell 
me that their campaign for independence will pause briefly and then return. If 
the opinion polls prove to be wrong and Scotland does vote for independence, 
there will be demands for a referendum in other parts of the UK on the issue of 
separation. There will be chaos, crisis, and no resolution.

As for the referendum on electoral reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/06/reasons-av-referendum-lost>
 held in this parliament, it resolves nothing. If there is a Lib-Lab 
partnership after the next election, expect electoral reform to be back on the 
agenda.

I am not suggesting that if Cameron had stood firm and refused to offer an 
in/out referendum, he would have discovered a primrose path to the next general 
election. But the route would have been less hellish than it is now proving to 
be.

His offer is dependent on a Conservative majority that seems even less likely 
since the referendum was dangled in front of his troops. Like most other 
national referendums it may never be held, although Labour will be under huge 
pressure to offer one too, dooming its leadership to a nerve-wracking nightmare 
if it wins the next election.Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> could well be the next leader 
to offer a referendum even though he does not believe it would be in anyone's 
interest and might destroy his leadership.

In theory referendums are a noble form of empowerment. But not the way they 
arise here: offered, postponed and withdrawn with leaders, in a state of 
neurotic panic, misguidedly hoping the deceptive device will give them peace 
and stability. Referendums have nothing to do with calmly devolving power to 
the voters.
 