
David Nobbs, who has died aged 80, became established in the 1960s as a gag 
writer for popular performers of the day such asDavid Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/01/sir-david-frost> and 
Frankie Howerd. This funded his greater ambitions as a novelist, and in 1975 he 
struck gold with The Death of Reginald Perrin, in which office politics and 
meeting-filled drudgery at Sunshine Desserts make Reggie Perrin so fear that 
“his past was his future’s jailer” that he fakes suicide and assumes a fresh 
identity. A much-loved television adaptation, The Fall and Rise of Reginald 
Perrin, starring Leonard Rossiter as Perrin andPauline Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/pauline-yates> as his 
long-suffering wife, Elizabeth, ran between 1976 and 1979, and Nobbs embarked 
on a series of sometimes interconnected novels and scripts chronicling changes 
to British life across the decades.

David Nobbs, Reginald Perrin creator, dies at 80
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/09/david-nobbs-reginald-perrin-creator-dies>
His own identity as a comedy writer came from living on the edge of things. He 
was born in Petts Wood, near Orpington, Kent, only child of Gordon, a teacher 
at the City of London school, and his wife, Gwen, a former teacher. His 
father’s school was evacuated during the second world war to Marlborough 
college. Nobbs became steeped in cricket, the adventure stories ofWE Johns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/18/longed-to-fly-with-biggles>
 andArthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2009/aug/13/biography-russia>, and 
Dick Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jul/16/dick-barton-very-special-agent>
, and began writing. He recalled: “By the time I was 10 or 11 my sense of 
humour seemed suddenly to have come to life … we were a very close-knit family 
as we listened to a whole succession of radio shows. We never mentioned love 
and affection. Our shared laughter round the snug coal fire spoke of these 
things for us.”

After four years at Bickley Hall preparatory school, at some financial 
sacrifice by his parents Nobbs was sent to Marlborough, where he relished 
Aristophanes (in the original), Waugh, Wodehouse, andPeter Ustinov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/mar/30/broadcasting.artsobituaries> and 
Peter Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/apr/11/guardianobituaries1>
’s radio comedy sketches in In All Directions. Aged 14 he was raped by an older 
boy, which he said left him “distressed rather than traumatised”. He speculated 
that it was a cause of sexual confusion for him in later life.

After his national service, he went to St John’s, Cambridge, to read classics, 
although he soon changed to English. He wrote for Varsity and Granta magazines, 
and his sketches were accepted for Footlights. On graduation in 1958, he joined 
the Sheffield Star as an apprentice journalist, and metPeter Tinniswood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/11/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, with whom he would later form a writing partnership. However, he realised 
newspapers were not his future after missing a scoop about a shootout. He and 
Tinniswood preferred discussing their writing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82e1664005663594173dd2f4ea5eb68a0921c29%2F0_124_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Nobbs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Nobbs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82e1664005663594173dd2f4ea5eb68a0921c29%2F0_124_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Pauline Yates, Leonard Rossiter and Sally-Jane Spencer in The Fall and Rise of 
Reginald Perrin. Photograph: BFI 
When one of his sketches was accepted for a revue, One to Another, at the 
Lyric theatre, Hammersmith, Nobbs moved to London, where he took a bedsit in a 
West Hampstead lodging-house and began a novel. His typing was noticed by one 
of his neighbours, the actorPhyllida Law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/oct/17/phyllida-law-family-values>
, who invited him for tea, and he gradually made other friends, and helped out 
at the St Pancras Chronicle. Once he was asked to take part in a police 
identity parade, and was fingered as the villain. While his name made “laughter 
ring through the police station”, he wondered: “Would I ever make people laugh 
on purpose?”

Through a theatrical group, Nobbs met Mary Blatchford, a divorced mother of 
three, and with fresh impetus, rang the satirical TV showThat Was the Week That 
Was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/nov/26/that-was-the-week-that-was-review-1962>
 to ask about submitting a monologue. He was put through to Frost, who 
remembered his name from Cambridge. “Super to talk to you,” said Frost, and 
immediately sent a taxi for the monologue that Nobbs was offering. That 
“Super!” and scripts by taxi became a way of life. Nobbs, however, remained 
ambivalent about Frost’s manner. The first Perrin novel refers disparagingly to 
him – and one Sunshine Desserts manager repeatedly says “Super!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439213443953%2F2ac0a20e-3e0d-4cc4-b459-dc4844e25f10-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Nobbs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Nobbs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fdavid-nobbs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439213443953%2F2ac0a20e-3e0d-4cc4-b459-dc4844e25f10-1360x2040.jpeg>
 David Nobbs, left, and Leonard Rossiter signing copies of The Better World of 
Reginald Perrin. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
With Tinniswood, Nobbs began working on sitcoms: some worked, others didn’t, 
but it was experience, as was a first novel, The Itinerant Lodger (1965), with 
a central character and storyline that anticipated Reginald Perrin’s 
preoccupation with shifting identity. Ostrich Country (1968) and A Piece of the 
Sky Is Missing (1969) also featured daydreaming heroes.

Nobbs married Mary in 1968 and they set up a crowded home in Barnet, north 
London. He wrote for Howerd, The Two Ronnies,Ken Dodd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ken-dodd>, Dick Emery, Jimmy Tarbuck, Les 
Dawson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-les-dawson-1490938.html> and 
Tommy Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/04/john-kearns-tommy-cooper-comedy-heroes>
, of whom Nobbs said “you don’t need to like Mozart to admire his music”. One 
day Nobbs needed fresh air and decided to try out one of his Howerd routines on 
Barnet common. The police soon jumped from a car and asked what he was doing. 
Startled, he flashed his Writers’ Guild card; they nodded - and explained that 
they were after an “escaped lunatic”.

Various ideas – including a newspaper article about the preparations for the 
launch of a new flavour of Morton’s jam (“Too fruity, not fruity enough, too 
bland, not bland enough, too blandly fruity, too fruitily bland, ad infinitum”) 
– inspired the story of his fraught businessman Perrin. He first wrote it as a 
half-hour play – rejected by the BBC as not being topical (not long before the 
disappearances ofJohn Stonehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2013/apr/26/john-stonehouse-faked-death>
 and Lord Lucan) – before it became The Death of Reginald Perrin.

Caught in a hapless suburban existence, Perrin reflected a contemporary mood 
with his fervent hope to become more than “just a product of Freudian slips and 
traumatic experiences and bad education and capricious pointlessness”. Although 
Nobbs avoided working in offices himself, he acutely described colleagues 
exchanging “the sort of meaningful looks in which each knows that the other is 
being meaningful but doesn’t know what they’re meaning”. The novel’s sequel, 
The Return of Reginald Perrin (1977), had the prescient notion of a firm called 
Grot whose things “are of no value and sell in our shops at high prices to 
people who will find them of no possible use whatsoever”.

Crossword blog: David Nobbs, crosswording's funniest commentator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/10/crossword-blog-david-nobbs-crosswordings-funniest-commentator>
After Rossiter’s death in 1984, Nobbs wrote two further TV series 
resuscitating his antihero: The Legacy of Reginald Perrin (1996), which brought 
together the rest of the original cast, andReggie Perrin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/apr/25/last-night-tv-reggie-perrin> 
(2009), a less successful remake withMartin Clunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/28/martin-clunes-doc-martin-my-family-values>
 in the title role. Nobbs declined many suggestions for other shows he might 
write, including a series based around the Fawlty Towers waiter Manuel. 
Instead, he developed one Perrin character, Jimmy, into Major Harry Truscott 
because he wished to work again with Geoffrey Palmer, whom Perrin had made a 
star. Script-edited byJohn Cleese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2015/jun/08/john-cleese-webchat-post-your-questions-now>
, Fairly Secret Army (1984‑86) concerned an unhinged officer’s attempt to run a 
mercenary paramilitary outfit. It became a cult success, described by Nobbs as, 
“a show which very few people watch, but which those few people like a great 
deal”.

Nobbs and his wife moved to Hereford, where the marriage drifted into 
companionship and then to amicable divorce. In 1998 Nobbs married Susan 
Sutcliffe, whom he had met on a YorkshireTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> set while she was working as 
an extra, and they settled outside Harrogate, in easy reach of a pub, a ready 
source of material.

Once upon a life: David Nobbs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/19/david-nobbs-humanist-mother-death>
A Bit of a Do, set in a fictional Yorkshire town, began as a series of plays 
set at social functions, then turned into a novel (1986) before in 1989 
becoming a TV series withDavid Jason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/06/david-jason-my-family-values>
 that attracted audiences of 15 million. The first of Nobbs’s four 
semi-autobiographical novels about Henry Pratt (published between 1983 and 
2006) was televised. A 1981 play became a surprisingly affecting novel, Cupid’s 
Darts (2007), about love across the generations between a philosopher and a 
“darts-team groupie”. His last novel, The Second Life of Sally Mottram, was 
published in 2014.

Best of all, though, was the substantial memoir I Didn’t Get Where I Am Today 
(2003), an anecdote-rich view of a continually shifting postwar society, that 
recounts how its author avoided the fate that Perrin feared, that his 
gravestone would record: “He made 196,465,287,696 bulldog clips, and they were 
all exactly the same.”

Nobbs is survived by Susan, and by four stepchildren.

• David Gordon Nobbs, writer, born 13 March 1935; died 8 August 2015
 