
You managed to come on the one day where the scene will ruin the entire movie 
for you,” saysDavid Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher>. 
The director stands outside a modest Middle American house that’s been built 
within a Los Angeles studio for his adaptation of Gillian Flynn’s bestselling 
novel. There are, really, plenty of scenes that will “ruin” Gone Girl, and 
given that part of its strength is unpredictability, it’s better not to know 
too much about what’s going in. On one level, it’s a murder mystery, with a 
tempestuous former journalist (Ben Affleck) under suspicion of killing his 
missing wife (Rosamund Pike). Underneath, it’s much more: an exploration of 
modern media and trial by television, the commodification of sex and marriage, 
the way we are driven, by fear and desire, to pretend. “Everybody’s doing the 
‘hero’s journey’,” says Fincher, over food in London months later. “So [this 
is] the antihero’s journey…”

The 52-year-old, Denver-born, west coast-raised film-maker has always tended 
towards the antiheroic, even in films with big budgets. After a series of music 
videos for the likes of Madonna, Aerosmith and George Michael, he made Alien 3 
– at the time the most expensive feature directorial debut ever. It opened with 
two of the series’ beloved characters already dead. Though Fincher has since 
disowned the film – which was compromised and confused by studio pressure – 
this start could almost be seen as a statement of intent: are you sitting 
uncomfortably? Then we’ll begin. Little of what followed was routine. Se7en 
promised a pulpy police procedural but twisted to become a devastating morality 
tale.Fight Club <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79278/fight.club> 
seemed all fisticuffs and buff Brad Pitt, then slyly indicted the lifestyle of 
a generation.Zodiac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/may/18/thriller.robertdowneyjr> is a 
serial-killer movie where – spoiler alert, kids – they never find the culprit. 
EvenThe Curious Case Of Benjamin Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/06/benjamin-button-brad-pitt-cate-blanchett>
 – ostensibly an Oscar-baiting romantic epic – is preoccupied with grief.

Fincher followed that with The Social Network, The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo 
and then a US-set reinvention of the BBC political drama House Of Cards, 
perhaps the moment online content came of age (if Netflix could attract him and 
Kevin Spacey, no one was off limits). He was developing 20,000 Leagues Under 
The Sea, raising the intriguing possibility of a David Fincher Disney film,
until it fell apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/20/brad-pitt-passes-20000-leagues-under-the-sea>
. Then his regular producer (and now wife) Ceán Chaffin read Gone Girl, and 
soon he was working to adapt the book with Flynn, a former Entertainment Weekly 
journalist who made hacks worldwide jealous with its breakthrough success.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F18%2Fgone-girl-trailer-david-fincher-gillian-flynn-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F16%2F1397668807859%2FGone-Girl-watch-the-trail-025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gone%20Girl%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20David%20Fincher's%20adaptation%20of%20Gillian%20Flynn's%20bestseller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F18%2Fgone-girl-trailer-david-fincher-gillian-flynn-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gone%20Girl%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20David%20Fincher%27s%20adaptation%20of%20Gillian%20Flynn%27s%20bestseller%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F18%2Fgone-girl-trailer-david-fincher-gillian-flynn-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F16%2F1397668807859%2FGone-Girl-watch-the-trail-025.jpg>
Fincher’s 10th feature, Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> 
shows no softening in the film-maker once labelled the “prince of darkness”. As 
sinuous as Se7en, it may appear less offensive, but could stay with you for 
just as long; not least because it deals less with murder than it does with 
marriage. The couple at its centre have been lying to each other, to varying 
degrees, and though things become – to say the least – extreme, the thematic 
resonance is universal.

“There’s an incredibly narcissistic function of ‘I feel I deserve this kind of 
person at my side and as long as you’re willing to do the work to appear like 
that, yeah, let’s do it’,” says the director. “And five years down the line 
it’s like, ‘Why are we so resentful of each other just cos we can’t keep it 
up?’”

As date movies go, it should make dinner after the movie rather interesting.

Fincher thinks people, in general, lie more than they did. Or, at least, “have 
become more accustomed to recontextualising their shortcomings. The business of 
shining things up is no longer just the purview of publicists and chatshow 
hosts, it’s permeated to everybody. With the information age, people are on the 
cover of their own Rolling Stone; they get to make decisions that cast a better 
light on what they’ve accomplished. I mean, when people are documenting 
everything in their life and uploading it, there’s a tendency to edit. There’s 
not a lot of people going: ‘Got up today, was lonely, masturbated.’”

This notion – of deception, not masturbation – was one of the interesting 
things to play with in Gone Girl, while one of the biggest challenges was to 
get audiences to engage in what they know could be a chastening experience. 
“It’s hard to get to an audience who have been told, you know, ‘Bad things 
happen in this movie’,” he says. “It’s hard to get people to invest in 
characters because they’re going, ‘I don’t wanna like somebody who’s going to 
end up in a 50-gallon drum. I’m gonna reserve judgment.’ It’s a tough balancing 
act: you want people respecting it as a procedural but you also want them 
invested. And I’m sure for the cast members, when you read a piece of material 
like this, you go, ‘If the director fucks this up, this is gonna be slow 
going.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411732123138%2F5f39fec8-3f6c-4a17-9dff-ec1f0e2af2eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Fincher%20on%20Gone%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98Bad%20things%20happen%20in%20this%20movie%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Fincher%20on%20Gone%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98Bad%20things%20happen%20in%20this%20movie%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411732123138%2F5f39fec8-3f6c-4a17-9dff-ec1f0e2af2eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gone Girl. Photograph: Merrick Morton/PR 
Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> pursued the part of 
Nick Dunne, to the extent that he pushed back production on his own directorial 
follow-up to the Oscar-winning Argo. Fincher cast him, in part, for the 
enjoyment of seeing someone so affable placed in such severe circumstances. 
Affleck is often underestimated; he’s much cleverer than the public realises or 
he appears to admit. “He’s very bright,” says Fincher. “And I think he sort of 
tempers how people react to him; he’s cautious about that. He doesn’t want to 
make anybody feel bad. It’s fun to watch somebody who is so willing to 
sublimate themselves in order to make everything better – or more lubricated – 
and put him in a situation where he’s got to speak for himself.”

Initially, Fincher wondered if the actor – who was cast as Batman partway 
through shooting – might be too big a star, but then he realised that too might 
help the performance: Affleck knew what it was like to be hunted by the media. 
“Ben went through a period of his life where he was fodder; I guess he still is 
in a weird way. And you wonder, ‘When will they let him off?’ But it’s really 
good to have somebody who understands how nutty that is. What it’s like to live 
in a house where you have to draw the drapes, just in case [of photographers].”

It’s fascinating to listen to the director talk about casting, the metaphors 
he finds for the qualities needed for the characters. Take his rationale for 
casting Pike, an excellent actor, but hardly the biggest name he could have 
secured. “You know, I was just looking for somebody who kind of did the ‘only 
child’ thing. And she has that: she’s an orchid. She’s not part of the lawn. 
She’s over in her own place.”

That Fincher gets the casts he does is a testament to two things. First, his 
determination in resisting any external pressure to go for stars over those 
best suited for the parts (for Tattoo he opted for the unknown Rooney Mara over 
Carey Mulligan and Scarlett Johansson). Second, the results: often career-best 
performances that mean actors are more likely to submit to his rigorous working 
methods. Spend time on Fincher’s sets and you realise one of the most important 
qualities for his actors is endurance. It’s not unusual for a take to be 
repeated 25 times, until the director is satisfied. He makes sure he has time 
to do this, so he can experiment to capture the little moments, the happy 
accidents that make a film feel something like life. “It’s like shooting a 
thousand free throws to hit the bucket.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411564803207%2F8a9d1330-4bf2-478e-837e-cf597c3f0196-1408x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Fincher%20on%20Gone%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98Bad%20things%20happen%20in%20this%20movie%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Fincher%20on%20Gone%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98Bad%20things%20happen%20in%20this%20movie%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F27%2Fdavid-fincher-gone-girl-ben-affleck%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411564803207%2F8a9d1330-4bf2-478e-837e-cf597c3f0196-1408x2040.jpeg>
 Mr and missing: Rosamund Pike as Ben Affleck’s AWOL wife in Gone Girl 
He’s worked with actors who weren’t overly keen on the process – Michael 
Douglas in The Game, Robert Downey Jr in Zodiac – but both would say those 
performances are among their strongest. The process has become less stressful 
the more established Fincher has become. “It’s easier to make movies when 
people want to be there!” he says. “I can’t imagine what it was like for George 
Lucas on the first Star Wars, with all the accounts of how the cast were 
mercilessly unsure of the material. That whole ‘trust me’ thing can be very 
debilitating, when you go, ‘I think I know how this can play.’ And also when 
you get a piece of material like [Gone Girl], it’s a lot of faith on the part 
of Ben Affleck to come in and go ‘Okay, I’m the rube.’”

There’s no decision yet on his next feature. A mooted biopic of Apple 
co-founder Steve Jobs – scripted by Aaron Sorkin and starring Christian Bale – 
“was definitely a possibility, but it got very sideways very fast”. For the 
time being, he’s going back to television, remaking the Channel 4 conspiracy 
seriesUtopia <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/utopia> for HBO, with 
Flynn scripting again. “I like the world of it,” he says. “I like the 
characters – I love Dennis’s [Kelly, creator of the UK show] honesty and 
affinity for the nerds. I mean, I’ve always been a bit of a junior conspiracy 
theorist cos I don’t have time to connect them all! But it’s nice to see that 
somebody has.” He is planning to direct the whole series, which will keep him 
busy for most of 2015, and is not looking much beyond that. There is no 
long-term plan (at least not that he’s confessing to). “Oddly enough,” he says, 
“I did a remake of a literary adaptation, then I did a remake of a television 
show. Now I’m doing a literary adaptation [and then remaking another show]. I 
don’t know: the pattern is not clear to me exactly what it is that I’m doing. 
But I’m sure it’ll be illuminated for me. Your job is context. I’m just a 
hamster on a wheel!”

So, as the hamster scurries on, 22 years since Alien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> 3 – the painful experience that taught 
him “take all of the responsibility, because you’re going to get all of the 
blame” – has anything really changed? He pauses, considers. “I find that people 
are more willing now to accept my proclivities,” he says, as the waitress 
clears the table. “I don’t have as many conversations with financiers about, 
‘Don’t worry, it’s gonna be funny.’ Now people are more apt to just go, ‘It’s 
gonna be what it’s gonna be. Don’t ask.’”

Gone Girl is in cinemas on Friday

 * Xan Brooks’ Gone Girl first look review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/22/gone-girl-review-film-ben-affleck-rosamund-pike-david-fincher>

 * The films to watch in autumn 2014: from Gone Girl to Mr Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/sep/08/the-films-to-watch-in-autumn-2014-from-gone-girl-to-mr-turner> 