
The start of a new year can be a tad bittersweet. While there’s the promise of 
hopeful resolutions and much-needed change, there’s also the unavoidable 
realization that we’re all edging closer to the grave. Given that we’re coming 
off the back of a year that saw more celebrity deaths than the first act ofThis 
Is the End <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/30/this-is-the-end-review>
, it feels like more of a relief to be done with 2016, our own mortality be 
damned.

Related: Aliens, sequels and even stranger things: predicting 2017's cultural 
highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/30/2017-tv-films-music-preview-blade-runner-star-trek>

With all eyes now on 2017 and what might lie ahead, what clues can we find in 
the films that were set in the year that we’re now in? Here’s a look back at 
the films that were looking forward:

Barb Wire

Given that the entire marketing campaign felt like it originated from a room 
of old men staring at Pamela Anderson’s cleavage for an hour straight, you’d be 
forgiven for not having the faintest idea of what Barb Wire is actually about. 
Yes it’s centered around a heroine in a revealing leather costume but, wait for 
it, it’s also about the after-effects of a second American civil war! Yes, 
really! Like many Americans, our protagonist is forced to work two jobs 
(nightclub owner and bounty hunter – standard) and, in what seems like a pretty 
legit touch, payment in 2017 is preferable in the far more robust Canadian 
dollar. Also, Barb is something of a feminist, with her catchphrase – “don’t 
call me babe!” – doubling as a handy Twitter comeback to patronizing men’s 
rights activists.

The Running Man

The unstoppable nastiness of reality television seemed to reach its nadir in 
2016 with the announcement ofa new Russian show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/15/russian-reality-tv-show-allow-rape-murder-game2-winter>
 where contestants are “allowed” to rape and murder one another. Before The 
Hunger Games made thefictional idea palatable for a teenage audience, this 
adaptation of a Stephen King novel gave audiences a similar future ripped apart 
by global economic meltdown and with its inhabitants entertained by watching 
people forced to kill for ratings. In 2017, all other cultural activity has 
been censored, which, given our next president’s increasing and vocal hatred of 
Saturday Night Live and the celebrities who shun him, might not be far off. The 
fact that it’s then replaced by a vicious reality show – well, let’s just say 
that in this future,Mark Burnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/08/mark-burnett-mipcom-reality> 
would be gainfully employed.

Cherry 2000

Sorry, but dating in 2017 is a total bureaucratic nightmare. Thanks to women! 
According to this nutso 1987 film, the increase in female agency will lead to 
sex becoming a drawn-out legal negotiation, with men painted as horny devils 
and women as difficult shrews. The solution? Get yourself a passive, pretty 
robot who will ensure that dinner is on the table right before offering up 
unlimited sex on a nightly basis. Like an Amazon Echo with an orifice. A 
strange film that was understandably buried at the time, the initial message of 
misogyny eventually leading to something less grotesque as our male protagonist 
ultimately chooses a real, strong-willed woman over a mindless sex bot. There’s 
hope for us all.

Fortress

The past year has seen a revitalized debate over whether privatized prisons 
should still exist alongside state-owned facilities, with the justice 
department announcing a plan to reduce and ultimately end them in the next few 
years. As an extreme cautionary tale, this schlocky 1992 action film works 
quite successfully with its dour view of how inmates are treated within a 
conglomerate-controlled system. In the year 2017, overpopulation has led to a 
strict one-child rule and even after our hero’s first baby dies, he is forced 
to travel across the border with his wife in order to become a parent again. 
After being caught, he’s sent to a brutal underground prison where he’s the 
victim of invasive mind control and other nefarious methods of making him 
compliant. While the insertion of “intestinators” – devices to induce severe 
pain on will – isprobably not happening yet, a recent report 
<https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/e1606.pdf#page=2> showing the decreased 
safety in private prisons suggests that the vision on display here is somewhat 
on point.

Click

Probably the most terrifying prediction on the list is that Adam Sandler will 
still be a thing in 2017. In this, one of his more “serious” comedies, by which 
I mean that there are slightly fewer fart jokes, he zips back and forth through 
time with a magic remote control. One of the stops is 2017, a year that sees 
people suffering from severe obesity. It’s also a time in which Michael Jackson 
is still alive and Britney Spears is still married to Kevin Federline. What can 
we learn from this? Reassuringly,Adam Sandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler> knows nothing.
 