
Superhero films, in all their Lycra-wrapped machismo, are easy enough for 
sceptics to mock; once the film-makers join in, however, a strained sense of 
regimented fun creeps into proceedings. So it is withDeadpool (Fox, 15), an 
eager but terminally smug exercise in self-aware Marvel prankery that leaves no 
fourth wall undemolished. StarringRyan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds> as an ex-military victim of 
medical experimentation left with superhuman healing powers and super-irksome 
wisecracks, Tim Miller’s film follows theKick-Ass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kick-ass> course of self-covering 
provocation: sadism or sexism with a wink, it reasons, isn’t sadism or sexism. 
(Deadpool’s girlfriend may be a colourless stock figure, but she does get to 
sodomise him. Feminists, you are hereby appeased.)

It feigns offensiveness, though only those appalled by hormonal schoolboys 
need take umbrage. Credit where it’s due to Reynolds, who sells the whole thing 
with smarm and charm that aren’t mutually exclusive, but this is a glib, greasy 
idea of fun.

For violently funny subversion of Boy’s Own fare, look instead to Bone Tomahawk
 (The Works, 18), S Craig Zahler’s splendid, morbid revival of the cowboys and 
Indians western. The palefaces’ enemy this time is a fantastical tribe of 
mutant cannibals (“Men like you wouldn’t distinguish them from Indians,” one 
Native American character pointedly observes) who kidnap some local townsfolk, 
setting sheriff Kurt Russell and his motley crew off in hard-squinting pursuit. 
Zahler has an adoring eye and ear for the idiom of Hollywood’s old west, with a 
salty, satirical streak that franklyoutclasses Quentin Tarantino’s recent 
strain of pastiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/20/the-western-is-back-quentin-tarantino-hateful-eight-revenant-leonardo-dicaprio>
. The film then thrillingly jackknifes into fresh, bloody B-movie terrain, yet 
even at its most viscerally grisly points, Zahler’s limber, literate way with 
language never deserts him: listen out especially for the sublime Richard 
Jenkins’s monologue about circus fleas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F601374d39ae0792ccb4b9dc9d0732ba6bd87029e%2F0_87_5123_3074%2F5123.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%3B%20Bone%20Tomahawk%3B%20Heart%20of%20a%20Dog%3B%20Nasty%20Baby%3B%20Alan%20Clarke%20at%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%3B%20Bone%20Tomahawk%3B%20Heart%20of%20a%20Dog%3B%20Nasty%20Baby%3B%20Alan%20Clarke%20at%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F601374d39ae0792ccb4b9dc9d0732ba6bd87029e%2F0_87_5123_3074%2F5123.jpg>
 Richard Jenkins and Kurt Russell in Bone Tomahawk. Photograph: Rex 
As beguiling as it is utterly classification-resistant, Laurie Anderson’s 
roving personal essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/27/laurie-anderson-interview-q-and-a-heart-dog-lolabelle-terrier-brighton-festival-lou-reed-o-superman>
Heart of a Dog(Dogwoof, E) got a tad lost in cinemas last month, but should be 
cherished on small screens. Beginning as a grief-stricken Valentine to the 
film-maker’s late terrier, it unrolls with graceful imprecision into a 
meditation on narrative, music, philosophy, even the paranoia of post-9/11 
America. Its cobweb connections make far more sense seen than described.

Simpler in its sweetness is Our Little Sister (Curzon, PG), an unashamedly 
small tale of sibling bonds lost and found that accrues power with its 
accumulation of fine domestic (and fragrantly culinary) details. It’s less 
preoccupied with emotional escalation than some of director Hirokazu Koreeda’s 
more acclaimed works, and more moving for it. Far more acrid human observation 
is to be found in Chilean-American auteur Sebastián Silva’sNasty Baby (Network, 
15), in which a gay couple’s attempt to conceive a child with a female friend 
(Kristen Wiig) goes off course via a neck-snapping plot twist that I found at 
once exhilarating and unconvincing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1366abd3d3cf6485efd5cfce6494ed7a28aee01%2F0_127_2287_1372%2F2287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%3B%20Bone%20Tomahawk%3B%20Heart%20of%20a%20Dog%3B%20Nasty%20Baby%3B%20Alan%20Clarke%20at%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%3B%20Bone%20Tomahawk%3B%20Heart%20of%20a%20Dog%3B%20Nasty%20Baby%3B%20Alan%20Clarke%20at%20the%20BBC%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeadpool-bone-tomahawk-heart-of-a-dog-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1366abd3d3cf6485efd5cfce6494ed7a28aee01%2F0_127_2287_1372%2F2287.jpg>
 Gary Oldman and friends in Alan Clarke’s 1989 film The Firm. Photograph: 
Ronald Grant Archive 
Reissue of the week, by a long yard, is Dissent & Disruption: Alan Clarke at 
the BBC (1969-1989) (BFI, 18), a mammoth compilation of the gut-spilling social 
realist’s collected TV dramas, alongside his feature filmsScum and The Firm, 
here presented in a new director’s cut. The total comes to 13 discs, 33 hours 
and more than a hundred quid; an investment for the committed, not the curious. 
I’m still working my way through, but it’s a stunning assembly: the cleaned-up 
transfers haven’t lightened the dirt under these films’ nails one bit.

Finally, you have just over two weeks left to head to Mubi.com and stream the 
year’s most dizzying swirl of cinema so far: Miguel Gomes’sArabian Nights 
<https://mubi.com/films/arabian-nights-2014> trilogy, a bounding, incandescent 
triptych of films themselves composed of profuse interlocking parts, addressing 
history, mythology and contemporary European economics through its own 
eccentric version of Scheherazade’s storybook. There are chaffinches and ghost 
dogs here; Gomes juggles personal and political grievances here, finding room 
for love, law and Lionel Richie. At over six hours, it sounds imposing, but 
proves a leisurely, enveloping wallow.
 