
Sorry, DC fans, but so far, the villains of the new “extended universe” have 
been a complete car crash. First, inBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
, we had Jesse Eisenberg’s garrulous, unhinged Lex Luthor chasing after the man 
of steel like a rabid dog . Then there was an out-of-her-depth Cara Delevingne 
– carrying all the threat of a drunken teenager at a bad costume party – as the 
paper-thin Enchantress inSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/suicide-squad-review-dc-comics-will-smith-margot-robbie-jared-leto>
. What a pity the best bad guy we’ve yet seen in these movies, Michael 
Shannon’s machine-honed megavillain General Zod, was killed off at the end of
Man of Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/13/man-of-steel-review>
. Not only did the Kryptonian baddie’s motivations actually make sense, but 
Shannon played the part with furious verve and relentless conviction.

How Russian, Chinese and Indian film-makers are taking on Marvel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/aug/25/marvel-russian-chinese-indian-film-makers-chakra-invincible-pancake-man>
Steppenwolf and his army of parademons look likely to be the enemy in next 
year’s Justice League, and they should at least present a genuine threat. We 
don’t yet know who Wonder Woman will be taking on in herdebut solo outing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/wonder-woman-gal-gadot-batman-v-superman>
 – also in 2017 – though the first world war setting will hopefully allow 
director Patty Jenkins to dial down the scale of the threat to the Amazon 
princess.

But according to The Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/deathstroke-will-be-main-villain-in-ben-afflecks-batman-movie-exclusive/>
, we do now have an idea who Ben Affleck’s Batman will be taking on in his 
first solo outing: fans’ favourite Deathstroke, otherwise known as Slade 
Wilson. If that alter ego sounds familiar, it’s because Marvel antihero 
Deadpool, real name Wade Wilson, was initially conceived as a riff on the DC 
icon. Is the popularity of 20th Century Fox’s recent movie the driving force 
behind Batman’s latest nemesis? That seems unlikely, especially as Deathstroke 
has a storied history of his own as one of DC’s greatest antiheroes, as well as 
one with a pretty muddled moral compass.
Ben Affleck (@BenAffleck) 
https://t.co/0NsNzCtGip <https://t.co/0NsNzCtGip>
 <https://twitter.com/BenAffleck/status/770259217940746245> August 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BenAffleck/status/770259217940746245> 
A super-soldier with remarkable healing abilities who broke free of his life 
in the military to pursue a career as an assassin, Slade Wilson has, at various 
times in DC’s comics, been an opponent and aide to adolescent superhero team 
the Teen Titans, and has also battled Batman and other members of the Justice 
League. His apparently devious schemes are occasionally revealed to be the 
result of twisted altruism, usually related to offspring such as the unhinged 
Titans Joseph (Jericho) and Rose (Ravager) Wilson.

Spider-Man's colourblind casting: a case of when it's OK to break with the 
canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/22/spider-man-colourblind-casting-zendaya-mary-jane-watson>
Quite how Deathstroke fits into the new DC universe remains to be seen, but 
his arrival does hint at yet another orgy of pixel-powered mega-violence. Where 
the Christopher Nolan films and TV show Batman: The Animated Series gave us a 
caped crusader who often outwitted his enemies, and favoured hand-to-hand over 
firearms, Dawn of Justice introduced a dark knight who blasts Gotham’s bad guys 
with giant Batguns and has no obvious moral code.

I’d been hoping the solo film might be set up as a prequel, taking place in a 
time before the superhumans began invading the DC universe. Not precisely a 
return to the grittily realistic Gotham of Nolan’s movies, nor the 
noir-inspired visions of either the current TV seriesGotham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/05/gotham-dick-tracy-batman-lot-of-fun>
 or its animated predecessors, but something with just a little less video game 
style of beat-em-up intensity. But this looks unlikely.

Despite being blind in one eye, Deathstroke is said to have the strength of 
nine men and the traditional Batman would surely have a hard time taking him 
down. It looks like Batfleck might be in need of his mechanical suit and 
Bat-cannons once again. More’s the pity.

Let’s hope not, because the short history of comic book movies has taught us 
that relentlessly upping the ante in the combat stakes isn’t the best way 
forward. Where Man of Steel and Dawn of Justice buried their heroes’ distinct 
personalities beneath the rubble of burning CGI mega-cities, other superhero 
films have prospered by using all those screen minutes to build more detailed 
comic book visions and undercut audience expectations. Fox’s Deadpool threw 
everything into meta-fuelled nuttiness, whileIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/22/iron-man-3-review> reimagined 
famous Marvel supervillain Mandarin as a Wizard of Oz-style imposter. It threw 
the audience a curveball and allowed Ben Kingsley to deliver one of his finest 
performances of recent times. Less can mean more.

Which Batman villains should Affleck bring back – and who should play them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/02/batman-villains-ben-affleck-film-riddler-penguin-poison-ivy>
But if Affleck does plan to dial down the epic scale of Batman’s battles in 
his debut solo outing, Deathstroke seems an odd pick for head villain. 
Presumably Warner Bros doesn’t feel the time is right to pitch the caped 
crusader against Jared Leto’s Joker. Or maybe the clown prince of Gotham has 
hired Deathstroke to take down his nemesis.


That’s probably a good idea, because a Batman v the Joker fight featuring the 
pair’s current iterations would be a short one indeed. The Joker plays on 
Batman’s morality. When the caped crusader is capable of murdering his enemies 
without a moment’s hesitation, one of the greatest rivalries in comic book 
history is rendered utterly redundant.
 