
Debbie Reynolds’ son Todd Fisher has said his mother did not die of a broken 
heart but just “left to be with Carrie”.

Fisher said that after hearing about the death of her daughter, Reynolds said 
‘I want to be with Carrie.”

“And then she was gone,” he said.

My friend, Carrie Fisher: 'You could have lit a candle with the twinkle in her 
eyes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/filmblog/2016/dec/30/my-friend-carrie-fisher-selina-cadell-tribute>
In an ABC News interview that was to air on Friday, Todd Fisher said that his 
mother joined his sister in death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer>
 because Reynolds “didn’t want to leave Carrie and did not want her to be 
alone.”

“She didn’t die of a broken heart,” Fisher said in interview for the programme 
20/20.

Reynolds wasn’t inconsolable over her daughter’s death, he said, and instead 
simply expressed love for her.

Todd Fisher said his mother and sister, actress Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>, will have a joint funeral 
and will be buried together.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20had%20'a%20wonderful%20career'%20after%20getting%20her%20break%20young%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20had%20%27a%20wonderful%20career%27%20after%20getting%20her%20break%20young%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Five-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video&media=>
Debbie Reynolds had ‘a wonderful career’ after getting her break young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/29/ive-had-a-great-life-debbie-reynolds-on-65-years-in-showbusiness-video>
He said the actresses will be interred at Forest Lawn-Hollywood Hills, the 
final resting place of numerous celebrities, including Lucille Ball, Dick Van 
Patten, Liberace, Florence Henderson, David Carradine and Bette Davis.

No date for the funeral has been set and it will be private, he said. A public 
memorial is being considered , but no plans have been finalised.

Earlier on Friday, the Los Angeles coroner’s office released Carrie Fisher’s 
body to her family. Chief of operations Brian Elias says an examination of 
Fisher was done, but he stopped short of calling it an autopsy and would not 
provide any details on what tests were done.

My time with Carrie Fisher, a hurricane of energy, charisma and foul language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/29/carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-remembered>
Elias said there was no timetable for when an official determination on what 
killed Fisher would be made.

Todd Fisher said the family wasn’t clear on what coroner’s officials had done 
during the examination, but was glad his sister’s body had been released to 
Forest Lawn. “My mother and my sister are together right now,” he said.

Carrie Fisher, 60, an actress and writer who starred as Princess Leia in the 
original “Star Wars” trilogy, died Tuesday after suffering a medical emergency 
23 December aboard a flight from London. Reynolds, 84, an Oscar-nominated 
actress who shot to fame after starring in “Singin’ in the Rain” at age 19,
passed away on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/28/debbie-reynolds-hospital-carrie-fisher-mother>
 after being briefly hospitalised.
 