
The combined deficit of the UK’s 6,000 defined benefit pension funds has grown 
by £100bn in the last month, bringing the total deficit to £710bn, according to 
a new report.

The research, by the accountants PricewaterhouseCooper, found that the pension 
schemes have total assets of £1,450bn but are liable to pay out about £2,160bn 
in contractual promises to existing and former workers.

Pension deficits have worsened since the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/uk-borrowing-costs-record-lows-bank-post-brexit-plan-gilt-buybacks>
 because companies use the interest rate ongilts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/16/gilts-the-unexpected-snag-stalling-banks-post-brexit-stimulus>
, otherwise known as the yield, as the main tool in estimating how much they 
will have to pay out in pensions in the future. The lower the gilt yield, the 
more that companies have to set aside to meet their future costs.

Gilts: the unexpected snag stalling Bank's post-Brexit stimulus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/16/gilts-the-unexpected-snag-stalling-banks-post-brexit-stimulus>


The scale of the problems facing companies offering final salary pension 
schemes was underlined on Wednesday by the Yorkshire-based manufacturer Carclo, 
which issued a statement to the stock exchange to say that the recent increase 
in its pension deficit meant that a dividend payout to shareholders announced 
in June and due to be paid in October could not now go ahead.

Carclo, which is based near Leeds and employs about 1,300 people making 
plastics and LED products, said in its statement: “If the corporate bond yield 
remains at its current low level then this will result in a significant 
increase in the group’s pension deficit.” It said this would have the effect of 
“extinguishing the company’s available distributable reserves”.


The announcement immediately wiped almost 15% off the company’s share price. 

Carclo is unlikely to be the only business that will have to slash dividends 
to repair widening pension deficits. Tom McPhail, the head of retirement policy 
at the financial advisers Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “We’re likely to see more 
of this kind of announcement in coming months, unless there is sharp pick up in 
bond yields.

“Current monetary policy may have kept the economy going but it is killing 
pension schemes, with disastrous consequences both for any employers sponsoring 
a final salary scheme and for any individuals looking to buy an annuity.”

McPhail suggested the Bank of England should consider introducing 
high-yielding pension bonds specifically for annuity providers and pension 
schemes.


Britons positive about own finances but not economy, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/britons-positive-about-own-finances-but-not-economy-report-finds>
The yield on the 10-year gilt has collapsed from 1.3% before the referendum to 
just 0.61% this week, a record low.


On the most rigorous actuarial measure, which assumes that a company has to 
buy its way out of its pension scheme and offload the liabilities to an 
insurance company, the combined deficit of UK companies is now £1.54tn, said 
PwC.

To put the deficit into context, £1.54tn is not far short of the total £1.87tn 
output of the entire UK economy in 2015.

But while PwC called the figures “challenging”, it warned against overreacting 
to deficits that are largely hypothetical.

Raj Mody, a PwC partner and its global head of pensions, said: “The 
challenging environment for pension funds is likely to endure for several years 
[but] companies andpension fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/15/coal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change>
 trustees should ask themselves if gilt yield measurements are still relevant 
for them when deciding how to measure and finance the deficit. There may be 
more appropriate measures that are better tailored to their own fund’s 
strategy.”

He said the £1tn-plus deficit figures were “a hypothetical scenario which does 
not reflect the reality for how most pension funds will be managed over the 
next few years. Pension decision-makers should understand the assumptions which 
sit behind any analysis presented to them around pension risk or deficit. 
Transparency is critical to avoid making inappropriate decisions.”
 