
Deloitte <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte> has named its 
highest-ever proportion of female partners in the accountancy firm’s annual 
round of promotions but the pool of senior employees is still more than 80% 
male.

The ‘big four’ accountant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/24/deloitte-partners-share-593m-profit-pool>
 said 24 of 80 new partners in its UK business, which includes offices in 
Switzerland, are female.

The figure means that 30% of the prized positions went to women, up on last 
year‘s 29% and just 20% in 2014.

But while the proportion of new female partners has been increasing, Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte> is still a long way off gender 
parity. This year’s intake means that just 16% of the 1,054 partners in the 
firm’s UK division are female, a slight increase on 15% before the latest batch 
of promotions.

Deloitte says that just 10% of new partners are not white, below the 13% of 
the population who identified as being non-white in the 2011 census. But 10% 
represents an improvement, given that the existing group of partners is only 4% 
non-white.

David Sproul, the chief executive and senior partner, hailed the firm’s 
progress on gender diversity, saying: “We have seen a second consecutive year 
of strong female representation amongst Deloitte’s new partners.”


But he admitted that the company had further to go to close the gender gap 
among partners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>
: “Achieving greater gender diversity is a clear business imperative and these 
promotions evidence the success of the range of initiatives we have put in 
place.”

Sproul pointed to company initiatives such as its return-to-work programme 
aimed at recruiting women who have been out of the workplace for two years or 
more. He said the scheme was likely to “further boost our pipeline of future 
partner candidates”.

More than half of the participants on last year’s return-to-work scheme 
accepted a job with the company and the programme has been expanded to 20 women 
this year.

Deloitte has also backed programmes designed to make working hours more 
flexible and started using mobile phone games to test the aptitude of job 
applicants, a process it says makes its recruitment process more egalitarian by 
removing “unconscious bias”.
 