
Gun control advocates’ best hope under President Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is that the businessman will 
have a “Nixon in China moment”, and push for reforms his Democratic predecessor 
did not have the political capital to achieve.

Climate change denial in the Trump cabinet: where do his nominees stand?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
That was what Democratic senator Richard Blumenthal proposed at a press 
conference on Thursday, held in memory of the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook 
elementary school in which 20 young children and six adults were killed.

“My hope is that newly elected President Trump will use this opportunity much 
as President Nixon did in going to China,” Blumenthal said.

“It’s a Nixon-to-China moment for Donald Trump, where he can defy the 
expectation, do the unpredictable.

“He likes doing the unpredictable,” he added, drily. 

Blumenthal, one of the senators for Connecticut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/connecticut>, where the Sandy Hook 
shooting occurred, said that unlike President Obama, Trump was “hardly 
committed to the cause of ending gun violence”.


The National Rifle Association spent at least $30m 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2016/11/the-nra-placed-big-bets-on-the-2016-election-and-won-almost-all-of-them/>
 to support Trump’s run for the White House – a greater sum than any other 
outside group.

“There would be good reason for people to be desolate and maybe despairing,” 
Blumenthal said.

But he portrayed gun control as an issue on which Trump could “respond to a 
rally, which he also likes to do, and the rally is the American people, who are 
clamoring and demanding action”.

Once in the White House, he said, Trump would have a “historic opportunity to 
do the right thing” and adopt “commonsense measures”.

Such measures include banning suspected terrorists from buying guns, requiring 
background checks for every gun purchase and repealing a federal law giving gun 
companies immunity from lawsuits when guns are misused by criminals.

“These are your ideas, Donald,” Blumenthal said, to laughter. “We’ll give you 
credit for them.”

Trump’s gun rights platform 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/> 
suggests that he does not support expanding background checks, which he called 
a “broken system”, but instead believes “we need to fix the system we have and 
make it work as intended”.

Repealing the gun industry immunity law was a high-profile agenda item for 
Hillary Clinton, not Trump. But the president-elect did suggest throughout the 
campaign that he wanted to do something to make it more difficult for suspected 
terrorists to buy guns legally.

Closing the gun-buying “terror gap” would have virtually no impact on 
America’s larger gun violence problem, which leaves about 100,000 people dead 
or wounded each year, including more than 20,000 gun suicides.

The NRA chief executive, Wayne LaPierre, told members in November that Trump’s 
victory, with Republican majorities in Congress, would allow gun rights 
advocates to “go on offense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/nra-gun-control-donald-trump-republicans>
”.

Gun rights advocates’ top priority for the Trump White House is the 
appointment of a supreme court justice who will protect or even expand the 
court’s gun-friendly interpretation of the second amendment.

“I will not let you down,” Trump told NRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra> members at their annual conference in 
Louisville in May, accepting the group’s endorsement in the presidential race. 
“Remember that, I will not let you down.”

In Congress, the NRA’s top legislative agenda is passing a national law that 
would allow people with a permit to carry a concealed weapon in one state to 
carry their guns in all 50 states – a measure gun control advocates say is 
dangerous, since states have dramatically different requirements for who is 
allowed to carry a concealed gun.

'Our moment to go on offense': NRA makes big plans for Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/nra-gun-control-donald-trump-republicans>
The new law could mean that tourists would be allowed to carry their guns 
around New York City, and might allow residents of states with strict gun laws 
to bypass local regulations altogether.

After a year in which gun violence prevention moved from a marginal, 
often-ignored policy debate to a central issue of the presidential campaign, 
gun control advocates were left stunned at the unexpected defeat of Clinton, 
who had made herself a champion of the movement.

At Thursday’s annual congressional press conference on gun violence 
prevention, politicians and advocates vowed to keep fighting despite the 
ascendancy of the NRA, and said decades of political dominance by gun rights 
advocates could not be vanquished in just four years.

“People are so frustrated and so mad that we haven’t been able to make more 
progress in four years, given that so many people are on our side,” said Chris 
Murphy, a Democratic senator from Connecticut who staged a filibuster after the 
Orlando massacre, forcing the Senate to hold a vote on gun control bills.

“The modern gun violence movement really did start four years ago this week,” 
he said, “and we’ve been playing a lot of catch-up.”
 