
The Department of Defence has spent nearly $20m on consultants to help with an 
overhaul intended to save taxpayers’ money.

The costs were linked to the hiring of 11 consultancy firms to implement the 
so-called first-principles review, which aimed to ensure Defence was “fit for 
purpose” and used “the minimum resources necessary”.

'First principles' review: 1,000 civilian jobs could go in defence shakeup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/01/first-principles-review-1000-civilian-jobs-could-go-in-defence-shakeup>
The biggest of the consultancy contracts disclosed by the department was an 
$8.5m deal with Bechtel to help with procurement reforms.

Defence said it had also reached a $7.1m contract with Partners in Performance 
“to assist with the change management process, reporting and governance within 
the implementation office”.


The Sweett Group was being paid $804,312 to help with a new push to sell 
Defence properties that were no longer needed.

The review – completed in April 2015 – pointed to a previous report earmarking 
17 sites for closure out of 75 major bases and estimated the disposal of these 
properties could reap $1.4bn over 30 years, including $570m from sales.

The extent of consultancy work has been laid bare in the department’s answer 
to a question it took on notice 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Senate_Estimates/fadtctte/estimates/sup1516/def/defenceqonsindex>
 from Labor’s defence spokesman, Stephen Conroy, during the previous round of 
Senate estimates hearings.

The other firms contracted to help with implementation include Ernst and 
Young, Deloitte, Rand Corporation, Helmsman International, PwC, Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu Limited, and ACIL Allen Consulting.

KPMG won two contracts totalling $390,240.

The department said the consulting firms, which were being paid a combined 
total of $19.4m, “must work in close partnership and collaborate with defence 
staff”.

Malcolm Turnbull to discuss terrorism and security during US visit this month
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/07/malcolm-turnbull-to-discuss-terrorism-and-security-during-us-visit-this-month>
The answer to the question on notice also named five other consulting firms 
that were contracted prior to the first-principles review and would now 
“contribute in varying extents” to the implementation.

The cost of those projects was not available, the department said, “but they 
have been included for completeness”.

The Coalition promised before the 2013 election 
<http://www.liberal.org.au/latest-news/2013/09/02/coalitions-policy-stronger-defence>
 to launch a defence review aimed at cutting waste in the bureaucracy and 
improving accountability.

The review panel, headed by the former Rio Tinto boss David Peever, called for 
a shakeup including the abolition of the Defence Materiel Organisation after 
finding defence structures were “complicated, slow and inefficient”.

When the government released the report 
<http://www.defence.gov.au/Publications/Reviews/Firstprinciples/>, the then 
defence minister, Kevin Andrews, estimatedabout 1,000 civilian jobs would be 
lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/01/first-principles-review-1000-civilian-jobs-could-go-in-defence-shakeup>
. He said the changes would provide “better value for taxpayers” and any cost 
savings would be re-invested in the Australian defence force.
 