
By now it’s obvious that the New York Knicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-knicks> are not, at least 
primarily, a sports franchise at this point of their existence. They are really 
more of a long-running dark comedy occasionally interrupted by athletic 
displays that usually – but by no means always – resemble NBA games. Even by 
the Knicks’ standards, however, the events of the last few days have been 
unusual.


On Monday night, the Knicks players had to prepare for a game without knowing 
the status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/derrick-rose-missing-new-york-knicks-awol?CMP=edi_3177>
 of one of their team-mates. Starting point guard Derrick Rose did not show, 
and his team’s attempts to contact him failed. Considering the circumstances, 
perhaps it wasn’t surprising that they suffered one of the worst losses of 
their season. During the game, their highest-paid player, Carmelo Anthony 
earned his third ejection of the season, while big manKyle O’Quinn was tossed 
<http://thebiglead.com/2017/01/10/video-anthony-davis-could-be-the-latest-victim-of-knicks-crumbling-season/>
 after a flagrant foul on Pelicans star Anthony Davis, who scored 40 points and 
18 rebounds against the Knicks defense.

Derrick Rose says he skipped Knicks game to be with his mother in Chicago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/derrick-rose-knicks-chicago-family>
While it’s not extraordinarily rare for a player to miss a game, the fact that 
Rose had apparently become completely unreachable was not only odd but 
downright concerning. His absence became the biggest story in the league, even 
eclipsing the news coming out of Chicago, where the Bulls had benched Rajon 
Rondo, Rose’s theoretical replacement, onRondo Bobblehead Night 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/rajon-rondo-celebrated-his-bobblehead-night-with-another-dnp-cd-064639399.html>
.

After the game, word spread to the media that Rose was OK, which eroded the 
biggest fears surrounding his no-show, but only added to the mystery. The next 
day, Rosetold the media 
<http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/18445112/new-york-knicks-derrick-rose-returns-team-going-awol>
 that his absence was due to a family issue. “It had nothing to do with the 
team or basketball,” Rose said during his oblique apology. “That’s the first 
time I ever felt like that emotionally and I had to be with my family.”

At least publicly, the Knicks have accepted Rose’s apology, merely fining him 
for his unexcused absence rather than suspending him. Still, no matter how 
valid his reasons for leaving were, it’s hard to imagine that this incident 
won’t affect his future with the team. The mere fact thatRose claims 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/after-absence-fiasco-its-now-on-derrick-rose-to-restore-his-standing-004112366.html>
 that he avoided taking the team’s calls because “he needed the space to myself 
and needed to be with my mom,” suggests there are other issues at play here.

Rose has been a solid contributor this season, averaging 17.3 points, 4.5 
assists and 3.9 rebounds per game, but he hasn’t proven himself to be 
irreplaceable. In fact, Rose’s play hasn’t been enough to keep him off the 
bench. Jeff Hornacek has benched him late in games, often playing rookie Ron 
Baker in his place, something which may havestrained Rose’s relationship 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/sources-derrick-roses-game-absence-a-surprise-to-knicks-031539867.html>
 with the Knicks head coach.

The Knicks traded for Rose, along with Justin Holiday, in an offseason deal 
that sent Jose Calderon, Jerian Grant and Robin Lopez to the Chicago Bulls. 
They did this despite the fact that the former MVP has been on an 
injury-related decline for the last several seasons. Rose was also in the 
middle of a civil trial involving charges of sexual assault when the Knicks 
acquired him, which caused him to miss most of the pre-season. (Rose was 
eventually cleared of the charges, which he celebrated by triumphantlyposing 
with the jurors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/19/derrick-rose-rape-trial-verdict-consent-nba-jury-photos>
, an action that didn’t exactly allay any character concerns people had about 
him.)

Given the seriousness of the latest Rose incident, one would think that we 
would have heard from Knicks team president Phil Jackson, the man who made that 
decision to bring in Rose in the first place. However, furthering Jackson’s 
growing reputation as an absentee landlord, he’s beencompletely silent 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2017/01/10/derrick-rose-knicks-disappearance-phil-jackson-mistakes-carmelo-anthony>
 on the affair. It’s likely that he is attempting to keep a low profile after 
hiscontroversial comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/16/phil-jackson-lebron-james-posse-comment-new-york-knicks>
 where he referred to LeBron James’ business partners as a “posse” andthe 
public announcement 
<https://twitter.com/PhilJackson11/status/813955607250096128>of his broken 
engagement with Jeanie Buss, team president of the Los Angeles Lakers.
Ian Begley (@IanBegley) 
Phil Jackson just walked out of the Knicks practice facility. He politely 
declined comment.
 <https://twitter.com/IanBegley/status/818909189594456064> January 10, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/IanBegley/status/818909189594456064> 
It’s understandable that he would want to draw more attention to himself, but 
this is the exact time when a true leader would stand up rather than passing 
off all of the PR work to his latest head coach.


Even before Rose’s no-show, the Knicks have been struggling. Despite their 
early-season success, much of it thanks to Kristaps Porzingis’ surprisingly 
rapid development into an all-star caliber player, the Knicks’ record has 
dropped to 17-21 after losing eight of their last nine games.


Of course, their current record, which puts them in 11th place in the Eastern 
Conference, might just be more indicative of where the Knicksshould be 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/the-knicks-are-bad-because-they-were-never-actually-good/?utm_source=vicesportstwitter>
 right now. The Knicks’ biggest mistake with the Rose trade might have been 
believing that they were a team that should make “win now” moves in the first 
place. Ideally, the Knicks would be looking to surround Porzingis with young 
talent, not surrounding him with veterans with minimal upside.

Maybe the Knicks, as an organization, are just incapable of such long-term 
thinking. It certainly doesn’t help that Jackson has been making moves like he 
doesn’t expect to be around for more than a few seasons. This would explain why 
Jackson extended Anthony and giving hima no-trade clause 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/24622633/report-carmelo-anthony-has-no-trade-clause-opt-out-in-new-deal>
, brought in Rose and what’s left of Joakim Noah, and putting together a team 
that, at best, could luck their way into the second round of the playoffs and, 
at worst, could end up being a dysfunctional joke.

The last few days suggest that the Knicks’ situation is much closer to the 
latter than the former.

 