
That proverbial wall of worry? With the election approaching, the Federal 
Reserve keeping investors on edge and the stock market emerging (possibly) from 
an earnings recession, it seems to be getting taller every day. Can stock 
market investors scale it? Will they even be willing to make the attempt?

 If you listen to at least one group of investment pundits, they should. 
Armageddon is not on the horizon, the argument goes, and we should all be 
taking advantage of this uncertainty to load up on US stocks. Not that many 
people are thinking that way.

 “You’d have more investor interest in a water purification plant in Botswana 
than in the Standard & Poor’s 500,” said Richard Bernstein, CEO and chief 
investment officer of Richard Bernstein Advisors, at a luncheon held in New 
York by Eaton Vance Investment Managers.

Eaton Vance, a mutual funds firm for which Bernstein manages two funds and 
provides investment insight, is one of several firms that every so often puts 
its top money managers in front of financial journalists, to opine on the 
global markets.

Last week, part of Bernstein’s mission, and that of his fellow speaker Eddie 
Perkin, chief equity investment officer at Eaton Vance, was to get out word 
that the odds of a stock market meltdown are minimal, or at least far, far 
lower than the fears of investors.

Those fears seem to be at astonishingly high levels. 

Eaton Vance released its fourth-quarter Advisor Top-of Mind Index 
<https://funds.eatonvance.com/advisor-top-of-mind-index.php>, a quarterly 
survey of more than 1,000 financial advisers which captures how they and their 
clients are thinking. And theyare worried: 76% responded that their clients 
were motivated by fear and 89% said clients viewed market volatility as a risk 
rather than an opportunity.

Anxiety ahead of any presidential election is hardly unusual. Even without a 
change in leadership, elections bring change or its prospect at the 
congressional level. For investors, change is a Bad Thing.

When you can’t predict what’s going to happen next, it is nearly impossible 
for analysts to pin a future value on a stream of corporate earnings, on which 
mutual fund managers and others base their buy and sell decisions.

It’s hard to find a more complex backdrop than this election. Will the Fed 
raise interest rates? When? By how much? How will Britain and its European 
soon-to-be-former partners handletheir divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/anniversary-of-big-bang-on-the-lse-tinged-with-post-brexit-anxiety>
 and what will that mean for global trade and the value of the dollar, on which 
depends the prosperity of US exporters?

Throw into the mix angst about trade policy, foreign affairs and all the other 
stuff a new president will concern herself or himself with, and it’s little 
wonder that investors are scurrying to cash.

Cash holdings by portfolio managers are at the highest levels recorded by one 
survey since the immediate aftermath of the September 11 attacks,15 years ago 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/moneybeat/2016/10/18/fund-managers-cash-hoard-returns-to-15-year-high/>
. In October, global fund managers have been keeping an average of nearly 6% of 
their assets in cash. That’s more than they had in the wake of the 2008 
financial crisis.

Other bearish indicators are flashing red lights. Some are esoteric, like one 
tied to the options market and known as the “skew”. It rises in price along 
with the cost to buy options that will pay off when stocks fall, relative to 
the cost to purchase options that rise in price when stocks gain ground. That 
metrichas hit record highs 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-12/docile-vix-masks-surging-prices-for-stock-hedges-before-election>
 this month.

 Add to that the perennial worries that stocks are overvalued – perhaps more 
so than they have been since the beginning of the 21st century 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/funds-baml-survey-idUSL8N1BP2G6>. The trailing 
price/earnings ratio for the S&P 500 index is now about 24, meaning that 
investors are paying about $24 for every $1 of profits generated by the 
companies in the index in the last 12 months.

The prospective P/E ratio, which is forward-looking, is about 18, meaning you 
would pay about $18 for every $1 of earnings. It’s a quick and easy valuation 
metric that gives you a way to tell how important the market sees those 
earnings as being, and how hard it would be to get that income anywhere else. 
For context, the long-term average P/E ratio for the S&P 500 index is about 15, 
so by that measure, you’d have to say current valuations are above average. But 
are they excessive?

 Not if you’re asking Richard Bernstein and his colleagues at Eaton Vance.

 True, those profits have been more meager recently 
<http://www.barrons.com/articles/punk-profit-growth-wont-kill-this-bull-market-1476508326>
, raising questions about whether lackluster growth in earnings was enough to 
fuel even modest expansion in share prices.

 But that ignores two facts. The first is that the profits recession may be 
drawing to a close 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/10/10/the-profit-recession-on-wall-street-is-coming-to-an-end.html>
. The second is interest rates, which remain near historic lows. The market 
seemed fine with lofty valuations when the interest rate on the 10-year 
Treasury note was at 6.5%. Today, with the 10-year Treasury trading at only 
1.7%, investors shouldn’t find those market multiples terribly unnerving. When 
investors can get such meager returns from bonds, stock-market returns become 
much more valuable and it makes sense to be willing to tolerate higher 
valuations.

 Meanwhile, investors refuse to take on higher levels of risk.

 “Find me an investor who is [borrowing] to get more exposure to equities,” 
Bernstein said.

US stock market and Brexit: a toxic blend of uncertainty and complacency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/us-money-blog/2016/jun/26/us-stock-market-reaction-uk-leave-vote-brexit>
The fact is, he says, that while investors may grumble about volatility and 
lackluster returns – the S&P 500 is ahead only 4.8% so far this year – their 
logic is flawed.

“With volatility comes opportunity,” Bernstein said. “We’re actually in the 
second-largest bull market of the postwar period and the opportunity cost of 
being fearful is high.”

In other words, it’s time to climb the wall of worry. Or, to translate that 
old investment cliche, to take all your extra cash and invest it. Bonds 
certainly aren’t going to generate much income and sitting on cash isn’t 
remotely useful if you want to retire with a nest egg that has grown in size.

You shouldn’t ever allow yourself to be distracted by short-term events, 
however major they appear at the moment. Remember the Iraq war(s)? The 
terrorist attacks of 9/11? Even the financial crisis of 2008? Eventually, after 
all of them, the market snapped back to life and investors with a long-term 
time horizon didn’t have to try to make the tricky or even impossible decision 
of when to jump back in after fleeing in terror.

 That doesn’t necessarily mean that you’ll want to buy everything in the 
market, the Eaton Vance pundits argued. Instead, it’s time to become a little 
more picky.

If the stock market itself isn’t overvalued, some corners are, such as 
consumer staples (think packaged foods): you’ll pay $19 to $20 for every dollar 
of earnings they produce and their earnings aren’t growing very rapidly, noted 
Perkin. He also noted that there has been a rotation away from defensive 
stocks, like utilities, and that investors will need to start taking a look at 
cyclical companies.

 It may even be time to revisit gold mining companies, Bernstein suggested, 
companies that have performed so badly in the last few years that they have 
fallen off most investors’ radar screens completely. Now they arestarting to 
revive 
<https://www.thestreet.com/story/13851452/1/here-s-what-to-know-before-trading-volatile-gold-stocks.html>
.

 “We’re heading into a new market stage: the recovery phase of the profits 
recession,” he says.

 Election or not, this is no time to be running for cover, he insists.
 