
The wildfire that raged through northern Alberta and forced the frantic 
evacuation of more than 90,000 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/07/alberta-wildfire-oil-fort-mcmurray-evacuations>
 was probably caused by humans, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police said on 
Tuesday.


After more than six weeks of investigation, police have determined the fire 
did not start naturally. “Wildfire investigators for the province of Alberta 
have established that the fire was most likely the result of human activity, 
having ruled out lightning as a probable cause,” the RCMP said in a statement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberta%20driver's%20dashcam%20footage%20of%20wildfire%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberta%20driver%27s%20dashcam%20footage%20of%20wildfire%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Falberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video&media=>
Alberta driver’s dashcam footage of wildfire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/05/alberta-drivers-dashcam-footage-of-wildfire-video>
Investigators are now exploring whether the cause is linked to any sort of 
criminal offence. The fire was sparked on 1 May near a wilderness area popular 
with outdoor enthusiasts and police are asking anyone who was there in the days
before the fire to come forward. 
<http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/ab/news-nouvelles/2016/06/160614-fort-mcmurray-investigation-enquete-eng.htm>

Potential causes linked to humans, said Travis Fairweather of Alberta 
Wildfire, include campfires left unattended, debris caught in recreational 
vehicles and downed power lines. “We’re not ruling out any possibilities.”

He said it was too early to speculate on the consequences that could emerge 
after the investigation. “Within the Forest Protection Act you can be held 
accountable for the cost of putting out a wildfire, which, with a wildfire of 
this magnitude, could be a very high cost,” he said. “But that’s not an avenue 
they go down unless they think it was some real negligence on that person’s 
part.”

Authorities are also investigating what he described as “incendiary” causes, 
ranging from playing with matches to setting off fireworks to arson. If 
evidence is found to suggest the fire was deliberately set, the RCMP could 
pursue charges.

The fire was first spotted by an airborne forestry crew about nine miles 
south-west of Fort McMurray, a town of some 90,000 people in the heart of 
Alberta’s oil sands.

Dry conditions, unseasonably hot weather and shifting winds quickly 
transformed the blaze from one that was largely in control to a“nasty, ugly” 
inferno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/07/alberta-wildfire-oil-fort-mcmurray-evacuations>
, in the words of the local fire chief, sending it swelling from about 1,200 
hectares in size to its current size of nearly 590,000 hectares.

The arsonists of Fort McMurray have a name | Martin Lukacs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2016/may/12/the-arsonists-of-fort-mcmurray-have-a-name>
As it grew, its flames breached Fort McMurray’s city limits, prompting the 
hurried evacuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/canada-wildfire-evacuation-fort-mcmurray>
 of the burning city. Residents jumped in their cars – often with little more 
than the clothes on their backs – only to be trapped in gridlocked traffic as 
flames licked the highway.

 “It was something out of a movie,” resident Erica Decker said after the 
evacuation. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/alberta-fort-mcmurray-wildfires-canada>
 “It was absolutely apocalyptic, there were vehicles stranded everywhere, the 
sky was black and orange, there were so many people trapped.”

After some 45 days of firefighting, authorities in Alberta said this week that 
crews had finally managed to gain the upper hand against the fire and had 
managed to halt its spread. Depending on weather conditions, it could take 
another month or two before the wildfire is completely contained and 
extinguished.

Earlier this month, the thousands of residents displaced by the fire began 
re-entering the city,starting the sluggish process of rebuilding their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/fort-mcmurray-wildfire-evacuees-return-home-canada>
 amid the rubble. The blaze destroyed about 10% of the city’s homes.

Oil sands projects in the region have slowly began ramping up production 
again, after the fire forced more than 1m barrels a day of oil sands production 
offline at one point.
 