
The death of Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> has 
prompted tributes and reflections from current and former leaders across the 
world and of all political stripes.

The Venezuelan president, Nicolás Maduro, urged revolutionaries everywhere to “
continue his legacy and carry his flag of independence, of socialism, of 
homeland <https://twitter.com/NicolasMaduro/status/802406334209675264>”, while 
the Ecuadorian president, Rafael Correa,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/MashiRafael/status/802395265344925699>: “A great man has 
gone. Fidel is dead. Long live Cuba! Long live Latin America!”


Evo Morales, the president of Bolivia and a close ally of the late Cuban 
leader, said he was “deeply saddened” at Castro’s death.


“Fidel [was] the only man in the world with so many principles and so many 
values,” he told the Latin American television network Telesur. “He made so 
much history not only forCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>, but 
also for the planet. That is socialism.”

 He added: “There will never again be a man or comrade like Fidel, who devoted 
his life, his knowledge and his struggle not only to the Cuban people but to 
all the people of the world.”

Michelle Bachelet, the president of Chile, offered her condolences over the 
death of “a leader for dignity and social justice in Cuba and Latin America 
<https://twitter.com/mbachelet/status/802474215676837888>”.

The Mexican president, Enrique Peña Nieto, described Castro 
<https://twitter.com/EPN/status/802396992949207040> as “a friend of Mexico, 
[and the] promoter of a bilateral relationship based on respect, dialogue and 
solidarity”.


Salvador Sánchez Cerén, the president of El Salvador, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/sanchezceren/status/802403447140028416?lang=en> in 
Spanish: “Fidel will live forever in the hearts of those of us who fight for 
justice, dignity and fraternity.”

Salvador Sánchez (@sanchezceren) 
Fidel vivirá siempre en los corazones de los pueblos solidarios que luchamos 
por la justicia, dignidad y fraternidad.
 <https://twitter.com/sanchezceren/status/802403447140028416> November 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/sanchezceren/status/802403447140028416> 
Castro turned to the Soviet Union for political and economic support as the US 
tried to kill the Cuban leader or bring down his government, supporting 
multiple assassination attempts and the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by exiles 
in 1961.

Critical financial aid ended abruptly when the Soviet Union fell apart, 
plunging Cuba into the “special period” of deprivations, but ties remained, 
with one senior politiciancalling for a statue 
<http://www.interfax.ru/russia/538700> in Russia just hours after Castro’s 
death.

Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, sent a telegram to the late Cuban leader’s 
brother, Raúl Castro, in which he said: “The name of this distinguished 
statesman is rightly considered the symbol of an era in modern world history. 
Fidel Castro was a sincere and reliable friend of Russia.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98e72ce76b8bee3cdc64cb59ac830ab6bbd5a02a%2F0_48_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Developing%20world%20leaders%20pay%20respects%20to%20Castro%2C%20their%20champion%20during%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Developing%20world%20leaders%20pay%20respects%20to%20Castro%2C%20their%20champion%20during%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98e72ce76b8bee3cdc64cb59ac830ab6bbd5a02a%2F0_48_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Fidel Castro and Nelson Mandela in 1991. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
Putin’s predecessor, Mikhail Gorbachev, was quoted as telling the Interfax 
news agency that Castro had done “everything possible to destroy the colonial 
system [and] to establish cooperative relations”.

He added: “Fidel survived and strengthened the country during the most severe 
US blockade, while there was enormous pressure on him, and still led his 
country out of the blockade on the road of independent development.”

The French president, François Hollande, condemned human rights abuses in 
Cuba, but paid tribute to the transformations Castro brought to a desperately 
poor country known primarily as a playground for wealthy Americans before he 
swept to power.

“Fidel Castro was a towering figure of the 20th century. He incarnated the 
Cuban revolution, in both its hopes and subsequent disillusionments,” Hollande 
said in a statement. The men met in Cuba in 2015, when Hollande made the first 
visit by a French head of state to Cuba since the revolution.

“France, which condemned human rights abuses in Cuba, had equally challenged 
the US embargo, and France was glad to see the two countries re-establish 
dialogue and open ties between themselves,” the Socialist party leader said.

China’s official news agency Xinhua paid tribute to his economic vision, 
although China has a far more open and freewheeling system than Havana 
controls. It quoted Castro: “’The people of theAmericas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> want neither freedom without food, 
nor food without freedom.’

“The Cuban leader was a pioneer in battling the current international economic 
order, particularly against the capitalist system, neoliberal globalisation, 
foreign debt and exploitation of natural resources,” theXinhua report 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2016-11/26/content_27493519.htm> said.

The UK foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, said: “Fidel Castro’s death marks the 
end of an era for Cuba and the start of a new one for Cuba’s people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942fccf7719166e38d6d3b6bc8c6698968ecf3de%2F0_68_1968_1181%2F1968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Developing%20world%20leaders%20pay%20respects%20to%20Castro%2C%20their%20champion%20during%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Developing%20world%20leaders%20pay%20respects%20to%20Castro%2C%20their%20champion%20during%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castro-developing-world-leaders-pay-respects-cold-war-champion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942fccf7719166e38d6d3b6bc8c6698968ecf3de%2F0_68_1968_1181%2F1968.jpg>
 Fidel Castro and then-president of Venezuela Hugo Chavez in 2006. Photograph: 
vi/Rex/Shutterstock 
In a measured statement released on Saturday morning, Spain’s foreign ministry 
said: “A figure of great historic importance has gone, a man who brought about 
a turning point in the country’s evolution and whose great influence was felt 
across the region. As the son of Spanish parents, former President Castro 
always maintained strong links with Spain and was bound by ties of blood and 
culture.”


Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, was more lavish with his condolences, 
calling Castro a “legendary revolutionary and orator”. In a statement, he 
added: “It is with deep sorrow that I learned today of the death of Cuba’s 
longest-serving president … We join the people ofCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> today in mourning the loss of this 
remarkable leader.

Trudeau also made reference the longstanding friendship between his father, 
former prime minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau, and Castro: “While a 
controversial figure, both Mr Castro’s supporters and detractors recognise his 
tremendous dedication and love the Cuban people who had a need and lasting 
affection forEl Comandante.”

The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, described the news as tragic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-cuban-leader-live-updates?page=with:block-58393625e4b0cc60d34773f0#block-58393625e4b0cc60d34773f0>
, adding: “Fidel Castro was one of the most iconic personalities of the 20th 
century. India mourns the loss of a great friend. I extend my deepest 
condolences to the government and people of Cuba on the sad demise of Fidel 
Castro. May his soul rest in peace.”

Fidel Castro death: Cuba declares nine days of national mourning – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-cuban-leader-live-updates>
Eulogies to El Comandante also came thick and fast from across Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. From Algiers to Cape Town, Fidel 
Castro is remembered not as a dictator but as a friend, ally and, in some 
places, a saviour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20leaders%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Cuban%20revolutionary%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20leaders%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Cuban%20revolutionary%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video&media=>
World leaders pay tribute to Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/world-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video>
Cuba under Castro fiercely opposed South Africa’s apartheid regime and its 
western backers, and supported the African National Congress, the most 
prominent party in the nation’s liberation struggle.

Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader and first president of post-apartheid South 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, was a deep admirer. 
“Comrade Castro’s leadership remains an inspiration to revolutionary movements 
committed to social justice worldwide,” the ANC said on Saturday.

Jacob Zuma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, the beleaguered ANC and 
South African president, said that Castro had dedicated his life to “the 
freedom of other oppressed people around the world”. In the 1970s and 1980s, 
Cuban troops played a critical and bloody role on Cold War battlefields in 
Angola and Ethiopia that has never been forgotten in the region.

The independence of Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> from 
Portugal in 1975, obtained with the aid of Cuban forces, removed a key ally of 
South African rulers that they saw as a buffer against majority rule and 
socialism.
Charles Onyango-Obbo (@cobbo3) 
RIP #FidelCastro <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FidelCastro?src=hash> (Aug.13, 
1926-Nov. 25, 2016) The African liberation movement owes you a huge gift of 
gratitudehttps://t.co/aP67ZzaWKK <https://t.co/aP67ZzaWKK> 
pic.twitter.com/TIGexLw32H <https://t.co/TIGexLw32H>
 <https://twitter.com/cobbo3/status/802418197542617088> November 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/cobbo3/status/802418197542617088> 
Castro was convinced that the global stage for the world revolution was 
Africa. “The African liberation movement owes you a huge gift of gratitude, 
said Charles Onyango-Obbo, a Kenyan columnist and publisheron Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/cobbo3/status/802418197542617088>.

In Algeria, one of the first destinations of the tens of thousands of Cuban 
doctors who worked on the frontline of cold war conflicts and in developing 
nations from the early 1960s onwards, Castro was remembered asa “great friend 
of the Algerian people” 
<http://www.huffpostmaghreb.com/djamel-abada/souvenir-de-la-visite-de-_b_11659444.html>
.
 