
A millennium tip on how to get rich quickish: wind up people on the radio. It 
certainly worked for DJ Steve Penk, who was responsible for the spoof phone 
call to Tony Blair last January in which 'William Hague' offered to get our 
beloved leader a copy of Cher's exercise video. Penk has just signed a new 
contract with London's Capital Radio for Â£1.5 million a year - more than Chris 
Tarrant makes from the station. The third CD of Penk's wind-ups must have ended 
up in many Christmas stockings; the second reached number two in last year's 
mid-price charts.

 So wind-ups have become money-spinning audience-pleasers. Once, they could 
engender terror. In 1938 Orson Welles's War Of The Worlds convinced a nation 
there had been an invasion from another planet, simply by guying the 
conventions of news radio. By the sixties Candid Camera was exploiting new 
technologies and popular gullibility to film members of the public in 
embarrassing situations for comic entertainment.

 What Candid Camera had done to the public, Noel's House Party did to 
well-known figures, in its Gotcha! sequences. But prank broadcasting is 
essentially a radiophonic form, using the telephone and thriving on 
invisibility. Noel Edmonds started his spoofing career as a Radio 1 
breakfast-show DJ, confusing listeners by assuming different guises in his 
Noel's Funny Phone Calls feature.

 Yet for sheer savagery, no one has beaten Victor Lewis-Smith and Chris Morris 
on Radio 1 (interestingly, there are no well-known female practitioners). In 
1990 Lewis-Smith set out to make dangerous radio, and his most potent 
instrument was the telephone. The scourge of po-faced switchboard operators 
everywhere, he phoned Harrods asking to speak to the indelicatessen department 
and demanding sheep's testicles. Lobbying Vatican Radio for a job, he vaunted 
his experience as a Top Shop DJ who could pull in an audience 'as far as boxer 
shorts'.

 Lewis-Smith was the bard of the surreal, a merry prankster whose spoofs 
pushed minor officials to the limits of professional politeness. Most hilarious 
was the way he toyed with BBC and ITV reception, getting them to Tannoy 
colleagues he was supposedly due to meet. BBC TV blithely paged General 
Pinochet, while the woman at Broadcasting House was quite happy to call for 
Marcel Proust until Lewis-Smith told her that he couldn't be there because he'd 
died in 1922.

 Lewis-Smith's hoaxes invited a complicity of superiority between hoaxer and 
listener: we clever Proust-knowers could mock his ignorant victims. But at his 
best he demonstrated the absurdity of bureaucracy and its unyielding, 
programmed responses.

 Indeed, radio wind-ups are superb revealers of codes and conventions of 
everyday life because they break them. On Radio 1, Alan Parker - Urban 
Warrior's unreconstructed Trotskyist wouldn't modify his ideology for social 
comfort, while on Radio 4 John Shuttleworth plays the no-hoper who violates the 
social rules, offering himself as head of a college of music with experience of 
one instrument (electronic keyboard). These spoofers also have a 
preternaturally high embarrassment threshold.

 The apogee of radio wind-ups occurred in 1994 when Radio 1's Chris Morris 
convinced Tory minister John Selwyn Gummer that, because of planned industrial 
action, the BBC was recording the news 24 hours in advance. Gummer agreed to 
comment on Britain's Euro-veto and then obligingly attacked the Labour Party's 
stance, producing what Morris later called 'instant indignation'. In the coup 
de grace, recorded just in case Labour changed its policy in the intervening 24 
hours, Gummer duly fulminated about that too. 'He was angry about a fiction - 
that's a soundbite mentality for you.' No one else has shown the lengths to 
which celebrities will go to become better-known, their moral fervour available 
for hire. In his Channel 4 TV series Brass Eye, Morris got big names 
(including, neatly, Noel Edmonds) to speak with touching sincerity about 
nonsensical issues, such as a non-existent drug called Cake. Chris Morris 
doesn't do wind-ups any more - there were none in his outstanding recent Blue 
Jam series - but now everyone else does.

 Wind-up broadcasting is one of a number of growing genres, such as spoof chat 
shows (Edna Everage, Mrs Merton, Alan Partridge) and bloomer/outtake shows 
(It'll Be Alright On The Night, Jeremy Beadle), that yoke actuality to 
entertainment and blur their boundaries. Some characters, such as Mark Thomas, 
Michael Moore and Louis Theroux, use them as faux-naif weapons to elicit and 
expose repressive policy.

 But elsewhere, as with Penk, the relationship between hoaxer and victim is 
far cosier. Penk is e-mailed by people suggesting he call their relatives. Some 
of Penk's pranks are witty, as when every sentence he uttered to an American 
cop came from a Bruce Springsteen song title. But unlike Lewis-Smith and 
Morris, he chummily reveals himself at the end of his spoofs, praising his 
victims for being good sports. There's something stomach-churning about hearing 
Michael Winner delighting in a 'jolly good gag, Steve'. And when 'Julian Clary' 
winds up Bernard Manning, he evinces not Manning's bigotry but yet another 
compliment: 'You've made my day today.' Most big names rumble him; being 
spoofed has become just another aspect of celebrity.

 Now Penk too is a celebrity, even though he has to call in Jon Culshaw when 
his wind-ups require impersonation. It was Culshaw who did Hague phoning Blair, 
though Penk, who writes the scripts, got all the publicity.

 There has always been an element of humiliation in hoaxes, as when Chris 
Morris got old women to read out out pornographic sentences they didn't 
understand, but the Radio Authority was sufficiently concerned last year to 
issue a directive on the subject. It stipulated that wind-up calls should be 
good-humoured and not exploit victims in an unacceptable way. It also issued 
two warnings last year - to Kiss FM, which had tried to get the Radio Authority 
itself to give examples of bad language over the air, and to Metro Radio for a 
call to the Child Support Agency, which, it was judged, had wasted their time.

 The spoofed, of course, often complain that their time has been wasted, as in 
1995, when Canadian DJ Pierre Brassard got through to Buckingham Palace and 
talked to the Queen for 15 minutes on air by pretending to be the Canadian PM.

 The final proof that wind-ups are no longer subversive came last year with 
the arrival of spoof-call adverts, in which an apparent representative of the 
British Institute of Barrel Inspectors harangues people who use barrels for 
anything other than brewing Marston Pedigree. The metamorphosis of wind-up 
radio is complete. It's now used to sell beer.
 