
Some reviews stick around and Diane Kruger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/diane-kruger> had the misfortune to receive a 
memorably withering one when she was starting out as an actress. “Too beautiful 
to play a role of any substance,” was the offhand dismissal from theNew York 
Timescritic, Manohla Dargis, in 2006. The comment was mostly a judgment on Troy
, the eye-wateringly expensiveIliad adaptation in which she was cast opposite 
Brad Pitt and Orlando Bloom as a blond, blue-eyed Helen. The film-makers wanted 
an unknown for the part and Kruger, a German ex-model, beat more than 3,000 
women to be the face that, in Christopher Marlowe’s words, “launch’d a thousand 
ships”.

Ten years – and around 30 films – on, the New York Times line still irks 
Kruger. “What an ignorant and stupid thing to say!” she exclaims, on the phone 
from Paris; she splits her time between there and New York. “But it really 
affected me at the time because I thought, ‘Why is she talking about the way I 
look? Why isn’t she talking about what I do in the movie?’ And so that really 
taught me to a) not read critics. And b) to just toughen up. So I was like, 
‘Fuck that!’ Or, ‘Fuck them!’ It made me really want to just dig deeper and 
show them I could do other things.”

Because I had such a tumultuous childhood, I was able to express my emotions 
dancing or being on stage

Kruger, now 40, has made a committed effort to change the public perception of 
her – and the project continues. She is perhaps best known here and in the 
States for playing kick-ass double agent Bridget von Hammersmark in Quentin 
Tarantino’s second world war epicInglourious Basterds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/23/inglourious-basterds-philip-french>
or as Sonya Cross, a detective with Asperger’s syndrome, in the American 
version of the Scandi thrillerThe Bridge. But mostly she works in France, 
leaning towards parts for strong women in darker, independent films, some of 
which she produces. She’s been Marie Antoinette (Farewell, My Queen), Abraham 
Lincoln’s stepmother (The Better Angels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/the-better-angels-review-torpid-take-lincolns-childhood>
) and a Bosnian immigrant taxi driver (Unknown). Kruger is in demand on 
magazine covers and never seems to make a misstep on the red carpet, but it’s 
clear that’s not where her heart lies.

And Kruger’s new movie, The Infiltrator, continues to make her case. It tells 
the true story of a customs official in 1980s Florida calledRobert Mazur 
<http://www.tampabay.com/things-to-do/movies/tampas-robert-mazur-talks-about-the-life-behind-the-infiltrator/2284472>
 (played byBreaking Bad’s Bryan Cranston) who went undercover to bring down a 
Colombian drug cartel and the banks that supported it. Kruger is a rookie 
special agent, Kathy Ertz, who comes in on the sting as Mazur’s wife. It is a 
superior thriller, tense and twisty, and Cranston is predictably excellent, but 
Kruger is sharp and spirited, more than holding her own in a role that could 
easily have just been arm candy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7f48593a28d6d64fa251eb041bc6610027ddd91%2F0_0_1890_2173%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7f48593a28d6d64fa251eb041bc6610027ddd91%2F0_0_1890_2173%2F1890.jpg>
 Diane Kruger as Face of the Year 1992. Photograph: Action 
Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Kruger, it turns out, is not what you would expect in a few ways. Her perfect, 
accentless English is more sweary than you might imagine and her co-stars are 
often surprised she is an excellent joke teller. She’s winningly honest about 
her career and personal life. And it’s hard not to warm to someone who, when I 
ask why she gave up modelling, says: “The third time the 1960s came around I 
was like, ‘Are wereally taking this picture again? I’m really, really bored.’”

Before modelling, there was ballet. Kruger grew up as Diane Heidkrüger, in a 
village in the heart of Germany, not far from Hanover. Each summer from the age 
of 11, she was shipped off to London on her own for intensive training with the 
Royal Ballet School. It sounds quite full-on,Black Swan-esque, but Kruger has 
fond memories of those trips: “My home was a little chaotic and I always loved 
getting away,” she recalls. Her father was an alcoholic and frequently absent; 
her parents went through a messy divorce when she was 13.

A knee injury around this time derailed her ballet aspirations, but, from 
puberty onwards, Kruger had already secretly feared the worst. “I don’t think I 
had the talent to be a prima ballerina,” she admits. “I was really depressed 
for a good year, but now I’m older, [I see] it was a really great life lesson: 
you don’t always get what you want. And I think it actually led me, through 
very mysterious ways, to acting. Because I had such a tumultuous childhood, I 
was able to express my emotions dancing or being on stage. It’s so much about 
getting it out and putting that passion or frustration into your performance 
and then being rewarded for that.”

Kruger started to model, aged 15, after being chosen to represent Germany in 
the Elite Model Look competition that has also launched the careers of Cindy 
Crawford and Gisele Bündchen. When it was suggested that she move to Paris, no 
one was more dubious than her family. “I did not grow up in a household where 
that was even a subject or encouraged,” says Kruger. “My mother was very much 
into making sure that I did OK in school because she wanted me not to be 
dependent on a man, because her life had been turned upside down. She was very 
loving but very strict and, if anything, she was incredibly disappointed when I 
chose to do modelling. She was like, ‘Why would you do that? You don’t look 
like a model.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4105689212d0c2b833387f109141c7c2ddae7135%2F237_0_3083_1946%2F3083.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4105689212d0c2b833387f109141c7c2ddae7135%2F237_0_3083_1946%2F3083.jpg>
 Diane Kruger with Michael Fassbender in Tarantino’s Inglourious Basterds. 
Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Kruger laughs. “Not that she was condescending and not encouraging, but she 
was like, ‘You’re crazy!’ basically. Again, now I’m older – and I could have a 
daughter the age I was when I left home – I can only admire her faith in me, 
because there’s no way I’d let my 16-year-old daughter go to Paris for a year.”

The jump to acting in her mid-20s was, again, partly personal choice and 
partly Kruger’s hard-headed realism. Although she booked covers for ParisVogue 
and featured in ads for Chanel and Giorgio Armani, she often felt like the swan 
whose legs whir incessantly to stay afloat. “I really don’t look like a model,” 
she insists. “I’m only 5ft 7in; I’m not like your 5ft 10in obvious model 
strutting down the street, so I always felt insecure about how I looked and I 
put so much pressure on myself. The minute I decided, ‘Why am I doing this to 
myself?’ my life got a lot better.”

There is a sense that I don’t have any time to waste... I’ve got to put myself 
first, no more excuses

The role of Helen in Troy, which Kruger won almost immediately after the 
switch, was, she says now, a mixed blessing. “It was hugely daunting, because I 
knew they didn’t necessarily hire me because I was Julia Roberts,” she says. 
“But it was the biggest thing to get at that time in Hollywood. I’d never even 
been to Hollywood, it allowed me to get an agent. I went from doing literally 
one movie to being known, or my face at least, throughout the world.”

Kruger has become more circumspect about the parts she takes, especially in 
American films. ForThe Infiltrator, the draw first and foremost was Cranston. 
“I was fan-girling a lot, just because of the show,” she says, meaningBreaking 
Bad. “It’s an embarrassing thing to say, but you’d be hard pressed to find any 
actor in Los Angeles, or even in England, who wouldn’t want to work withBryan 
Cranston <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston>. He’s a 
character actor who became a movie star and that doesn’t happen very often. You 
forget who he is, his face just changes. In fact, so much so, I ran into him in 
theVanity Fair party, after we wrapped The Infiltrator, and I walked past him 
without recognising him. Definitely one of the best actors I’ve ever worked 
with – ever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3c9d2c87d723ee1ceb19c22298543d528111d9%2F0_92_3648_2240%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diane%20Kruger%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20truly%20believe%20the%20best%20is%20yet%20to%20come%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fdiane-kruger-interview-best-is-yet-to-come-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3c9d2c87d723ee1ceb19c22298543d528111d9%2F0_92_3648_2240%2F3648.jpg>
 Kruger as Helen in Troy: ‘It was hugely daunting.’ Photograph: Warner Bros 
The Infiltrator has had a decidedly odd journey to the cinema. The director is 
Brad Furman (who had success withThe Lincoln Lawyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/17/the-lincoln-lawyer-review>) and 
the screenplay – in a possible movie-history first – is by his mother, Ellen 
Brown Furman, a former lawyer who has turned to writing in her 60s. “That was 
an interesting dynamic to say the least, but I kind of loved it,” says Kruger. 
“Brad is such a good and nice Jewish boy who adores his mom.” Meanwhile, 
despite the story playing out in tropical Florida, the film, for budgetary 
reasons, was mostly shot in the UK in rainy, cold springtime. Locations 
included a bowling alley next to Heathrow and Dunsfold Aerodrome, home of the
Top Gearracetrack. Did Kruger see the Stig? “No, what is that?” she replies.

Kruger turned 40 in July, but celebrations were rather muted. Shortly after 
the big day, it was officially announced that she and Joshua Jackson (Pacey from
Dawson’s Creek) were splitting after more than 10 years together. “It wasn’t 
the most fun time; my partner and I separated so it was a transitional time in 
my life,” she says with a wry snort. “But a very positive one.”

Was there a sense that, as a new decade loomed, Kruger found herself assessing 
her personal and professional happiness? “You know, if you’d have asked me that 
a year ago, I’d have said absolutely not, it doesn’t matter,” she replies. “And 
it kind of didn’t. And it kind of doesn’t. But there is a sense that I don’t 
have any time to waste. Like, I want to do what I want to do or I want to be 
with who I want to be with. I’ve got to put myself first, no more excuses. I’m 
going to live in the now.”

Career-wise, at least, Kruger is on a hot streak. And as she talks you sense 
that she is almost relieved to be entering a phase of her life where her looks 
will be less commented on. “Around 70% of my career is in France, which is an 
amazing place for women who are getting older,” she says. “I’m not daunted. I 
feel and I truly believe that the best is yet to come. I have felt better this 
year about where I am in life and who I am as a person than I have in the past 
10 years.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkFhctJ52bow&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkFhctJ52bow>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkFhctJ52bow&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Infiltrator. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kFhctJ52bow> 
Next up, Kruger plays Catherine Deneuve’s daughter in Tout nous sépare: “It’s 
a really fucked-up movie and I loved every second of it.” But the one she’s 
really excited about is the new project from Fatih Akin, a German director of 
Turkish descent whose films, notablyHead-On 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1416759,00.html>
 andThe Edge of Heaven, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/22/worldcinema.drama> often focus on 
the identity problems of immigrants. Kruger collared Akin at the 2012 Cannes 
festival, where she was a judge, and the new movie,In the Fade, which starts 
shooting this autumn, was written with her in mind.

“I don’t want to give too much away, but my character is very far from what 
people physically think of who I am,” she says. “It’s a transformation and I’ve 
never been more scared about a film than this! Like truly scared. For the last 
month or so, I’ve dreamed about it every night. I can’t wait to get started, 
but I’m dreading the emotional toll of it.

“I’m really scared!” she repeats, but she’s giggling too. Perhaps, after this, 
no one will dismiss her as just a pretty face any more.

The Infiltrator opens on 16 September
 