
I've said it often - the point about the spin doctors and media manipulators 
employed by New Labour is that they're not very clever. They believe they are. 
The vainglorious braggartism ofDerek Draper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/derek-draper> last year gives you a 
flavour of what they really think about themselves: Masters of the Universe, 
every one. Like Tom Wolfe's anti-hero, they confuse their small world with the 
planet the rest of us inhabit.

 It's a cliche that very intelligent people often lack common sense. Perhaps 
Einstein wouldn't have known how to place an accumulator bet. But identifying 
and manipulating public perception was what Peter Mandelson was supposed to 
excel at. Here was a man whose job was telling the Prime Minister the public 
mood and how it could be altered. Yet he himself was the most unpopular member 
of the Government and clearly had no idea whatever how we would react to news 
of an enormous sweetheart loan from a man dependent partly on his patronage, 
and whom his own department was investigating for possible fraud.

 If you employed a barrister who said, 'tell you what, mate, we'll try 
slipping five hundred quid to the judge,' you'd fire him. Yet what Mandelson 
did was no less inappropriate and no less crass. Only Mandy himself didn't see 
that.

 At least Charlie Whelan is recognisably a human being and good company too. 
But his bellowed briefings down the mobe at the Red Lion pub, in the manner of 
a plumber fixing an emergency job, sent a signal to the rest of the world that 
the Treasury was in the hands of incompetent point-scoring amateurs.

 The real scandal about this lot isn't that they hate each other; lots of 
politicians do. It's that too many of them just don't have the brains for the 
task in hand.



 Thank goodness the latest royal wedding is to be downbeat and semi-private. I 
don't think I could have coped with another big one. When friends break up, the 
most poignant memory is of the wedding and its unfulfilled hopes: the couple's 
faces shining with happiness, the solemn excitement of the bridesmaids, the 
chums who have flown in from all round the world, and the blend of panic and 
pride on the face of the bride's father, as he watches thousands of his own 
money disappear down the faces of people he barely knows. It makes a painful 
recollection, and since the royal family have inflicted the experience on the 
nation three times, it's thoughtful of them not to risk it again.

 Given that the horrors of the marriage seem to depend on the magnificence of 
the wedding, perhaps they ought to go the whole way and hold it in a registry 
office. I attended an excellent wedding in Hounslow not long ago; the floral 
arrangements were particularly fine, and the registrar charming. It wouldn't 
make much of a splash in Hello! but it would spare us all a lot of annoyance.



 I don't want to sound like a crusty old bore, but it's a risk I'm always 
prepared to take. I've been reading with fascination a book I got at Christmas 
called The Nation's Favourite, by Simon Garfield (Faber, Â£9.99). It's about 
Radio 1, and it covers in lavish detail the back-biting, the hatreds, the 
rivalries and the agony of trying to get listeners back. This is a job which I 
think is vitally important. As soon as the BBC lets go of popular mass 
broadcasting, the argument for the licence fee will disappear and we'll be 
stuck with all-commercial broadcasting, prop. R Murdoch. A successful Radio 1 
is necessary to keep the Today programme.

 The book describes the incredible importance attached to each DJ. How the 
stars were wooed away from their existing stations, like some Premiership club 
trying to bag Andy Cole or La Scala signing Kiri Te Kanawa. It was all so 
interesting that I started listening to Radio 1 again.

 And it was terrible. Really awful - stunningly, unmitigatedly bad. Wall to 
wall nonsensical jabber. Endless repetition. The vocal equivalent of pimply 
youths preening themselves in the mirror. Even the jocks described as inventive 
risk-takers seem to be prattling bores. I'm not just denouncing the new; I 
thought Jimmy Saville was dreadful too, though Kenny Everett showed how it 
could be done with just a smidgeon of real intelligence and concern for the 
listener.

 After pummelling my ears for some time I felt like the American professor in 
David Lodge's novel Changing Places. Turning on the radio here, 'he listened to 
what he took to be a very funny parody of the worst kind of American radio... 
instead of advertising products, the disc jockey advertised himself - pouring 
out a torrent of drivel generally designed to convey what a jolly, amusing and 
loveable guy he was... it was only after four successive programmes of 
narcissistic gabble that the awful truth dawned on him: Radio One was like this 
all the time.' That was published 24 years ago, and since then things seem to 
have got worse.



 I pledge that this is my last mention of circular letters. I have, however, 
continued my quest for the worst introduction. From America: 'What a year it 
has been... trips, boating, grandchildren, friends, gardening, class reunion, 
and a number of litigation cases!' Or the 'don't we lead more glamorous lives 
than you?' letter from East Sussex: 'Whilst racking our brains for an inspiring 
introduction to our letter this year, Suzanna and Bob, who have been travelling 
the world since June '97, solved the problem for us! They had arrived in the 
Seychelles on a yacht on which they were en route to Denmark from Darwin, 
Australia...' But the worst was one of the many religiose circulars, this one 
also from the States: 'Dear family and friends, This year I am a witness that 
our Lord has used my pain and difficulties to create an awareness of His 
wondrous presence in my life.' Aarghhh!

The Commons Culture committee is off to Australia next week, Bondi Beach being 
the last place on earth where Gerald Kaufman looks underdressed. Their task is 
to find out why the Australians are so much better at sport than us. I can tell 
them now: it's because that wonderful weather keeps children outdoors all day 
doing sporty things. Our weather keeps us indoors. That's why their cultural 
achievements are on a par with our sporting triumphs - few, and highly prized 
as a consequence. Perhaps their culture committee will fly over here to 
investigate why the finest flower of Australian TV is Neighbours.



 A survey this week shows that women were most offended by the car ad on TV in 
which Claudia Schiffer strips naked. No doubt the agency will be delighted by 
this extra publicity, especially as it will mask the real scandal - nobody can 
remember which car it advertised. There's another ad on now, in which a woman 
starts to make love to some hunk who's washing his car while 'him upstairs' is 
asleep. It turns out they're married and the male person in her bed is their 
little boy. That's sexy too, in an obvious sort of way, but I genuinely have no 
idea which car it's advertising (or bed, or wax treatment).
 