 They sold off Alan Clark's wine collection at Christie's yesterday. It was not 
an enormous quantity, but most of it was very good indeed, and the sale fetched 
£52,767. He once famously remarked that it was impossible to entertain properly 
now that good wine cost £100 a bottle - and that was several years ago.
I vaguely imagined that his cellar would be under his house - Saltwood Castle 
in Kent - and would consist of damp, cobwebby walls lined with racks, 
occasionally visited by a hunchbacked butler selecting a dust-covered bottle of 
the Lafite '61. In fact, he kept his wine in the undercroft, one of the castle 
outbuildings, where it lay in wooden cases under old tarpaulins, discarded toys 
and lawnmower parts. The one time I had dinner at the castle, he served 
something quite magnificent - I think it was a Latour, but that was a long time 
ago too.

What's remarkable about the famous scene - hilariously described in his 
diaries - when, as a junior minister, he was completely drunk at the dispatch 
box, was that he could remember all the wines he had consumed (a '61 Chateau 
Palmer, the '75 Palmer "for comparison", then a '61 Pichon Longueville).

For Clark it had to be the best stuff. Once we were to be on stage together at 
the Cheltenham literary festival, and had met in the writers' room beforehand. 
"I can't stand this filthy wine," he said. "Let's go to a pub and drink some 
ale." We finally found a pub, which was hot, sweaty and packed with young 
people listening to ear-blistering music. But we had two pints each, and he was 
quite happy - or at least happier than he would have been forcing down some 
£3.49 a bottle grape-flavoured fluid.
 