
• So the British press will face the judgment of Moses – Sir Alan Moses, who 
is standing down from the court of appeal to head theIndependent Press 
Standards Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/apr/29/press-regulation-ipso>
 (Ipso), the voluntary regulator with powers to fine journalists up to £1m. Let 
us hope things progress more smoothly than one of his most famous cases, as 
prosecutor ofPaul Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/defence-and-security-blog/2012/nov/09/arms-iraq-saddam-hussein>
, a Matrix Churchill director, for selling bomb-making equipment to Saddam 
Hussein. Moses presented the court with immunity certificates from four cabinet 
ministers. The Thatcher government was keen to cover up that it knew all about 
the shipments. But then there was the maverick trade minister Alan Clark, who 
came clean under cross-examination and admitted he had been "economical with 
the actualité" – or rather that he committed perjury in his witness statement – 
by saying that he knew nothing about the arms shipment he had authorised. The 
trial collapsed. Thereafter Moses was elevated to dispense his wisdom on the 
bench and a long-running inquiry into Tory sleaze engulfed the dog days of the 
Major government. Sir Alan may find the quagmire of press regulation a more 
straightforward affair.

• As a judge, Sir Alan is best remembered for a judgment that was overturned. 
He wrote that Tony Blair and Lord Goldsmith besmirched the rule of law by 
stopping the serious fraud office inquiry intoBAE's corrupt dealings with the 
Saudis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/15/bae.armstrade>. The 
government, gripped by panic, rustled up an official who said lives would be at 
stake if we arrested any corrupt Saudis; and the more subservient law lords 
quashed Sir Alan's highly principled decision. Sources at the criminal bar 
stand disappointed, for they were rather hoping he would be elevated to the 
supreme court, which has no criminal law specialist. Instead, he's off to Ipso. 
He probably figures he'll meet just as many criminals dealing with the press.

• The future's bright, the future's nuclear. To those who'd like to get 
involved, we commend the fifth annualNuclear Decommissioning Conference, Europe,
 <http://www.nuclearenergyinsider.com/decom/> in Manchester next month. 
Tickets: £1,495 (the gold pass) and £1,595 (the platinum). Both plus VAT. Steep 
perhaps, but this is an industry in expansion and these are skills for life. 
Perhaps there's financial help available from Iain Duncan Smith.

• As a new series of the action drama 24 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/20/24-live-another-day-jack-bauer-kiefer-sutherland>
 is to be filmed in London, our thoughts turn to the US and matters of 
security. Jack Bauer can't be here all the time, and he's just one guy. And the 
first place he will want to secure is the brand new US embassy, plans for which 
can be seenat Wandsworth town hall 
<http://www.wandsworth.gov.uk/news/article/11419/new_us_embassy_in_nine_elms_approved>
 because the new design required planning permission. Apart from massive 
underground defences, observers note what looks like a long underground escape 
tunnel leading to the Thames. One can't be too careful. Bauer can shoot 
straight. How well can he swim?

• Politics is child's play in France. Since reforming the school timetables, 
there has been much debate about what children should do in the hours between 
the new earlier end of the school day and when their parents collect them after 
work. Workshops have been set up for them to learn such as circus arts, 
architecture and painting. But the new education minister thinks they should 
also put this time to good use by thinking of ways to get France out of the 
economic crisis. "There's a tendency to forget just how children have a fertile 
imagination," said Benoit Hamon. A committee has been set up to sift the ideas. 
During the press conference, 10-year-old Solène unveiled her masterstroke. Make 
the rich pay more taxes and give the poor higher wages. Imagine that. From 
babes and sucklings.

• Finally, the latest Oldie magazine has an offering from Wilfred De'Ath, 
author, journalist and magnet for controversy. They're really quite excited 
about it. "At last! A column which will not cause offence! With no sleazy 
references to his pathetic sexual fantasies and a marked absence of his 
trademark racism and homophobia, this could be an Oldie first. He has also 
become an atheist." And he was such a man of faith.

Twitter: @hugh_muir <https://twitter.com/hugh_muir> 
 