
The extremes of British political interviewing are represented by Sir Jimmy 
Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/07/broadcaster-sir-jimmy-young-dies-aged-95>
 and Jeremy Paxman. Whereas Paxo famously asked ex-home secretary Michael Howard
the same question 12 times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/apr/22/election2005.uk5>, while 
working through his full repertoire of “Who farted?” faces, Young would have 
called Howard “Michael”, while making 14 different and courteous inquiries.

The question of which broadcaster revealed more of the politics and 
personalities of their guests is, though, harder than it looks. Young liked to 
quote two proverbs – “softly softly catchee monkey” and “you catch more flies 
with honey than with vinegar” – that were also invoked by another broadcaster 
criticised for his soft-sofa approach, Sir David Frost.

Broadcaster Sir Jimmy Young dies aged 95
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/07/broadcaster-sir-jimmy-young-dies-aged-95>
And, although the Paxmans and John Humphrys of the schedules provide more of 
the crackling theatricality that is also a part of good broadcasting, any tally 
of monkeys and flies caught by their side and Young-Frost would be a close 
contest.

The biggest question mark over Jimmy’s legacy is that no single interview ever 
produced a news story or publicity rush to match Paxo’s repetitious encounter 
with Howard; Neil Kinnock’s 1987 admission to Frost that he would prefer 
hand-to-hand combat rather than nuclear weapons to deter Russian invasion; or 
Humphrys’ here’s-your-P45 evisceration of briefBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> director general George Entwistle.

No other British interview has a single-person archive, though, to equal the 
significance – first journalistic and then historical – of Young’s 14 
conversations with Margaret Thatcher. If played end to end, they would capture 
the vocal, ideological and perhaps eventually psychiatric transitions of her 
career. For all the apparent chumminess, Young understood the need to raise the 
growing public and party hostility towards Thatcher (“some people really hate 
you, Margaret, do you know why?”). Though the answers were generally 
dismissive, her rejection of the criticisms was revealing of her increasing 
intransigent isolation. An alternative proverb for soft, gentler interviewers 
might be that you are more likely to wound a boxer with their guard down than 
their gloves up.

Sir Jimmy Young obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/08/sir-jimmy-young-obituary> 
Young can be seen as a broadcasting equivalent of Ronald Reagan. Just as the 
politician used an actor’s warmth and timing to play convincingly the role of 
president, so Young applied the gifts of empathy and vocal modulation from his 
first career in singing to succeed in a field that was previously the preserve 
of journalists. Like Reagan, Young was usually working from cue cards 
(producers provided detailed briefings and question lists), but had the knack 
of making them seem his own.

Although the two interviewees he seemed most to enjoy meeting were the 
perfectly BBC-balanced pair of Thatcher and Tony Benn, Young was usually 
assumed during his broadcasting career to be a Conservative by conviction, and 
this view seemed to be confirmed by the Sunday Express column he wrote until 
2014 after being sacked from hisRadio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> show. However, Paxman has described 
himself as a “one-nation Tory”, a description that Frost would also almost 
certainly have accepted.

Intriguingly, this means that three of the most high-impact BBC interviewers 
in the second half of the 20th century were – despite their very different 
styles – privately men of the right. The significance of this may be that it 
helped them to avoid constructing questions from the liberal-left assumptions 
to which BBC journalists can easily tend.
 