
There is a temptation to assume that Princess Leia, and by extension Carrie 
Fisher <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>, who played the 
Alderaanian Rebel leader in four movies across more than five decades, belongs 
to all of us. For those who grew up with the fiery bun-headed teenager in 
1977’s Star Wars, her youthful image is burned so deeply into our cerebra that 
we can recall her countenance in an instant.

Related: Star Wars focus group to plot life in Leia-less universe after Carrie 
Fisher's death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/star-wars-braintrust-to-plot-life-in-leia-less-universe-after-carrie-fishers-death>

As the late actor was given to mentioning whenever she felt like embarrassing 
George Lucas –her venomous 2004 congratulatory speech at the Star Wars 
creator’s AFI lifetime celebration <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZ97s396kb0>
 springs to mind – the film-maker did in fact “own” Fisher for decades, as part 
of her deal to appear in the original space opera trilogy meant that his 
company Lucasfilm retained her image rights. “Every time I look in the mirror I 
have to send you a cheque for a couple of bucks,” joked the actor and comic in 
her famous roasting of Lucas at Hollywood’s Kodak theater.

Now Disney, which presumably inherited those rights when it bought Lucasfilm 
for $4bn in 2010 and embarked on a new Star Wars trilogy, has to decide how 
fully to use them in the wake of Fisher’s distressing death in the final days 
of 2016.A new piece in the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/carrie-fisher-episode-viii-how-star-wars-will-handle-leias-future-960849>
 suggests Leia, reimagined as a general in the Resistance against her estranged 
son Kylo Ren’s nefarious First Order during the events of 2015’s The Force 
Awakens, was due to play a major role in the two films that will complete the 
new triptych, Rian Johnson’s Episode VIII and Colin Trevorrow’s Episode IX, out 
in December of this year and 2019 respectively.

Leia’s key scenes are reportedly a meeting with her long-lost brother Luke 
Skywalker (Mark Hamill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-hamill>), and a 
showdown-of-sorts withAdam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/29/adam-driver-lots-things-said-about-face-interview>
’s patricidal Ren, which promises to be a family reunion to make Skywalker’s 
father-and-son battles with Darth Vader look like breakfast with the Brady 
Bunch. The Hollywood Reporter’s sources suggest Fisher was due to play a 
greater part in the events of IX than she will do in VIII, scenes for which 
were shot before the actor’s death.

This leaves Disney with a Death Star-sized quandary. Write Leia out, and deny 
the Rebel leader – and by extension Fisher – her full part in the new trilogy? 
Or use digital tinkering – similar to the process that brought Peter Cushing 
back to life forRogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> – to create a 
CGI Leia who can play a reasonably full, if somewhat ghoulish part in the final 
instalment, a move which would surely have its own ethical ramifications so 
soon after the actor’s death.

The above is complicated by two further factors. The first is Fisher’s famous 
uneasiness over Lucas’s exploitation of her younger self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/slave-leia-controversy-star-wars-objectification>
 in the original trilogy, via that gold bikini scene andthe film-maker’s 
distinctly murky assertion that there were no brassieres in space 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/carrie-fishers-dead-self-written-obituary-wishful-drinking-1201876176/>
. The second is the sense that Leia was relatively under-established as a key 
character in The Force Awakens, in comparison to the other two members of the 
original Star Wars trio. Harrison Ford’s Han Solo emerged as something close to 
the new instalment’s central figure – and achievedFord’s long-wished-for death 
scene 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Why-Harrison-Ford-Wanted-Han-Solo-Die-Return-Jedi-100887.html>
 – while Mark Hamill’s Luke Skywalker was reconfigured as a figure of 
near-mythical grandeur, even if he only appeared for a few tantalising seconds 
at the movie’s denouement.
 Fisher with Harrison Ford in Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens. 
Photograph: Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
On the other hand, Frank Oz’s Yoda did not require three movies to make his 
syntactically eccentric mark on the originalStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> trilogy. Alec Guinness’s Obi-Wan 
Kenobi will always be a singular totem of 20th century Hollywood despite dying 
in the first instalment - though he did return as a Force Ghost in parts two 
and three. Might it be possible to give Leia a fitting send off in Episode VIII 
without going down the digital route? Only Johnson and his team know the answer 
to that one right now.

Still, those rumoured scenes are tantalising, and it’s almost certain we’ll 
never get to see them unless Disney does go the CGI route. We have the 
technology; we can bring her back to life. But would it be right to do so just 
to satisfy our own yearnings as Star Wars fans?

Fisher endured her own struggles in the face of such early fame with great 
grace and charm – publicly at least. But there was obvious pain beneath those 
near-impenetrable layers of ballsy, quickfire charisma, which makes the idea of 
using her image to generate extra box office a troublesome one. And let’s not 
equivocate here, a CGI Leia in Episode IX would be a big deal profit-wise. The 
closest comparison is probably not Cushing at all, butthe digital resurrection 
of Paul Walker for Fast and Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/24/paul-walker-fast-furious-7-body-doubles-cgi>
 following the actor’s death in a high-speed road smash in November 2013. It is 
no coincidence that James Wan’s film was by far the highest-grossing instalment 
of the petrolhead saga, amassing a gargantuan $1.5bn globally. Cinemagoers are 
not immune to morbid curiosity.

One possibility the Hollywood Reporter failed to mention is that the matter 
might still be taken out of Disney’s hands, despite Fisher’s famous assertions 
over Lucasfilm’s rights to her image.A 1985 California law 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/California_Celebrities_Rights_Act> suggests that 
studios require permission from the estate of a celebrity to use his or her 
image for up to 70 years after death, so it may come down to the actor’s family 
to decide which way this one goes. It’s a reminder that, in the end, neither 
Fisher nor Leia really did belong rightly to all of us, or to Disney for that 
matter.

There have been calls this week – misguided, some might say, given the brand’s 
problematic history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/13/disney-makeover-brave-princess-cowardly>
 – for Leia to be officially canonised as a Disney princess, alongside Ariel 
from The Little Mermaid, Belle from Beauty and the Beast, Snow White and 
numerous other pencil-waisted royal playthings. Frankly, it’s hard to imagine 
anything Fisher might have hated more, given her experiences with Lucas. 
Whatever decision the studio finally comes to on her future role in the 
long-running space opera, Leia surely deserves to be immortalised among the 
stars – in the movies – rather than in Disney stores.
 