
It was only a matter of time before Disney transformed Merida 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/13/brave-director-criticises-sexualised-merida-redesign>
, the heroine of Brave, hailed by many as their first feminist princess, into a 
female archetype. The Princess franchise, which came into being in the early 
2000s when then-chairman Andy Mooney saw the marketing potential in presenting 
celebrated Disney princesses as a unit, isn't known for its nuanced portrayal 
of modern femininity. The cartoons have never encouraged ambition in little 
girls, with character traits limited to marriageability (Jasmine, Cinderella), 
beauty (Belle, or Snow White, whose appearance is such that jealous women seek 
to annihilate her), or submission to drastic physical changes in order to 
attract a man (Ariel). Disney princesses never really did have much to offer. 
Until Merida.

To be "crowned" Disney's 11th princess, the Scottish, red-headed Merida (who 
refuses to marry the prince) has been treated to the kind of airbrush job that 
magazine pages habitually go in for. Suddenly her waist is slimmer, her eyes 
are doe-like with heavy lashes, and she's subtly grown breasts. As Peggy 
Orenstein, author of Cinderella Ate My Daughter, pointed out: "In the end, it 
wasn't about being brave at all. It was about being pretty."

It's unsurprising that those parents who initially praised Disney for its 
creation of a princess who looked like a real girl are dismayed, to the point 
whereA Mighty Girl <http://www.amightygirl.com/>, a resource site that helps 
parents find books and toys that encourage positive feminine role models,has 
launched a petition 
<https://www.change.org/petitions/disney-say-no-to-the-merida-makeover-keep-our-hero-brave>
. Already it has received more than 100,000 signatures.

The importance of having visible positive female role models should not be 
underestimated. Seeing strong, independently minded female characters is vital 
to both boys and girls if they're ever going to grow up viewing their fellow 
human beings as subtle and multifaceted. It's especially vital for girls, 
because, as campaigners keep telling us, you can't be what you can't see. I 
wish that Brave had been around when I was a little girl, to show me an 
alternative to all those big-skirted damsels in distress, with their "some day 
my prince will come" and their serenading of small mammals.

As someone whose parents fought against but eventually yielded to Disney 
princess culture, I know how persuasive these myths can be. When I was six, all 
I wanted was to be a princess, but despite their popularity in the playground, 
my parents made a concerted effort to temper every Disney cartoon with a more 
positive portrayal of womanhood. We know that the female characters in 
fairytales have not always been so two-dimensional, and while I'm not 
suggesting that we return to the originals (you can't really blame Disney for 
shelving the rape and the cannibalism in Sleeping Beauty), an alternative 
adaptation of the Hans Christian Andersen Little Mermaid tale I watched on VHS 
certainly provided another perspective (namely: don't try to change yourself 
for a man, ever, or you'll die and then end up as foam).

Similarly, books such as the Tough Princess and Jane and the Dragon, both of 
which I loved, provided me with confident, scrappy women to look up to. When I 
wanted to dress up as a princess for a fancy dress competition, my mum 
compromised by styling me as "a Celtic princess" somewhat like Merida. I had a 
shield and a spear, as well as a crown.
 Emma as Amelia Earhart. Photograph: Jaime C Moore 
In fact, one of the most effective ways of challenging the Disney princess 
myth is through dressing up. Instead of stumping up Â£30 for a shiny, polyester 
concoction from the Disney store, why not investigate other options, as Texan 
photographer Jaime C Moore did last week by dressing her five-year-old Emma as 
"a real women for my daughter to know about and look up to". Thus we see Emma as
aviator Amelia Earhart, fashion pioneer Coco Chanel 
<http://www.jaimemoorephotography.com/2013/05/09/not-just-a-girl/> and, perhaps 
most touchingly, the president of the United States.
 Emma as Coco Chanel. Photograph: Jaime C Moore 
"We had so much fun picking out the costume pieces and through each woman's 
portrait I would tell her about each incredible woman. Learning of Amelia 
Earhart seemed to be her favourite," said Moore. "Just the idea of her dressing 
like the first female pilot to fly across the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean 
thrilled her. I love her facial expression in the photograph, I took the shot 
as I was cheering 'Emma you just flew a plane, by yourself, over the Ocean!'. 
In her eyes I see so much pride and confidence."

In the end, that is what matters; pride and confidence. It's a shame that 
Disney couldn't be as brave.
 