
A major row has broken out on the board of Ireland’s leading newspaper 
publisher, Independent News & Media (INM), and could well lead to the departure 
of its chief executive, Robert Pitt.

It stems from differences of opinion some months ago over INM’s proposed 
acquisition of a national radio station, Newstalk. Pitt believed INM was in 
danger of paying too much.

However, INM’s chairman, Leslie Buckley, thought the price tag was reasonable.

Before I go further I must point out that INM is a listed company whose 
biggest shareholder is Denis O’Brien while Newstalk is part of the Communicorp 
group, which is owned by Denis O’Brien.

So this dispute about a takeover, reported both by the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/inm-heads-had-major-dispute-over-price-tag-on-newstalk-1.2885728>
 andby RTÉ 
<https://www.rte.ie/news/business/2016/1129/835159-inm-ceo-and-chairman-clash-over-possible-acquisit/>
, is anything but routine. It offers an interesting insight into O’Brien’s 
business dealings.

Both reports carry an INM statement in which it confirmed that an “issue” had 
arisen between Pitt and Buckley “in relation to the terms of a possible 
acquisition by the company”.

The statement said discussions about the takeover “ended at a preliminary 
stage and the acquisition was never considered by the board”.

It also confirmed that a sub-committee of the INM board was set up to “review” 
Pitt’s dispute with Buckley.

According to the Irish Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times>, 
the row between Pitt and Buckley arose over the price that INM should pay for 
Newstalk. Pitt obtained a valuation from one corporate finance firm that was 
lower than the valuation obtained by Communicorp from a different corporate 
finance firm.

In a separate article 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/financial-services/inm-s-extraordinary-boardroom-spat-raises-host-of-questions-1.2886990>
, the Irish Times’s finance correspondent, Ciarán Hancock, called it “an 
extraordinary boardroom spat even for INM.”

As the paper states: “A sale of Newstalk to INM, which appears to be off the 
table at the moment, would have resulted in a significant payout for Denis 
O’Brien.”


It further reports that O’Brien “is thought to have held discussions earlier 
this year with the Broadcasting Authority ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> over the possibility of selling 
Newstalk to INM.”


Hancock pointed to the “many questions that arise from this issue, even 
allowing for the INM statement that the acquisition was not formally put to the 
board.”

He asked: “Why would INM consider acquiring what is believed to be a 
loss-making national radio station that is losing market share?... How would 
this deal have been in the best interests of all shareholders?... Why did 
O’Brien want to offload Newstalk to INM?”

Meanwhile, O’Brien is suing the Irish state 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/crime-and-law/denis-o-brien-separation-of-powers-key-to-high-court-case-1.2886823>
 over comments made about his business affairs in Ireland’s parliament. His 
lawyers opened the case in Dublin’s high court on Tuesday.
 