
Dixons Retail has risen around 3% after acting to ease concerns about the 
competitive threat of soon to be floated Appliances Online.

AO is expected to have a valuation of some Â£1bn when it joins the stock 
market, and news of its plans have put pressure on Dixons. But over the weekend 
Dixons hit back with a presentation addressing concerns about its market share 
and competitive position.

The news has lifted Dixons shares 1.43p higher to 48.52p, and prompted a buy 
note from Barclays. Analysts Christodoulos Chaviaras and Claire Huff put a 65p 
target on Dixons, and said that investors had probably overestimated the threat 
that AO posed to its business. They said:
 Dixons' presentation addresses a number of investors' concerns about the 
company's market share and marketing position versus AO.com which has attracted 
a lot of interest recently. Clearly we cannot fully endorse the estimates 
coming from either Dixons' or OC&C's (commissioned by AO) reports as we cannot 
verify the data ourselves but in our view the noise caused by AO's intention to 
float and the associated negative impact on Dixons' share price is overdone.

Our analysis shows that Dixons' and AO's prices are similar while Dixons' 
service levels have been rapidly improving to a very competitive level. In our 
estimates Dixons gained circa one-third of Comet's lost sales meaning that it 
has been able to accelerate its market share gains in the white goods market 
and certainly didn't lose market share due to AO's sales growth. Some sensible 
checks we did on the facts presented by both Dixons and AO lead to an overall 
picture which is not very dissimilar to how the two retailers presented it. We 
do not dismiss AO as a credible competitor in the major domestic appliances 
[MDA] market and Dixons shouldn't do either, in our view, but we have yet to 
see any evidence of AO impeding Dixons' growth.

The five main points Dixons management highlights in its presentation 

1. Dixons is the market leader in UK and Ireland MDA while its market share 
online is very close to AO's market share.

2. Dixons' MDA online sales have been growing at a faster pace than AO's in 
the last 3.75 years hence Dixons has actually gained more market share than AO 
contrary to the bears' beliefs that they have been losing share.

3. Dixons is cheaper than AO in terms of prices and services provided. 

4. The strong feedback from Dixons' customers is not very dissimilar to AO's 
although the two have chosen different sources to draw customer feedback from.

5. Dixons' brand awareness is much higher than AO's and hence customer 
acquisition costs are lower. In general Dixons claims that its multichannel 
model is more profitable than a pure online model.
 