
It is easy to forget what a shock to the system Christopher Nolan’s Batman 
Begins <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/17/1> was when it 
debuted just over a decade ago.

Nolan seemed to trim all extraneous fat from the comic book movie template, 
handing the caped crusader a humanising backstory that intelligently explained 
his capacities as the byproduct of huge wealth and near-psychotic levels of 
determination to perfect himself as a martial unit. Villains were stripped of 
their more fantastical elements and draped with the adornments of real-world 
freakiness, Cillian Murphy’s Scarecrow shifting from Worzel Gummidge-like 
silliness to steely-eyed sociopath; Liam Neeson’s Ra’s al Ghul losing the comic 
character’s magical powers but retaining his hatred of civilisation.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story set for reshoots to 'lighten film's mood'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/01/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-reshoots-disney>
For the first time, we witnessed Gotham as a sort of shadowy doppelganger of 
real-world cities, rather than the pantomime facsimiles of the previous films. 
Then, once viewers had got their heads round the idea of a Batman flick with 
the silliness scraped off,The Dark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/25/actionandadventure1> debuted 
three years later to the highest box office returns ever seen (at that point) 
for a superhero movie, not to mention rapturous reviews. No wonder everything 
that came afterwards tried to copy the formula.

What Hollywood film-makers failed to grasp, though, was that while audiences 
wanted their superheroes treated with Nolan’s verve and tenacity, that didn’t 
necessarily mean throwing everything through a super-serious “dark” filter. 
It’s a collective misunderstanding that has almost destroyed Warner Bros’s 
fledgling DC universe, whose films Man of Steel and Batman v Superman: Dawn of 
Justice have strained so hard for wracked solemnity that you sometimes worry 
for their bowel control. The director of upcoming DC movie Aquaman, James Wan,
has even taken the bizarre step of promising fans he won’t “darken” the king of 
Atlantis 
<http://comicbook.com/dc/2016/05/31/aquaman-movie-wont-be-very-dark-according-to-director-james-wan/>
 for his first big-screen venture.

Earlier this week, Simon Kinberg, producer of last year’s ill-fated Fantastic 
Four reboot,admitted the film’s “darker, sort of body-horror” tone was out of 
keeping <http://earwolf.com/episode/simon-kinberg/> with its “bright, 
optimistic, poppy” source material. We also know that Warner’s Suicide Squad 
movieis being reshot <http://collider.com/suicide-squad-reshoots-dceu/> to add 
extra funnies in the wake of huge popularity for an early, bombastic trailer. 
And it now appears thatRogue One: A Star Wars Story is going through the same 
process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/01/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-reshoots-disney>
, following reports Disney execs are concerned Gareth Edwards’s spin-off lacks 
the knockabout space fun of The Force Awakens.

Rogue One reshoots and Alice falls down a hole – the Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/jun/01/star-wars-rogue-one-johnny-depp-dailies-film-podcast>
I hardly need mention that we’ve also seen James Bond move back towards his 
light-hearted roots via last year’sSpectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/spectre-review-james-bond-is-back-stylish-camp-and-sexily-pro-snowden>
, despite the series’ most popular movie having been the intensely melancholy
Skyfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/skyfall-review>. 
Likewise, the most successful superhero movies of recent times have not been 
Nolan’s Batman saga but the far cheerier Avengers films from DC’s rival Marvel.

In fact, one of the darkest entries in the studio’s canon is the most recent. 
Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>
, despite a bravura frenzy of wisecracking rival superhero teams midway 
through, is largely pitched around a bleak storyline about national security 
and the end of friendship. But that’s because the graphic novel being adapted 
lends itself to such a tone.

We may be entering the twilight of Hollywood’s near decade-long shift to the 
dark side, but it would be a great pity if the studios’ response was to add 
Joss Whedon-esque smarts to the screenplays for every new movie being produced, 
not least because there are few writers around with Whedon’s knack for 
crackling, pop culture-infused dialogue. The lesson we should be learning from 
recent comic book movies – let’s takeDeadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/deadpool-review-marvel-ryan-reynolds-film-superhero>
, The Dark Knight andthe Avengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/26/avengers-age-of-ultron-obeserver-review>
 as examples – is that they all flourished by sensibly adapting their source 
material rather than myopically trying to impose a “dark” or “light” template.

In the case of Rogue One, then, there is cause for hope. Even in an expanded 
cinematic universe, an overly grim entry to the Star Wars series would 
certainly jar with what’s come before. So reshoots may not be the worst idea 
ever.

JJ Abrams’ The Force Awakens, successfully balanced zippy camaraderie with 
dour moments of desperation and loss (Han Solo’s death) without adding any 
sense of tonal imbalance. While we don’t know quite how moody an entry Edwards 
has been putting together, a skilled director ought to be able to brighten up 
the filmic firmament with a few well-timed moments of levity. And hopefully do 
so without irreversibly destroying the balance of the movie.
 