
Thousands of families have started receiving official letters telling them 
they need to set up a pension plan for their nanny during the next few months. 
Many of those receiving the “act now” letters from thePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator probably don’t think of 
themselves as employers, and will feel daunted by the prospect of having to set 
up a staff pension scheme for their nanny.

Both the employer and the nanny will have to contribute to this pension. 
Calculations done for Guardian Money suggest that by 2019-20 the amount a 
typical family is required to pay in could easily be £400-£500 a year, with the 
nanny having to pay in perhaps £600 of her or his annual pay.

Those receiving the letters are being warned they must comply with their new 
legal duties or risk a fine of £400, and then £50 a day.

Women’s state pension age rise: an unfair burden or a necessary reform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
Families who employ a nanny are the latest category of employer to be affected 
by “automatic enrolment”: a shake-up of retirement saving designed to get 
millions more people paying into a pension. Auto enrolment went live in late 
2012 and requires all employers to automatically enrol eligible workers into a 
workplace pension where both the worker and their employer pay some money in. 
Big companies such as supermarkets were the first to sign up; now the focus has 
switched to the millions of small and “micro” employers, such as those who 
employ someone like a nanny or personal care assistant.

Employers must automatically enrol any employee who, on the date the law 
applies to them, is at least 22 years old but below state pension age, earns 
more than a minimum amount (currently £10,000 a year, which is the same as 
gross earnings of £833 a month), and is not in a workplace pension scheme.

Those who employ a nanny or carer will typically receive a letter from the 
Pensions Regulator 12 months before the date that the law applies to them – 
this is called their “staging date”.

Sarah Rogers*, who lives in south London with her husband and two children 
aged seven and three, employs a nanny-housekeeper for 30 hours a week. She pays 
the nanny, who lives out, £11 an hour after tax and national insurance. Rogers 
received a letter earlier this month informing her that her staging date is 1 
February 2017. That date might be a year away, but the regulator says employers 
should start planning 12 months before their duties start, and choose a pension 
scheme around six months before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fpensions-employ-nanny-home-help-auto-enrolment-employees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4ab4baf99c3ceaaf5a1322cfb88f8b93c95a62%2F246_0_2324_1396%2F2324.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20you%20employ%20a%20nanny%3F%20Then%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20pay%20into%20their%20pension&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fpensions-employ-nanny-home-help-auto-enrolment-employees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20you%20employ%20a%20nanny%3F%20Then%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20pay%20into%20their%20pension&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fpensions-employ-nanny-home-help-auto-enrolment-employees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4ab4baf99c3ceaaf5a1322cfb88f8b93c95a62%2F246_0_2324_1396%2F2324.jpg>
 ‘Workie’, the mascot of the government’s workplace pensions awareness 
campaign. Photograph: DWP/PA 
Rogers says: “I don’t mind paying into a scheme for my nanny as I think it’s 
important that everyone benefits from a pension when they retire. But, on a 
practical level, trying to balance a job and two small kids, it does feel like 
just another paperwork headache.” She is planning to enrol her nanny into Nest 
(National Employment Savings Trust), the giant workplace pension scheme set up 
by the government.

So how much might Rogers and her nanny have to pay into the pension? Under 
automatic enrolment, the total minimum amount paid in is currently 2% of 
qualifying earnings (typically made up of 0.8% from the worker, 1% from their 
employer and 0.2% in tax relief from the government), rising to 5% in April 
2018 (typically 2.4% from the worker, 2% from their employer and 0.6% in tax 
relief), and then 8% in April 2019 (typically 4% from the worker, 3% from their 
employer and 1% in tax relief). Just to complicate matters further, these 
percentages don’t apply to all of an individual worker’s salary, only to their 
“qualifying earnings”, which is what they earn over a minimum amount, currently 
£5,824 a year, and up to a maximum amount, currently £42,385 a year.

I don’t mind paying into a pension for my nanny … but it feels like just 
another paperwork headache

The nanny’s net wage of £330 a week translates into a gross wage (take-home 
pay plus tax and national insurance) of £20,682 a year. We asked Nest to 
calculate how much would need to be paid into her pension. It told us that the 
employer contribution would start at around £149 a year, rising to £297 a year 
from April 2018, and then £446 a year from April 2019 onwards. Over the same 
period the nanny’s contributions would start at around £119 a year, rising to 
£357 and then to £594. The tax relief from the government would start at around 
£30 a year, rising to £89 and then £149.

Payroll companies are targeting those affected by this, and are offering to 
help those with nannies to comply with their pension duties in return for a fee 
of typically £50-£100 a year.

How is your auto-enrolment pension faring?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/03/how-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring>
Karen Kemp at Way2paye says: “A lot of [clients] don’t class themselves as 
employers – it’s childcare. We had one who said ‘I’m not doing that’. She made 
her nanny redundant and put her child into nursery.” Asked about the fee her 
firm charges, Kemp didn’t wish to disclose it, but says: “There is quite a lot 
[of work] involved.” As well as calculating pension payments, the firm takes 
care of other jobs such as completing the declaration of compliance, which 
confirms someone has met their legal duties, with the Pensions Regulator.

The law sets out various employer obligations – for example, they must write 
to their employee(s) within six weeks after their staging date to explain how 
automatic enrolment applies to them; and must declare their compliance within 
five months after that date.

Helen Dean, Nest’s chief executive, says: “If you employ a nanny, you may have 
to enrol them in a pension soon. You’ll be helping them build up a nest egg for 
their future, but we know the idea of setting up a pension scheme can sound 
daunting. Luckily it doesn’t have to be difficult. You can set yourself up 
really easily online with Nest or use a payroll package that will do the admin 
for you.”

Workers can opt out of automatic enrolment, ie say no to being put into a 
pension scheme. But they can’t opt out until after they have been enrolled, and 
they have to do all the legwork.

* Not her real name
 