
The decision to appoint Wonder Woman as an honorary United Nations’ ambassador 
for the empowerment of women and girlswas never going to go down well with all 
parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
. While Diana of Themyscira is ostensibly from a mysterious, magical island and 
is known for her kindness, decency and determination to protect the weak, the 
comic-book version of the superhero wears an outfit of US iconography and is 
usually depicted with a tiny waist and enormous breasts.

Wonder Woman announced as UN ambassador amid staff protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
The staff members who chose to turn their backs when Gal Gadot, who plays the 
character on the big screen, was lauded at the UN alongside her 1970s forebear 
Lynda Carter, probably wondered why such a sexualised and westernised figure 
had been picked to represent women across the globe. But it could have been 
worse: DC could have sentHarley Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/harley-quinn-suicide-squad-margot-robbie-dc-comics>
.

At least Warner Bros cannot be blamed for the understandable reaction, except 
perhaps as the parent company of DC Comics. While the superhero has retained 
her spectacular proportions in print, she is played on the big screen, in 
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, by the slim and athletic Israeli actor 
Gadot,who has faced criticism from the meathead corner of the internet for not 
being bosomy enough 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Gal-Gadot-Had-Awesome-Response-Her-Boobs-Being-Too-Small-Wonder-Woman-70428.html>
 for the role. From one point of view, Warner deserves praise here for finally 
jettisoning a Wonder Woman template that has been in place since the 
character’s creation in the 1940s. Unfortunately, the studio ruined that rare 
piece of good work byleering all over Margot Robbie’s Harley Quinn in the DC 
Expanded Universe follow-up Suicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/suicide-squad-killing-joke-dc-comics-women-misogyny>
. Maybe the solo outing for the Amazonian princess, directed by Patty Jenkins, 
will make amends next year.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2042a8b95e8225fb59ca2a546dc8de5700c486%2F320_64_1400_1748%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Brie%20Larson's%20Captain%20Marvel%20signal%20a%20new%20era%20of%20superhero%20diversity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Brie%20Larson%27s%20Captain%20Marvel%20signal%20a%20new%20era%20of%20superhero%20diversity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd2042a8b95e8225fb59ca2a546dc8de5700c486%2F320_64_1400_1748%2F1400.jpg>
 Brie Larson at Comic-Con International in July. Photograph: Albert L 
Ortega/Getty Images 
Is Marvel doing any better? The Disney-owned studio has so far failed to 
produce a single female-led superhero feature, but is ready to make up for lost 
time with Captain Marvel in 2019. Not only hasMarvel cast Oscar-winner Brie 
Larson as Carol Danvers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/24/comic-con-2016-brie-larson-to-play-captain-marvel>
, who took over the role in 2012, but studio president Kevin Feige now seems to 
be pitching the superhero as a future leader of the Avengers.

“All the Marvel characters have flaws to them, all of them have a deep 
humanity to them,”he told Vulture 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/10/captain-marvel-movie-director-kevin-feige.html>
. “With Captain Marvel, she is as powerful a character as we’ve ever put in a 
movie. Her powers are off the charts … and she will be by far the strongest 
character we’ve ever had.”

One of the arguments often proposed by the so-called “men’s rights” brigade 
against female action heroes is that women are simply physically weaker than 
men. It’s a ridiculous proposition – speaking as a 16-stone bloke who would not 
last five seconds in the ring with Ronda Rousey – but one that is even sillier 
when applied to the fantasy world of superheroes, where power is rarely linked 
to size. Movies such asMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/11/mad-max-fury-road-review-tom-hardy>
,Mission Impossible: Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/30/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review>
 and the newJack Reacher: Never Go Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/jack-reacher-never-go-back-review-tom-cruise>
 all feature women physically outdoing their male counterparts - and frankly, 
why not?

Larson’s Captain Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> offers an 
opportunity to revel in this phenomenon for comic effect. Let’s imagine the 
shock on Thor’s face when he realises this puny female newcomer is more than a 
match for his cosmic brawn. Might Danvers even be able to take down the Hulk?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f28367b6c5b5066d2363b6830aeb01c0c52436e%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Brie%20Larson's%20Captain%20Marvel%20signal%20a%20new%20era%20of%20superhero%20diversity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Brie%20Larson%27s%20Captain%20Marvel%20signal%20a%20new%20era%20of%20superhero%20diversity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbrie-larson-captain-marvel-superhero-diversity-hollywood-doctor-strange%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f28367b6c5b5066d2363b6830aeb01c0c52436e%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Tilda Swinton and Chiwetel Ejiofor in Doctor Strange. Photograph: Jay 
Maidment/Marvel 
Captain Marvel comes across as a pleasingly progressive hero in other areas. 
Since the superhero’s reinvention four years ago – she was previously known as 
Ms Marvel – the character has swapped a series of revealing outfits for a 
rather more appropriate red and blue jumpsuit. One imagines critics of Wonder 
Woman’s UN role would be keen to take Danvers in her place.

This doesn’t mean Marvel always gets it right: the studio has faced criticism 
for “whitewashing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/27/marvel-doctor-strange-tilda-swinton-whitewash-ancient-one>
 Doctor Strange’s mentor the Ancient One from Tibetan to Celtic in a misguided 
attempt to please the Chinese market. Butthere has also been praise for casting 
Tilda Swinton’s casting as an apparently non-binary take 
<http://screencrush.com/when-lgbt-film-looked-in-the-mirror-this-year-so-did-i/>
 on the powerful mystic. Another strike for diversity? At the very least, this 
is an addition studios would never have countenanced in the Superman movies of 
the 1970s and 80s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDiv0iP65aZo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDiv0iP65aZo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDiv0iP65aZo&media=>
Watch the trailer for Logan on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Div0iP65aZo> 
The oldies seem to be getting a run-out, too. The version of Wolverine 
featured inthe new trailer for Hugh Jackman’s final turn as the 
adamantium-clawed mutant <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Div0iP65aZo> may not 
quite be the Old Man Logan of Mark Millar’s splendid graphic novel, but he’s 
looking a lot more crinkly than previous iterations. Perhaps even more 
encouragingly, there’s strong evidence that the teenage girl who appears 
alongside Jackmanis the X-23 clone, who in the comics takes on the mantle of 
the new Wolverine 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2016/10/23/logan-new-photo-confirms-x-23>. If the 
English actor Dafne Keen is confirmed in the role, there’s every chance 20th 
Century Fox’s film, titled Logan, could be the first instance in which Marvel 
Comics’ ongoing diversification programme – a new mixed-race Spider-Man, female 
Thor and female Iron Man have all featured in comics in the last couple of 
years – transfers to the big screen.

I’m not sure superheroes should ever be pitched as role models, especially not 
at the level of an organisation like the United Nations. But comic book movies 
can be a progressive force without necessarily treading into uncomfortably 
wholesome territory. There is clearly a place for a diverse vision of 
superheroes at the multiplex in 2016 – even if Quinn will most likely not be 
taking up her seat at the UN any time soon.
 