
The view from office windows is rarely the stuff of picture postcards. Yet the 
scenic quality of our daily environments has a direct correlation on our 
personal wellbeing,researchers <http://www.nature.com/articles/srep16899> say.


The team from Warwick Business School used results from an online game called 
Scenic-Or-Not <http://scenicornot.datasciencelab.co.uk/>, which features 
217,000 images from around Britain and asks people to rate them according to 
their “scenicness”. The highest ranked pictures are broadly predictable: 
snow-capped mountains, tree-banked rivers, wild seascapes.

More surprising was the connection between where people live and their sense 
of wellbeing. Working off the health data in the 2011 census, the researchers 
were able to demonstrate that residents in more scenic areas are happier and 
healthier that those residing in less eye-catching locales.

The reasons why await further scientific investigation, yet lead researcher 
Chanuki Seresinhe believes it has much to do with our mental disposition (amuch 
publicised recent study <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/28/8567.abstract> 
shows that exposure to nature reduces stress, for instance) and our behavioural 
traits (scenic spots prompt us to get outdoors and be more active).

Seresinhe argues that the implications for business are profound. “People 
spend a lot of time at work and their environment definitely affects them. So 
if pleasant scenery makes people feel better, there’s a good case that the 
scenicness of their working environment will have a similar effect.”

All hail the mothership: Norman Foster's $5bn Apple HQ revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/15/norman-foster-apple-hq-mothership-spaceship-architecture>
Boosting staff productivity

Of course, the aesthetics of workplaces and its impact on employee wellbeing 
are nothing new. A slew of research reveals how everything fromartwork on the 
walls <http://www.umass.edu/fac/spotlight/1.9.html> to workstations with 
natural light <http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy02osti/30769.pdf> boost productivity. 

“Longer distance views, away from computer screens or written documents, allow 
the eyes to adjust and re-focus, which reduces fatigue, headaches and the 
effects of eye strain in the long term. Views also have a positive impact on 
wellbeing, in part by providing a psychological connection with other groups of 
people while in a safe space,”states a report 
<http://www.worldgbc.org/files/9714/3401/7431/WorldGBC_Health_Wellbeing__Productivity_Full_Report_Dbl_Med_Res_Feb_2015.pdf>
 from the World Green Building Council.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ec8cc8c73ddfc3ee8fcc3e8f9bf9d79d6842ad%2F1317_0_2472_1484%2F2472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20a%20pretty%20office%20make%20a%20productive%20workforce%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20a%20pretty%20office%20make%20a%20productive%20workforce%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ec8cc8c73ddfc3ee8fcc3e8f9bf9d79d6842ad%2F1317_0_2472_1484%2F2472.jpg>
 Apple has said that 80% of the site of its new headquarters being built in 
California will be green space. Photograph: Foster and Partners/Handout/EPA 
In recent years, considerable energy has gone into showing how plants and 
flowers brighten the work experience. “Biophilia” (the research strand, not the 
Björk album) demonstrates how green office spaces generate physiological 
responses such as increased brain activity and lower stress hormones. AHarvard 
University paper 
<http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/green-office-environments-linked-with-higher-cognitive-function-scores/>
 last year found that the cognitive performance of “green” office workers was 
double that of those working in conventional environments.


But “green” isn’t necessarily scenic. When it comes to green space, the issue 
is quality, not quantity, says Seresinhe. “Just because an area is green 
doesn’t mean it’s a beautiful area of green,” she says, citing the examples of 
a derelict recreational park or a field with an industrial park in the middle.


Improving city offices

The apparent logic of the “scenic” argument is that companies should relocate 
to the Lake District or the banks of a Scottish loch. However, the arrival of 
UK plc in the country’s beauty spots would dramatically reduce their scenic 
qualities. And urban and peri-urban areas can be scenic too (this counters the 
other obvious argument that rural-dwellers should work more from home).

“It’s not about nature versus the city,” Serensinhe says. “The scenic effect 
exists in cities too. Buildings can be scenic [and] there are things you can do 
to make the urban environment more scenic as well.”

John Alker, the campaign and policy director for the UK Green Building 
Council, concurs and cites Crown Estate’srefurbishment of a grade-two listed 
property <http://7airstreet.co.uk/> in London’s West End as an example of urban 
“healthy building” design. The UK developer increased the “scenicness” of the 
city-centre property by equipping it with a green roof, replete with wild 
flowers and bulb species.

“The view doesn’t have to be a grand rural vista. It could easily be a roof 
garden, green roof, courtyard with plants, etc. In other words, designers can 
recreate natural views in urban areas,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b247971e5bb45d745f4aecd73be89b88a881a75%2F0_25_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20a%20pretty%20office%20make%20a%20productive%20workforce%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20a%20pretty%20office%20make%20a%20productive%20workforce%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Foffice-beautiful-pretty-views-employees-productive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b247971e5bb45d745f4aecd73be89b88a881a75%2F0_25_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Uber’s new headquarters under construction in San Francisco provide views of 
the city and the bay. Photograph: SHoP Architects PC 
It’s a message architects and commercial property firms are increasingly 
taking on board. Take Uber’snew headquarters 
<http://qz.com/413981/this-is-what-ubers-futuristic-new-headquarters-will-look-like/>
, currently under construction on a 14-acre vacant site in San Francisco’s 
Mission Bay neighbourhood. Comprising two main buildings, the blueprints 
incorporate “sky porches” into the taller of the two to provide views of the 
city and the bay. The common areas of the office block also boast as much 
natural ventilation and daylight as possible to bring an “air of scenic 
openness to the interior.”

Creating scenic views where there aren’t any is another option, albeit a large 
undertaking for any single firm. Business parks present one of the best options 
for large-scale landscaping. Take, for example,Chiswick Park 
<http://www.enjoy-work.com/gallery/> in South London. The 33-acre site, an 
award winner at the latestLondon in Bloom <http://www.londoninbloom.co.uk/> 
competition, includes a central “village green” area as well as a series of 
lakes and open spaces.

For some businesses, however, natural “scenicness” is always going to be a 
struggle. Think sprucing up a power plant or improving the view down a mine. 
But all is not lost. “Virtual nature can work just as well,” says Sue Thomas, 
author of the bookTechnobiophilia <http://www.technobiophilia.com/>, which 
explores the online prevalence of nature-derived metaphors and imagery.

Dorset County Hospital shows live web feeds of beautiful natural spaces to 
leukemia patients kept in isolation, she says. The strategy, which is shown to 
ease their loneliness, is based on a phenomenon known as “nearby nature”. First 
coined by environmental psychologists Rachel and Stephen Kaplan in the 80s, the 
idea is that just the suggestion of the natural world - the smell of summer 
grasses, say, or the memory of a walk by the river - can prompt wellbeing. 
Companies should consider similar tactics, Thomas says.
 