
Theresa May knows it. Jane Russell and Marilyn Monroe exploited it to stunning 
effect.Even singer Chris De Burgh was aware of the transformative powers of the 
colour red <http:>.

This is not just the judgment of the stylist who helped the prime minister 
choose her Amanda Wakeley number for a charity bash last week, or Howard Hawks, 
who dressed Monroe and Russell in glitzy red robes inGentlemen Prefer Blondes. 
Countless psychological experiments have confirmed that wearing red clothing 
increases attractiveness and sex appeal.

A 2010 paper, published in the European Journal of Social Psychology, found 
that when a woman wore red it prompted men to sit closer to her and ask more 
intimate questions. The effect is considered to work the other way, too.A paper 
published in theJournal of Experimental Psychology 
<http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/xge-139-3-399.pdf> produced evidence 
from seven experiments which demonstrated that women perceive men to be more 
attractive and sexually desirable when viewed against a red background and in 
red clothing. As an article in the latest Research Digest of the British 
Psychological Society says 
<https://digest.bps.org.uk/2016/12/12/wardrobe-malfunction-three-failed-attempts-to-replicate-the-finding-that-red-increases-attractiveness/>
: “Red displays in the animal kingdom also often indicate sexual interest and 
availability – complemented by the cultural connotations of red with passion 
and sex.”

The festive party season has been dominated by the colour. Last week, Amy 
Adams wore red for the recent premiere ofNocturnal Animals in New York, as did 
the Duchess of Cambridge for a Buckingham Palace reception. Fashion retailer JD 
Williams told theEvening Standard that sales of red dresses have outstripped 
black ones by 43% this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcdbc055a161088b936778ef3214f9839fa9dd29%2F0_185_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20wearing%20red%20really%20make%20you%20look%20hot%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20wearing%20red%20really%20make%20you%20look%20hot%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcdbc055a161088b936778ef3214f9839fa9dd29%2F0_185_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Amy Adams at the New York premiere of Tom Ford’s Nocturnal Animals. 
Photograph: Jason Kempin/Getty Images 
But what if red’s allure is just a myth? A team of Dutch and British 
researchers has published three attempts to replicate what they call the “red 
effect”. This included testing whether it was more pronounced in a “short-term 
mating context”, something, as the digest says, supports “the idea that red 
signals sexual availability”. However,not only did the research, published in 
the journalEvolutionary Psychology 
<https://dspace.stir.ac.uk/bitstream/1893/24451/1/Peperkoorn%20et%20al%20Final%20Accepted%20Version.pdf>
, fail to uncover an effect in the mating context, all three experiments failed 
to demonstrate any effect of red on attractiveness.

In the first study, about 200 young Dutch men were asked to rate the 
attractiveness of a woman pictured on a dating site, as well as how much they 
wanted to have sex with her. The woman was shown wearing either a red, black or 
white shirt. Some men looked in the context of finding a one-night stand, the 
rest in terms of searching for a long-term partner. In both cases, wearing red 
didn’t affect the rating.

The same results were found with a sample of nearly 200 heterosexual American 
men. In the third study, researchers recruited about 400 men via an Amazon 
affiliate site and asked some to study an image of a woman in a red shirt and 
others of her in a white shirt. The men’s responses confirmed that the colour 
had no effect on their rating of the woman.

“The lack of evidence for a red effect in our three experiments … leads us to 
question the robustness of the red effect in human mate preferences,” the 
researchers concluded. “We argue … that if red has an effect, then it is likely 
to be small.”

However, Christian Jarrett, editor of the Digest, offered a word of caution 
for anyone thinking of giving up on red. “Just as it is wise not to place too 
much faith in the findings from single studies, we should also interpret failed 
replications with caution,” he wrote. “These new null results do not mean there 
is no red effect, but they do raise questions about its robustness, and the 
possibility that there was a bias in past research to publish positive results.

“A generous interpretation is that the red effect could be more significant in 
real interactions than in lab-based research using static photos, because the 
colour might influence the wearer to behave more flirtatiously, for example.”

The fabled benefits of wearing red clothing had already been thrown into 
question. Earlier this year, a study of waitress-tipping found that, contrary 
to expectations, men gave smaller tips to women wearing red. This is not to say 
the colour is without its supporters. Psychologists studying the relationship 
between colour and voting believe red can still be a powerful influencer, one 
that historically has benefited the US Republican party.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde76ba5298d613c7ec20d49d4d8808fef051cb47%2F207_551_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20wearing%20red%20really%20make%20you%20look%20hot%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20wearing%20red%20really%20make%20you%20look%20hot%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fred-sexual-attraction-myth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde76ba5298d613c7ec20d49d4d8808fef051cb47%2F207_551_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
 A Donald Trump supporter in red. Photograph: Gregg Newton/AFP/Getty Images 
“Red is arguably the most vibrant colour on the colour wheel,” according to 
colorpsychology.org <http://www.colorpsychology.org/>. “It is attention-getting 
and induces a sense of power and excitement.”

In sport, too, red appears to have talismanic properties. A 2009 study by 
sports psychologists at the University of Münster in Germany, reported inNew 
Scientist magazine, found that players who wear red clothing score 10% more in 
competitions than when playing in other colours. England football fans are 
painfully aware that the victorious World Cup team of 1966 wore red, rather 
than their usual white. They have not won a World Cup or European Championship 
since.
 