
Does the Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> want us to 
vote for judges? Would it prefer Britain to adopt the system of certain states 
in the US where judges are chosen by the electorate?

That is the logical conclusion from its persistent assault on the judiciary. 
In its intemperate “Enemies of the people 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3903436/Enemies-people-Fury-touch-judges-defied-17-4m-Brexit-voters-trigger-constitutional-crisis.html>
” front page on Friday, the opening sentence stated:

“MPs last night tore into an unelected panel of ‘out of touch’ judges for 
ruling that embittered Remain supporters in parliament should be allowed to 
frustrate the overwhelming verdict of the British public”.

Monday’s leading article opened with a similar jibe, referring to the “three 
unelected high court judges” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3911700/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-No-Lord-Patten-don-t-kowtow-here.html>
 who “handed down from their lofty benches a ruling that rode roughshod over 
the views of 17.4m voters”.

Although its target appeared to be Lord Patten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-patten> - “that perfect embodiment of 
the arrogant political class” and “self-appointed censor-in-chief” - the Mail’s 
main concern were the men and women in wigs.

It was aware of the backlash that followed its reaction to the high court’s 
ruling that the prime minister,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, cannot trigger article 50 to 
begin Brexit without a parliamentary vote.

The Mail, in company with the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and Daily Express, came 
under heavy flak from politicians and rival newspapers for their assaults on 
the judges.

The Guardian was particularly exercised by the “hysterical, and frankly 
ludicrous, response” to the judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/the-guardian-view-on-brexit-ruling-the-response-to-the-courts-threatens-to-undermine-the-bedrock-of-a-democratic-society>
 by “rightwing newspapers”. It continued:

“This intolerance threatens to undermine political freedom and judicial 
independence. No court is infallible. One can dissent from judgments without 
trying, via newsprint and social media, to shatter a nation’s confidence in 
judges as impartial guardians of the rule of law”.

But the Mail’s editor, Paul Dacre <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>
, doesn’t do retreat. So he went back on the offensive by widening the paper’s 
assault on “one of the last great unreformed British institutions”. His 
editorial contended:

“By scrutinising the backgrounds of the judges, the press - which, thankfully, 
is still free in this country - is simply doing its job of holding the powerful 
to account”.

That’s a fair enough point. And many will agree with the Mail’s concern about 
the judiciary being “a virtual closed shop, with supreme court judges largely 
selected by their peers”.

Many newspapers of the left have made similar arguments down the years, but 
what is the Mail’s solution and, more pertinently, what is its motive? It said:

“Calls for public hearings to gauge candidates’ views and any political 
leanings - as happens in the US - have been resisted. Isn’t it time for a 
change?

Surely, if judges have allegiances which may affect their decisions, the 
public has a right to know. For example, one of those involved in the high 
court ruling and several at the supreme court have links with the EU and 
European courts.

How can such detail not be of relevance? Of course the high court insists its 
ruling was purely legalistic. But the political motivation behind the case - 
and those who brought it - is unashamed and transparent”.

But the paper doesn’t explain what should happen after such hearings. Will 
judges with “political leanings” unacceptable to those who oversee such public 
hearings - politicians? newspapers editors? - be denied their post?

Will the public then be called upon to vote for their favourite candidates, 
after having the benefit of sensibly impartial advice from the Mail?

In fact, the paper gave a clue about such advice in an article by its 
associate editor, Andrew Pierce, the journalist who puts the squeak in 
pipsqueak.

In his scrutiny of four law lords 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3911656/And-s-lot-lining-EU-links-judges-rule-Brexit-impact.html>
, he highlighted their links to Europe (how scandalous). He made much of the 
fact that two of them (Lords Reed and Kerr) had sat on the European court of 
human rights. Worse still: Kerr “is an unashamed champion of the human rights 
act brought in by the Blair government”.

As for the career of Lord Mance - who is “fluent in several languages” - it 
“has been saturated in the processes of European law”. And Lord Carnwath is 
just as bad, having been “steeped in EU laws and tradition”.

Nudge, nudge to readers: don’t vote for them! 


And here’s another example of the Mail’s straightforward, factual reporting. A 
headline across two pages on Monday said “May backs Press in judges row 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3910708/The-press-free-criticise-Theresa-backs-newspapers-attacks-judges-ruled-EU-deal-Parliament.html>
”. But did she?


In fact, her statement was even-handed between press and judiciary and, 
therefore, utterly unremarkable. Indeed, it was much more significant, given 
the storm, that she backed the judges.

Looking way down the Mail’s article was the following quote: 

“I believe in the value of the independence of our judiciary. I also value the 
freedom of our press. I think those both underpin our democracy and they are 
important”.

And in a second quote, the prime minister also said: “It is important that we 
have the independence of the judiciary. It is also important that we have a 
free press”.

So that headline could just as easily have said: “May backs judges in Press 
row”.
 