
Want to be happy? Lift your smartphone in the air, angle it to the best side 
of your face, and click – because selfies make you happy, according to a recent
report 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/10/17/keep-taking-loads-of-selfies-because-they-make-you-happy-science-says-6196271/>
. Google estimates that, in 2014, at least93m selfies a day were posted 
<http://phandroid.com/2014/06/25/android-has-1-billion-active-users-in-the-past-30-days-and-other-interesting-numbers-from-io/>
 on Android phones alone, and the Pew Research Center says more than 91% of 
teenagershave posted a self portrait online 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/05/21/teens-social-media-and-privacy/>.

But the ubiquitous selfie irritates the hell out of anyone over 40 years of 
age and is more usually associated in the media with unhappy outcomes. Last 
year,more people died worldwide while taking selfies 
<http://www.seventeen.com/life/news/a34163/selfies-shark-attacks/> than from 
shark attacks – mostly from falling but also from being hit by vehicles and 
even gored by a bull. The selfie has also been linked to mental health 
problems. In 2014, astudy 
<https://news.osu.edu/news/2015/01/06/hey-guys-posting-a-lot-of-selfies-doesn%E2%80%99t-send-a-good-message/>
 from Ohio State University found that men who posted the most selfies on 
social media scored highest on questionnaires for narcissistic and psychopathic 
traits. An editorial by Dr Pankaj Shah in the International Journal of 
Emergency Mental Health and Human Resilience also argued that taking selfies 
was addictive and that spending more than five minutes on a selfie or taking 
more than three to five a day may be “considered a disease 
<http://www.omicsonline.com/open-access/selfie-a-new-generation-addiction-disorderliterature-review-and-updates-1522-4821-1000e227.php?aid=60704>
”. So, when a hoax newsreport 
<https://mic.com/articles/86981/doctors-supposedly-made-selfitis-a-mental-disorder-here-s-the-real-story#.T8vd83bnZ>
 in 2014 claimed that Selfitis was a new mental health problem defined by the 
American Psychiatric Association as “the obsessive compulsive desire to take 
photos of one’s self and post them on social media”, many people believed it.

Selfies have been linked to body dysmorphic disorder (BDD, where people obsess 
about perceived flaws in their appearance) but, as Dr David Veale, a consultant 
psychiatrist at the South London and Maudsley NHS Trust, explains: “Some people 
with BDD use selfies as a way of checking their appearance – to see if they are 
as ugly as they feel they are. They are taken alone and people may store 
hundreds or thousands of pictures on their phone that are not shared with 
anyone. Selfie use in people without BDD is not pathological.”

But can selfies actually make us happy? Should we all start taking them?

The solution


The study that suggested selfies might be linked to happiness was relatively 
small. The selfie component included asking 14 students to smile (regardless of 
how they felt) and take pictures of themselves three times a day for three 
weeks. These pictures were kept on an Android app and only seen by the students 
and the researchers. Nothing was posted on social media but, when the students 
looked at their own smiling faces, their mood improved significantly. But Yu 
Chen, the lead author of the study, is adamant that it didn’t suggest taking 
selfies made the students happy. “It is not selfies that make you happy,” says 
Chen. “It is smiling that makes you happy.”
 