
Dog Eat Dog review – Willem Dafoe is magnificently needy in Paul Schrader's 
tasty thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/dog-eat-dog-review-willem-dafoe-paul-schrader-ed-bunker-cannes>
Age is not mellowing 1970s wunderkind writer-director Paul Schrader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-schrader> one bit. Now aged 70 and 
essentially an outcast in Hollywood, he’s spent the past few years, the sunset 
of his career, doing what his contemporaries were doing at the dawn of theirs 
half a century ago for Roger Corman: savouring the untold creative freedoms 
available to inspired artists on Z-movie budgets. Since The Canyons – in which 
he cast the most mercurial household name in the States, Lindsay Lohan, and its 
most famous (and, as it turned out, most creepy) male porn star, James Deen – 
he’s been making his movies like a film student, improvising, stunt-casting, 
rewriting on set, filming in friends’ houses. It’s as if he’s living his career 
in reverse.

His ultra-violent new thriller Dog Eat Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/dog-eat-dog-review-willem-dafoe-paul-schrader-ed-bunker-cannes>
 throws the book at its source novel, a terse, brutal and meticulously 
realistic account, by convict-novelist Edward Bunker, of three psychotic 
ex-cons and a failed child kidnapping. Schrader goes all Natural Born Killers 
on the material, using different stocks, bizarre widescreen framing choices, 
tons of garish filters – turquoise and fuchsia – and bathing a sanguinary 
opening massacre in lurid pinks not seen since mid-career Brian De Palma. In a 
no-budget Nic Cage movie like this, you expect the star to be the one going 
wild – but no, it’s Schrader who’s all hopped up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWMKm9ydY12s&media=>
Paul Schrader and Willem Dafoe: 'We thought we should really do the nasty'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/27/paul-schrader-willem-dafoe-dog-eat-dog>
Cage is head honcho Troy, just out of jail after 20 years and appropriately 
twitchy. But not as twitchy as Mad Dog, played by Willem Dafoe as if he’s porn 
star John Holmes on a month-long pills-and-meth jag. Mad Dog is needier than a 
four-year-old, honks giant rails of crank all day and has, let’s say, poor 
impulse control. Add Christopher Matthew Cook’s Diesel, capable of flipping in 
a second, plus a wacky kidnap plot, and you have, well, Three Psychopaths And A 
Baby.

It’s a mess, really, but it’s an audacious, cock-eyed, weirdly experimental, 
ambitious – and cheap – Paul Schrader mess, which is always something special. 
He’s been my favourite great bad American director for decades now. His best 
work has always lain cheek by jowl with his very worst, often in the same 
movie, sometimes in the same scene. He lards his work with obscure homages to 
please snobby critics (he was one himself once), he makes calamitous creative 
leaps in the dark and sticks to them, and he’s remade Robert Bresson’s 
Pickpocket more times than Hitchcock remade The 39 Steps. But I’ll gladly take 
those bum notes alongside his moments of perfect pitch. We need more of him.

Dog Eat Dog is in cinemas from Friday 18 November
 