
The man who introduced Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> to the prospect of 
buying BHS has accused him of bleeding the department store chain dry and said 
he wishes he had never met him.

Paul Sutton said Chappell had done “incredible” damage and BHS could still 
have been saved after it wassold for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 by the billionaire tycoon Sir Philip Green in March 2015.

BHS collapsed into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and leaving a£571m pension deficit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/08/sir-philip-green-told-do-right-thing-bhs-pension-deficit>
. The retailer failed 13 months after it was bought by Chappell, a serial 
bankrupt. His consortium, Retail Acquisitions, is estimated to have been paid 
at least £17m by BHS.

The unwinding of BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> took another 
twist on Monday when a high court hearing due to consider whether to wind up 
Retail Acquisitions was adjourned.

Duff & Phelps, the administrator to BHS, is seeking the winding up order 
because it wants access to the Retail Acquisitions accounts and the return of 
millions of pounds owed to BHS. The case was adjourned after lawyers acting for 
Chappell submitted evidence against the order.

Chappell was Sutton’s driver while the latter was working with Green on a deal 
to buy BHS.

Pensions Regulator's powers might be expanded after BHS scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/pensions-regulator-could-see-powers-expand-after-bhs-collapse>
However, this collapsed after a whistleblower delivered a dossier to Green – 
revealing that Sutton was convicted of fraud in France in 2002 and making a 
string of other allegations against him.

Sutton claims that the dossier is part of a blackmail plot, which police are 
investigating.

After Green halted talks with Sutton, Chappell stepped in and continued 
negotiations.

“I wish I had never met Dominic Chappell. The damage he has caused is 
incredible,” Sutton told the Guardian. “He changed the team [after taking over 
discussions to buy BHS] then took millions of pounds and bled it dry.

“If things had turned out different, I could easily have saved BHS. I told the 
select committee that. It did not need to turn out this way.”

The demise of the high street chain is being investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/pensions-regulator-could-see-powers-expand-after-bhs-collapse>
 by the Insolvency Service, the Pensions Regulator and the Financial Reporting 
Council. The Serious Fraud Office is examiningwhether there are grounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/serious-office-steps-up-bhs-investigation>
 to launch a criminal investigation.

Sutton said Green made a “dreadful mistake” in selling BHS to Chappell. 

“I understand the debate about Philip, but the criticism is unfair. He always 
said he would sort the pension and he left the company with hundreds of 
millions of pounds [to invest in running the business].”

Sutton said his involvement with BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>
 had led to “untold problems”, including threats to his children at school.

He wants to revive his business career and clear his name of the allegations 
made against him, he said, which include that Sutton and his partner were 
involved in a Ponzi scheme in the UK relating to unofficial share certificates 
in Snoozebox, a pop-up hotel operator. There has been no prosecution over these 
claims.

“I have never been involved in a Ponzi scheme, I don’t even understand how 
they work,” he said.

On the fraud conviction, Sutton said: “If I had known it was there, I would 
have defended it. There are details from my lawyers that show it [the trial] 
was conducted without me in France. In France, it is now spent.

“I have been accused of all sorts of things and they are untrue. The police 
have witness statements that show what has gone on.”

Chappell has said he will make a statement about the winding up order “in the 
next few days”. He has previously said he “earned” the money paid out from BHS, 
his “conscience is very clear” and his team “did the right thing, right the way 
through”.
 