
Debra Winger


It’s sadly not uncommon for a female actor to go from lead to mom to obscurity 
within the space of a few years, but the rise and fall of the Terms of 
Endearment star was so notable that it led to a 2002 documentary called 
Searching for Debra Winger. As she entered a self-imposed retirement, the 
multiple-Oscar nominee’s last lead was in 1995’s Forget Paris. She returned in 
the following decade, but with only roles in Rachel Getting Married, and more 
recently, Ashton Kutcher’s Netflix show, The Ranch, to her name. This summer, 
however, offers her something rather more substantial: she plays alongside 
Tracy Letts in The Lovers as a recently separated married couple who have an 
affair with each other. The trailer suggests major breakout potential.

Related: Golden Globes 2017: who will win – and who should win – the film 
categories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/golden-globes-2017-moonlight-manchester-by-the-sea-ryan-gosling-amy-adams>

Val Kilmer
 Val Kilmer, who had to deny he was close to death. Photograph: Mark 
Humphrey/AP 
The last time you heard from Val Kilmer? Probably when Michael Douglas claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/16/val-kilmer-michael-douglas-apologised-after-throat-cancer-scare>
 he was close to death, something Kilmer then had to embarrassingly deny. The 
Batman Forever and Tombstone star saw his star appeal diminish in the late 90s 
with rumors of a difficult reputation (The Island of Dr Moreau marked a 
particular low point professionally and personally) relegating him to a 
plentiful array of low-grade action thrillers. But seemingly out of nowhere, 
he’s set to have a strong year, starring with Michael Fassbender in the Jo 
Nesbo thriller The Snowman and cropping up alongside Ryan Gosling and Natalie 
Portman in Terrence Malick’s latest drama,Song to Song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/terrence-malick-song-to-song-world-premiere-sxsw-film-festival-austin-texas>
. Kilmer Forever!

Michelle Pfeiffer
 Michelle Pfeiffer appears in Where is Kyra? Photograph: Courtesy of Sundance 
Institute 
After roles in Scarface, The Witches of Eastwick and Dangerous Minds, Pfeiffer 
became one of the most marketable female actors in the industry – but after she 
took time out for children, Hollywood didn’t make it all that easy for her to 
return. She appeared in Hairspray and Stardust, but since 2007, her roles have 
been both minimal and forgettable. She’s got an impressive year ahead though, 
headlining the indie Where Is Kyra?, which will premier at Sundance later this 
month; appearing in the star-studded remake of Murder on the Orient Express; 
and, most excitingly, starring alongside Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem in 
Darren Aronofsky’s mysterious drama Mother.

Elisabeth Shue
 Elisabeth Shue: preparing for a tennis match. Photograph: JPI Studios / 
Barcroft Media 
Breaking out at a young age in The Karate Kid and Adventures in Babysitting, 
Shue’s ascent to the A-list in the 90s led to her Oscar-nominated role in 
Leaving Las Vegas but by the following decade she was relegated to thankless 
roles in dross like De Niro thriller Hide & Seek and playing herself in Hamlet 
2. She’s since cut her losses and taken a role in CSI but with the show now 
(thankfully) over, she’s back competing for roles. Luckily this year has at 
least one potential doozy: starring with Emma Stone and Steve Carell inBattle 
of the Sexes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/21/brie-larson-set-to-play-billie-jean-king-in-battle-of-the-sexes>
, the story behind the iconic tennis match between Billie Jean King and Bobby 
Riggs. She’ll also be headed to the multiplex with Bruce Willis as his 
ill-fated wife in a remake of Death Wish.

Adam Sandler
 Adam Sander: working with Noah Baumbach and Dustin Hoffman. Photograph: Globe 
Photos vi/REX/Shutterstock 
In 2002, Adam Sandler took a brief break from punishing families across the 
world to star in Paul Thomas Anderson’s offbeat romance Punch-Drunk Love. It 
was a tantalizing look at what hidden skills the comic actor possesses and 
sadly, they have been buried ever since. He’s tried to expand but picked 
poorly, with The Cobbler and Men, Women and Children both tanking. While his
Netflix deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/netflix-adam-sandler-ridiculous-six-6-best-viewing-figures-ted-sarandos>
 continues to provide him with various opportunities to make jokes about farts 
and bare breasts, he’s also keen to position himself back in more highbrow 
company – and 2017 provides him with a stellar opportunity. He’s taking the 
lead in Noah Baumbach’s comedyYeh Din Ka Kissa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/19/the-most-exciting-comedy-films-of-2017>
, with a cast that includes Dustin Hoffman, Emma Thompson and Ben Stiller, 
whose work in Greenberg and While We’re Young remains proof of what Baumbach 
can do with a comic actor.

Goldie Hawn

It’s been 15 years since we last saw Goldie Hawn on the big screen, starring 
with Susan Sarandon in The Banger Sisters, and a year after Sarandon nabbed her 
first lead role in many years (in the underrated comedy The Meddler), it seems 
fitting that she’s also making a comeback. Hawn’s comic talents, on display in 
Private Benjamin, The First Wives Club and Death Becomes Her, will be put to 
good use playing the mother of Amy Schumer’s character in the action comedy
Snatched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/16/snatched-trailer-amy-schumer-goldie-hawn>
. The trailer suggests that she hasn’t lost her touch and the pair will make 
for a perfect sparring partners.

Halle Berry
 Halle Berry appeared in a string of disasters. Photograph: Broadimage/REX 
Despite boasting an Oscar, Halle Berry has failed to nab herself an agent able 
to bring her the scripts she deserves. An almost impossibly long line of 
disasters (Catwoman, Perfect Stranger, New Year’s Eve, Movie 43) has led to 
many forgetting her considerable talents. She headed to the small screen with 
the Spielberg-produced Extant but achieved only moderate success. This year 
she’s back in force with a role in the action sequelKingsman: The Golden Circle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/11/colin-firth-back-from-the-dead-for-kingsman-2>
, leading the frenetic thriller Kidnap and, most promisingly, starring with 
Daniel Craig in Mustang director Deniz Gamze Ergüven’s English language debut 
Kings, about the LA riots of 1992.
 