
One of the most eagerly awaited jumps races for years is set to take place on 
the second day of the Punchestown festival this month following confirmation on 
Monday that Vautour, Don Cossack and Cue Card are all expected to line up in 
the Bibby Financial Services Gold Cup.

Colin Tizzard, Cue Card’s trainer, immediately nominated the Punchestown race 
on 27 April after his horse’s smooth victory in the Betfred Bowl at Aintree 
last week. TheCheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham-gold-cup> winner, Don Cossack, 
was already on course for the Punchestown event and they were joined on Monday 
as intended runners by Vautour, who fell in his race in the Melling Chase at 
Aintree at the halfway stage.

Trainer Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> said 
on Monday: “There’s a very good chance Vautour will run in the Gold Cup. He’s 
as fit as a flea, and as long as he’s sparkling at home he’ll take his chance.”

Cue Card wins King George VI Chase at the fourth attempt after thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
The Gordon Elliott-trained Don Cossack fell two fences from the finish when 
Cue Card won a thrilling King George VI Chase from Vautour at Kempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
 on Boxing Day, but the boot was on the other foot at Prestbury Park last month 
as the Colin Tizzard-trained Cue Card exited at the third-last beforeDon 
Cossack careered away to claim Cheltenham Festival glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
.

“The plan always was to go on to Punchestown and I don’t see any reason to 
change that,” Tizzard said after his horse’s Aintree success. “Hopefully [Cue 
Card and Don Cossack] jump a clear round. Don Cossack’s fallen once, we’ve 
fallen once and hopefully they both jump clear and we’ll see who finishes in 
front.”

Don Cossack wins Cheltenham Gold Cup under Bryan Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
Elliott is also looking forward to the rematch after seeing Don Cossack work 
over a mile and a half alongside stable companion Cause Of Causes in front of 
the media at Punchestown on Monday.

He said: “We haven’t done anything serious with him since then and today was 
the first time that he’s really stretched his legs since Cheltenham.

“Cue Card is a horse I’ve got massive respect for. It’s going to be a very 
good race at Punchestown. He [Don Cossack] will have one more good bit of work 
and then it’s all systems go.”

There have since been arguments among jump-racing fans as to which horse would 
have won both the King George and the Cheltenham Gold Cup but for the falls Don 
Cossack and Cue Card endured and now race fans have another chance to find out 
with Vautour, so impressive at the Cheltenham Festival in the Ryanair Chase, 
likely to be a formidable opponent for both.

Don Cossack holds the position as best long-distance chaser at present with 
rating experts Timeform on 183, while Cue Card is rated 182 and Vautour 180p, 
suggesting he is capable of improving on that current figure.
 