
The winner: Don’t Breathe

With Sausage Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-review-seth-rogen> 
retaining the top spot at the UK box office, several new releases battled for 
second place. Honours go toBen-Hur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/ben-hur-review-bekmambetov-jack-houston-morgan-freeman>
, with £1.05m from 509 cinemas, but that number includes Wednesday and Thursday 
previews totalling £265,000. Strip those out, and Ben-Hur’s tally falls to 
£783,000.Don’t Breathe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/24/dont-breathe-review-horror-fede-alvarez-house-robbery>
 earned all its £1.03m opening number from the three-day weekend period.

Don’t Breathe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/24/dont-breathe-review-horror-fede-alvarez-house-robbery>
 is shaping up to be highly profitable. Production budget is a reported $10m, 
and the film has already grossed $67m in the US. The UK opening number isn’t 
anything special – Warners’Lights Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/lights-out-review-david-sandberg-horror-film>
 debuted a few weeks ago with £1.13m – and was probably hit by the sunny 
weather on Sunday. On the other hand, rain on Saturday gave all films a boost.

The loser: Ben-Hur
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fben-hur-trailer-roman-epic-gets-a-greenscreen-reboot-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben-Hur%20trailer%3A%20Roman%20epic%20gets%20a%20greenscreen%20reboot%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fben-hur-trailer-roman-epic-gets-a-greenscreen-reboot-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben-Hur%20trailer%3A%20Roman%20epic%20gets%20a%20greenscreen%20reboot%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fben-hur-trailer-roman-epic-gets-a-greenscreen-reboot-video&media=>
Ben-Hur trailer: Roman epic gets a greenscreen reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/08/ben-hur-trailer-roman-epic-gets-a-greenscreen-reboot-video>
Ben-Hur’s weekend takings of £783,000 would have put it in fifth place for the 
weekend period, behind Sausage Party, Don’t Breathe,Bad Moms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/bad-moms-review-more-rowdy-coffee-morning-than-riot-grrrl>
 andKubo and the Two Strings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/kubo-and-the-two-strings-review-charlize-theron-laika-animation>
. Production budget is a reported $100m.

Even if previews are added to Ben-Hur’s opening tally, 56 films have opened 
bigger in the UK so far in 2016, and its box office is far from the blockbuster 
numbers it needs to achieve profitability. US box office is a calamitous $26m 
so far, but foreign is helping to stem the losses, with decent numbers in 
Brazil and Mexico.

Laika dips with Kubo
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4-6qJzeb3A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4-6qJzeb3A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp4-6qJzeb3A&media=>
September has traditionally been Universal’s favoured slot for a Laika 
animation, with Kubo and the Two Strings following the pattern set in 2012 by
ParaNorman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/13/paranorman-review> and 
in 2014 byThe Boxtrolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/the-boxtrolls-review-animated-childrens-film>
. (Coraline <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/07/coraline-film-review>
, in 2009, was a May release in the UK.) Kids are back at school, and 
competition from other family films is less intense. ParaNorman debuted with 
£1.39m, and The Boxtrolls with £1.31m plus £689,000 in previews. Coraline was 
even stronger, beginning with £1.56m plus £872,000 in previews. Kubo falls 
below these earlier Laika hits, with a debut of £844,000 from 520 cinemas.

Bad Moms and David Brent: a tale of two comedies
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fricky-gervais-in-first-full-david-brent-life-on-the-road-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ricky%20Gervais%20in%20first%20full%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fricky-gervais-in-first-full-david-brent-life-on-the-road-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ricky%20Gervais%20in%20first%20full%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fricky-gervais-in-first-full-david-brent-life-on-the-road-trailer-video&media=>
David Brent: Life on the Road trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/23/ricky-gervais-in-first-full-david-brent-life-on-the-road-trailer-video>
With third-weekend takings of £898,000, Bad Moms falls just 22%, the smallest 
decline of any film in the Top 10. This follows a drop of just 5% in the 
previous session. Compare that with the performance ofDavid Brent: Life on the 
Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/david-brent-life-on-the-road-review-ricky-gervais-office-pop-band>
, which has been on release one week longer, and has fallen by 65%, 63% and now 
82%. You’d expect bigger drops for a film based on a familiar character, as 
fans will tend to rush out and see it in the first week of release. Still,Alan 
Partridge: Alpha Papa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/24/alan-partridge-alpha-papa-review> 
achieved a final box office of £6.17m, after a debut of £1.43m plus previews – 
a multiple of 4.3 times its opening. David Brent kicked off with £1.45m plus 
negligible previews, and is looking set for a lifetime total of about £3.7m – a 
multiple of just 2.6 times the opening number.

Bad Moms (£5.74m so far) is an interesting case in that the film was not 
glowingly reviewed but is winning UK audiences. While comedy Sausage Party is 
providing some competition, Bad Moms faces more of a challenge with the arrival 
this week of the female-skewingBridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/bridget-joness-baby-review-reborn-renee-zellweger-excels-in-fun-romp-heavy-with-expectation>
.

Julieta cracks £1m
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH5_4osOZK8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH5_4osOZK8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH5_4osOZK8&media=>
In 2015, for the first time in many years, no non-Bollywood foreign language 
film earned £1m at the UK box office; top title was Argentina’sWild Tales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/26/wild-tales-relatos-salvajes-review>
, with £728,000. That result provoked plenty of gloomy analysis of the 
seemingly beleaguered foreign-language sector. So the arthouse realm will take 
cheer from the fact thatJulieta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/julieta-review-pedro-almodovar-ties-himself-down-with-fractured-melodrama>
 has now passed £1m – the first non-Bollywood foreign-language film to do so 
sinceThe Raid 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/10/the-raid-2-gareth-evans-action-martial-arts-review>
 in 2014.

With £1.08m including Monday’s takings, Julieta is neck and neck with The Raid 
2, and has overtaken 2013’sThe Great Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/05/le-grande-bellezza-great-beauty-review>
. This means it is set to be the UK’s biggest-grossing non-Bollywood foreign 
language film since the French mismatched-buddy comedyUntouchable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/20/untouchable-review>, in September 
2012 (£2.04m).

Hell or High Water is director’s biggest debut
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&media=>
Over 14 years, director David Mackenzie has delivered pictures admired to 
greater (Young Adam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/may/19/cannes2003.cannesfilmfestival4>, 
Hallam Foe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/aug/31/drama>) and lesser 
(Spread, You Instead) degrees. But box office success has tended to elude him. 
In 2014,Starred Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/starred-up-jonathan-asser-peter-bradshaw>
 brought a commercial breakthrough, achieving UK cinema takings of just over 
£1.5m, following a debut of £495,000 (including £17,000 previews) from 316 
cinemas.

Now the critically admired Hell or High Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/hell-or-high-water-review-cannes-film-jeff-bridges-chris-pine>
, starring Chris Pine, Ben Foster and Jeff Bridges, raises the bar again, 
starting its UK run with £552,000 (including £36,000 previews) from 264 cinemas.

Hell or High Water faced direct competition from Captain Fantastic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/captain-fantastic-review-viggo-mortensen>
 andAnthropoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/anthropoid-review-second-world-war-czech-resistant-cillian-murphy>
, two films that similarly straddled the indie/commercial divide. Anthropoid, 
which began with £228,000 (including £7,000 previews) from 132 cinemas, 
delivered by far the biggest box office so far for director Sean Ellis (Metro 
Manila <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/19/metro-manila-review>). 
Captain Fantastic, with a tighter release at 105 carefully selected venues, 
achieved the highest screen average of the three films, with £2,092 (if 
previews of £61,000 are excluded from its £281,000 total).

Nick Cave documentary burns brightly
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHdl5sox2G6g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHdl5sox2G6g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHdl5sox2G6g&media=>
Initially conceived as a filmed performance of Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds’ 
new albumSkeleton Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/09/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-skeleton-tree-first-listen-review-a-masterpiece-of-love-and-devastation>
,One More Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
 was originally set to play cinemas only on September 8, the day before the 
record’s release. The creative evolution of the film under Andrew Dominik’s 
direction, and acclaim at the Venice film festival, helped the picture achieve 
significant encore showings over the weekend. Total box office for the four 
days is £343,000 in the UK, and $1.7m across the globe.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fthe-beatles-eight-days-a-week-the-touring-years-exclusive-clip-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Beatles%3A%20Eight%20Days%20A%20Week%20-%20The%20Touring%20Years%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fthe-beatles-eight-days-a-week-the-touring-years-exclusive-clip-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Beatles%3A%20Eight%20Days%20A%20Week%20-%20The%20Touring%20Years%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fthe-beatles-eight-days-a-week-the-touring-years-exclusive-clip-video&media=>
The Beatles: Eight Days a Week - The Touring Years: exclusive clip – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/06/the-beatles-eight-days-a-week-the-touring-years-exclusive-clip-video>
Largely due to the underperformance of Ben-Hur, takings are 29% down on the 
equivalent session from 2015, when a double ration of Tom Hardy inLegend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/legend-review-tom-hardy-on-double-duty-in-cartoonish-krays-biopic>
 led the box office charge. This ends a nine-week run where box office was 
either ahead or level with the 2015 equivalent weekends. Cinema bookers are now 
hoping that the arrival of two belated sequels – Bridget Jones’s Baby andBlair 
Witch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/blair-witch-review-horror-sequel> 
– can remedy the situation this weekend. Alternatives include Bryan Cranston in 
crime thrillerThe Infiltrator <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1355631/> and the 
widely admired New Zealand comedyHunt for the Wilderpeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-review-sam-neill-misfit-kid-kiwi-hit>
. Thursday sees several hundred cinemas nationwide play the Ron Howard-directed
The Beatles: Eight Days a Week – The Touring Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/13/beatles-eight-days-week-ron-howard>
, followed by a more focused full release from Friday.

Top 10 films, 9-11 September

1. Sausage Party <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sausage-party>, £1,219,972 
from 533 sites. Total: £5,290,877

2. Ben-Hur <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-hur>, £1,047,800 from 509 
sites (new)

3. Don’t Breathe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/24/dont-breathe-review-horror-fede-alvarez-house-robbery>
, £1,028,938 from 446 sites (new)

4. Bad Moms <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bad-moms>, £898,450 from 448 
sites. Total: £5,738,313

5. Kubo and the Two Strings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/kubo-and-the-two-strings-review-charlize-theron-laika-animation>
, £844,027 from 520 sites (new)

6. Finding Dory <https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-dory>, £718,508 from 
549 sites. Total: £40,096,594

7. Hell Or High Water <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hell-or-high-water>, 
£552,230 from 264 sites (new)

8. Brotherhood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brotherhood>, £465,031 from 
237 sites. Total: £2,910,640

9. The BFG <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg>, £332,704 from 468 
sites. Total: £29,197,858

10. Suicide Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>, £313,292 
from 362 sites. Total: £33,191,023
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcaptain-fantastic-viggo-mortensen-stars-survivalist-dad-wilderness-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Captain%20Fantastic%3A%20Viggo%20Mortensen%20stars%20as%20a%20survivalist%20dad%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcaptain-fantastic-viggo-mortensen-stars-survivalist-dad-wilderness-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Captain%20Fantastic%3A%20Viggo%20Mortensen%20stars%20as%20a%20survivalist%20dad%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fcaptain-fantastic-viggo-mortensen-stars-survivalist-dad-wilderness-video&media=>
Captain Fantastic: Viggo Mortensen stars as a survivalist dad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/08/captain-fantastic-viggo-mortensen-stars-survivalist-dad-wilderness-video>
Other openers

Captain Fantastic <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-fantastic>, 
£280,614 (including £60,926 previews) from 105 sites

Anthropoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/10/anthropoid-review-humdrum-account-extraordinary-plot-heydrich>
, £227,591 (including 7,054 previews) from 132 sites

Baar Baar Dekho <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5197544/>, £156,337 from 66 sites

Janaan <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5960464/>, £49,678 from 39 sites

Iru Mugan <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5372466/>, £44,562 from 29 sites

Freaky Ali <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5943306/>, £16,562 from 15 sites

The Man Who Fell to Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-man-who-fell-to-earth-review-nicolas-roeg-david-bowie>
, £16,353 from 14 sites

Theo and Hugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/theo-and-hugo-review-lovers-on-a-soul-searching-odyssey>
, £8,874 (including £3,082 previews) from four sites

The Blue Room <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-blue-room-la-chambre-bleue>
, £4,136 from nine sites

Line Walker <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5896962/>, £1,307 from two sites

The Land of the Enlightened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-land-of-the-enlightened-review-afghanistan-documentary>
, £459 from two sites

Marubhoomiyile Aana <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5533990/>, £262 from two sites

• Thanks to comScore <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK>. All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.
 