
Fans of jump racing will have to wait until next season at least for another, 
hopefully decisive clash between Don Cossack and Cue Card, the two top-class 
staying chasers whose relative ability remains the subject of dispute. The 
matter would have been resolved, had Cue Card jumped over the third-last in
Friday’s Cheltenham Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
rather than into it, but one fall by each horse this season has left it as an 
open question and they will now go their separate ways until the autumn at 
least.

“He’s fine, fresh as anything,” said Colin Tizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>, trainer of Cue Card, after 
saddling a runner at Kempton on Saturday. “That’s the only good thing about it.”

Victoria Pendleton: Cheltenham race ‘was a dream, audacious and ridiculous’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/victoria-pendleton-cheltenham-festival-foxhunter-chase-dream-audacious-ridiculous>
Tizzard had a good Festival in any case, thanks to the extraordinary ease with 
whichThistlecrack won Thursday’s World Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/17/cheltenham-festival-2016-st-patricks-day-live>
, but he is keenly aware that the chance to win a Gold Cup comes along but 
rarely. Cue Card’s stamina for three and a quarter miles remains unproven but 
he showed no sign of fatigue as he cruised to the lead about two seconds before 
exiting Friday’s race.

It appeared to be the trainer’s view that Cue Card was probably three clean 
leaps from victory. “I watched the others after he fell,” he said. “Watched 
them plod on.”

Paddy Brennan, Cue Card’s jockey, said he was “struggling a bit, mentally” in 
the aftermath of the race. “But the best thing for me to do is come here, with 
my friends and get back to work. You’ve got to move on.

“He settled so well, early on, I was sure he would stay. When I pulled him out 
and went into that gap [between Djakadam and Don Cossack], it was like he was 
running away.”

That natural exuberance, which spoke so well of Cue Card’s remaining reserves 
of energy, led to his downfall.

Tizzard said Cue Card would be trained for Aintree’s Grand National meeting, 
where he will have the choice between races at three miles or two and a half. 
He was thoroughlybested last year in the shorter race by Don Cossack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/10/tony-mccoy-melling-chase-don-cossack-aintree>
but that was before the transformative wind operation that has allowed Cue Card 
to be better this season than ever before.

Don Cossack, who went on to beat Djakadam by four and a half lengths on Friday 
when ridden by Bryan Cooper (right), was also reported in robust health, 
despite pulling a shoe off in mid-race. Gordon Elliott, his trainer, said that 
Aintree was not in his thoughts and that the Gold Cup hero might run at 
Punchestown at the end of next month before being given his summer break.

Don Cossack wins Cheltenham Gold Cup under Bryan Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
Elliott added that one of his two other Festival winners, Cause Of Causes, 
would be trained for the Grand National on 9 April in the hope that he will 
make the cut at the bottom of the weights. Cause Of Causes, whose winning 
margin of 12 lengths was the biggest of the four days at Cheltenham, will 
compete from the same handicap mark at Aintree if he makes the final field of 
40, but needs 27 of the higher-weighted entries to withdraw. It appears that 
Don Poli, the Gold Cup third, will help by dropping out of the National in 
favour of the Betfred Bowl earlier that week.

Aintree’s three-day meeting could settle the trainers’ title race after Willie 
Mullins had such a good Festival that he now trails Paul Nicholls by less than 
£120,000. He would be the first Irish-based jumps trainer to win a British 
title since Vincent O’Brien managed it more than 60 years ago.

Mullins expects to have more runners at Aintree than would usually be his wont 
and will perhaps find other British opportunities for his enormous string of 
runners. He even had a favourite at Kempton, though Townshend faded into a 
well-beaten 12th.

That was rather a pity for Ruby Walsh, who travelled from Cheltenham for one 
ride. The Irishman was limping after at least one fall too many during the 
week, but cheerfully reeled off the memories he would take from the Festival: “
Annie Power, spectacular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/annie-power-wins-champion-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
. The surprise of Vautour. Black Hercules’ toughness. The raw potential of 
Yorkhill, the speed of Limini and the class of Vroum Vroum Mag.”

While the sport’s rulers reflect on the seven equine fatalities at Cheltenham 
and what might be done to improve safety, they must also now consider rather 
disappointing viewing figures recorded by Channel 4 for Gold Cup day, when the 
audience ought to have been boosted by the extraordinary interest and coverage 
aroundVictoria Pendleton’s ride in the Foxhunter Chase.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
Channel 4 drew an average audience of 820,000, down from 864,000 last year, 
while its peak of 1.5m was barely ahead of the 2015 equivalent. The feeling 
among racing’s powerbrokers will surely be that thedecision to go with ITV from 
next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/01/itv-win-rights-racing-channel-4>
has been the correct one.

Rather rubbing salt into Tizzard’s wounds, his Golden Chieftain was a 
last-fence faller in the Midlands Grand National at Uttoxeter, at which point 
he was in front and trading at 1-12 on Betfair. The race was won by Firebird 
Flyer, last seen running second in the Welsh National.
 