
As the revelations in the Panama papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> continue to make ever 
greater waves across the world, we must ask how those bankers, accountants and 
lawyers who help rich people and large corporations avoid taxes can live with 
themselves.

The best clue is found in an email sent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/a-world-of-hidden-wealth-why-we-are-shining-a-light-offshore>
 by one Mossack Fonseca employee: “Is there any kind of indemnity that stop[s] 
us as employees of Mossack Fonseca from being prosecuted? We are getting a bit 
worried.”

For four years I have been interviewing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joris-luyendijk> bankers and financial 
professionals in London, Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Tokyo, and if you want to 
know the moral outlook of people in finance today this email tells you all you 
need to know.

Big banks still have a problem with ethics and morality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/18/big-banks-problem-ethics-morality-davos>
The bankers’ own term for that outlook is “amoral” and they all insist that 
this is fundamentally different from immoral. The latter is what the Wolf of 
Wall Street does: get rich by knowingly selling other people shares in 
companies that do not exist. This, financial professionals will tell you, is 
immoral: you deliberately break the law. Amoral, by contrast, is to take the 
law as your ethical framework and say: “If what I do is not illegal, then I 
must be innocent”.

Talk to the “structurers” who, until 2008, built ever more complex instruments 
with ever more worthless US mortgages in them, and you hear them resorting to 
amorality. Speak to the salespeople who sold unsuspecting German banks, Swedish 
municipalities or Italian pension funds derivatives that they knew their 
clients did not understand, and you will hear similar justifications. It is the 
same when you listen to those bankers and lawyers offering “tax-efficient 
solutions” allowing “high net-worth individuals” to pay almost no tax within 
the law.

As prime minister David Cameron was struggling to distance himself from his 
father’s “tax vehicle”, the US president Barack Obamanailed it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/05/justice-department-panama-papers-mossack-fonseca-us-investigation>
 when he said: “The problem is that a lot of this stuff is legal, not illegal.”

It gets worse. Many ordinary citizens now fuming about the industrial scale at 
which banks and other big financial firms engage in tax avoidance do not 
realise that, every month, many of us are paying into a pension fund that in 
all likelihood is acting just as amorally. When pension funds invest on the 
stock market they seek out the best returns. This means they tell the CEOs of 
corporations to make as much profit as possible, because otherwise the pension 
fund will shift to their competitors. When your insurer invests your premium in 
order to be able to pay out should you file a claim, it is doing the same: 
finding the corporations that make the most profit.

Exclude criminal records from job applications, companies urged
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/15/exclude-criminal-records-from-job-applications-companies-urged>
Now, what do you expect those corporations – banks among them – to do? They 
see an opportunity to make a lot of profit by offering “tax-optimising 
services” to clients. If they do not offer them, their competitors will. As 
long as those services are legal, how is it possible to stop them?

This is why the way forward is not to ostracise and demonise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/18/oil-company-employees-morals-ethics>
 individual bankers or even banks. It is, first, to change the law so “all this 
stuff” – in Obama’s words – becomes illegal. The second step is to prosecute 
those bankers breaking the law – and not just the grunts at the coalface but 
those at the top. CEOs who demand to be paid tens of millions as “compensation” 
for bearing the “responsibility” for their companies should be held fully 
accountable if those companies break the law.

This was a point made by many of the professionals I have interviewed: if you 
want us to behave differently, stop waving your fist in powerless anger but 
change the incentives embedded in the law. Yes, they would concede, there are 
powerful, well paid, well connected and well placed brains constantly working 
out new ways to avoid tax. Activists, however, will tell you that there is 
still a lot of low hanging fruit waiting to be picked.

 