
If there’s one group that could survive extreme tribulations, it would be AC/DC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>. In the last couple of years, Malcolm 
Young, their leader and rhythm guitarist, was forced to depart, stricken by 
dementia, and they ploughed on. Phil Rudd, their drummer, was ditched, having 
become embroiled in a court case that saw himsentenced to home detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/phil-rudd-acdc-drummer-sentenced-to-home-detention-for-threat-to-kill>
, and still they ploughed on. And that omits their greatest act of survival: 
the replacement of singerBon Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/11/acdc-fans-raise-45000-bon-scott-statue-hometown>
, seemingly the lascivious embodiment of AC/DC, with Brian Johnson after Scott 
died in 1980.

Scott’s death, rather than killing the band, was followed by AC/DC attaining 
their greatest heights: theBack in Black album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/05/back-in-black-ac-dc> became the 
second biggest-selling album ever, behind Michael Jackson’s Thriller, and gave 
the group a position – never relinquished – as one of rock’n’roll’s biggest 
draws. Even the events of the last couple of years couldn’t knock AC/DC off 
their stride: without Young, they recorded the perfectly serviceableRock or 
Bust album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/24/acdc-rock-or-bust-first-listen-review>
; with Rudd displaced they went on tour andwere as thrilling as ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/06/ac-dc-review-wembley-stadium-essence-of-rock-and-roll>
.

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
Earlier this week, though, AC/DC announced that Johnson had been advised to 
stop touring, or risk “total hearing loss” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/acdc-singer-brian-johnson-to-stop-touring-to-save-his-hearing>
. The group said 10 US dates would be rescheduled, “likely with a guest 
vocalist”, and that was it. Never the most forthcoming of groups – Malcolm’s 
dementia was admitted only when news outlets began to report it – they have 
made no further statement about their future.

AC/DC’s Powerage was the first album I bought – 27 December 1980, on cassette, 
from HMV Oxford Street in London, the version with Cold Hearted Man instead of 
Rock’n’Roll Damnation – and they’ve been the only constant of my listening 
life. Powerage is still among my favourite albums, and I’ve never begrudged 
them their decisions to continue, no matter the vicissitudes they face. After 
all, it’s their band, their lives.

This time, though, I’m joining those who think AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> should call time. They’d already long 
ceased to be a group who made records because they couldn’t stop themselves – a 
mere five albums since 1990 – and who played live only on long worldwide jaunts 
off the back of those records. They had entered the realms of those groups for 
whom each album was a potential return to form, rather than a new landmark. 
It’s not that they were making bad records, more that no one was turning to 
Black Ice or Ballbreaker instead of Back in Black or Highway to Hell. They were 
making records, and touring, to keep the business ticking over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n7NUDOY9cc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n7NUDOY9cc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5n7NUDOY9cc&media=>
 Watch video for AC/DC Hells Bells 
There’s nothing wrong with musicians making music to make money. For all the 
supposed romance of rock’n’roll, no one joins a rock band – except on the DIY 
fringes – in the hope of pursuing a life of poverty. In 1975, on his mission 
statement, Rock’n’Roll Singer, Bon Scott outlined his reason for following that 
path: “I hear it pays well!” And AC/DC have continued making enormous amounts 
of money while making a lot of people very happy indeed – check out the faces 
of the crowd in their Live at River Plate if you don’t believe me (or if you 
haven’t seen me beaming on my way out of an AC/DC show).

To go ahead with those shows​, of karaoke AC/DC​,​ looks ​​like putting the 
bank account before the fans

But there comes a point where the trade-off between going home with large 
amounts of money and offering fans a show to delight seems skewed too far in 
one direction. And that point would seem to me to have arrived with the notion 
that a stand-in singer take Johnson’s place for those 10 shows. If Johnson 
might ever be fit to return, postpone the shows until he can. If he is not, 
give the fans refunds. Don’t give them a show that is not what they paid for. 
They paid for AC/DC – for Brian Johnson andAngus Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/14/acdc-phil-rudd-has-got-himself-in-a-pickle-angus-young-says>
. They didn’t pay for Angus Young, bassist Cliff Williams, and three stand-ins, 
which is what they would be getting. To go ahead with those shows of karaoke 
AC/DC looks like putting the bank account before the fans. At the very least – 
given the longstanding loyalty and support of fans – AC/DC should at least 
clarify Johnson’s situation: has he retired, or hasn’t he?

If I believed AC/DC were likely to go into the studio the minute this tour was 
over, that more than anything they wanted to remain a working band, I’d be 
delighted to hear of them recruiting a new singer. But given the gaps between 
albums these days, I can’t see that being a possibility. If I believed they 
were simply desperate to keep on playing until the dying of the light, I’d be 
happy for them. Yet they only play live for albums, so it’s hard to believe 
they live for the show. Instead, a new singer would just be a way to keep the 
show on the road, whatever that show might be.

AC/DC's Malcolm Young was a master of discipline and economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/sep/24/acdc-malcolm-young-master-of-discipline-and-economy>
Hard-rock bands are uniquely capable of sustaining themselves in the face of a 
high turnover of members:when I spoke to David Coverdale last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/22/david-coverdale-whitesnake-the-purple-album-deep-purple>
, he was surprised to learn that he had employed 39 different musicians to fill 
out the lineups of Whitesnake. It’s a testimony to the strength of their brands 
that such acts are able to do this. However, those bands that have are often 
dependent on a single charismatic member, who embodies the band and the brand, 
or are those whose careers are not, perhaps, what they were. History is not 
replete with examples of stadium-filling member bands retaining their status 
once they have adopted conveyor-belt membership. The nearest comparison I can 
think of is Queen, and they are a jukebox act now Only their decision to hire
Adam Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jun/04/adam-lambert-american-idol-interview>
 saw them regain their live-act status.

For AC/DC, it’s different. They are among the world’s most commercially 
successful bands, even now. To decide to give that up must be hard. If they do 
play atLondon’s Olympic Stadium in June 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/whats-on/events/2015/12/acdc-at-the-stadium>
 with a new singer, I will probably go. Just to see. To revisit my memories of 
one of my all-time favourite bands.

But I hope they don’t. I hope, this time, they decide that AC/DC is too 
precious a thing to diminish.
 