
An Olympic gold medalist, an influential lobbyist and a former beauty queen 
convicted of illegally killing a bear have joined forces forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, joining his son’s 
“coalition” for gun rights and the second amendment.

At the helm of the “second amendment coalition” are Donald Trump Jr, Trump’s 
eldest son, andChris Cox <https://www.nraila.org/about/chris-cox-nra/>, the 
head of theNational Rifle Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/14/inside-the-nra-the-officials-keeping-gun-control-laws-off-the-us-agenda>
’s lobbying arm, the NRA Institute for Legislative Action.

Trump's campaign says Clinton 'hitting the panic button' in blue states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/trump-campaign-clinton-panic-losing-blue-states>
“My father defends the second amendment, so that you and I and your spouse and 
your children can take care of themselves when someone much stronger, much 
meaner and much more vicious than them tries to break into their home,” Trump 
Jr said in the press release announcing the group.

“It’s not just a hobby or something I do on the weekends. It’s a lifestyle; 
and as my father often says: ‘This is about self-defense, plain and simple.’”

Both Trump’s sons are avid hunters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/31/donald-trump-sons-hunting-iowa-zimbabwe-pheasants>
, and their enthusiasm for weapons has been well documented since photographs 
surfaced of the brothersposing with dead animals 
<http://gothamist.com/2012/03/13/photos_donald_trump_sons_awesome_at.php#photo-2>
 after a big game hunt in Zimbabwe – a hunt thatprovoked 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/29/donald-trump-s-sons-killed-exotic-animals.html>
criticism 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/animalia/wp/2016/08/06/the-trump-sons-go-hunting-again-will-more-trophy-photos-follow/>
 at home and abroad. Since the campaign began, Trump Jr has served as a liaison 
between the campaign and the gun industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3b3cb800ce1e5e8d342ba1b4bc3c4d64e8c5921%2F0_91_3252_1951%2F3252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20Jr's%20gun%20rights%20coalition%20includes%20Olympian%20and%20beauty%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20Jr%27s%20gun%20rights%20coalition%20includes%20Olympian%20and%20beauty%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3b3cb800ce1e5e8d342ba1b4bc3c4d64e8c5921%2F0_91_3252_1951%2F3252.jpg>
 Members of Donald Trump’s family: Melania Trump, Ivanka Trump, Eric Trump and 
Donald Trump Jr. Photograph: Tasos Katopodis/AFP/Getty Images 
One of the most powerful lobbyists 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/29/us/politics/nra-victories-in-congress-grow-with-chief-lobbyists-role.html?_r=0>
 in the country, Cox will serve as a chairman of the advisory panel, and have 
the ear of a Republican nominee who has, alternately,bragged about currying 
favor 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-bragged-that-his-money-bought-off-politicians-just-not-this-time/2016/09/07/00a9d1e4-750b-11e6-be4f-3f42f2e5a49e_story.html>
 with money and railed against the influence of big money in politics.

“The supreme court ruled 5-4 that we have a fundamental, individual right to 
protect ourselves and our families with a firearm in our own homes,” Cox said. 
“Clinton said ‘the supreme court is wrong on the second amendment,’” he added, 
alluding to Clinton’s disagreement with the controversial 2008 ruling that 
broadly ruled against states’ rights to regulate guns. “A Clinton supreme court 
means your right to own a firearm is gone.”

Among the group’s 62 co-chairs are a handful of hunters and sportsmen that 
appear to share the Trump sons’ proclivity for big game hunting.

One of the co-chairs, Paul Babaz 
<http://safariclubfoundation.org/about-sci-2/directors-staff>, sits on the 
board of directors for the Safari Club International. The Arizona-based big 
game hunting organization has beensharply criticized  
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/safari-club-attacked-for-incentives-to-kill-rare-animals/>
by animal protection groups for holding competitions that promote the killing 
of lions, elephants and other endangered species. Last year, the grouprevoked 
<http://www.foxnews.com/science/2015/07/30/walter-palmer-safari-club-membership-suspended-after-lion-killing.html>
 the membership of Walter Palmer, after the Minnesota dentist was accused of 
illegally killingCecil the Lion in Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/05/why-did-death-of-a-single-lion-cecil-cause-such-an-uproar>
. Trophy hunting is legal, however, and its supporters argue that its high fees 
help fund conservation efforts and regulate ecosystems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84faa7809eb10fc25bfbf0e9751aff1d30a4f6aa%2F858_837_1241_1551%2F1241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20Jr's%20gun%20rights%20coalition%20includes%20Olympian%20and%20beauty%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20Jr%27s%20gun%20rights%20coalition%20includes%20Olympian%20and%20beauty%20queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdonald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84faa7809eb10fc25bfbf0e9751aff1d30a4f6aa%2F858_837_1241_1551%2F1241.jpg>
 Chris Cox, the head of the National Rifle Association’s lobbying arm, is among 
the coalition’s leaders. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Another adviser, Don Peay, an influential conservationist from Utah, is the 
founder of Big Game Forever, an advocacy group that has been givenhundreds of 
thousands of dollars 
<http://www.sltrib.com/home/2298978-155/utah-sends-500k-more-to-unexplained> to 
lobby for the removal of wolves from the endangered species list. On a hunting 
trip with Trump’s sons earlier this year, Peaycalled 
<http://kutv.com/news/local/utah-sportsman-hunts-with-trumps-sons-calls-them-authentic-blue-collar-kids>
 the real estate heirs “kind of blue-collar kids” who like to hunt fish and 
camp.

“With Donald Trump Jr and Eric, it’s authentic,” Peay told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/31/donald-trump-sons-hunting-iowa-zimbabwe-pheasants>
 the Guardian ahead of the Iowa caucuses. “These guys speak the language, they 
know the gear, they’re hardcore avid hunter conservationists and fishermen.”

Theresa Vail, a former Miss Kansas and Outdoor Channel host, was convicted 
<http://www.kansas.com/news/local/article53613120.html> last year of illegally 
killing a grizzly bear. Prosecutorsaccused her 
<http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2015/12/09/theresa-vail-deeply-sorry-for-covering-up-illegal-grizzly-bear-shoot-in-alaska.html>
 of trying to cover up the incident, which occurred while on a hunt in Alaska 
with her show for the Outdoor Channel, Limitless with Theresa Vail. She now 
hosts a program, NRA All Access, for the channel.

Other co-chairs include a slate of NRA board members, including former 
Virginia governor Jim Gilmore, former Washington Redskins lineman Dave Butz, 
former Nascar driver Richard Childress, country music singer Craig Morgan and 
Ronnie Barrett, designer of the Barrett .50 caliber rifles,described 
<http://smartgunlaws.org/gun-laws/policy-areas/classes-of-weapons/fifty-caliber-weapons/>
 as “among the most destructive weapons legally available to civilians” by the 
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fiowa-pheasant-hunting-with-donald-trump-jr-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iowa%3A%20pheasant%20hunting%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20Jr%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fiowa-pheasant-hunting-with-donald-trump-jr-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iowa%3A%20pheasant%20hunting%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20Jr%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fiowa-pheasant-hunting-with-donald-trump-jr-video&media=>
Iowa: pheasant hunting with Donald Trump Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/31/iowa-pheasant-hunting-with-donald-trump-jr-video>
It also includes double-trap and skeet shooter Kim Rhode, a six-time Olympic 
medalist, world shooting champion Doug Koenig, and well-known gun 
manufacturers, such as Jesse James of Monster Garage and Marty Daniel of Daniel 
Defense.

Only a handful of the 62 co-chairs are members of Congress, among them House 
majority whip Steve Scalise, of Louisiana. The House’s third-highest ranking 
leader, Scalise called on Trump to apologize for hislewd remarks in a 2005 
Access Hollywood video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, in which Trump bragged that he could grope and kiss women without their 
consent, but the representative has continued to support Trump as other senior 
Republicans have fallen away.

The coalition’s late rollout appears to be a last-ditch attempt by the 
campaign to shore up support from gun owners, some of whom have been skeptical 
of the New Yorker’s record on gun rights. Trump received the endorsement of the
NRA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra> despite opposition from some of 
its members that he was not strong enough on the issues.

Donald Trump Jr has a knack for landing himself in hot water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/donald-trump-jr-skittles-tweet-hunting>
On the trail, Trump has sought to cast himself as a staunch defender of gun 
rights, but hepreviously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-endorses-donald-trump-convention>
 supported a ban on assault weapons and longer waiting periods to purchase a 
gun.

As a presidential nominee, Trump has advocated against 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/?/positions/second-amendment-rights>
 expanded background checks and restrictions on guns and magazines, and called 
for a national right to carry in all 50 states. At his rallies, Trump claims 
that the second amendment is “under siege” and promises supporters that as 
president he will appoint supreme court justices who will defend the right to 
bear arms.

 On the trail, the Republican has falsely 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/may/11/donald-trump/donald-trump-falsely-claims-hillary-clinton-wants-/>
 andrepeatedly 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/11/politics/hillary-clinton-gun-control-second-amendment/>
 claimed that Hillary Clinton will “take your guns away” and “abolish the 
second amendment” if she wins the election. The press release announcing the 
coalition warned that as president, Clinton would “virtually abolish the second 
amendment” through her appointment of liberal supreme court justices.
 