
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> insisted on 
Thursday that he was “working hard” even during the Thanksgiving holiday, as 
the latest speculation around the president-elect’s cabinet focused on 
billionaire distressed debt investor Wilbur Ross.

Trump is spending the holiday with his family at his Mar-a-Lago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/donald-trump-climate-change-florida-resort>
 in Palm Beach, Florida, a luxury resortwhich has a $100,000 membership fee 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/trump-trips-focus-attention-on-small-wealthy-palm-beach/2016/11/22/d81b4cf4-b122-11e6-bc2d-19b3d759cfe7_story.html>
 plus $14,000 in annual dues.

If Donald Trump gets his way, his administration will be disastrous | Trevor 
Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/donald-trump-administration-conflicts-of-interest>
Late Wednesday he made a video appeal saying it was time to “begin to heal our 
divisions” after a bruising campaign. Then just after 10am on Thursday,the 
president-elect tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/801805564577808385>: “I am working 
hard, even on Thanksgiving, trying to get Carrier A.C. Company to stay in the 
U.S. (Indiana). MAKING PROGRESS – Will know soon!”

Carrier, a manufacturing company, announced in February 
<https://www.thestreet.com/story/13547785/1/united-technologies-profits-from-moving-its-carrier-unit-to-mexico-sorry-donald-trump.html>
 it would move 2,000 jobs at two of its Indiana plants to Mexico to cut costs. 
Trump repeatedly referred to the company on the campaign trail, though many 
workers were not convinced he could stop the planned move.

Carrier said in a statement that it: 
<https://twitter.com/Carrier/status/801826384670760960> “has had discussions 
with the incoming administration and we look forward to working together”.

The president-elect, who announced the first two women as choices for his 
cabinet on Wednesday, was thought to have been having a more restful day before 
meeting with potential cabinet members on Friday, and possibly confirming
retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/nov/07/ben-carson-house-homage-to-himself-in-pictures>
 as head of housing and urban development. The transition team communications 
director Jason Miller tweeted saying there would be no announcements on 
Thursday.
Jason Miller (@JasonMillerinDC) 
Happy Thanksgiving, everyone. No announcements from the Transition Team today, 
so enjoy the turkey and football!
 <https://twitter.com/JasonMillerinDC/status/801832956809670656> November 24, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/JasonMillerinDC/status/801832956809670656> 
Last week, Carson adviser Armstrong Williams told multiple reporters that 
Carson would not be a good fit for Trump’s cabinet because “Dr Carson feels he 
has no government experience”. But Carson suggested on Wednesday that he had 
changed his mind. “An announcement is forthcoming about my role in helping to 
make America great again,”he wrote in a Facebook post. 
<https://www.facebook.com/realbencarson/posts/738670639632738>


There has also been speculation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/donald-trump-president-elect.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 that Trump would name General James Mattis as defense secretary shortly after 
announcing Carson’s appointment. The president-elect this week credited Mattis 
for changing his mind about the value of waterboarding, which Trump previously 
said he supported.

“He [Mattis] said, ‘I’ve never found it to be useful,’” Trump told the New 
York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/22/us/politics/donald-trump-visit.html>. He 
went on to say Mattis found more value in building trust with terrorism 
suspects: “‘Give me a pack of cigarettes and a couple of beers, and I’ll do 
better.’”

“I was very impressed by that answer,” Trump said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-commerce-secretary-talks-wilbur-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4979b31f8c8781a76004b6bdea01228ef36a333a%2F0_104_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20in%20talks%20over%20commerce%20secretary%20role%20with%20'king%20of%20bankruptcy'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-commerce-secretary-talks-wilbur-ross%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20in%20talks%20over%20commerce%20secretary%20role%20with%20%27king%20of%20bankruptcy%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-commerce-secretary-talks-wilbur-ross%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4979b31f8c8781a76004b6bdea01228ef36a333a%2F0_104_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
 President-elect Donald Trump, left, stands with investor Wilbur Ross after 
meeting at the Trump National Golf Club Bedminster in New Jersey. Photograph: 
Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Ross, who backed Trump during the campaign and had spent time with the 
president-elect in New Jersey with on Sunday at his Bedminster golf course, has 
emerged as the leading candidate to be Trump’s choice for commerce secretary.

The Associated Press reported he would be Trump’s choice, citing a senior 
transition official.

Ross, reputed to be worth $3bn, has been called the “king of bankruptcy” for 
buying troubled companies and restructuring. He helped craft Trump’s tax-cut 
and infrastructure plans and has praised the president-elect for representing a 
shift to a “less politically correct direction”.

Ross played a role in the president-elect’s tax-cut and infrastructure plans 
and has suggested that much of America is disgruntled because the economy has 
left middle-class workers behind. “Part of the reason why I’m supporting Trump 
is that I think we need a more radical, new approach to government at least in 
the US from what we’ve had before,” Ross told CNBC in June.

He’s a Yale graduate and worked as a banker at Rothschild for 24 years, 
specialising in bankruptcy and corporate restructurings. He then founded his 
own firm, WL Ross, in 2000 and earned part of his fortune from investing in 
troubled factories in the industrial Midwest.

That region swung hard for Trump in the election on the promise of more 
manufacturing jobs from renegotiated trade deals and penalties for factories 
that outsourced their work abroad.


A specialist in corporate turnarounds, Ross buys distressed or bankrupt 
companies at steep discounts, then seeks to shave costs and generate profits. 
He has been described by some as a saviour of distressed firms, though some 
critics say cost reductions have come from altering pay and benefits for 
workers.

Both Ross and Carson have homes near Trump’s Mar-a-Lago retreat, but it is 
unclear whether they will also be spending the Thanksgiving holiday there.


Before the holiday, Trump named the first women to his cabinet. On Wednesday, 
he announced South Carolina governor Nikki Haley as the ambassador to the 
United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/nikki-haley-named-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
 and Betsy DeVos, a billionaire philanthropist and conservative activist,as 
education secretary. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>

Both women criticized Trump during the campaign and backed his opponents – 
Haley supported Florida senator Marco Rubio, while DeVos spent most of the 
campaign raising money for other Republican candidates.

But Trump insisted it was time for Americans to put the campaign behind them 
and aim for unity in a Thanksgiving address released on Wednesday night, where 
he acknowledged the previous year of campaigning had taken a toll on the 
country. “Emotions are raw and tensions just don’t heal overnight,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20Thanksgiving%20message%3A%20'Tensions%20just%20don't%20heal%20overnight'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20Thanksgiving%20message%3A%20%27Tensions%20just%20don%27t%20heal%20overnight%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s Thanksgiving message: ‘Tensions just don’t heal overnight’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video>
This message was echoed by Barack Obama, who released his final Thanksgiving 
addressas president on Thursday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/24/barack-obama-calls-for-unity-in-final-thanksgiving-address-as-president-video?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
. “As a country, we’ve just emerged from a noisy, passionate and sometimes 
divisive campaign season,” Obama said.

He continued to say it was time to move past the election and unite. Obama 
said: “A few short weeks later, Thanksgiving reminds us that no matter our 
differences, we are still one people – part of something bigger than ourselves”.

These calls for unity came as Trump’s opponents clung to Hillary Clinton’s 
2m-vote lead in the popular count –campaigns emerged this week calling for 
recounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/hillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
 in the states that were essential to Trump’s electoral college victory. As of 
12pm ET on Wednesday, the Green party presidential candidate,Jill Stein, had 
raised more than $3m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/jill-stein-election-recount-fund-michigan-wisconsin-pennsylvania>
 for a fund she said was needed to request reviews of the results in several 
key battleground states.
 