
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> shattered 
expectations on Tuesday with an election night victory that revealed deep 
anti-establishment anger among American voters and set the world on a journey 
into the political unknown.

The Republican nominee has achieved one of the most improbable political 
victories in modern US history, despite a series of controversies that would 
easily have destroyed other candidacies, extreme policies that have drawn 
criticism from both sides of the aisle, a record of racist and sexist 
behaviour, and a lack of conventional political experience.

After surprise early victories in Florida, North Carolina and Ohio, it fell to 
the rust belt states of the industrial midwest to determine the result of his 
stunning upset.

Wisconsin and Michigan, two states hit hard by a decline in manufacturing jobs 
and lost byHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>
 to Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, were led by Trump as the race 
headed for an early morning cliffhanger.

At 2.30am, the Associated Press projected Trump had won Wisconsin and called 
the overall race for Trump, who passed the 270 electoral college votes he 
needed to secure the presidency.
 Who voted for Donald Trump? 
Shortly afterwards, Clinton called Trump to concede but did not make a public 
address.


Trump left Trump Tower for the short journey to the Hilton Midtown, where the 
president-elect then took to the stage and insisted he would “deal fairly with 
everyone”.

“Sorry to keep you waiting, complicated business, complicated business,” began 
Trump to raucous chants of “U-S-A, U-S-A” from his excited supporters.

“I have just received a call from Secretary Clinton. She congratulated us – 
it’s about us and our victory – and I congratulated her on a very hard-fought 
campaign.

“Now it is time for Americans to bind the wounds of division,” he added. “It 
is time for us to become together as one united people … I pledge to every 
citizen of our land that I will be president for all Americans.”

Earlier, the Clinton campaign chairman, John Podesta, appeared before 
distraught supporters to announce that she would not be appearing to give a 
concession speech. “Everybody should head home,” he told them. “Get some sleep. 
We’ll have more to say tomorrow.

How Trump won the election: volatility and a common touch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-did-donald-trump-win-analysis>
“It’s been a long night and a long campaign,” he added. “We can wait a little 
longer, can’t we? They are still counting votes and every vote counts, several 
states are too close to call so we are not going to have anything more to say 
tonight.”

Clinton called Trump to concede around 2.30am, Trump’s campaign manager, 
Kellyanne Conway,told New York Magazine. 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/from-humility-to-euphoria-donald-trumps-team-triumphs.html>
 Conway said Trump told Clinton: “You’re a smart tough lady and you ran a great 
campaign. Thank you for calling. I respect you.”

Trump also spoke with Barack Obama, who called to congratulate Trump early on 
Tuesday morning. The White House said the president called Clinton and 
“expressed admiration for the strong campaign she waged throughout the 
country”. .

Obama is set to speak more about the results later on Wednesday and has 
invited the president-elect to the White House on Thursday.


“This is a historic night,” said the vice-president-elect, Mike Pence, in the 
first official Republican response, introducing Trump. “The American people 
have spoken and the American people have elected their new champion.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Republicans have also secured majorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/us-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans>
 in the House of Representatives, the Senate and will probably get to reappoint 
a fifth Republican nominee to the supreme court – potentially leaving the new 
president with few checks and balances.

Investors reeled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/financial-markets-set-for-record-falls-after-asian-shares-battered-by-trump-surge>
 from the prospect of a victory that would reverberate around the world and 
futures markets pointed to a fall of nearly 600 points in the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average.

As results started to come in, two candidates with very different views of 
America were watching television just two minutes’ walk from each other: the 
Clintons at the Peninsula Hotel in midtown Manhattan and the Republican team in 
Trump Tower.


But the mood in the Trump camp shifted early after signs of a strong 
performance in Florida and Clinton supporters began contemplating the 
consequences of a result few thought was possible.

At a “victory party” for Clinton supporters, under the veil of a glass ceiling 
that was meant to be an epic symbol of a historic night when gender barriers 
were swept aside, there was a bleak mood.

Thousands of people who filled the Jacob Javits convention center 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/hillary-clinton-new-york-election-returns-watch>
 in Midtown Manhattan – and the thousands more lining the blocks outside – had 
eyes glued to the TV. A woman clasped her hands over her mouth in disbelief as 
the newscasters announced Trump had won North Carolina.


The mood dropped markedly as results began to roll in: Ohio, Florida, North 
Carolina, all for Trump. Outside the Javits Center at the so-called “block 
party”, a couple embraced. The woman wiped a tear from her face and the man 
stroked her hair.

Another man, who identified himself only by his first name, Theo, called the 
results “scary and troubling”. “You don’t think there could be so much hate in 
this country – there is.”

After Podesta spoke, a stream of stunned supporters, some in block-colored 
pantsuits, others toting tired children, many wiping tears from their eyes, 
exited the building that was meant to be a symbol of barriers broken.


“What happened? What did we just do?” asked Gloria Lowell, the mother of an 
adopted son from Guatemala.


Staffers hugged each other and wiped tears from their eyes. They had prepared 
for this outcome – but no one truly believed it.


Susie Shannon travelled from California to be at the Javits Center on Tuesday 
night so that her eight-year-old daughter, Gracie, could say she was there when 
Hillary Clinton was elected president.


They left the center in the early hours of Wednesday morning stunned. 

“We waited for hours to come here tonight,” she said in shock, holding her 
daughter’s hands. “I wish Clinton herself had come out and spoken to us. It 
would have been nice to hear from her.”

Meanwhile, the crowd at Trump’s watch party in the Midtown Hilton grew 
increasingly excited as the evening went on. Loud cheers erupted every time 
that returns from Florida and Ohio were shown on the television screen. The 
mood grew increasingly optimistic as attendees huddled anxiously around their 
televisions clasping their drinks and their cellphones in equally tight grips.

Many shouted “lock her up” when Clinton’s name was mentioned and berated 
members of the media for being slow to report election results.

Meanwhile, in Oregon and California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live?page=with:block-5822f351e4b0199b938950d5#block-5822f351e4b0199b938950d5>
, demonstrators took to the streets to protest about Trump’s victory. Hundreds 
gathered in Oakland, Portland and Los Angeles overnight, but there were no 
immediate reports of arrests.

Exit polling by CNN suggested 88% of voters had made up their minds more than 
than week ago, before last-minute FBI inquiries into Clinton’s emails 
temporarily raised fears of a late Trump surge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20leaders%20congratulate%20president-elect%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20leaders%20congratulate%20president-elect%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video&media=>
World leaders congratulate president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/world-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video>
. 
World leaders offered messages of congratulations, with some offering more 
subdued support, to Trump on Wednesday morning.

The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, who Trump repeatedly praised on the 
campaign trail, sent a telegram to congratulate the president-elect, the 
Kremlin said. Putin reportedly expressed “his hope to work together for 
removing Russian-American relations from their crisis state”.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, did not publicly congratulate Trump, but 
offered the president-elect “close cooperation”.

“Germany and America are connected by common values: democracy, freedom, 
respect for the law and for human dignity irrespective of origin, skin color, 
religion, gender, sexual orientation or political conviction,” Merkel said. “On 
the basis of these values, I offer the future president of America, Donald 
Trump, a close working relationship.”
 