
How we made Donnie Darko
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/how-we-made-donnie-darko-jake-gyllenhaal>
I miss Richard Kelly. His much-loved directorial debut Donnie Darko (which is 
about to be re-released in cinemas) turned 15 this year and it sure feels like 
a long time has passed since its slow-burning rise to cult success in the 
period after September the 11th (it was released on 26 October). I always 
thought it chimed with the wounded, depressive feelings of that time in the 
same way that, say, Band Of Brothers chimed with the more gung-ho sentiments 
then convulsing the country. It teemed with interesting ideas (reflective of 
Kelly’s youthful energy; he was 26) – so many that it was a miracle the movie 
kept hold of them all. Like The Matrix two years earlier, Donnie Darko became 
the subject of many a beetle-browed academic monograph and much furious 
internet-geek debate.

It wanted to do and be everything: to incorporate time travel, giant bunnies 
and mental illness in aSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> suburb and a Stephen 
King-style high school, add teen romance and death, and moral quandaries and 
self-doubt. Among other things it’s a key linking work between the actual 
Spielberg-King 1980s and their fond reiteration in Stranger Things.

With Darko, Kelly managed to hold it all together. One got the impression he 
had shoved an entire lifetime’s worth of movies, sci-fi novels, stoner ideas 
and college philosophy classes into his debut, as if he was afraid if he didn’t 
squeeze it all in he’d never get another chance to say it all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfA3DZa6bifE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfA3DZa6bifE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfA3DZa6bifE&media=>
Donnie Darko director Richard Kelly: 'Sometimes films need time to marinate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/14/donnie-darko-richard-kelly-donald-trump>
For Southland Tales, the follow-up, Kelly had lots more new ideas, and enough 
material for four movies by another director; except these four movies were all 
having a fight. He was a young director with backers eager to let him rip, and 
he blew it all on one chaotic three-hour extravaganza (like Paul Thomas 
Anderson with Magnolia, though Anderson succeeded). This time, too many ideas 
was Kelly’s downfall. I can only watch any random 40 minutes of Southland Tales 
before it wears me down with its hectoring ambition, sprawl and volume. It’s 
fascinating, but hard to love.

Predictably, his next movie, 2009’s The Box, felt like a chastening rebuke: 
tiny budget, begrudging backers, no profit, gone in a week. In mere years, 
Kelly had gone from hubris to nemesis, Hollywood-style. Or had the ideas simply 
run out? Either way, he’s has made nothing since.

Fifteen years ago, I held Donnie Darko to my heart, admitting its shortcomings 
even then (those CGI wormholes looked a lot like windsock condoms), but 
thinking we had a great new American director on our hands. Prove me wrong, 
Richard Kelly.

Donnie Darko is back in cinemas from Friday 23 December
 