
Douvan survived a couple of late awkward jumps to make a comfortable winning 
reappearance at Cork on Sunday, on a day whenWillie Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins>, his trainer, reasserted his 
dominance of Irish jump racing with six winners. Mullins also took the John 
Durkan Memorial at Punchestown with Djakadam and has cause to feel considerably 
more sanguine about his chance of fending off Gordon Elliott in the battle to 
be Ireland’s champion.

The New One profits from new approach to win International Hurdle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/10/the-new-one-international-hurdle-nigel-twiston-davies>
Plans are never set in stone with Mullins but the reaction from him and other 
connections strongly suggests that there will be no attempt to stepDouvan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/douvan> up to three miles this season, with 
the result that races like the Cheltenham Gold Cup and the King George VI Chase 
appear to be off the agenda. Mullins said the King George, which is only a 
fortnight away, “would not be in my plans at the moment”.

Asked on At The Races if Douvan would stick to two miles, Mullins said: “I 
think so. I can’t see any reason to move him up. Maybe go to two and a half if 
a race presents itself that we want to run him in but I don’t see any point in 
going three. Next year, if we want to, but I’m very happy to stick around that 
trip for this year.

“It was extraordinary. It looked like a five-furlong sprint, the way they 
jumped off, and I thought, ‘Cripes, what’ll happen here?’ And chatting to Paul 
[Townend] after the race on the telephone, he said he never felt he was out of 
half-speed. That’s the sort of cruising speed he has.”

Douvan is likely to be seen next in a Grade One at Leopardstown’s Christmas 
meeting, which will be his first race at the highest level since stepping out 
of novice company. HisCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> target appears certain 
to be the Queen Mother Champion Chase, for which he is no bigger than 4-6, 
while everything else in the betting is available at 7-1 or more.

Mullins said he felt vindicated in his decision to choose the easy option of 
Cork for Douvan’s reappearance, rather thanlast week’s Tingle Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/un-de-sceaux-sandown-tingle-creek-ruby-walsh-defiance-willie-mullins-horse-racing>
 at Sandown, which turned out to be “a very, very hard race”. “I think he’ll 
improve more for doing what he did today,” the trainer said, adding that Douvan 
had “come alive” in his recent work after being slightly disappointing.

While discussing Djakadam, Mullins added some colour to that comment, saying: 
“A lot of these horses, I just want to get them out. We’re always behind but 
we’re even behind more this year.” It now appears that his Carlow yard is 
hitting its stride and there will surely be more Grade Ones to follow over the 
busy Christmas period.

Douvan’s jumping has been a strong point since he began over fences a year ago 
but Mullins will surely want to see no more of the errors he made in Cork’s 
home straight, when he hit the third-last, staggered sideways for a couple of 
strides and was again less than fluent at the last. But lapses of concentration 
are understandable when the rest of the field lags 20 lengths behind.

Colin Tizzard still weighing up the King George option for Thistlecrack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/colin-tizzard-king-george-vi-chase-options-thistlecrack-horse-racing>
Mullins still appears to entertain Gold Cup hopes for Djakadam, despite his 
having been beaten intosecond in the race  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
twice before. Djakadam remains a young horse, at seven years old, and impressed 
in holding off his former stablemate Outlander, now with Elliott.

“What I really took from it was that he made such a bad mistake over there, 
going down the hill, and he found a fifth leg, which he hadn’t been able to do 
up to now,” said Mullins of Djakadam, who has twice fallen at Cheltenham. “It 
just shows that he’s learned and he’s matured, so I’m pleased with that. I’m 
just hoping he’s more mature and stronger, hoping it’s going to be a big year 
for him.”

Eyebrows were raised about the fact that Ruby Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ruby-walsh> rode Djakadam and others at 
Punchestown rather than going to Cork for such a good prospect as Douvan. “I 
left that to Willie and he thought I should come here,” said the jockey, adding 
that he had no doubt of being able to keep the ride on Douvan in the future.
 