
Arms control campaigners who have been urging the UN to approve the first 
global arms trade treaty have condemned a draft text as weak and confusing, and 
warn that it will not save lives.

Oxfam said that if the treaty were not toughened up before the month-long 
talks ended, on Friday, it could become meaningless, and would not even stop 
arms shipments by Moscow toSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

British diplomats were more optimistic, insisting the draft was a "strong 
basis" for what could be the first global treaty to regulate the way arms are 
bought and sold. But they conceded that "more work was required" in certain 
contentious areas, and said the UK would not compromise on some core demands.

The schisms between the sides are likely to become more pronounced as the end 
of the week approaches, and there are fears among activists that some nations 
will try to browbeat smaller countries to accept a weak final text.

The talks at the UN in New York are the culmination of a decade-long effort to 
get a global treaty.

The majority of nations, including the UK, began by demanding a robust text 
that would prohibit arms sales to countries with poor human rights records, and 
make independent arms dealers more liable to scrutiny.

But a small number of states, including the US, Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and China, expressed concern about 
the scope of some of the proposals. The US said it did not want ammunition 
included in any treaty.

Russia and China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> were said to oppose 
criteria that would have outlawed arms transfers to countries that might use 
the weapons for human rights abuses. This week a draft text was published that 
appeared to fudge some of these issues.

Oxfam, one of the leading campaign groups for the treaty, said the draft's 
lack of clarity meant it was "far too weak to achieve its humanitarian goals". 
This text "would lead to few, if any, lives being saved".

Anna Macdonald, Oxfam's head of arms control, said the draft did not cover all 
conventional weapons, was ambiguous about ammunition and unconvincing on the 
issue of human rights. She said the threshold had been set so high it would 
only prohibit arms sales in situations where the weapons were intended for 
genocide. The draft would also let countries honour existing contracts to 
states no matter how much circumstances changed.

"This means Russia could continue to supply arms to Syria," she said. "That is 
a key test for us. Would the draft [treaty] stop Russia arming Syria? No it 
wouldn't."

The UK delegation in New York, which has included the British ministers Alan 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> and Alistair Burt, 
insisted it had not compromised on its core demands.

"Inevitably there are still areas in the draft that require more work," said 
one British diplomat. "However, this is the closest the international community 
has ever been to agreeing a treaty that effectively regulates the international 
trade in conventional arms. It is crucial we do not miss this vital opportunity 
to secure a robust and effective, legally binding, [treaty]."

The Foreign Office minister Lord Howell said: "We are negotiating very hard 
â€¦there are very high prizes to be achieved if we can get the robust treaty we 
want. We've always said we want to have a humanitarian dimension fully in this 
treaty. But how we do, in this last vital stage, is a matter of delicate 
negotiation and I must leave it there."

The treaty must be approved unanimously, so any one country can effectively 
veto a deal on Friday.

Campaigners say the early weeks of the negotiations were constantly delayed by 
bickering, objections and disruptions from some countries, including Syria, 
North Korea, Iran, Egypt and Algeria.
 