
Drax shares have surged more than 14% after the coal fired power plant owner 
unveiled a series of deals to diversify its business.

It is paying £340m to buy power supplier Opus Energy, which was founded in 
2002 now has 8.3% of the non-domestic market.

Drax has also bought four gas power plant projects for £18.5m. The company is 
moving away from its traditional coal-fired business, and has converted its 
plants so that some 70% of the electricity generated now comes from biomass. 
But it is still awaiting European approval of the contract for difference 
investment awarded to it by the UK government, and the Opus deal will depend on 
this.Drax <https://www.theguardian.com/business/draxgroup> chief executive 
Dorothy Thompson said:

These initiatives mark an important step in delivering our strategy, 
contributing to stronger, more predictable, long-term, financial performance, 
through greater diversification of the businesses, delivering more 
opportunities right across the markets in which we operate.

Drax shares are 37.6p higher at 315.2p, while Telecom Plus, which will receive 
£71m in cash for its 20% stake in Opus, is up 9p at £12.21.

But analysts at Jefferies cautioned the price paid for Opus looked a little 
high, and Drax was forecasting profits at the bottom end of its target range. 
Jefferies said:

In essence, today’s update will we see Drax evolving away from its traditional 
commodity exposed business towards a more diversified and integrated model.

We see three key benefits from today’s acquisition. (1) Opus Energy looks like 
a well run retail business with attractive margins in a segment that is not 
hugely exposed to political and media scrutiny compared to the domestic retail 
market. (2) The deal increases the stability of Drax’s earnings and cash flows 
going forward. (3) There are also some opportunities for synergies related to 
Opus’ current trading agreements.

The acquisition multiple is 10 times enterprise value/EBITDA which, in our 
view, does not stand out as considerably cheap. Secondly, this is the first 
time that the company is making a step into the SME retail market, therefore it 
remains to be seen whether Drax has the necessary expertise to manage this 
successfully. Lastly, Drax states that the combined group will be able to 
provide flexible and innovative energy solutions for customers, it is unclear 
how much of this could translate into earnings growth and shareholder return.

Drax has updated guidance for 2016. Full year 2016 EBITDA is now expected to 
be at the low end of the £135-169m consensus range as a result of the CfD 
contract not yet being approved.

Despite the rise in Drax shares, the mid-cap FTSE 250 has fallen 70 points or 
0.4%, dragged down by spread betting groups after a proposed clampdown by the 
Financial Conduct Authority. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/spread-betting-industry-loses-1bn-after-city-watchdog-steps-in>
CMC Markets is down 28% while IG has lost 29%.

Meanwhile the FTSE 100 is down just 5.17 points at 6741.66, as investors 
continued to take the Italian referendum and resignation of prime minister 
Matteo Renzi in their stride.

HSBC is 3% higher at 645.1p after analysts at Morgan Stanley moved from 
underweight to equal weight with a 645p price target, whileRoyal Bank of 
Scotlandhas risen 3.2p to 201p.

But mining shares suffered some profit taking with Anglo American down 40p at 
£12.03 andBHP Billiton 35p lower at 1304.5p.
 