
Duke has suspended star guard Grayson Allen indefinitely after he was caught 
tripping an opponent in a game for the third time a year.

Allen picked up a technical foul for tripping Elon’s Steven Santa Ana on a 
drive in the first half of a 72-61 win on Wednesday night. That earned him a 
seat on the bench for the final 4:15 of the half and the start of the second 
half, though Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski re-inserted him to the game with about 
16 minutes left.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2Fd6mo3&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2Fd6mo3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2Fd6mo3&media=>
 Duke’s Grayson Allen was caught tripping an opponent yet again on Wednesday 
night. 
“We have had the opportunity to thoroughly review the incident involving 
Grayson Allen from last night’s game against Elon,” Krzyzewskisaid in a 
statement <http://www.goduke.com/SportSelect.dbml?SPID=1845> issued Thursday 
morning. “As I stated last night, the incident was unacceptable and 
inexcusable. He took an important step last night by apologizing in person to 
Steven Santa Ana and [Elon coach] Matt Matheny. As a program, we needed to take 
further steps regarding his actions that do not meet the standards of Duke 
Basketball. To that end, we have determined that Grayson will be suspended from 
competition for an indefinite amount of time.”

The sum of all fears: have Duke become ... likeable?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/apr/08/the-sum-of-all-fears-have-duke-become-likeable>
After meeting with Santa Ana and Matheny to apologize, Allen hung his head and 
fought back tears while talking to reporters in the locker room.

“Just talking about what led up to it is just an excuse,” Allen said. “There’s 
no excuse for it.”

Krzyzewski called it “unacceptable” on Wednesday night, initially refraining 
from revealing any other measures or reprimands.

“I handle things the way I handle them,” Krzyzewski said. “I think I’ve 
handled this correctly and moving forward I will continue to handle it 
correctly, and I don’t need to satisfy what other people think I should do.

“I’m a teacher and a coach. And I’m responsible for that kid, so I know him 
better than anybody. So to think that it’s the last thing that’s said about 
this to him is wrong. Obviously, we will do more. It doesn’t mean you have to 
see it, or anybody else has to see it.”

Teammate Matt Jones said he tried to console the emotional Allen afterward.

“I love Grayson, he’s my brother,” Jones said. “We’ve been to battle, we’ve 
won a (national) championship together. We won plenty of games together. So 
there’s nothing really you can say.

“I just gave him a really big hug, told him, ‘I love you.’ That’s all that 
was, and let the silence kind of fill the void. There’s nothing really you can 
say about it.”

It’s officially a pattern for Allen, who was twice caught tripping opponents 
last winter.

On 9 February, Allen received a flagrant foul for extending his leg to trip 
Louisville’s Ray Spalding after he fell to the court and Spalding tried to go 
by him. Roughly two weeks later, Allen kicked up his left leg to trip Florida 
State’s Xavier Rathan-Mayes as Rathan-Mayes tried to run by from behind.

Allen wasn’t called for a foul there, but the Atlantic Coast Conference later 
reprimanded him.

The fifth-ranked Blue Devils don’t play again until opening ACC play at 
Virginia Tech on 31 December.

“That’s out of my control,” Allen said when asked whether he was worried about 
a suspension. “I can’t worry about something out of my control now.”
 