
Slytherin House, Hogwarts, Saturday, May 1

Today, I witnessed a most pleasing encounter while taking my EMT. From the 
turret window I spotted that pontificating creep Dumbledore accompanied by that 
jumped-up little git Potter and his two sidekicks. I was briefly sidetracked by 
young Miss Granger, who one suspects could turn into something of a beauty were 
she to alter her ghastly swotty appearance. Thinking it was merely Dumbledore 
indoctrinating his favourites on an early morning stroll, I made to return to 
my tea and copy of Viz but stopped when I noticed the Dark Lord emerging from 
the Forbidden Forest along with my old friend Lucius Malfoy. It heartened me to 
see LM in such obviously fine form. I had been concerned that Azkaban would 
take a similar toll on him that Belmarsh prison took on poor, dear Jonathan.

Like so many of the toadying socialists when confronted with the Dark Lady, 
Potter and his awful, common, ginger-haired accomplice wilted at the sight of 
the Dark Lord. I could see Dumbledore was about to launch into an earnest and 
ponderous, dipsy-ego tirade about good and evil and other guff that these 
earnest people like to think is important, but the Dark Lord cut him off 
smartly with a well-placed killing curse. Catching my eye from the distance in 
a conspiratorial manner, LM cackled magnificently while the DL stepped with 
beautiful haughty contempt over the incapacitated bodies of Potter and Weasel. 
Then, spectacularly and without any warning, DL simply vanished, taking young 
Miss Granger with him. The whole manoeuvre was conducted at a speed that 
reminded me of those halcyon days where I would tear down the cobbled streets 
of Oxford on my trusty old C-type broomstick (still the most invigorating broom 
for town use).

Richard Rouse
 