
Geert Wilders, the far-right politician who was acquitted five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/23/geert-wilders-cleared-anti-islam>
 of making anti-Islam remarks, has gone on trial again for allegedly inciting 
hatred against the Dutch Moroccan minority.


 The case comes as Wilders and other populist politicians – including Donald 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 in the US and Marine le Pen in France – have won support by calling for a ban 
on Muslim immigration.

Wilders, with his trademark peroxide blond hair, joked with reporters at the 
start of the hearing and listened calmly as prosecutors detailed the charges. 
He says the trial is politically motivated and that his comments are protected 
by his right to free speech.

“Freedom of expression is not absolute, it is paired with obligations and 
responsibilities,” said the lead prosecutor, Wouter Bos, “the responsibility 
not to set groups of people against each other.”

“Racism and hatred of foreigners constitute a direct violation of the basis of 
freedom, democracy and the rule of law,” he added.

 State prosecutors say Wilders asked a crowd of supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/20/dutch-politician-geert-wilders-moroccans-outrage-pvv-party-anti-islam>
 in March 2014 whether they wanted more or fewer Moroccans in the Netherlands, 
triggering the chant “Fewer! Fewer! Fewer!”, to which a smiling Wilders 
responded: “We’ll take care of that.”

Muslims in Europe fear anti-Islamic mood will intensify after Paris attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/09/muslims-europe-fear-escalation-anti-islamism-paris-attacks>
 The politician, whose decade-old Freedom party holds a commanding lead in 
Dutch opinion polls but has never been in power, denies any wrongdoing. “Nobody 
will silence me. Not about Moroccans either,” he tweeted last week. “No 
terrorist threats … no judge. Nobody.”

 Wilders has lived under 24-hour protection since the 2004 murder of Theo van 
Gogh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/nov/03/film.filmnews>, who – like 
Wilders – made films criticising Islam.

 The case against Wilders in 2011 centred on his call for a “towel-head” tax 
and equating the Qur’an with Hitler’s Mein Kampf. He said “Muslim criminals” 
should be stripped of their Dutch nationality and deported.

 Although Wilders’ remarks are offensive to many, he insists he has no grudge 
against immigrants who accept Dutch laws and customs and has never advocated 
violence.

 Judges have previously concluded that Wilders’ remarks may have been rude, 
but he was cleared because they targeted a religion, not a race.

Prosecution spokeswoman Ilse de Heer said the difference now was that his 
remarks “targeted a specific race, which is considered a crime”.

 Wilders faces one charge of discrimination and a second for inciting hatred 
of Moroccans, who make up about 2% of the Netherlands’ population of roughly 17 
million.

 In addition to the “fewer” comment, Wilders referred to Moroccans as “scum” 
in a television broadcast. He may go to jail for as long as a year and could be 
fined a maximum of ‎€7,400 (£5,770).

 The hearing, at a high-security courtroom next to Amsterdam’s Schiphol 
airport, is frequently used for cases involving organised crime and the trials 
of Islamist radicals.

 In France in December, Le Pen was acquitted of charges of inciting hatred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/marine-le-pen-not-guilty-inciting-religious-hatred-lyon-french-front-national>
 against French Muslims for comparing Muslims praying in the street to the 
German occupation of France during the second world war.
 