
A Dutch journalist, Okke Ornstein, is being held in jail in Panama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> after being arrested last Tuesday 
(15 November) on a charge of criminal libel.


He is facing a 20-month prison sentence over articles published on his blog 
about the business practices of a Canadian who lives in Panama City, Monte 
Friesner.

The Dutch Journalists Association (NVJ) has called for Ornstein’s release, 
arguing that the charge is baseless.

Its secretary-general, Thomas Bruning, said the prison sentence “is against 
the fundamental principles of freedom of speech and the freedom of expression, 
principles that are acknowledged as fundamental rights worldwide.”

His call is backed by the International and European Federations of 
Journalists (IFJ and EFJ). IFJ’s president, Philippe Leruth, said: “Journalists 
should be able to investigate freely. The messenger is being punished [for his 
message].

“This prison sentence sends a signal that critical journalism on fraud and 
corruption is not possible in Panama. Ornstein is being punished in a way that 
does not comply with the principles of a democratic justice system.”

According to Ornstein’s lawyer, Channa Samkalden, Ornstein did not get due 
process during the criminal proceedings in Panama following a complaint from 
Freisner.

NVJ is working with the Dutch foreign ministry and the Dutch embassy in Panama 
to secure Ornstein’s release.

Ornstein, who works for Dutch broadcasters and Al-Jazeera, often writes about 
corruption and fraud cases on hisbananamarerepublic 
<http://www.bananamarepublic.com/> blog (which is currently closed). 

His broadcasting work has been nominated for awards, such as the Prix Europa 
radio prize in 2013 and the Tegel prize in 2015.

In the former instance, his radio documentary about the environmental 
consequences of a hydroelectric dam in Panama funded by a Dutch bank prompted 
questions in the Dutch parliament.


Sources: IFJ 
<http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-view/backpid/1/article/panama-ifjefj-urge-to-release-dutch-journalist-detained-over-fraud-and-corruption-reports/>
/EFJ/NVJIn Dutch: Metro 
<http://www.metronieuws.nl/nieuws/buitenland/2016/11/journalist-okke-ornstein-opgepakt-in-panama>
/VillaMedia 
<https://www.villamedia.nl/artikel/nederlandse-journalist-vast-in-panama>
 