
This week's column comes to you from the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venice-film-festival-2014>, another marathon 
of red carpets, cocktail-fuelled schmoozing and surname-based auteurism – "the 
Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/27/birdman-review-michael-keaton-venice-film-festival>
" screened only this morning – where, as a friend once remarked: "Critics get 
the opportunity to overrate films months before everyone else does." Such 
cynicism! Yet it's easy to understand how readers might get frustrated by 
festival reports – the critical equivalent of holiday-snap slideshows. Due 
credit to Venice, then, for attempting to address the imbalance with itsSala 
Web programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/27/birdman-review-michael-keaton-venice-film-festival>
, a selection of 11 films from this year's festival made available to the 
global public to view online.

For five days after each film's world premiere on the Lido, interested punters 
can stream them at the invaluable industry-targeted siteFestival Scope 
<https://boxoffice.festivalscope.com/>, having purchased one of a limited 
number of digital "tickets" in advance. This year's options, mostly coming from 
the festival's non-competitive Horizons section, includeThe President, the 
latest political drama from new Iranian cinema veteran Mohsen Makhmalbaf, and 
British director Duane Hopkins'sBypass, his long-brewing, George 
MacKay-starring follow-up to his auspicious 2008 debut,Better Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124584/better.things>.

Other options come from Croatia, India and, of course, Italy; I can only 
inform rather than recommend, given that I haven't seen any of them yet. That, 
of course, is the beauty of the system: the democratisation of film festival 
culture begins here.

Bar the odd accidental leak, such as this summer's much-publicised The 
Expendables 3 cock-up, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2014/aug/27/expendables-piracy-calculation>
 it'll be some time before Hollywood studios are willing to allow audiences 
initial online access to tentpole blockbusters such asThe Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/20/amazing-spider-man-2-review-cgi-pizzazz>
 (Sony, 12). If they did, after all, not only would the sanctity of the cinema 
experience be forever destroyed, but they wouldn't be able to release heftily 
stuffed Blu-ray packages such as this one, which includes nearly two hours of 
exhaustive making-of footage, plus nine deleted scenes with director Marc 
Webb's commentary.

Watching the film itself, it's hard to believe that any scenes were left out 
at all: clocking in at over 140 minutes, with extraneous villains and subplots 
to spare, the film's self-mythologising bloat doesn't really square with the 
nimble, get-the-job-done approach of Spidey himself. Coming just 10 years after 
Sam Raimi'sSpider-Man 2, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/98600/spider-man.2> still the gold 
standard for the superhero genre, Webb's steelier, less playful vision can't 
quite make the case for the bewilderingly swift reboot of this particular 
franchise.

Yet the film is not without its charms, most of which belong to Andrew Garfield
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> and Emma Stone, 
marvellously overqualified actors whose spiky, sparky romantic chemistry as 
Peter Parker and Gwen Stacy holds more supernatural power than any number of 
green goblins and radioactive muscle men.
 'The laughs simply aren't there': Jason Bateman and Olivia Wilde in The 
Longest Week. 
They're enough to make you wish mainstream film-makers would recover the lost 
formula for the breezy mainstream romantic comedy. Peter Glanz's agreeable, 
unmemorable debut,The Longest Week 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2064968/?ref_=ttfc_fc_tt> (Signature 
Entertainment, 15), premiering, unusually, on DVD in the UK days before opening 
in US cinemas, attempts the sweet-and-sour New York relationship terrain of 
vintage Woody Allen, but despite the efforts of a game Jason Bateman and Olivia 
Wilde, the laughs simply aren't there. The French don't come any closer, 
either, inA Perfect Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/12/a-perfect-plan-review-diane-kruger-romcom>
 (Icon Entertainment, 15), a strenuously zany affair fromHeartbreaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/04/comedy-vanessa-paradis> director 
Pascal Chaumeil with a cute high concept – believing most first marriages end 
in divorce, a dentist seeks to get hitched and ditched by someone else when she 
meets the man of her dreams – that makes little case for Diane Kruger and Dany 
Boon being together, on screen or otherwise.

The best DVD release of the week is also the most modest: Steve Jamison and 
Mike Brett's utterly disarming documentaryNext Goal Wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/11/next-goal-wins-review-uplifting-documentary>
, about the feisty efforts of the American Samoa football team to escape their 
position at the bottom of the international rankings. Compassionate, 
unpatronising and often riotously funny, with a charismatic gaggle of human 
subjects that includes world football's first transgender player, it's the 
underdog story to end – or perhaps begin – them all.
 