
Downtown LA may not have the glamour of la Croisette, but there's no doubting 
E3 <http://www.e3expo.com/> is the videogame equivalent to Cannes – a huge 
trade and press show that stuffs all the industry's big players into acolossal 
convention centre <http://www.lacclink.com/lacclink/Virtual_Tour.aspx> to show 
off their wares.

Microsoft came with two of the most anticipated titles, both sequels to highly 
popular and successful series.Halo 4 <http://halo.xbox.com/halo4> (6 November) 
is the firstHalo game from new developers 343 Industries 
<http://www.microsoft-careers.com/go/343-Industries-Jobs/190537/>, and returns 
protagonist Master Chief to centre stage. The Covenant may have been defeated in
Halo 3 but now they're back along with a new biomechanical foe, which brings an 
eerier, darker feel to the space shooter.

All the familiar Halo staples are present and correct – and despite the switch 
in developer it plays just as well as ever. The WarGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> deathmatch multiplayer is 
frantic, with grenades being thrown and vehicles zooming around the expansive 
landscape. There's also new Spartan Ops cooperative play, which will be 
released in a series of weekly episodes for no extra charge, continuing the 
narrative from the end of the game.

Microsoft's other big title was Forza Horizon 
<http://forzamotorsport.net/en-us/FH/Default.aspx> (23 October), taking the 
racing sim <http://forzamotorsport.net/en-us/Default.aspx> on to the open road 
to create a more accessible game but with the same superb visuals and control 
mechanics. All the cars still handle like a dream, but now there's oncoming 
traffic and winding country roads to take into account as you race through 
urban and rural USA. It's more accessible but shouldn't put off the hardcore 
racing fans who've taken theForza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/16/forza-motorsport-4-xbox-review>
 series to their hearts.

Sony's strongest titles were both brand new. Beyond: Two Souls, Quantic Dream 
<http://www.quanticdream.com/>'s follow up to Heavy Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/feb/21/heavy-rain-sony-quantic-dream>
, stars the Oscar-nominated actress Ellen Page and shares the same narrative 
focus as its predecessor, but with added telekenesis.The Last of Us 
<http://thelastofus.com/agegate.html> (2013) is a brutal third-person action 
game reminscent of Cormac McCarthy'sThe Road, with a 14-year-old girl being 
protected by an older male survivor. The combat is visceral and the 
post-apocalyptic landscape looks stunning.

Nintendo was all about its upcoming new console Wii U (release date to be 
confirmed) and explaining the novel tablet controller that comes with it. In 
the collection of minigames,NintendoLand, which will accompany the console at 
launch, asymmetrical gameplay was emphasised, allowing players to do different 
things depending on which type of controller they use. For example, inAnimal 
Crossing: Sweet Day three players collect sweets with Wiimotes, while another 
attempts to catch them controlling two guards via the tablet's analogue sticks 
– it's very tricky, much like rubbing your tummy whilst patting your head. 
Familiar faces returned, withPikmin 3 and New Super Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> Bros U set to bring old 
favourites to the new console.

They were also keen to show off third-party titles with perhaps the best use 
of the controller coming from Ubisoft.ZombiU 
<http://zombiu.ubi.com/zombi/en-GB/home/index.aspx> showed that the new console 
isn't just for kids, and the excellentRayman Legends used a tablet player as an 
assistant. It has some superb rhythm action segments, where one player is 
platforming with the Wiimote while the other interacts with the landscape on 
the tablet to a beat.

Ubisoft <http://www.ubi.com/uk/> had an impressive conference all round, 
showing off exciting sequels toFar Cry 
<http://far-cry.ubi.com/fc-portal/en-GB/home/>, Splinter Cell 
<http://splintercell.ubi.com/blacklist/en-GB/?utm_source=ubi&utm_medium=lighbox&utm_content=&utm_campaign=postconfv2_UK-UK>
 andAssassin's Creed 
<http://assassinscreed.ubi.com/ac3/en-gb/index.aspx?utm_source=ubi&utm_medium=lighbox&utm_campaign=postconfv2_UK-UK>
 that are sure to please fans. However it was a demo ofWatch Dogs 
<http://watchdogs.ubi.com/watchdogsgame/en-GB/home/> that stole the show – a GTA
-type game set in a large city where you are connected to all the technology 
within it to spy on fellow citizens. It looks incredible and promises a depth 
of gameplay that has yet to be seen in this generation of consoles.

Five standout titles at E3


Need for Speed: Most Wanted (out 2 Nov 2012) From British developers Criterion,
Most Wanted is head and shoulders above recent offerings from EA's racer. It's 
an open world title likeBurnout: Paradise and great fun – you can escape the 
cops in single-player or challenge friends online.

Dishonored (12 Oct 2012) Bethesda's new first-person shooter brings something 
different to the crowded FPS market with its sumptuous steampunk visuals and 
its clever use of magic to switch things up.

The Cave (2013) Ron Gilbert, the genius behind the Monkey Island series, 
returns with a new puzzler that sends intrepid adventurers into the eponymous 
cavern to search for their heart's desire.

Aliens: Colonial Marines (2013) Sega still won't let us try being the Alien, 
but playing as the marines, motion sensor in hand, is thrillingly close to the 
films upon which it is based.

South Park: The Stick of Truth (5 March 2013) Written and voiced by TV series 
creators Matt Stone and Trey Parker, this is an irreverent take on the RPG 
genre that takes you right into the world ofSouth Park. It looks identical to 
the series, and the story is full of the characters and jokes you'd expect – 
even Mr Slave.

Device Wars


It took Sony and Microsoft a while to catch up with Nintendo's Wii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii> motion controls – but the Wii U's 
tablet/motion-controller is already looking a little passé.

Microsoft's SmartGlass isn't a new piece of kit but an app, to be released 
later this year, for all major smartphones and tablets. This will turn your 
touch device into a second screen and input for the Xbox 360, allowing you to 
pause a film on one and start it up on the other, gain interactive extra 
contact while watching video, and provide extra gameplay opportunities – such 
as finding people to play with online onHalo 4  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/video/2012/mar/05/halo-4-first-look-video>
or creating custom plays forMadden NFL <http://www.easports.com/madden-nfl>. If 
it works it will bring second screens to the masses of people that own both an 
Xbox and some form of touchscreen device.

Sony's answer is interactivity between the PS3 and their the portable Vita 
<http://uk.playstation.com/psvitasystem/>, allowing it to act as an extra 
controller, provide added content, and even allow multiplayer between the two 
devices, as on PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale. It's not as neat as 
SmartGlass, but in combination they must have Nintendo a bit worried.
 