
The Alan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> Diaries lost 
a quarter of its audience last night, compared with its first episode last 
week, but remains the most popular ever show on digital arts channel BBC4.

BBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4> was watched by 600,000 viewers - 
a 5.5% multichannel share - when The Alan Clark Diaries was broadcast, between 
10pm and 10.30pm, according to unofficial overnights.

Last week the first episode of the six-part series, helped by a BBC marketing 
campaign and rave previews, attracted 840,000 viewers - BBC4's best ever 
ratings.

However, despite dropping more than 200,000 viewers, last night's second 
episode still claims the number two slot in the list of BBC4 all-time top 
ratings shows.

Third place goes to an episode of BBC1 drama State of Play premiered on BBC4 
in June last year, which was watched by 560,000 viewers.

The Alan Clark Diaries was also one of the most watched multichannel 
programmes last night, beaten in its slot only by a new episode of ER on E4, 
which attracted 700,000 viewers.

Elsewhere yesterday evening, the UK's continuing fascination with the Atkins 
diet proved a ratings winner for BBC2, which broadcast a Horizon documentary 
looking at the scientific arguments for and against the low-carb, high-protein 
regime.

Horizon: The Atkins Diet was watched by 3.6 million viewers and attracted a 
15% audience share between 9pm and 9.50pm.

The BBC2 documentary proved more popular than Channel 4's Making Babies the 
Gay Way, which attracted 1.8 million viewers and an 8% audience share between 
9pm and 10pm.

Making Babies the Gay Way also lost out to Channel Five's terrestrial movie 
premiere Vertical Limit, which attracted 2.1 million viewers and a 9% audience 
share between 8pm and 10.25pm.

But the most popular show in the 9pm slot last night was BBC1's Tamzin 
Outhwaite drama Red Cap, followed by ITV1's Linda Barker show, With a Little 
Help from My Friends.

Red Cap was watched by 5.7 million viewers and attracted a quarter of the 
available audience.

With a Little Help from My Friends, in which Barker teamed up with Tara 
Palmer-Tomkinson to renovate a house for parents whose children are undergoing 
leukaemia treatment at a nearby hospital, attracted 5 million viewers and a 22% 
audience share.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 