
Leading shares are moving higher at the start of the new trading week, helped 
by positive Eurozone data, takeover speculation and a host of upgrades from 
analysts.

Mining shares have been lifted by a positive note on the sector from Barclays, 
withAntofagasta adding 12.5p to 531p, BHP Billiton 23.5p better at 1244.5p and 
Rio Tinto rising 43p to 2711.5p. Barclays said:

One month on from upgrading our European Mining industry view to Positive, we 
round up developments on the macro, commodity and equity-specific fronts. Macro 
data has generally been supportive. Earnings momentum continues to underpin 
equity outperformance, with upgrade pressure concentrated in the bulk 
commodities and diversified equities, where valuations remain compelling. We 
mark to market coking and thermal coal and manganese prices, driving earnings 
and price target upgrades.

Elsewhere easyJet has climbed 22p to 940.5p after UBS moved from neutral to 
buy:

On the back of three profit warnings (since the end of June) we have seen the 
easyJet <https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> share price nearly halve 
since the start of the year. However, we upgrade the shares to Buy and 
highlight (1) Shares are pricing in material future value destruction – we 
don’t think this will be the case (2) The shares have materially de-rated and 
we think look attractive (3) Earnings forecast risk for 2017 in our view is now 
balanced, and (4) Post expansion capex the free cashflow and return on invested 
capital look attractive.

Overall the FTSE 100 is 19.45 points better at 7039.92, albeit underperforming 
rival European markets after the positive eurozone purchasing managers reports.

With AT&T agreeing to take over Time Warner for £70bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/trump-att-time-warner-deal-clinton-kaine>
, media shares are in focus, andITV has added 2.8p to 173.8p.

Provident Financial is up 75p at £30.80 as Goldman Sachs raised its target 
price from £25.70 to £30.

But Royal Bank of Scotland, which has paid a consortium £180m to back an 
aborted attempt to float 300 branches on the stock market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/rbs-paid-consortium-including-church-of-england-at-least-180m-for-flotation>
, is down 3.5p at 186.5p as Investec moved from hold to sell. Analyst Ian 
Gordon said:

The RBS share price is up 12% in 4 days. Although our underlying and/or 
near-term expectations are largely unchanged, we think that RBS now faces a 
potentially even less favourable environment for conduct resolution. In truth, 
our forecasts here remain substantially guesswork, (and therefore highly 
unsatisfactory), but in particular, we now assume that settlement of the GRG 
debacle [where the bank faces claims from small businesses] may have a material 
cost attached to it. We also fear further “fine inflation” in the US.

Gordon added:

There is little real visibility on the financial fall-out from GRG. Andrew 
Tyrie MP comments that “RBS have said that they will consider the question of 
redress after publication of the FCA’s report”. We think that both timing and 
amount remains highly uncertain, but we now model a £500m charge in the fourth 
quarter of 2016...

We still do not know precisely what hedging RBS has in place for as yet 
unprovided, but “anticipated” conduct settlements, in particular in relation to 
the US Department of Justice. The view of Investec Economics is that “Hillary 
Clinton now looks a near shoo-in to beat Donald Trump”. We think this may prove 
detrimental to RBS’ negotiating position (and that of other banks under 
investigation). In aggregate, we raise our incremental conduct charge forecast 
through the third quarter of 2016 to the fourth quarter of 2018 to £6.4bn (from 
£4.8bn).

InterContinental Hotels has fallen 18p to £31.42 as Kepler Cheuvreux moved 
from hold to reduce.

Among the mid-caps Petra Diamonds has put on after a positive first quarter 
production update, but defence groupCobham has dropped 18% to 131p after it 
downgraded its profit forecast for the second time this year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/cobham-releases-second-profit-warning-in-six-months>

But French Connection has jumped 16% to 38p following a report that it could 
be attracting overseas or private equity predators 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/10/22/foreign-buyers-circle-struggling-french-connection/>
, with US firm Neuberger Berman and Rutland Partners mentioned.
 