
Cannibalism, suggests the biologist Bill Schutt in his entertaining but 
slightly unorganised account, is an “enduring aspect of life” that leaves none 
of us “untouched”. At this point, the reader may be checking his or her neck 
for bite marks. But Schutt clearly means that we are touched by cannibals in 
some kind of all-encompassing but non-literal sense. From the child-eating hag 
of“Hansel and Gretel” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hansel_and_Gretel> to 
Hannibal Lecter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,530779,00.html>
, Schutt argues that cannibals are central to human stories.

In many single-topic books, there is an element of special pleading. It’s an 
understandable form of salesmanship in a market of too many books and not 
enough readers. Whether the book is about cod or clocks, the author attempts – 
sometimes more convincingly than others – to persuade us that this tiny sliver 
of life on earth is more pivotal than anything else. As someone who wrotea book 
suggesting honeybees are – in multiple ways! – the key to human civilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/sep/17/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
, I am not the person to criticise such writing. On the other hand, it can go 
too far. Schutt’s final paragraph tries to make the case that cannibalism is 
highly underrated. Maybe it’s even the key to everything:

Far from being the nightmarish aberration we tell ourselves it is – in films, 
novels and tabloid sensationalism – cannibalism has woven itself into our myths 
and legends, formed the basis of miracle cures, ancient and modern, helped 
discipline naughty children (and entertain good ones), popped up in the Bible, 
fascinated anthropologists, zoologists and biologists and – sadly – played a 
significant role in colonialism, conquest and war.

Cannibalism, in other words, is even better than cod.

It’s surprising Schutt felt he had to plead that his subject is worthy of our 
attention. We recoil from a book on cannibalism not because the subject doesn’t 
interest us but because it bites us, right in the viscera. I’m not aware of 
anyone ever reproaching cannibals for being boring. They have been accused of 
many horrible things – eating other people being the main one – but then, they 
are guilty of those.

Take Armin Meiwes 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/armin-meiwes-interview-with-a-cannibal-documentary-sheds-new-light-on-one-of-germany-s-most-infamous-a6863201.html>
,currently serving a life sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/may/09/ukcrime.world> in Germany for 
eating engineer Bernd Brandes,who answered a chatroom request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/dec/04/germany.lukeharding> looking for 
someone who actually wanted to be consumed. With Brandes’ consent, Meiwes 
killed and dismembered him and sauteed him with “salt, pepper, garlic and 
nutmeg”. He said the flesh tasted a bit like pork.

Such psychopathic cannibals are not, however, the main focus of Schutt’s book, 
as he wisely remarks that he wanted to avoid giving “acclaim” to real-life 
Hannibals. Schutt is more interested in cannibalism as a cultural and 
biological phenomenon. In a series of fascinating chapters, he examines the 
circumstances under which different forms of cannibalism are adopted by either 
human or animal societies.
 Armin Meiwes, the German man jailed in 2006 for eating Bernd Brandes – 
despite having his consent. Photograph: Epa European Press Agency/EPA 
In anthropology, there are two basic kinds of cannibalism. Exocannibalism 
means eating someone from outside your social group, perhaps as a form of 
ritual tribute or warfare. The Caribs apparently consumed enemy prisoners “to 
transfer desired traits, like strength or courage, from the deceased enemy to 
themselves”. Endocannibalism, by contrast, means eating someone from within 
your family or group, and it can be an act of love or respect. For the Amazonian
Wari’ tribe <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wari%E2%80%99>, eating a small piece 
of a deceased relative mixed with bone meal and honey is believed to help with 
the grieving process.

A more extreme form of endocannibalism is the filial variety once practised in 
China. Key Ray Chong, author ofCannibalism in China, recounted that “children 
would cut off parts of their body and make them into soup to please family 
members, particularly their parents”. It most often occurred in medieval times 
between sons and fathers. Part of one’s own thigh or upper arm might be removed 
and thoughtfully cooked for an ailing parent in a congee rice porridge.

In the Wari’ tribe, eating a small piece of a deceased relative is believed to 
help with the grieving process

Eating human body parts, Schutt reminds us, has not always involved violence 
or slaughter. The most obvious example is the tradition of new mothers eating 
the placenta after a baby is born as a way to replace nutrients lost during 
birth. In Texas, Schutt meets Claire Rembus, founder of a company called Your 
Placenta, which sells an array of placenta-based products. Rembus and Schutt 
share a meal of placentaosso bucco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/mar/06/how-to-cook-perfect-osso-buco>
 cooked with tomatoes, garlic and onion. It reminds him of chicken gizzards, 
with the texture of veal: “firm, but tender”.

Human meat is a taste few will ever share. For all our talk about cannibalism, 
there are very few human cultures where it actually happens, apart from in 
extreme circumstances such as theUruguayan flight disaster of 1972 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/22/newsid_3717000/3717502.stm>
, when 16 survivors on a remote, snowy mountain collectively – and reluctantly –
decided to eat some of their dead comrades 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2217141/I-eat-piece-friend-survive-Torment-1972-Andes-plane-crash-survivor-haunted-ordeal-40-years-later.html>
. But non-survival cannibalism is extremely rare. Schutt argues that this is 
partly because there is a strong western taboo against it. In Freudian terms, 
cannibalism is one of those unthinkable actions that we forbid to hide the fact 
that we have a deep and primitive urge to do it. But there are strong signs 
that most humans have an even stronger urge not to eat other people. It isn’t 
pleasant to think of ourselves as meat.

Many animals, on the other hand, have no such compunction. In nature, as 
Schutt writes, cannibalism comes with “no grey areas, no guilt and no 
deception’. The best and most vivid parts of the book describe some of the 
extraordinary forms of cannibalism that take place in non-human societies. For 
animals, cannibalism can offer evolutionary advantages to deal with problems 
that Schutt summarises as “too many kids, not enough space, too many males, not 
enough food”. Firstborn eagles may consume rival siblings and even hamsters may 
be driven to eat their young in conditions of stress, but perhaps the goriest 
of all cannibals are to be found in various spider families. The female redback 
spider munches on the abdomen of her male partner as they copulate, before 
wrapping him in silk as a nourishing meal to enjoy later. Male redbacks, Schutt 
notes, weirdly benefit from being eaten because it gives them the chance to 
pass on their genes. For redback spiders, cannibalism really is the key to 
everything.

• Eat Me is published by Profile. To order a copy for £12.74 (RRP £14.99) go 
to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eat-me-470065.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 