
A thousand dead, terrible wounds; the Union Jack flying again over the 
Falklands (pop. 1,800); rejoicing and mutual congratulation in the House of 
Commons; champagne and Rule Britannia in Downing Street - each must draw his or 
her own balance sheet and historians must decide where to place the Falklands 
War in the annals of Britain's post-1945 adjustment to her reduced 
circumstances as a declining power.

Truth is one of the first casualties of peace and, now that it has broken out, 
we had better be on our guard against disinformation. President Harding was 
right, although his vocabulary wasn't, when he announced the return to 
"normalcy".

Things will never be quite the same after Mrs Thatcher's war, but they will be 
more the same than is apparent on the VF Day.

The Falklands themselves, the prize of the war, will quite quickly retreat 
down the league table of public concern. For a while they will remain too 
serious a matter to be left to Sir Bernard Braine but before very long, I would 
guess, they will revert to their traditional place in British politics, one 
they have occupied since they were brought briefly to Dr Johnson's attention, 
that is - out of sight and out of mind.

The islands are vulnerable to a continuing war of attrition but, if the 
paramount consideration is to avoid unseemly contact withArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> this side of a General Election, 
they are defendable. The cost of defending them will be great, but if their 
sovereign rights are to be paramount until Mrs Thatcher goes to the country, 
the sums involved can be swept under the carpets of patriotism. For political 
purposes the war is all plus and no minus.

There are a few debits on the international account. American and European 
relations with South America are damaged, although there is a Latin Americanist 
school which says that the United States' hemispheric relations will be bad in 
any case and that there are a good few South American countries which won't be 
crying for Argentina. A new strain has been put on Britain's relations with 
Europe and we've quarrelled with the Republic of Ireland, but you could say 
that these things would have happened in any case. International controversy 
about Mrs Thatcher's war has been largely silenced by the horror at Mr Begin's 
Lebanese holocaust.

The Prime Minister's standing on VF Day will not be her standing on Polling 
Day. Nevertheless, the Ten Weeks War has done wonders for her. Last year she 
was bottom of the pops: the "worst Prime Minister" said 48 per cent of Gallup 
respondents, 12 per cent worse than Neville Chamberlain. When she arrived at 
Blackpool for her party conference last autumn she opened the Times and read 
"The Most Unpopular Prime Minister Since Polls Began."

Today a lot more people think she's wonderful. Her crisis-management rating, 
as measured by MORI, soared from 64 per cent approval at the beginning of the 
affair to 84 per cent at the end. Interestingly, 54 per cent remained 
"dissatisfied" with her Prime Ministership in general, compared with the 40 per 
cent who were pleased. MORI discovered that more people supported the 
Government after the Falklands had been mentioned than when other more general 
questions were asked first. Nevertheless, if the General Election were tomorrow 
she would be queen of all.

The war has advertised the split in the Labour Party. Dissatisfaction with its 
general performance sank from 40 per cent to a low 26 per cent, then recovered 
to 37 per cent. Mr Michael Foot's approval rating sank to an all-time low. The 
war has left him looking less than ever like a national leader. Meanwhile, it 
has diverted the publicity spotlight from the SDP-Liberal Alliance and 
reinforced the check to its momentum.

This leaves the Prime Minister soaring high on the wings of victory. She is 
liable to look down and conclude that her personality and her "conviction 
politics" have been vindicated while she, and her friends on the Daily Mail and 
the Sun, were always right although misled by the Foreign Office or other 
sundry and subversive wets.

As she stokes the victory bonfire to the last ember she will be wondering how 
to give lasting effect to the spirit of patriotism she has aroused. She once 
said of her party "We are, above all, a patriotic party" but she has never 
translated that clich√Ä into full effect. She preferred to be a monetarist to a 
nationalist; "Thatcherism" became a Treasury creed.

It became fashionable to see her as a radical rather than a conservative, an 
economic liberal rather than a Tory, but there has always been a side of her 
which invited the label "populist." Traditionally, Tory populism is a brew of 
paternalism and patriotism, of social reform and law and order. Joseph 
Chamberlain added tariff reform (trade protection) to Randolph Churchill's 
"Tory Democracy" but the purpose was the same - to recruit a new majority from 
the lower middle classes and the newly enfranchised working class.

Her brand of populism has lacked direct appeal to the working class, has 
shunned paternalism. Her version of patriotism de-emphasised the role of the 
state, whereas nationalists more generally make much of it. Her ideological 
attachment to liberal economics has kept her from trade protection. She 
rejoiced in the sobriquet "Iron Maiden" but after a year in office a Tory 
commentator could call her "a Palmerston without a navy".

Conservative nationalism, as it manifested itself at last year's party 
conference, came to consist of booing Mr Edward Heath and all mentions of 
international cooperation. When he made reference to the European monetary 
system, the response was the same as would now be obtained by the mention of 
General Galtieri. Thatcherite patriotism was of the sour and sullen shopkeeper 
variety - an expression of resentment rather than of pride.

Now, a quite unexpected war has reassembled her 1979 plurality. Patriotism has 
worked its old magic with the working class and trade unionists; skilled 
workers and young people have rallied to the flag and the Conservative Party. 
The prospect of a "new majority" - a patriotic majority, a moral majority - 
presents itself through the smoke of war.

The Prime Minister was preaching a gospel of national regeneration before the 
war came to the rescue. At Harrogate on March 27, reaching out to her moral 
majority, she complained that over two decades standards had been vilified and 
scorned and that the nation was now reaping what in the Sixties had been sown. 
Fashionable theories and permissive claptrap had set the scene for a society in 
which the old virtues of discipline and self-restraint were denigrated.

An international Gallup Poll at the end of last year showed that the British 
were the most ready among the western peoples to fight for their country, the 
strictest of parents, the most highly valuing of liberty above equality, and 
the most confident in the police. They were also the least confident in 
American leadership and the least welcoming of American nuclear weapons, while 
at the same time the most determined to resist Soviet domination.

Mr Tony Benn's Socialist nationalism plays on similar instincts and fears. He 
opposed the war in the name of a people he sees as colonised by the 
establishment, betrayed to the alien suzerainty of the Common Market, the 
Pentagon, the IMF, and the multi-national corporations.

Bennite nationalism is the other side of the coin to Mrs Thatcher's.

The directions that nationalism could now take, in one version or the other, 
are much the same. First there is Europe. While the war was going on in the 
Falklands, public opinion turned sharply hostile to the Common Market - 
according to MORI, in favour of leaving by 61 to 39 per cent. Labour is pledged 
to take Britain out, although the feasibility of that policy is in grave doubt. 
Mrs Thatcher, having won her war in the South Atlantic, may now turn her 
attentions to the European front.

Trade policy is another outlet for aroused national sentiment. In practice, 
the Government's trade policy has been more aggressive and nationalistic than 
its official free-trade ideology might suggest. That tendency may harden, 
especially as Japan has incurred the Prime Minister's wrath for its Falklands 
vote in the Security Council.

A third direction for nationalism lies in asserting Britain's independence. In 
the Prime Minister's case this might take the form of a more globalist approach 
to foreign affairs, supported perhaps by a larger navy. Her preference for 
Reagan's America over the Europe of the EEC will have been reinforced by the 
Falklands experience, especially as it enabled her to cash her special 
ideological relationship with the President who instructed a policy of full 
support.

Independence for the Labour Party, and especially the Bennite nationalists, 
means something more akin to neutralism or isolation. It means out of the EEC 
and out of Nuclear NATO. It would effectively end the "special relationship" 
between Britain and the United States.

The "Falklands factor" in British politics will wane as the Falkland Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/falklands> recede into the distance of national 
concerns. Unemployment and inflation will soon be restored to the head of the 
list of the public's concerns. People will start saying that if we can afford 
task forces we can afford to pay hospital staffs, and that if we can win wars 
we ought to be able to run railways.

Yet something has happened to break the dreary routine of party politics and 
economic difficulties. Patriotic instincts have been aroused and they 
potentially transcend the dividing lines of class and ideology. A spirit of 
nationalism has been aroused and it will linger on beyond the quieting of the 
guns.
 