
Egyptian prosecutors are investigating the death of a teenage girl during a 
female genital mutilation operation at a private hospital.


Mayar Mohamed Mousa, 17, died in a hospital in the province of Suez on Sunday 
while under full anaesthesia, said Lotfi Abdel-Samee, the local health ministry 
undersecretary.

Ifrah Ahmed: helping Somalia's government end FGM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/27/ifrah-ahmed-helping-somalias-government-end-fgm>
“This is something that the law has prohibited,” stressed Abdel-Samee.

Despite the ban in 2008, female genital mutilation (FGM) is still widespread in
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, especially in rural areas. It 
is practised among Muslims as well as Egypt’s minority Christians.

The law led to the first prison sentence against a doctor in Egypt in January 
2015, with the girl’s father in that case given a three-month suspended 
sentence.

On Sunday, Mousa’s sister had just undergone the operation before she was sent 
in for surgery.

The girls’ mother is a nurse, while their late father was a surgeon. The 
operation was being carried out by a registered female doctor, according to 
Abdel-Samee.

Authorities shut down the hospital on Monday after transferring patients to 
other hospitals as prosecutors questioned the hospital manager and medical 
staff involved in the operation, Abdel-Samee said.

They have also spoken to the mother, a prosecution official said.

The case was opened after a health inspector reported the circumstances of the 
girl’s death.

Medical examiners have carried out an autopsy, and are due to report the cause 
of death, said Abdel-Samee.

While 200 million women and girls worldwide have been subjected to the practise
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blog/2016/apr/13/fgm-costly-organised-crime-africa>
, there have been major strides in Egypt, as well as Liberia, Burkina Faso, and 
Kenya against FGM, according to Claudia Cappa, the lead author of a February UN 
children’s agency report on the issue.

“The latest figures from the Egypt Demographic and Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Survey show that we’re winning,” 
the United Nations Development Programme said in a report last year.

“Mothers’ attitudes are changing, too,” UNDP said.

While 92% of mothers had undergone the procedure, only 35% of them “intend to 
circumcise their daughters,” according to the UNDP report.

Victims of the procedure are left to cope with a range of consequences from 
bleeding and pain while urinating, extreme discomfort during sex, fatal 
complications in childbirth and deep psychological trauma.


 