
Eight out of 10 of middle-aged people in the UK weigh too much, drink too much 
or do not exercise enough, analysis from PublicHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England (PHE) shows.

Modern life is harming the health of the nation, according to the 
organisation, which has launched a campaign, One You, aimed at the 83% of 40 to 
60-year-olds – 87% of men and 79% of women in this age bracket – who are 
overweight or obese, exceed thechief medical officer’s alcohol guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/08/mens-recommended-maximum-weekly-alcohol-units-cut-14>
 or are physically inactive.

Obesity is one of the biggest problems for this group: 77% of men and 63% of 
women in middle age are overweight or obese.Obesity in adults has risen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/21/three-genes-could-explain-why-some-people-are-obese-but-healthy-say-scientists>
 by 16% in the past 20 years. Research shows that many peoplecannot identify a 
healthy body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/parents-children-overweight-survey-obesity>
, suggesting being overweight has become the new normal.

Eat less? Drink less? In the Year of Dying Too Soon, spare us the advice | 
Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/2016-year-dying-too-soon-public-health-england-advice>
Prof Sir Muir Gray, a clinical adviser to One You, said: “The demands of 
modern day living are taking their toll on the health of the nation and it’s 
those in middle age that are suffering the consequences most, as their 
[ill-]health reaches worrying new levels.


“More than 15 million Britons are living with a long-term health condition, 
and busy lives and desk jobs make it difficult to live healthily. But just 
making a few small changes will have significant benefits to people’s health 
now and in later life.”

Many more middle-aged people are being diagnosed with diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/14/surge-number-uk-adults-with-diabetes-bhf>
, with the rate among the 40-60 age group doubling in the past 20 years. Obese 
adults are more than five times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes, which 
90% of adults with diabetes have, than those who are a healthy weight – have a 
body mass index of between 18.5 and 24.9.

Dan Howarth, the head of care at Diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/diabetes> UK, said: “We know that people 
often bury their heads in the sand when it comes to their general health, but 
the consequences of doing nothing can be catastrophic.

“There are an estimated 11.9 million people at increased risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes in the UK because of their lifestyle and more than one million 
who already have the condition, but have not yet been diagnosed.

“Type 2 diabetes can lead to serious complications such as amputation, 
blindness, heart attack, stroke and kidney disease. We know how hard it is to 
change the habits of a lifetime, but we want people to seek the help they need 
to lose weight, stop smoking and take more exercise.”

People are being urged to consider their health and the simple steps they can 
take to improve it in the run-up to the new year. Theonline quiz “how are you?” 
<http://www.nhs.uk/oneyou/how-are-you> helps participants assess their health 
and offers advice on how they can eat better, be more active, stop smoking and 
consider their alcohol consumption.

After receiving an individual’s lifestyle information, the website provides a 
health score and links to free and personalised information, apps and tools.


More than 1.1 million people have taken the quiz so far and been directed to 
download apps including Couch to 5K,Alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> Checker and Easy Meals, where 
appropriate.

Prof Kevin Fenton, the director of health and wellbeing at PHE, said:“People 
are busy with work, with families and with the daily grind, and sometimes their 
own health is the least of their priorities.

“The how are you quiz will help anyone who wants to take a few minutes to take 
stock and find out quickly where they can take a little action to make a big 
difference to their health.”
 