
If you’re looking for a quiet place of refuge from the idiotic summer movie 
season, head south.Victor Erice’s 1983 film El Sur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/el-sur-review-victor-erice-spain> 
is haunted by the ghost of its unmade other half: intended to run three hours, 
its producer stopped production midway through and Erice was left to spin his 
gold from an unfinished story. As such, its family dramas and tragedies – 
persecution, internal exile, disappearance – almost all occur elsewhere, in the 
past, or in the never-seen south of Spain. Halved or whole, however, it is 
almost perfect.

A short history of Spanish cinema
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/mar/29/short-history-spanish-cinema>
Like Erice’s debut, The Spirit Of The Beehive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/sep/16/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm>, El 
Sur is a child’s-eye view of a world that the protagonist, Estrella, is not yet 
equipped to fully understand. The movie opens in 1957 when she is 15, on the 
night her father Agustín disappears, but it mostly unfolds in 1950 when she is 
eight. The unnamed, isolated part of northern Spain where she lives, a place 
between town and country, is nicknamed “no man’s land” by her brooding father, 
a doctor who never talks about his past or his own father back home in the 
south, where Agustín hasn’t returned since the civil war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOHz1maSVCWw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOHz1maSVCWw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOHz1maSVCWw&media=>
On the roof of their isolated house is a weather vane, first seen covered in 
winter icicles, compounding a looming sense that life is elsewhere, along with 
history, the future, other women, even explanations, as it turns out. Whole 
areas and characters exist off-screen: one (Aurore Clément) is only seen in a 
movie she appears in at the cinema; a suitor of Estrella is only heard on the 
phone; Generalissimo Franco, the author of this family’s sorrows, is mentioned 
once. And the producer’s decision to halt filming before the crew’s move to 
southern locations means that we never even see El Sur either.

El Sur review – haunting story of a girl's quest to understand her father
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/el-sur-review-victor-erice-spain> 
Which leaves us with a young girl trying to figure out her parents (her mother 
has also faced postwar “reprisals”), finding certain clues via old letters and 
servants’ gossip about the family’s poisoned past. Erice favours dark interiors 
in which stasis acquires dynamism (a Caravaggio effect his work is noted for), 
and loves deeply centred, symmetrical compositions. When he delivers a 
stylistic flourish, it’s worth the wait: a father-daughter dance after 
Estrella’s first communion is a track out from the main table to the dance 
itself (to a tune ironically called In The World), followed by a track back to 
Estrella’s empty chair, a sublime camera move that mimics the bellows-like 
movement of the accordion leading the dance. And the dissolve that ages 
Estrella from eight to 15 is a 10-second triumph of clarity.

This is a simple and moving cinema language, whose serenity belies the rich 
complexity of its visual construction and its mastery of the themes of 
childhood, memory and loss. A masterpiece, haunted by itself.
 