
The rain has ended, the low clouds are clearing and the wet rust-coloured 
earth of the track shines in the sharp, angled sun. Justin Kipchumba is 
walking, his backs and shoulders steaming as the sweat evaporates.


His training for the morning is over. The 27-year-old has covered 30km through 
the fields and pastures outside the western Kenyan town of Eldoret in an hour 
and 45 minutes, and is heading to his rented room for tea and a plate of maize 
flour mash with vegetables. It is 8am.

“It is like this every day. I sleep, I run, I eat. One day I will win big 
races,” said Kipchumba, who comes from a small village nearby and is yet to 
compete overseas.

Few of the million-plus tourists who visit Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> every year come close to Eldoret, 
which lies at an altitude of around 7,000ft (2,100 metres) on a plateau above 
the Rift Valley, a five-hour drive west of the capital, Nairobi.

Few have even heard of the town. Yet for anyone who knows anything about 
athletics Eldoret is the heart of the extraordinary phenomenon that is Kenyan 
running. For hundreds of thousands of people in and around the town, a poor 
region that has suffered recurrent ethnic violence, the money earned by local 
athletes pays for school fees, clinics or cash support for local farmers.

If I win a race, those kids go to school next year. If I don’t, they don’t. 
It’s a very big motivation
Wesley Korir 
The dominance of the Kenyans in distance running remains almost unchallenged. 
All of the10 fastest marathons 
<http://www.runnersworld.com/newswire/the-worlds-fastest-marathons-and-marathoners>
 ever run by men on record-eligible courses were run by Kenyans. Its athletes
won 11 Olympic medals 
<http://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/2012/medals/countries/kenya> in London in 
2012,topped the 2015 world championship in Beijing 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-34102562>, and look set for similar 
achievements at the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.

Eliud Kipchoge, who won the London Marathon for the second consecutive year in 
April with the second-fastest time in history on a record-eligible course, is 
hoping to win in Brazil. “The Olympics is a lifetime achievement. When you are 
an Olympian you are a champion forever,” the 31-year-old, wholeads the Kenyan 
men’s team <http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/eliud-kipchoge-188307>, told the 
Guardian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffceca8188ec1e0d20baa26969fac8aed621b8743%2F0_176_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eldoret%3A%20the%20Kenyan%20town%20trying%20to%20'run%20away%20from%20poverty'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eldoret%3A%20the%20Kenyan%20town%20trying%20to%20%27run%20away%20from%20poverty%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffceca8188ec1e0d20baa26969fac8aed621b8743%2F0_176_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 2016 London marathon winners, Eliud Kipchoge and Jemima Sumgong, also of 
Kenya. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
But a shadow lies over Kenyan athletics: allegations of widespread use of 
performance-enhancing drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/17/iaaf-kenya-investigation-doping-allegations?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_Gmail>
 and corruption at the highest levels. A law reforming oversight of doping was 
passed in a last-minute bid to avert a ban, but Kenyan competitorsface extra 
individual tests 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/athletics/2016/06/21/russia-and-kenya-athletes-face-extra-drug-tests-ahead-of-rio-oly/>
 if they wish to participate in the Games.


“We are going to Rio not to just win medals, but to clear the reputation of 
Kenyan athletes. That is our primary task,” said Wesley Korir, one of the five 
Kenyan men travelling to Brazil to compete in the marathon.

There is more at stake than national pride or the careers of top sportsmen.

Surrounding every athlete are concentric rings of dependants. For the lower 
ranked runners – such as Kipchumba, on his long early morning run with his 
cheap Chinese shoes and rented room – these are ageing parents, children, a 
spouse and siblings. Athletes competing at national level or in minor races 
overseas have more responsibilities.

Ruth Bosibori 
<https://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/ruth-bisibori-nyangau-237048>, a 
middle-distance runner who competed in the 2008 Olympics, pays thousands of 
dollars annually in school fees for her three children and a host of cousins. 
“When I think of all the children that motivates me to work hard to take care 
of them,” she said.

For the top athletes such as Korir, who has won a string of top races in the 
US, the dependants number in the hundreds.

Korir was elected to the Kenyan parliament in 2012 and funds a foundation 
which pays school fees for 300 children, supports 2,000 farmers and is proving 
jobs to 100 tailors. “If I win a race, those kids go to school next year. If I 
don’t, they don’t. It’s a very big motivation. When you reach the pain, you 
have to have a reason. People always ask: ‘Why do we run so fast?’ There’s a 
simple answer. We are running away from poverty,” Korir said.
Eldoret 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/eldoret-zip/giv-12515mjOhr60Mhnbd/>
For men like Korir, that poverty is a distant memory. The rewards for elite 
runners are extraordinary. Totalprize money  
<http://www.bostonmarathonmediaguide.com/prize-structure/0>on offer at the 
Boston or London marathons this year exceeded a million dollars. Appearance 
fees negotiated by top athletes and revenues from sponsorship deals or brand 
endorsements can easily earn elite runners a million dollars annually.

The impact of such massive infusions of cash on what remains a poor rural 
community is enormous. In and around Eldoret, athletes have built office 
blocks, hospitals, clinics, apartment complexes, shopping centres and petrol 
stations. Many are named after the races which funded their construction. 
Property prices have skyrocketed.

“Our people participate all over the world, and then invest everything back 
home. It has transformed our town,” said David Kimosop, a local businessman.

In schools, unsurprisingly, there is only one career choice. “Very, very few 
want to be engineers or doctors or lawyers. They all want to run. They see the 
successful athletes with their big cars and so on, so it’s a role model,” said 
James Legat, 40, a headteacher and coach.


But the incentives and the pressure lead some into wrongdoing. A World 
Anti-Doping Agency study 
<https://wada-main-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/resources/files/kenya_anti-doping_taskforce_final_report_.pdf>
 from 2014 found that almost one in four sportspeople knew another who used 
illegal drugs. More than40 Kenyan athletes 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/athletics/36275649> have tested positive for 
various banned substances in recent years and 18 are currently serving bans 
totalling 55 years. Some are high profile – such as marathon runnerRita Jeptoo 
<http://nairobinews.nation.co.ke/news/here-are-the-top-kenyan-athletes-who-got-banned-for-doping/>
 – but many others are not.

“It is not the top athletes or the bottom ones. It is those in the middle. 
They are seeking a shortcut to financial security and success,” said Nelson 
Kitwarotith, a 35-year-old marathon runner, from Eldoret.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7e41476d5c05f80210f557c55656e921eda4ee%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eldoret%3A%20the%20Kenyan%20town%20trying%20to%20'run%20away%20from%20poverty'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eldoret%3A%20the%20Kenyan%20town%20trying%20to%20%27run%20away%20from%20poverty%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Feldoret-the-kenyan-town-trying-to-run-away-from-poverty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7e41476d5c05f80210f557c55656e921eda4ee%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Athletes exercise in the early morning in the sports ground of the University 
of Eldoret in western Kenya. Photograph: Siegfried Modola/Reuters 
The elite athletes are only a tiny minority among the thousands running every 
morning in the fields outside the town. Many make a tough living running in 
events in Asia or Europe where there is no appearance fee and the prize money 
sometimes only just about covers travel costs.

Kitwarotith, the son of subsistence farmers, is typical. He ran, barefoot, the 
18km to and from school with his school bag on his back. The rangy former 
policeman and soccer player only started seriously training in his mid-20s. 
Since then, Kitwarotith has run three or four races a year in China, Malaysia, 
South Korea and India, earning up to $10,000 for a win, and nothing if he does 
not run fast enough.

“It’s tough, but what I have now I have thanks to running. Otherwise it’s 
miserable. Your kids have no shoes, no bread even,” he said.

But the sudden riches can cause problems too. Kitwarotith has seen young men 
win large sums of money, and change. “They are not the same people. They start 
drinking, partying. They go crazy. They can’t handle it,” he said.

Some observers say it is unlikely Eldoret can sustain its astonishing 
tradition of running. Fewer children run long distances to school. Though, 
according to official statistics, unemployment in Kenya is at 40%, there are 
more opportunities than before for school leavers. The town is home to a large 
university and dozens of other vocational training centres.

Kipchoge, the Olympic team leader, has no doubt the dominance of Eldoret, and 
Kenya, will continue for decades to come.

“There are thousands of athletes in Kenya. A lot are teenagers. We have the 
people to take over,” he said.
 