
In the aftermath of the UK’s vote to leave the EU and Donald Trump’s victory 
in the US election, many who expected the results to go the other way were left 
shocked. How could this happen when almost everyone they knew had backed the 
other side?

If they’d been paying attention to Eli Pariser back in 2011, they might have 
realised their disbelief was at least partly down to the filter bubbles that 
most of us occupy online without ever really being aware of it.

Related: Upworthy reels in clickbait and moves into story creation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jul/08/upworthy-clickbait-story-creation>

“If you only see posts from folks who are like you, you’re going to be 
surprised when someone very unlike you wins the presidency,” Pariser tells the 
Guardian.

Five years before the twin shocks of Brexit and Trump, Pariser published his 
New York Times bestseller The Filter Bubble: What theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> is Hiding From You. The book 
laid out how our algorithmically personalised online lives were insulating us 
from opposing views, predicting how echo chambers could leave users sheltered 
from alternative opinions.

“The danger of these filters is that you think you are getting a 
representative view of the world and you are really, really not, and you don’t 
know it,” he explains. “Some of these problems that our fellow citizens are 
having kind of disappear from view without our really even realising.”

Related: Upworthy's co-founder said the most amazing thing about clickbait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/26/upworthy-peter-koechley-clickbait-charity>

Pariser was warning about the filter bubble half a decade ago; more recently 
he turned his attention to an even more hot-button topic – “fake news”.

Throughout the campaign, a slew of fabricated articles tapped into the 
prejudices of pro-Trump or pro-Clinton Facebook users by making up stories they 
wanted to believe. Filter bubbles may not have caused fake news, but they 
incubated them and helped them spread.

While he doesn’t think fake news swung the election, Pariser was concerned 
enough to set up anopen Google document 
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OPghC4ra6QLhaHhW8QvPJRMKGEXT7KaZtG_7s5-UQrw/preview#heading=h.97o89pmf8ct6>
 inviting design solutions to the problem. Web users weighed in withideas 
ranging from verified news pages to time-delayed re-shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/29/facebook-fake-news-problem-experts-pitch-ideas-algorithms>
, while others helped add structure, and in one case more attractive 
formatting. At last count the document clocked in at more than 150 pages long.

Facebook has since proposed its own solution – asking users to flag false 
stories, which are then assessed by third-party fact-checkers. Yet as Pariser 
and others have come to realise, the problem goes beyond the sort of completely 
false stories dreamed up by Macedonian teenagers for money.

“The more you look at it, the more of a complicated it gets,” he says, when 
asked whether he thinks Facebook’s plan will solve the problem. “It’s a whole 
set of problems; things that are deliberately false designed for political 
ends, things that are very slanted and misleading but not false; memes that are 
neither false nor true per se, but create a negative or incorrect impression. A 
lot of content has no factual content you could check. It’s opinion presented 
as fact.”

Fake news has exposed a deeper problem – what Pariser calls a “crisis of 
authority”.

“For better and for worse, authority and the ability to publish or broadcast 
went hand in hand. Now we are moving into this world where in a way every 
Facebook link looks like every other Facebook link and every Twitter link looks 
like every other Twitter link and the new platforms have not figured out what 
their theory of authority is.

“As a result we live in this information environment that is both on the one 
hand more filter-bubbly, but also the bounds of what is considered acceptable 
to talk about, acceptable to think, and the norms, seem to be shifting. It is 
changing the bounds of what the conversation can be in a way that I think is 
pretty corrosive.”

Despite his downbeat analysis, Parsier is resolutely positive about the 
potential for change, which may be linked to his campaigning background. He 
spent seven years working at the political fundraising and advocacy group 
MoveOn (where he helped found activist network Avaaz) before leaving after 
Barack Obama’s election in 2008 to write The Filter Bubble. It was only after 
the book was finished that he decided to try using the combination of online 
behaviour and algorithms he had described to achieve the progressive goals he 
had always worked towards. The result, in 2012, was the launch of Upworthy.

You may have seen Upworthy stories poking their way into your own filter 
bubble. With an unashamedly feelgood bent, and, at least in the early days, 
highly clickable, shareable and sensationalised “curiosity gap” headlines 
(example:This Kid Just Died. What He Left Behind Is Wondtacular 
<http://www.upworthy.com/this-kid-just-died-what-he-left-behind-is-wondtacular-rip>
), the idea was to repackage other people’s content about issues such as 
women’s rights or structural racism in a relatable and, importantly, shareable 
way.

The site, which was co-founded with a former managing editor of The Onion, 
Peter Koechley, grew rapidly (heralded at one point in 2013 as the 
fastest-growing media site of all time 
<https://www.fastcompany.com/3012649/how-upworthy-used-emotional-data-to-become-the-fastest-growing-media-site-of-all-time>
), using Facebook to build an audience of millions. Its tactics were not 
popular with those in the traditional news organisations, but it had a huge 
effect on the way most media looked at how stories spread online.

“There were times where there were particular headlines that when I looked 
back I kind of winced,” admits Pariser. “But I think the place that I came from 
was looking at how people engage on social media, and really thinking about how 
you build storytelling that works when someone is on their mobile phone, they 
are distracted and they are really quickly trying to figure out: what should I 
tune in to?”

Upworthy has retained some of the curiosity-baiting tactics, but is now 
focused on original content, overseen by former New York Times digital whizz 
Amy O’Leary as editorial director. It claims to reach 200 million people a 
month.

Pariser believes that Upworthy is in tune with the digital activism he started 
out in, and not just in getting people to engage with social issues online. 
What some disparagingly call clicktivism, he views as a step towards changing 
real-world behaviour.

“There’s an idea that people have some kind of action budget and either they 
are spending it on posting to social media or they are spending it on going to 
a march. Not only is there very little evidence to support that, there’s a lot 
of evidence both in social science and in my own experience of just running 
these experiments to the contrary.”

He argues that people want to live up to the identity they present to the 
outside world, so if they share an article abouta woman challenging homophobia 
in a restaurant 
<https://www.upworthy.com/she-went-high-instead-of-going-low-after-overhearing-a-table-of-homophobes?c=pop>
, they’ll be more likely to do the same themselves.

Pariser’s unwavering belief that in the ability of the web to be “a tremendous 
force for empathy” seems at odds with his analysis of its role in boosting the 
anti-progressive forces that recorded victories in 2016. Yet one of Upworthy’s 
– and Pariser’s – underlying assumptions is almost perfectly in tune with the 
populism of Trump and Brexit: that facts don’t change minds without emotion.

“The sort of classical model of democracy is one where it’s about information, 
making sure the populace has information to make good decisions,” says Pariser. 
“That’s absolutely a part of what is necessary, but I think if you don’t have 
empathy across groups then the information only goes so far.”


Pariser is banking on using the web to create unifying emotional responses, 
particularly ones that cross boundaries such as gender, race and wealth, rather 
than stoking divisions. He doesn’t appear to see much of an alternative. “I 
really believe that understanding and empathy are a critical pre-condition of 
action. And really of democracy.”

Recent events don’t suggest either understanding or empathy are going to be 
central to how the web influences politics in 2017. But maybe it’ll take 
another five years for him to be proven right again.

CV

Age 36

Education Bard College at Simon’s Rock law and political science

Career

2001 Joined MoveOn.Org

2004 MoveOn executive director

2007 Founded Avaaz

2011 Published The Filter Bubble

2012 Launched Upworthy
 