
Inter-film references can be dangerous things in criticism: you might have 
seen a lot of films that feed intoEmbrace of the Serpent (Peccadillo, 12) – 
Coppola’sApocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/26/apocalypse-now-review>, Herzog’s 
Fitzcarraldo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jun/24/dvdreviews>, even 
Miguel Gomes’sTabu <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/06/tabu-review> – 
without ever having seen anything quite like it. Colombian director Ciro 
Guerra’s Oscar-nominated trip into the Amazon is a singular vision and I use 
“vision” (and “trip”, for that matter) in the slightly unearthly sense. As two 
white explorers, 30 years apart, are drawn into the heart of the jungle in 
pursuit of healing and enlightenment, the ghosts of the region’s colonial past 
are raised in vivid, disquieting fashion. Shot in lustrous, deep-toned black 
and white, Guerra’s film functions as a muscular adventure tale quite aside 
from its complex political undertow: outwardly imposing, it proves utterly 
immersive.

Somewhere along the line, and we may never know exactly how this came to pass, 
Zac Efron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/zac-efron> came to be one of the 
best comic actors in current American film, with a self-effacing disregard for 
his own matinee-idol stainlessness that is both endearing and cruelly funny. 
He’s on oddly bittersweet form in the otherwise raucous sequelBad Neighbours 2 
(Universal, 15), playing a former fraternity bro who knows his glory days are 
already behind him and is beginning to realise they weren’t all that glorious 
to start with. The film, for its part, slyly complicates the crude generational 
battle of its predecessor, satirising millennial-era feminism and identity 
politics by introducing Chloë Grace Moretz’s sorority outcast to proceedings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff357cc3d0f88c7204a44c0969860dc41b5de3f1a%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Embrace%20of%20the%20Serpent%3B%20Bad%20Neighbours%202%3B%20Our%20Kind%20of%20Traitor%3B%20I%20Saw%20the%20Light%3B%20The%20Measure%20of%20a%20Man%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Embrace%20of%20the%20Serpent%3B%20Bad%20Neighbours%202%3B%20Our%20Kind%20of%20Traitor%3B%20I%20Saw%20the%20Light%3B%20The%20Measure%20of%20a%20Man%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff357cc3d0f88c7204a44c0969860dc41b5de3f1a%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Ewan McGregor, Naomie Harris and Damian Lewis in Our Kind of Traitor. 
Photograph: Studiocanal 
Two new John le Carré adaptations hit our screens this year: while Susanne 
Bier’s sleek, rivetingThe Night Manager  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/22/the-night-manager-review-bbc-le-carre>
became whatever the equivalent of appointment TV is in this unscheduled era, 
over in cinemas, Susanna White’sOur Kind of Traitor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/our-kind-of-traitor> (Studiocanal, 15) made 
scarcely a ripple. Some would use this as ammo in the recently fashionable
telly-over-film debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/oct/23/10-reasons-tv-better-movies>
, but White’s shrug of a spy thriller hardly gives cinema a chance; adapted 
from Le Carré’s most classically suspense-driven novel of recent years, it’s 
colour-by-numbers film-making in which every number calls for a moody shade of 
beige.

As The Night Manager demonstrated, that’s the kind of territory for which Tom 
Hiddleston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> was essentially 
born. Playing rootsy Alabama-born country music legend Hank Williams? Not so 
much, though let it be said that Hiddleston plays compellingly against his own 
natural presence in every scene of the rather dusty biopicI Saw the Light 
(Sony, 15). It’s a twitchy, twangy, hard-working performance, even if it’s not 
quite a natural one, and gives some oddball energy to the otherwise rote 
backstage-drama mechanics the film has applied to Williams’s deeply sad story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85077175222cb17a39a05ccb8f084c798760b26b%2F0_395_5742_3445%2F5742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Embrace%20of%20the%20Serpent%3B%20Bad%20Neighbours%202%3B%20Our%20Kind%20of%20Traitor%3B%20I%20Saw%20the%20Light%3B%20The%20Measure%20of%20a%20Man%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Embrace%20of%20the%20Serpent%3B%20Bad%20Neighbours%202%3B%20Our%20Kind%20of%20Traitor%3B%20I%20Saw%20the%20Light%3B%20The%20Measure%20of%20a%20Man%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fembrace-of-the-serpent-bad-neighbours-2-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85077175222cb17a39a05ccb8f084c798760b26b%2F0_395_5742_3445%2F5742.jpg>
 ‘Twitchy, twangy’: Tom Hiddleston in I Saw The Light Photograph: 
Everett/Shutterstock/Rex 
One of those reliably careworn character actors whose face has been begging 
for just the right showcase, Vincent Lindon earns hisCannes plaudits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/cannes-2015-jacques-audiards-dheepan-surprise-winner-of-palme-dor>
 fair and square inThe Measure of a Man (New Wave, PG), a determinedly low-key 
but cumulatively shattering portrait of an unemployed factory worker cruelly 
thrust into the job market at 51. It’s plainly styled social realism, rightly 
stripped back to foreground on Lindon’s quietly wrenching work.

If you like your French drama a little sunnier and more scenic, Catherine 
Corsini’sSummertime (Curzon Artificial Eye, 15) is a sweetly played romance 
between a naive farm girl and a liberal feminist activist, even if I liked 
their story more than I believed it; it would pair up nicely with Michal 
Vinik’s warm, funky, coming-out taleBlush (TLA, 18), in which 
Israeli-Palestinian tensions spike the more universal adolescent drama.

We stick with an LGBT theme for this week’s streaming pick: South Korean 
transgender noirMan on High Heels is a spiky curio from last year’s festival 
circuit that I wasn’t expecting to see show up even on Netflix’s catholic 
playlist. Butthere it is <https://www.netflix.com/title/80091303> and while 
this brash, wildly veering story of a hard-bitten cop yearning for a sex-change 
operation occasionally loses its own tail in its mash-up of issue drama, comedy 
and grisly shoot-’em-up, I’m glad it’s on the loose.
 