
Emily Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte> may have had 
Asperger syndrome, according to the literary biographer Claire Harman.

At an event at the Edinburgh international book festival, Harman, author of 
the recent biographyCharlotte Brontë: A Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/31/charlotte-bronte-by-claire-harman-review-biography>
, said several of Emily’s character traits, including her genius, her dislike 
of leaving home, her discomfort in social situations and her sudden bursts of 
anger and frustration could have been symptoms of Asperger’s.

School where Brontë sisters worked as teachers is to be restored
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/03/bronte-sisters-old-school-room-haworth-teachers-restored>
One famous case of Emily’s anger was recorded by Charlotte Brontë’s first 
biographer and fellow author Elizabeth Gaskell, who in her 1857 biography 
recalled how the family dog was left “half blind and stupefied” after Emily 
punched it in the face for dirtying the laundry. But Harman said on Sunday that 
Gaskell related the incident as “just a sign of Emily’s strength of character”.

“It is actually very disturbing. I think Charlotte and everybody was quite 
frightened of Emily. I think she was an Asperger’s-ey person,” Harman said. 
“She was such a genius and had total imaginative freedom ... Containing Emily, 
protecting Emily, not being alarmed by Emily, was a big project for the whole 
household. She’s an absolutely fascinating person – a very troubling presence, 
though.”

Even more than reclusive Charlotte, Emily hated leaving home, Harman said, 
which was why they hoped, for a while, to start a school from their home at 
Haworth, West Yorkshire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Femily-bronte-may-have-had-asperger-syndrome-says-biographer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F739ff908ab067eb8fde76034bab3941e3b689dab%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Bront%C3%AB%20may%20have%20had%20Asperger%20syndrome%2C%20says%20biographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Femily-bronte-may-have-had-asperger-syndrome-says-biographer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Bront%C3%AB%20may%20have%20had%20Asperger%20syndrome%2C%20says%20biographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Femily-bronte-may-have-had-asperger-syndrome-says-biographer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F739ff908ab067eb8fde76034bab3941e3b689dab%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 The Yorkshire village of Haworth, home to the Brontë family. Photograph: 
Travelib Europe / Alamy 
At the event, Harman also dismissed the theory that all the Brontë books were 
written by one sibling, and that Emily’s brother Branwell wrote part of 
Wuthering Heights – an idea Harman said only existed because the novel was “so 
peculiar”.

“Being Emily Brontë is enough. Emily Brontë was an amazing genius. One of the 
problems of writing aboutCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> was, I thought, ‘Hang on, 
being Emily Bronte’s sister would be enough to have a book written about you, 
wouldn’t it?’” Harman said.

Why those subversive Brontë sisters still hypnotise us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/27/bronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair>
“People do tend to sentimentalise [Emily]. They say their favourite romantic 
novel is Wuthering Heights, but it is so full of violence, so full of things I 
would not classify as romantic at all.”

The Wuthering Heights author shared many behavioural qualities with her father 
Patrick. “He gave them an immense latitude in terms of his interest in issues 
of the day that transferred very readily. The children liked nothing more than 
to read a parliamentary report around the fireside. They were a very unusual 
family in that respect, and he did not restrain them intellectually. But he was 
a very chilly man, very emotionally strange. He was clearly hugely egotistical 
and I think, also a bit Asperger’s-ey too.”

After writing the biography of Charlotte in the lead-up to her 200th birthday 
this year, Harman said she was looking forward to the inevitable range of 
biographies about Emily in two year times. “It is Emily Brontë’s bicentenary in 
2018 – it’s too late for me to write another book I’m afraid, but I am looking 
forward to what people produce because she is such an extraordinary person.”
 