
When I was a child I had some strange ideas about what being a writer 
entailed. My dad is a literary critic, who has written many more books than I 
have. He somehow fitted them all into his teaching life and so, apparently from 
nowhere, I would see boxes of books with his name on the spine turning up at 
the house every now and then. At the same time, I developed the theory that to 
be a famous writer meant you first had to die young, and then wait for your 
work be discovered years after your death. This was based on some weird 
conjunction ofEmily Dickinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/13/emily-dickinson-lyndall-gordon> 
andAnne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/27/the-greatest-anne-frank-quotes-ever>
, but it all meant that I never really saw writing as an ordinary job, and it 
didn’t help much when I started my career and began to treat writing as, more 
or less, an ordinary job,

Related: Emma Donoghue: ‘I’ve ended up having a family and being a lesbian.' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/07/emma-donoghue-this-much-i-know>

My routine in the early years involved reading for an hour or two over 
breakfast before wondering if I felt like writing that day. That was before I 
had kids. They are now 12 and nine, and these days I put them on the school bus 
and run to my computer knowing I have only from 8.30am to 3.30pm to work. It’s 
a very healthy discipline, especially as within that time you also have to 
administer a career in terms of answering emails, making travel arrangements 
and the rest of it, so sometimes it can take a while to get to the actual 
writing.

When I do start to write I try not to worry too much about whether it is 
actually any good. The great thing is to get it on the page. In a first draft 
the prose is always very indecisive and messy, and I might put in four 
different adjectives with slashes between them because I’m not sure which one 
to use. If I’m writing on an aeroplane or a bus, I always tilt my screen away 
from the person beside me because I’d hate the idea that they would look at 
this pile of rubbish and ask if I really am an author. But a lot of writers 
become a bit inhibited by asking whether something is a beautiful sentence. I 
see it much more in craft terms, more like being a landscape gardener or a 
carpenter. The thing is to make a solid structure first knowing you can do the 
polishing later on. The one recent novelty to my regime has been a treadmill 
desk which means I now spend some of my time walking as I write. It hasn’t made 
the writing any better, or any worse, but it does mean I don’t have to fret 
about making time for the gym.
 Jacob Tremblay in the 2015 film of Room, directed by Lenny Abrahamson. 
Photograph: Allstar/A24 
The main variation among my novels is not the writing but the research. 
Sometimes I stick closely to facts. Other times, as in my latest book The Wonder
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/23/the-wonder-by-emma-donoghue-review>
, I make up the story but the background is as historically accurate as 
possible, so I spend time checking whether a particular bird would have been in 
the Irish Midlands in 1859. There is a bigger difference between the practice 
of writing novels and screenplays. With a novel you have all the power and 
editors send elegant notes with polite suggestions (which nevertheless can be 
absolutely crucial). In TV and film they have all the power and you get rather 
crisp comments about a problem with page 37 which they expect you to fix 
immediately. I had a great experience filmingRoom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/17/room-review-lenny-abrahamson-brie-larson-jacob-tremblay>
 with Lenny Abrahamson, and was allowed a say in everything. But I knew I 
didn’t have the final say, which is fine as long as you know that from the 
beginning.

By the time the kids do get home at 3.30pm I can find that my loyalty is still 
to the characters in my book and it’s hard to meet the needs of real human 
beings. I’m aware there is a selfishness to writing. But, like a football 
match, there can be some extra time if they pick up a book themselves. I will 
always have my laptop at tennis classes and will be typing at the back while 
the other parents are clapping at the front.

When I eventually do finish there is no celebratory drink. Even when I send 
off the final draft, if I have more time left that day I will start the next 
book. It’s not quite likeTrollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/11/anthony-trollope-200th-anniversary-writers-favourite-novel>
, who supposedly could finish one novel at 4.45pm, and work on the next until 
his regular knocking-off time of 5pm, but I do very much admire that spirit. So 
I try to be as industrious and unpretentious about the process as I can and 
that would be my advice to any aspiring writers. I know if I was wedded to a 
special pen, or particular violins playing in the background, I’d have very few 
productive writing days in a year.

• Emma Donoghue’s The Wonder 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wonder-473417.html> is published by Picador.
 