
An early exit of the England team from Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> would wipe £6bn off the stock 
market in a single day, according to a finance expert.

The European football tournament kicks off with France playing Romania at 9pm 
local time (8pm BST).

Alex Edmans, a professor of finance at the London Business School, believes 
the effect of football results on the national mood is so strong that it can 
spill over into the stock market with impacts measured in billions of pounds.

He said: “My research shows that a loss in a major football competition can 
have a profoundly negative effect on investor mood. Share prices are affected 
not only by fundamentals but also by emotions. Sports have huge effects on 
people’s emotions.”

Edmans and his co-authors, from the University of Colorado and BI Norwegian 
Business School, investigated the link between 1,100 international football 
matches and stock returns in 39 countries in a paper entitledSports Sentiment 
and Stock Returns <http://faculty.london.edu/aedmans/SteelJF.pdf>. 

The results showed that being eliminated from a regional tournament like Euro 
2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> led to the national stock 
market falling by 0.3% the next day.

Edmans said: “When applied to the UK stock market, this translates into a 
single-day loss of £6bn.”

Guardian sports writers are predicting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/euro-2016-guardian-writers-predictions>
 that Germany, France or Spain could reach the final, with England expected to 
get as far as the quarter-finals.

There is no evidence, however, that there would be a boost to the London stock 
market were England to go further than expected. Somewhat surprisingly, the 
Sports Sentiment paper found no effect of a win in any sport, including 
cricket, rugby and ice hockey.

Edmans said: “One reason could be that sports fans are notoriously 
over-optimistic about their team’s prospects. If fans go into each game 
expecting they’ll win, there’s little effect if they do win, but they become 
depressed if they lose.

“Another is the asymmetry of the competition. Winning an elimination game 
merely sends you into the next round, but losing leads to instant exit.”
 