
The Eritrean government has committed crimes against humanity in a widespread 
and systematic manner, according to a UN inquiry that calls for perpetrators to 
be tried by the international criminal court.

Officials in Eritrea, the biggest source of African refugees in Europe in 
recent years, have enslaved up to 400,000 people, the inquiry says. The 
government used murder, forced disappearances, rape and torture “to instil fear 
in, deter opposition from and ultimately to control the Eritrean civilian 
population since Eritrean authorities took control of Eritrean territory [from 
Ethiopia] in 1991”, the UN Commission of Inquiry for Eritreaannounced on 
Wednesday 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20067&LangID=E#sthash.pGNdgdjR.dpuf>
.

The report is an expanded version of a preliminary investigation last year 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2015/jun/08/human-rights-abuses-eritrea-may-be-crimes-against-humanity-un-report>
.

EU considering working with Sudan and Eritrea to stem migration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/eu-sudan-eritrea-migration> 
Mike Smith 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/CoIEritrea/Pages/MikeSmith.aspx>, the 
Australian diplomat who chaired the inquiry, said: “Eritrea is an authoritarian 
state. There is no independent judiciary, no national assembly and there are no 
other democratic institutions. This has created a governance and rule of law 
vacuum, resulting in a climate of impunity for crimes against humanity to be 
perpetrated over a quarter of a century. These crimes are still occurring today.


“There is no genuine prospect of the Eritrean judicial system holding 
perpetrators to account in a fair and transparent manner. The perpetrators of 
these crimes must face justice and the victims’ voices must be heard. The 
international community should now take steps, including using the 
international criminal court, national courts and other available mechanisms, 
to ensure there is accountability for the atrocities being committed inEritrea 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/eritrea>.”

The government issued an immediate rebuttal 
<http://www.shabait.com/news/local-news/21964-press-statement-by-he-mr-yemane-gebreab>
, saying the inquiry lacked “the minimum standards of rigour and 
professionalism”.

Yemane Gebreab, a spokesman for the government, said in a statement 
<http://www.shabait.com/news/local-news/21964-press-statement-by-he-mr-yemane-gebreab>
 that the report “has no solid evidence or firm legal basis to support its 
extreme and unfounded charges … The methodology the [inquiry] followed in its 
work is so deeply flawed as to seriously compromise its findings and render its 
conclusions null and void.”

Based on testimony from 833 Eritreans, the report alleges that the president, 
Isaias Afwerki, and his aides have eradicated all forms of political opposition 
and independent media, collapsed the judiciary and abandoned the rule of law. 
Many described how Eritrea’s unique system of lifelong military service amounts 
to modern-day slavery.

Some revealed how they were tortured 
<http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/CoIEritrea/TESTIMONY.pdf> 
(pdf) inside government detention centres. Speaking anonymously, one man 
claimed to have been jailed after expressing dissent at a public meeting.

In prison, he said: “I was repeatedly beaten and tortured. Each time two 
people held me down and two others beat me with stakes and rubbers. They 
submerged my head in a deep container with dirty water. They beat me on my 
testicles many times. I fainted each time they did this. I have no testicles 
now, they disappeared.”

The situation has led hundreds of thousands to flee the country, and some to 
seek asylum in Europe following hellish journeys across the Sahara and the 
Mediterranean. Faced with this influx, some western countries,including Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/22/uk-using-misleading-information-return-eritrean-asylum-seekers-home-office-guidance>
, are increasingly unwilling to offer Eritreans asylum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fun-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12542fa49e3f4eee8dd93343a59322c0b2373da1%2F0_59_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eritrea%20has%20committed%20widespread%20crimes%20against%20humanity%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fun-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eritrea%20has%20committed%20widespread%20crimes%20against%20humanity%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fun-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12542fa49e3f4eee8dd93343a59322c0b2373da1%2F0_59_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Hundreds of Eritreans demonstrate in front of the African Union headquarters 
in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, asking for measures to be taken against Eritrea in 
June 2015. Photograph: Nichole Sobecki/AFP/Getty Images 
Diplomatic dispatches and western reports from affluent parts of the capital, 
Asmara, have added to the perception that life is not as difficult as many 
Eritreans allege.


But the inquiry accuses such reports of whitewashing reality.

It's not at war, but up to 3% of its people have fled. What is going on in 
Eritrea?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/eritrea-migrants-child-soldier-fled-what-is-going>
“The facade of calm and normality that is apparent to the occasional visitor 
to the country, and others confined to sections of the capital, belies the 
consistent patterns of serious human rights violations,” the report reads.

“The types of gross human rights violations in Eritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> documented by the commission … are 
not committed on the streets of Asmara, but rather behind the walls of 
detention facilities and in military training camps. Torture and rape are not 
normally perpetrated in the open.”

Following the report’s publication, the Refugee Council, a British charity for 
refugees, said the Home Office should rethink its asylum policy for Eritreans.

The Refugee Council’s head of advocacy, Lisa Doyle, said 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/latest/news/4655_explosive_un_report_on_eritrea_further_undermines_uk_policy>
: “This report should send shockwaves throughout Whitehall. It confirms the 
ongoing gravity of the human rights situation in Eritrea; once again finding 
evidence of crimes against humanity.

“When a regime is on the verge of being referred to the international criminal 
court for gross human rights violations, it is dangerous and absurd that its 
citizens are being denied refuge in Britain.”
 