
Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> will be allowed to field 
a “competitive side” for 2016 with extraordinary player concessions granted by 
the AFL, but captain Jobe Watson’s Brownlow medal – won during the supplements 
scandal season of 2012 – appears in jeopardy.

AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan said the league “accepts and 
acknowledges” the decision of the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS),which on 
Tuesday morning upheld an appeal by the World Anti-Doping Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/essendon-drugs-verdict-34-players-guilty-of-doping-charges-and-banned-for-a-year>
, finding 34 former and current Essendon players guilty of doping infringements 
during the club’s 2012 supplements program.

Essendon verdict: a bleak day for the Bombers but a big victory for 
anti-doping | Francis Leach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/12/essendon-drugs-verdict-a-bleak-day-for-bombers-but-a-big-victory-for-anti-doping>
“These suspensions must stand as part of our commitment to a clean sport,” 
McLachlan said.

Since 12 of those 34 are still Bombers players, their suspension would leave 
the club drastically short-staffed for the 2016 season.

But McLachlan confirmed at a press conference on Tuesday the beleaguered club 
would be given special dispensation to bolster its squad before the new season.

Essendon will be permitted to top up their depleted list with 10 additional 
players in 2016 to help cover for the 12 who were hit with bans for violating 
anti-doping rules. The Bombers will also be allowed to promote five players off 
their rookie list.

“It is the AFL’s view that Essendon must be allowed to field a competitive 
team,” McLachlan said.

The other four clubs with former Bombers from 2012 on their list – Port 
Adelaide, Melbourne, St Kilda and the Western Bulldogs – can promote rookies to 
fill the gaps in their playing squads.

But McLachlan said Essendon would be weakened on the field. “There is no doubt 
about that,” he said. “Clearly they won’t be as competitive as they would have 
been.”

Essendon doping scandal: where are the 34 banned players now?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/12/essendon-doping-scandal-where-are-the-34-banned-players-now>
The full board of the AFL Commission will meet in February to decide whether 
Jobe Watson’s Brownlow medal, awarded as the fairest and best player in theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> for 2012, will stand. Watson will be 
invited to address the commission meeting.


Wada’s anti-doping policy 
<http://www.ausport.gov.au/supporting/integrity_in_sport/anti_doping/anti_-_doping_policy>
 states that athletes found to have breached the code will forfeit “any medals, 
points and prizes” won from the time of the offence to the start of any 
suspension, “unless fairness requires otherwise”.


If Watson’s award is rescinded, Hawthorn’s Sam Mitchell and Richmond’s Trent 
Cotchin, who finished equal second in the 2012 voting, may be retrospectively 
awarded medals.

Watson would become the first player in the Brownlow’s 91-year history to have 
the game’s highest individual honour stripped from him.

McLachlan said the CAS decision to uphold the Wada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> suspensions was a “devastating 
decision” for the players affected. “It’s our view that they’ve been horribly 
let down by the administration of the time,” he said.

Essendon club president Lindsay Tanner said the suspensions imposed were 
“manifestly unfair”.

“As far as we’re concerned our players acted in good faith with honesty and 
integrity,” he said.

But Tanner said the club acknowledged the authority of CAS and accepted the 
court’s decision. He conceded the supplements program was a “mistake of the 
highest magnitude”.

“As a club we should have had more robust systems in place. The supplements 
program of 2012 was a mistake.”

AFL Players’ Association boss Paul Marsh said he wanted the AFL to consider a 
withdrawal from Wada’s anti-doping regime, which he said led to “injustices”, 
an idea that was later dismissed by McLachlan.

“I don’t have a great deal of faith in the Wada regime and Asada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> is a part of that,” Marsh said.


“I’m sure I’ll be criticised for saying that, but I don’t really care. It’s 
something we’ve got to have a really good, hard, long look at because there’s 
just too many injustices ... it’s catching too many people that are not cheats.”

McLachlan poured cold water on the idea and suggested Marsh, who said the 
chances of legal action by banned players against the club or the AFL were 
“very high”, was speaking from a position of hurt.

“People are going to say a lot of things today and they’ll be wearing the hats 
that they wear,” he said. “We’re committed to clean sport. We have a long-term 
partnership with Asada and the Wada code is at the core of that.”

McLachlan said the league would accept the bans handed down by CAS, but it 
agreed with the Players’ Association that Wada’s anti-doping regulations were 
not a suitable regulatory framework for the sport.


 “I don’t believe this [Wada] code is entirely suitable for team sport, and 
the unique culture in our game is different to individual athletes.”
 