
Shares in some of Britain’s biggest estate agencies fell sharply on Wednesday 
asthe chancellor used his first autumn statement to ban upfront fees charged by 
letting agents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
.

Roughly £70m was wiped off the combined value of Foxtons and Countrywide after 
Philip Hammond confirmed a clampdown to prevent tenants from being forced to 
pay administrative costs for simple things such as inventory and reference 
checks.

The move by Hammond to ban letting fees for people who rent their homes forms 
part of the government’s ambition to do more forBritain’s so-called “Jams” – 
those families “just about managing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/jam-tomorrow-all-philip-hammond-is-likely-to-offer-struggling-britons>
.

Chancellor to crack down on letting fees in autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
Foxtons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/foxtons> was the sector’s 
biggest faller, with shares down almost 14%. Countrywide was down 6%, while LSL 
Property and Savills also fell.

The Association of Residential Letting Agents reacted with anger to the 
changes. David Cox, its managing director, said it would be counterproductive 
because the costs would be passed on to landlords who would, in turn, raise 
rents.

He said: “A ban on letting agent fees is a draconian measure, and will have a 
profoundly negative impact on the rental market.

“It will be the fourth assault on the sector in just over a year, and do 
little to help cash-poor renters save enough to get on the housing ladder. This 
decision is a crowd-pleaser, which will not help renters in the long term. All 
of the implications need to be taken into account.”

Announcing his autumn statement to parliament, Hammond said fees charged often 
spiralled to hundreds of pounds.

He said: “In the private rental market, letting agents are currently able to 
charge unregulated fees to tenants. This is wrong. Landlords appoint letting 
agents and landlords should meet their fees. So I can announce today that we 
will ban fees to tenants as soon as possible.”


Neil Wilson, a market analyst at ETX, said it was another blow for the sector, 
which had already been hit hard following the UK’s Brexit vote in June.

He said: “News of a ban on charging fees to tenants comes as a hammer blow to 
embattled estate agents. Shares in estate agents opened sharply lower as the 
government plans to ban upfront fees charged by letting agents.

“Estate agents have suffered since the Brexit vote – shares in Foxtons are 
still trading down around 30% from their pre-referendum level amid falling 
client activity. Countrywide stock is now worth a third of what it was in May 
2015.”

Will rents go up if unfair letting fees are banned?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/rents-unfair-letting-fees-tenants-charges> 