
6.23pm GMT 18:23  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * Sir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary, has denied “politicising” the 
Queen - despite refusing to deny that he was involved in getting her to speak 
out against Scottish independence ahead of the referendum in 2014. The Labour MP
Paul Flynn accused Heywood of politicising her, and said that a recent speech 
by Prince William suggested ministers and civil servants were again trying 
involve the royals in a referendum. (See 6.05pm.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/01/eu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live?page=with:block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c#block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
The exchange came during a hearing on Heywood’s guidance as to what government 
information ministers can see if they are campaigning for Britain to leave the 
EU. Heywood said that ministers would get all the information they needed, 
apart from “briefing material or speech material” which they could use to 
attack the government’s position on the EU. Bernard Jenkin, the Eurosceptic 
Conservative who chairs the public administration and constitutional affairs 
committee, suggested that this was reasonable and said that he was glad Heywood 
had cleared up the matter. Heywood’s letter to civil servants explaining his 
rules suggested that the restrictions for Brexit ministers would be more 
wide-ranging, Jenkin said. Heywood said that ministers could also see any facts 
they wanted, but that they could not commission “facts” to be used to attack 
the government’s position. This, from Sky’s Faisal Islam, sums this up nicely. 
Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) 
Heywood's two fact types: random facts already established -Outer Ministers 
can ask Civil Service. Can't ask for new Facts in support of Out
 <https://twitter.com/faisalislam/status/704721372681998340> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/faisalislam/status/704721372681998340> 
 * The Sun editor, Tony Gallagher, has said he hasn’t decided which side the 
newspaper will back at June’s referendum on EU membership, despite the 
“extremely sceptical” tone of its EU coverage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/sun-eu-referendum-editor-tony-gallagher-brexit>
 * The state pension age could rise quicker than expected after the government 
announced an inquiry into whether it should still be linked to life expectancy, 
Labour and financial experts have said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/01/state-pension-age-could-rise-faster-than-expected-say-experts>
 * New controls on trade unions that could cut Labour’s funding by £8m a year 
may be delayed, as peers are expected to recommend more progress on changes to 
party funding before some changes go ahead. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/trade-union-bill-funding-reforms-labour-house-of-lords-committee>
 * Nicola Sturgeon’s government is to set up a new Scottish benefits agency to 
oversee and simplify more than £2.7bn of welfare spending. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/scottish-government-to-set-up-benefits-agency-to-streamline-welfare>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated at 6.26pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4%23block-56d5dabee4b0d0eebca058a4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
6.05pm GMT 18:05  <> 

Heywood accused of 'politicising' Queen as he refuses to deny role in her 
pro-Union Scottish intervention

Here are the key quotes from the exchange between Paul Flynn, the Labour MP, 
andSir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary.

 * Heywood refused to deny being involved in getting the Queen to speak out 
against Scottish independence.Flynn put this allegation to him, quoting from 
Cameron at 10 by Anthony Seldon and Peter Snowdon. Heywood replied: 
I never comment on royal matters.

 * Flynn accused Heywood of “politicising” the royal family. After making the 
point about the Queen and the Scottish independence referendum, Flynn told 
Heywood: 
I’m accusing you of collaborating and politicising the royal family. These 
matters were regarded as being so important, the break-up of the United 
Kingdom, that something had to be done about it.

Flynn also quoted what happened when Prince William recently appeared to use a 
speech at the Foreign Office to make the case for Britain staying in the EU. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/prince-william-appears-to-signal-support-for-remaining-in-eu>

(There is no doubt that Number 10 was involved in getting the Queen to speak 
out, in coded terms, againstScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, but Number 10 
says it did not know about Prince William’s speech in advance and it has not 
been proved this was a politically-motivated intervention.)

 * Heywood denied “politicising” the royals. Although he would not comment on 
the claim that he was involved in getting her to speak out against Scottish 
independence, he objected to the suggestion that he had ever “politicised” her. 
I would never dream of trying to politicise Her Majesty the Queen. 

(There may be a civil service view that getting the Queen of the United 
Kingdom to speak out in favour of the United Kingdom does not amount to 
politicisation.

Flynn quoted from the Seldon/Snowdon book, but he would have had better 
material if he had quoted fromthe Guardian’s long read on this, by Severin 
Carrell, Nicholas Watt and Patrick Wintour, which covered it in more detail. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/dec/16/-sp-real-story-scottish-referendum-final-days-fight-for-independence>
Here’s an excerpt.

Sir Jeremy Heywood <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sir-jeremy-heywood>, 
the cabinet secretary, and Sir Christopher Geidt, the Queen’s private 
secretary, embarked on discussions to work out how the Queen might register her 
concerns at the prospect of a yes vote while upholding her constitutional duty 
to remain wholly impartial. The Whitehall machinery was fully apprised of the 
prime minister’s concerns that the yes side was developing an ominous momentum.

The talks between the most senior civil servant in the land and the palace’s 
most senior official, the two key figures at the heart of what the Whitehall 
source described as the “deep state”, focused in the first place on the wisdom 
of a public intervention by the monarch, who has been scrupulously impartial 
during her 62 years on the throne. Once it became clear that the Queen was 
minded to speak out, Geidt and Heywood then needed to fashion some words that 
would ensure that the she remained within the bounds expected of a 
constitutional monarch.

Jim Lawson, a veteran freelance reporter who has dutifully covered royal 
visits to the Scottish Highlands for decades – he remembers covering Prince 
Charles at Gordonstoun boarding school in the 1960s – got the answer a week 
later on Sunday 14 September, outside Crathie Kirk, the small church where the 
Queen attends Sunday services while at Balmoral. As he has done at these events 
for years, Lawson wandered over to the crowd behind the barriers after the 
Queen had departed, to harvest quotes from her greetings to wellwishers. To his 
surprise, one woman disclosed that the monarch had offered a coded warning 
about the impending referendum, telling her:“Well, I hope people will think 
very carefully about the future.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/14/scottish-independence-queen-remark-welcomed-no-vote>

“The Queen looked almost uneasy,” Lawson recalled. “It was strange. [She] 
didn’t look supremely confident.” When he asked the woman who had spoken to the 
Queen for her name, a friend standing with her urged her not to reveal it. When 
Lawson asked her why not, she replied “It’s my job.” For Lawson, this was a 
first. “It has never happened in my life before,” he recalled. “Normally if the 
Queen has talked to someone, they’re delighted to give you everything. I was 
baffled, to be honest.”

Updated at 6.28pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c%23block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.28pm GMT 17:28  <> 

Bernard Jenkin is now summing up.

He says Heywood has been very helpful. He has clarified that Brexit ministers 
can get access to facts.

Heywood says that is correct. But he says the civil service will not be 
pro-actively producing facts that can be used to attack the government.

Jenkin quotes from the Heywood’s letter. He says that letter suggests Brexit 
ministers could be denied access to a wider range of material. But Heywood says 
he has clarified that ministers will only be denied access to speech and 
briefing material.

He says that it would have been better if Heywood’s letter, and the Q&A that 
went with it, had made it clear.

But he indicates that he is happy with the situation now. 

And that’s it.

I will post a summary now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882%23block-56d5cf54e4b0d0eebca05882&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.20pm GMT 17:20  <> 

Heywood says Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, has not 
commissioned work from his department to attack government policy, and he would 
not expect him to do so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61%23block-56d5cf0be4b054e3a47b4d61&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.19pm GMT 17:19  <> 

David Jones, the Conservative MP and former Welsh secretary, goes next.

Q: Where you surprised by how much anger there was about this in the Commons 
yesterday (when Matthew Hancock answered an urgent question on it)?

Yes, says Heywood.

Q: So will you rewrite the guidance?

Heywood says it is clear.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880%23block-56d5cebbe4b0d0eebca05880&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.17pm GMT 17:17  <> 

Q: Have any secretaries of state raised concerns with you about these 
guidelines?

Heywood says one secretary of state raised a point about facts. He says he 
thinks the matter was resolved.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988%23block-56d5ce7de4b023cfa49eb988&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.15pm GMT 17:15  <> 
Emily Ashton (@elashton) 
Kate Hoey: “Are we making a fuss over nothing?” Jeremy Heywood: “I couldn’t 
possibly say that.”#HouseofCards 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/HouseofCards?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/elashton/status/704716067797667840> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elashton/status/704716067797667840> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e%23block-56d5ce26e4b054e3a47b4d5e&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.15pm GMT 17:15  <> 

Q: How many council of ministers meetings will pro-Brexit ministers attend 
between now and the referendum?

Heywood says he is not sure. But there is nothing to stop pro-Brexit ministers 
attending a council of ministers meeting in Brussels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c%23block-56d5cdd3e4b054e3a47b4d5c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.13pm GMT 17:13  <> 

The Labour MP Paul Flynn says Sir Jeremy Heywood’s answer to his questions on 
the royals (see4.41pm) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/01/eu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live?page=with:block-56d5c4bde4b023cfa49eb973#block-56d5c4bde4b023cfa49eb973>
 was “ludicrous”.
Paul Flynn (@PaulFlynnMP) 
Ludicrous defence by Jeremy Heywood of using royals to influence Referendum & 
Brexit debates saying Royal matters cannot be discussed.
 <https://twitter.com/PaulFlynnMP/status/704712820756185088> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PaulFlynnMP/status/704712820756185088> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59%23block-56d5cd29e4b054e3a47b4d59&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.09pm GMT 17:09  <> 

At least someone is finding this interesting - Sir Jeremy Heywood is now 
trending on Twitter. 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%22Sir%20Jeremy%20Heywood%22&src=tren>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a%23block-56d5ccafe4b0d0eebca0587a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.07pm GMT 17:07  <> 

Kate Hoey goes next.

Q: What will you do if a minister or civil servant breaks this guidance?

Heywood says he does not like speculating on hypotheticals. It would be up to 
the prime minister to decide what happened to a minister. If a civil servant 
broke the rules, Heywood would regard that as a serious issue.

He would look at this “in the round”, using a common sense approach, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53%23block-56d5cb9ce4b054e3a47b4d53&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.04pm GMT 17:04  <> 

Heywood says his guidance applies to some public servants outside the civil 
service. But he would have to get back to the committee to explain exactly who 
might be covered.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877%23block-56d5cb51e4b0d0eebca05877&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.58pm GMT 16:58  <> 

Q: Won’t the public think the prime minister is hiding something?

Heywood says he thinks people will be more interested in the substantive 
issues.

He says the civil service works to support the government’s position. But in 
all other respects things will carry on as normal for ministers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a%23block-56d5c9d7e4b054e3a47b4d4a&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.53pm GMT 16:53  <> 

Labour’s Kate Hoey goes next.

Q: Wouldn’t it have been better to produce common sense guidance?

Heywood say his guidance is common sense.

In his experience, he says, there is always some confusion in the first few 
weeks of a campaign like his.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20MPs%20question%20Heywood%20over%20papers%20ban%20for%20Brexit%20ministers%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Feu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873%23block-56d5c8c7e4b0d0eebca05873&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Sir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary, has denied “politicising” the 
Queen - despite refusing to deny that he was involved in getting her to speak 
out against Scottish independence ahead of the referendum in 2014. The Labour MP
Paul Flynn accused Heywood of politicising her, and said that a recent speech 
by Prince William suggested ministers and civil servants were again trying 
involve the royals in a referendum. (See 6.05pm.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/01/eu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live?page=with:block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c#block-56d5d220e4b054e3a47b4d6c>
The exchange came during a hearing on Heywood’s guidance as to what government 
information ministers can see if they are campaigning for Britain to leave the 
EU. Heywood said that ministers would get all the information they needed, 
apart from “briefing material or speech material” which they could use to 
attack the government’s position on the EU. Bernard Jenkin, the Eurosceptic 
Conservative who chairs the public administration and constitutional affairs 
committee, suggested that this was reasonable and said that he was glad Heywood 
had cleared up the matter. Heywood’s letter to civil servants explaining his 
rules suggested that the restrictions for Brexit ministers would be more 
wide-ranging, Jenkin said. Heywood said that ministers could also see any facts 
they wanted, but that they could not commission “facts” to be used to attack 
the government’s position. This, from Sky’s Faisal Islam, sums this up nicely. 
Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) 
Heywood's two fact types: random facts already established -Outer Ministers 
can ask Civil Service. Can't ask for new Facts in support of Out
 <https://twitter.com/faisalislam/status/704721372681998340> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/faisalislam/status/704721372681998340> 
 * The Sun editor, Tony Gallagher, has said he hasn’t decided which side the 
newspaper will back at June’s referendum on EU membership, despite the 
“extremely sceptical” tone of its EU coverage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/sun-eu-referendum-editor-tony-gallagher-brexit>
 * The state pension age could rise quicker than expected after the government 
announced an inquiry into whether it should still be linked to life expectancy, 
Labour and financial experts have said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/01/state-pension-age-could-rise-faster-than-expected-say-experts>
 * New controls on trade unions that could cut Labour’s funding by £8m a year 
may be delayed, as peers are expected to recommend more progress on changes to 
party funding before some changes go ahead. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/trade-union-bill-funding-reforms-labour-house-of-lords-committee>
 * Nicola Sturgeon’s government is to set up a new Scottish benefits agency to 
oversee and simplify more than £2.7bn of welfare spending. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/01/scottish-government-to-set-up-benefits-agency-to-streamline-welfare>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 
Here are the key quotes from the exchange between Paul Flynn, the Labour MP, 
andSir Jeremy Heywood, the cabinet secretary.

 * Heywood refused to deny being involved in getting the Queen to speak out 
against Scottish independence.Flynn put this allegation to him, quoting from 
Cameron at 10 by Anthony Seldon and Peter Snowdon. Heywood replied: 
I never comment on royal matters.

 * Flynn accused Heywood of “politicising” the royal family. After making the 
point about the Queen and the Scottish independence referendum, Flynn told 
Heywood: 
I’m accusing you of collaborating and politicising the royal family. These 
matters were regarded as being so important, the break-up of the United 
Kingdom, that something had to be done about it.

Flynn also quoted what happened when Prince William recently appeared to use a 
speech at the Foreign Office to make the case for Britain staying in the EU. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/prince-william-appears-to-signal-support-for-remaining-in-eu>

(There is no doubt that Number 10 was involved in getting the Queen to speak 
out, in coded terms, againstScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, but Number 10 
says it did not know about Prince William’s speech in advance and it has not 
been proved this was a politically-motivated intervention.)

 * Heywood denied “politicising” the royals. Although he would not comment on 
the claim that he was involved in getting her to speak out against Scottish 
independence, he objected to the suggestion that he had ever “politicised” her. 
I would never dream of trying to politicise Her Majesty the Queen. 

(There may be a civil service view that getting the Queen of the United 
Kingdom to speak out in favour of the United Kingdom does not amount to 
politicisation.

Flynn quoted from the Seldon/Snowdon book, but he would have had better 
material if he had quoted fromthe Guardian’s long read on this, by Severin 
Carrell, Nicholas Watt and Patrick Wintour, which covered it in more detail. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/dec/16/-sp-real-story-scottish-referendum-final-days-fight-for-independence>
Here’s an excerpt.

Sir Jeremy Heywood <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sir-jeremy-heywood>, 
the cabinet secretary, and Sir Christopher Geidt, the Queen’s private 
secretary, embarked on discussions to work out how the Queen might register her 
concerns at the prospect of a yes vote while upholding her constitutional duty 
to remain wholly impartial. The Whitehall machinery was fully apprised of the 
prime minister’s concerns that the yes side was developing an ominous momentum.

The talks between the most senior civil servant in the land and the palace’s 
most senior official, the two key figures at the heart of what the Whitehall 
source described as the “deep state”, focused in the first place on the wisdom 
of a public intervention by the monarch, who has been scrupulously impartial 
during her 62 years on the throne. Once it became clear that the Queen was 
minded to speak out, Geidt and Heywood then needed to fashion some words that 
would ensure that the she remained within the bounds expected of a 
constitutional monarch.

Jim Lawson, a veteran freelance reporter who has dutifully covered royal 
visits to the Scottish Highlands for decades – he remembers covering Prince 
Charles at Gordonstoun boarding school in the 1960s – got the answer a week 
later on Sunday 14 September, outside Crathie Kirk, the small church where the 
Queen attends Sunday services while at Balmoral. As he has done at these events 
for years, Lawson wandered over to the crowd behind the barriers after the 
Queen had departed, to harvest quotes from her greetings to wellwishers. To his 
surprise, one woman disclosed that the monarch had offered a coded warning 
about the impending referendum, telling her:“Well, I hope people will think 
very carefully about the future.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/14/scottish-independence-queen-remark-welcomed-no-vote>

“The Queen looked almost uneasy,” Lawson recalled. “It was strange. [She] 
didn’t look supremely confident.” When he asked the woman who had spoken to the 
Queen for her name, a friend standing with her urged her not to reveal it. When 
Lawson asked her why not, she replied “It’s my job.” For Lawson, this was a 
first. “It has never happened in my life before,” he recalled. “Normally if the 
Queen has talked to someone, they’re delighted to give you everything. I was 
baffled, to be honest.”
 
Bernard Jenkin is now summing up.

He says Heywood has been very helpful. He has clarified that Brexit ministers 
can get access to facts.

Heywood says that is correct. But he says the civil service will not be 
pro-actively producing facts that can be used to attack the government.

Jenkin quotes from the Heywood’s letter. He says that letter suggests Brexit 
ministers could be denied access to a wider range of material. But Heywood says 
he has clarified that ministers will only be denied access to speech and 
briefing material.

He says that it would have been better if Heywood’s letter, and the Q&A that 
went with it, had made it clear.

But he indicates that he is happy with the situation now. 

And that’s it.

I will post a summary now.
 
Heywood says Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, has not 
commissioned work from his department to attack government policy, and he would 
not expect him to do so.
 
David Jones, the Conservative MP and former Welsh secretary, goes next.

Q: Where you surprised by how much anger there was about this in the Commons 
yesterday (when Matthew Hancock answered an urgent question on it)?

Yes, says Heywood.

Q: So will you rewrite the guidance?

Heywood says it is clear.
 
Q: Have any secretaries of state raised concerns with you about these 
guidelines?

Heywood says one secretary of state raised a point about facts. He says he 
thinks the matter was resolved.
 Emily Ashton (@elashton) 
Kate Hoey: “Are we making a fuss over nothing?” Jeremy Heywood: “I couldn’t 
possibly say that.”#HouseofCards 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/HouseofCards?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/elashton/status/704716067797667840> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elashton/status/704716067797667840>  
Q: How many council of ministers meetings will pro-Brexit ministers attend 
between now and the referendum?

Heywood says he is not sure. But there is nothing to stop pro-Brexit ministers 
attending a council of ministers meeting in Brussels.
 
The Labour MP Paul Flynn says Sir Jeremy Heywood’s answer to his questions on 
the royals (see4.41pm) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/01/eu-referendum-mandelson-heywood-vote-leave-chair-of-talking-absolute-rubbish-politics-live?page=with:block-56d5c4bde4b023cfa49eb973#block-56d5c4bde4b023cfa49eb973>
 was “ludicrous”.
Paul Flynn (@PaulFlynnMP) 
Ludicrous defence by Jeremy Heywood of using royals to influence Referendum & 
Brexit debates saying Royal matters cannot be discussed.
 <https://twitter.com/PaulFlynnMP/status/704712820756185088> March 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PaulFlynnMP/status/704712820756185088>  
At least someone is finding this interesting - Sir Jeremy Heywood is now 
trending on Twitter. 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%22Sir%20Jeremy%20Heywood%22&src=tren>
 
Kate Hoey goes next.

Q: What will you do if a minister or civil servant breaks this guidance?

Heywood says he does not like speculating on hypotheticals. It would be up to 
the prime minister to decide what happened to a minister. If a civil servant 
broke the rules, Heywood would regard that as a serious issue.

He would look at this “in the round”, using a common sense approach, he says.
 
Heywood says his guidance applies to some public servants outside the civil 
service. But he would have to get back to the committee to explain exactly who 
might be covered.
 
Q: Won’t the public think the prime minister is hiding something?

Heywood says he thinks people will be more interested in the substantive 
issues.

He says the civil service works to support the government’s position. But in 
all other respects things will carry on as normal for ministers.
 
Labour’s Kate Hoey goes next.

Q: Wouldn’t it have been better to produce common sense guidance?

Heywood say his guidance is common sense.

In his experience, he says, there is always some confusion in the first few 
weeks of a campaign like his.
 