
Government ministers from seven European countries including the UK, France, 
Germany and Italy have joined together to ramp up pressure on clothing brands 
to pay compensation to victims of theRana Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza> factory collapse.

A statement agreed at a forum on responsible business conduct organised by the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said ministers regretted 
that some companies whose clothes had been produced in the building where over 
1,100 people died had not paid into an International Labour Organisation-backed 
compensation fund. The fund remains less than half way to its $40m (Â£23m) 
target. "We therefore firmly recommend all companies that sourced in Rana Plaza 
donate generously to the Trust fund, either for the first time or with a second 
contribution to come to an appropriate amount," the joint statement said.

The ministers, including the UK's minister for international development Alan 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> and led by the 
Netherlands' Lilianne Ploumen, also urged the government of Bangladesh and the 
local factory owners association to increase their contributions to the fund 
and "ensure their public accountability".

With the first 700 workers' claims for full compensation expected to be 
approved by the ILO-backed compensation fund next week, Inneke Zeldenrust from 
the Clean Clothes Campaign, a workers rights campaign group, said there was an 
"urgent problem". She said that all those workers due compensation were likely 
to have their claims cleared in the next four to six weeks and the current 
budget was insufficient.

UNI Global Union's general secretary Philip Jennings said: "These seven 
governments have put down another line in the sand for any brand with 
connections to Rana Plaza." He warned those brands which haven't paid into the 
fund, which include the UK's Matalan and Italy's Benetton: "Rana Plaza is not a 
'story' that is going to go away."

The EU ministers' intervention comes as Duncan revealed he was writing to 
British companies with a presence in Rana Plaza who had not paid into the 
compensation fund urging them to pay up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/25/uk-government-retailers-matalan-rana-plaza-compensation-bangladesh>
. Matalan, understood to be among those companies on Duncan's list, has said it 
was not using any factories within Rana Plaza when the building collapsed and 
insists that it has already helped victims with a donation to a charity support 
programme to mothers involved in the disaster. But workers' rights campaigners 
say the type of charity scheme Matalan has paid into does not provide full 
compensation for loss of earnings by injured workers and the families of those 
who died.
 