
An industry known for being open and liberal, the technology sector certainly 
didn’t want to wake up to a smug and delighted Nigel Farage on the morning of 
23 June. But like many others, the vote to leave the EU left some startups 
questioning where their future lies, particularly if they’re confronted with 
issues around employing foreign staff.

While there’s clearly been no mass exodus, more than six months later some 
startups have made the tough decision to leave, while others are still 
pondering whether or not to start afresh in Europe. With so many tech hubs 
springing up acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, we 
take a look at the cities attracting British startups:


Berlin

There’s no question over which European city has been most vocal in wooing 
British tech startups. Weeks after the vote, Germany’s Free Democratic party 
kicked off a charm offensive by running an ad on the side of a white truck 
travelling around east London reading, “Dear startups, keep calm and move to 
Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/09/berlin-brexit-beckons-britains-startups-london-tech>
”. This was followed in November byBerlin Partner 
<http://www.berlin-partner.de/en/>, the capital’s marketing agency, running a 
pop-up lab in Soho highlighting what the city offers startups.

But even hours after the referendum, Berlin Partner was inundated with 
inquiries from disillusioned startups. “The messages came mostly from startups 
telling of their plans to relocate to Berlin,” says Dr. Stefan Franzke, CEO 
Berlin Partner. “I guess that this was the result of the initial shock.” But 
for many it wasn’t just a fleeting thought. Berlin Partner says five startups 
have already swapped the UK for Berlin while it’s liaising with 40 startups 
interested in moving to the German capital. The chief executive of digital 
vehicle management firmKonetik <http://www.konetik.io/>, Balazs Szabo, says he 
was swayed to move their head office from Shoreditch, London to Berlin 
following the vote to leave. “The uncertainty of the future business 
environment in UK made us ready to move forward by strengthening our position 
in Germany.”

In Berlin you’re part of a global and cosmopolitan crowd. “Berlin is 
international, with people from 190 nations,” says Franzke, adding that 50% of 
employees working at startups in Berlin are from other countries.

Lisbon

Lisbon was thrown in the tech spotlight when the city hosted the Web Summit in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2016/nov/14/report-from-web-summit-tech-conference-chips-with-everything-podcast>
, marking the start of a three-year partnership between the city and the global 
tech conference. Choosing Lisbon over Dublin, its backdrop for the past three 
years, and other European cities has helped carve Lisbon out as a burgeoning 
tech hub. “The fact Web Summit elected Lisbon as the city to run the show from 
is a sign of something,” says Rui Coelho, executive director ofInvest Lisboa 
<http://www.investlisboa.com/site/en/>, the city’s promotional agency. 
“Portugal is known for its sun, beach, food and wine and now tech is about to 
take off.” At a time when many countries are talking of closing borders, 
Lisbon’s door is firmly open, with Invest Lisboa on a mission to attract 
foreign companies, including UK startups. Coelho beats the drum for the city. 
“We offer a good quality of life, good infrastructure, it’s affordable and it’s 
a great city to work in. We are opening our doors.”

Coelho doesn’t have too difficult a job. Startups are already turning to 
Lisbon. On the second floor of Startup Lisboa’s office are the founders of
EatAbout <https://www.eatabout.co/>, an app that lets diners experience eating 
a meal in a chef’s home. Philip Källberg and Felix Bråberg moved their company 
from London to Lisbon in October. “Brexit didn’t make us feel good about 
staying in London,” admits Källberg. “We want to be a global company and if the 
UK has a hard Brexit it’s not the place we want to have our headquarters. That 
was the core reason we left, but we’ve also found Lisbon to have a relaxed 
climate and less stressful.” There’s another upshot: the move has slashed their 
workspace costs by around 60%.

Dublin

Just weeks following the vote in favour of Brexit and applications for Irish 
passports hit the roof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/huge-rise-in-britons-applying-for-irish-citizenship-after-brexit-vote>
 as Brits turned to their Irish roots in a hope of hanging on to EU 
citizenship. In a city already home to tech giants such as Google, Facebook, 
Twitter and LinkedIn, it’s no surprise that Dublin is an appealing alternative 
for startups wishing to remain in the EU. “Assuming a UK exit, Ireland will be 
the only English-speaking country in the EU and with advantages of talent, a 
well-developed ecosystem, the presence of large tech companies and leading-edge 
research centres,” says Marina Donohoe, UK and northern Europe director at
Enterprise Ireland <https://www.enterprise-ireland.com/en/>. “It’s is a great 
location for startups.”

Donohoe says the government agency has received a number of inquiries from UK 
startups. “Some of the inquiries were triggered by concerns around access to 
non-UK talent and constraints on this going forward. It’s unclear how this will 
unfold but with 3.6 million EU citizens living in the UK the concern is quite a 
real one.”

The uncertainty around Brexit certainly presents an opportunity for Ireland. 
Donohoe says her team will host formal workshops and organise one-to-one 
discussions. “Initially we aim to target the Irish diaspora, especially young 
professionals who may wish to come back to Ireland to start their own 
business,” she says. “We will also ensure that some of the key influencers such 
as those in professional services companies in London are made aware of what 
Ireland has to offer startups so they can advise accordingly and appropriately.”

Amsterdam

Home to the Next Web, the European commission awarded it the European Capital 
of Innovation 2016/2017, and it’s the fourth biggest tech hub in Europe by 
number of startups, according toresearch published by Balderton Capital 
<https://talent.balderton.com/European_Tech_Talent_Landscape.pdf> (pdf). 
Amsterdam is a viable choice for disillusioned British startups, with
StartupAmsterdam <http://www.iamsterdam.com/en/business/startupamsterdam>, an 
agency designed to connect startups and investors, reporting increased interest 
from British firms following the Brexit vote.

So what does the city synonymous with cycling and canals, offer startups? 
“Amsterdam is Europe’s most connected tech city,” explains Bas Beekman, 
director of StartupAmsterdam. “The accessibility of the city, the journey 
between Schiphol airport and the city centre takes about 15 minutes, and its 
strategic location means Amsterdam is very suitable for startups wishing to 
expand into mainland Europe.” He points out that a number of renowned startups 
and scale-ups including Uber, Netflix and Tesla have offices in Amsterdam. He 
says the wide use of English in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> sets them apart, too. “This 
makes doing business so much easier.” And then, of course there’s the 
liveability factor. “Amsterdam’s vibrant cultural life, being able to bike to 
work and the low cost of living make it a magnet for the international talent 
that startups need.”

While the UK tech sector remains strong and London still leads the way as the 
tech capital of Europe, the above cities, and more, are vying for those 
startups that need a home where there’s freedom of movement in order to attract 
talent. Whether it’s the beaches of Lisbon that sway you or you’re hankering 
after the urban grit and cool of Berlin, there’s plenty of destinations that 
will welcome startups with open arms.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2016/jan/25/content-funding>.
 