
An exclamation mark at the end of any title can often betray a sort of 
are-we-having-fun-yet? eagerness; two of them, as inRichard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater>’s Everybody Wants Some!! 
(eOne, 15), suggest positively deranged levels of pep. Yet even as it surfs the 
antic party scene of American college life circa 1980, there’s a sauntering, 
Zen-infused calm to the film that feels almost melancholic. Many have deemed it 
a pure nostalgia exercise, a film that treats its gaggle of pretty, randy 
fratboys and their retrograde social and sexual beliefs with uncritical, 
honey-dipped affection.

Yet the film is more complicated: it may be rooted in one highly specific era, 
as opposed to the time-lapse exercises 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/interviews/long-conversation-richard-linklater-cinema-time>
 ofBoyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/18/dvds-downloads-guy-lodge-boyhood> 
and theBefore Sunrise trilogy, but it extends Linklater’s fascination with 
people as inchoate beings. The camera participates in its characters’ 
short-sighted revelry while exposing many of the personal stumbling blocks that 
could betray them when they’re no longer princes of  the universe – or at least 
of the baseball diamond. Linklater also looks upon the puppyish, peach-skinned 
beauty of these college athletes in a way that no jockish campus jaunt of the 
80s would have done: a celebratory gaze, in one sense, but laced with awareness 
that this too shall pass. In the course of this alternately lovely and leery 
romp, at least one of those exclamation points curls into a question mark.

No punctuation is aggressive enough for Green Room (Altitude, 18), a 
seismically nasty exercise in bloody backwoods horror that confirms all the 
ruthless technical strengths director Jeremy Saulnier demonstrated inBlue Ruin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/dvds-and-downloads-bad-neighbours-concussion-sopranos-blue-ruin>
 – with, sadly, none of that film’s human texture. Pitting punk rockers against 
neo-Nazis in a confined, effortfully grisly fight to the death, it works up 
some efficient cat-and-mouse tension upfront yet runs out of complicating 
factors – for its characters and narrative alike – even before the halfway mark.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvMja-moAlE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvMja-moAlE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvMja-moAlE&media=>
Watch the trailer for Author: The JT LeRoy Story. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvMja-moAlE> 
Among the year’s most ambiguously compelling documentaries, Author: The JT 
Leroy Story (Dogwoof, 15) digs under the hoax of Leroy, the nonexistent West 
Virginia hustler-novelist who briefly became the toast of the New York literary 
scene. Affording his outed inventor, Brooklyn writer Laura Albert, the chance 
to tell her side of this “myth”, Jeff Feuerzeig’s film is a feast of bizarre 
anecdotal detail – yet never fully questions its own questionability in taking 
the word of a famously unreliable narrator. Approach with fascination and 
caution in equal measure.

Neither fascinating nor especially dangerous – despite the seemingly risky 
promise of an Afghanistan conflict comedy –Whiskey Tango Foxtrot (Paramount, 
15) is a jaunty diversion, starring a gameTina Fey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tina-fey> as a green war correspondent 
plunged into the maelstrom of Kabul. There’s a pleasingly acidic edge to some 
of the fish-out-of-water antics that ensue, but the film treads conservatively 
around any hot points of political or cultural interest. Pair it up withA 
Hologram for the King (Icon, 12) for a curious double bill of American 
civilians dazed and confused in the Middle East: starring Tom Hanks as a 
beaten-down businessman attempting to secure a major contract in Saudi Arabia, 
Tom Tykwer’s adaptation ofDave Eggers’s novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/30/hologram-for-king-eggers-review> 
retains a sense of the author’s skewed, semi-sweet whimsy, but its more probing 
philosophical questions mostly lie decoratively on the surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Feverybody-wants-some-green-room-author-jt-leroy-story-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0505ea3d6039fc3fd65d456d172328ec6e8745%2F198_0_1786_1072%2F1786.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everybody%20Wants%20Some!!%3B%20Green%20Room%3B%20Author%3A%20The%20JT%20LeRoy%20Story%3B%20Whiskey%20Tango%20Foxtrot%20and%20%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Feverybody-wants-some-green-room-author-jt-leroy-story-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everybody%20Wants%20Some%21%21%3B%20Green%20Room%3B%20Author%3A%20The%20JT%20LeRoy%20Story%3B%20Whiskey%20Tango%20Foxtrot%20and%20%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Feverybody-wants-some-green-room-author-jt-leroy-story-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0505ea3d6039fc3fd65d456d172328ec6e8745%2F198_0_1786_1072%2F1786.jpg>
 Natalia Tena and David Verdaguer in the ‘rather special’ 10,000 Km. 
Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
On the streaming-only front, Mubi.com once more comes to the rescue of a fine 
film overlooked by UK distributors. Spanish director Carlos Marques-Marcet’s 
tender, ruefully romantic debut10,000 Km <https://mubi.com/showing/10000-km> 
must rank among the most poignant painfully observed depictions of that most 
increasingly prevalent of modern relationship dramas: long-distance dating. 
Artfully volleying viewers between Los Angeles and Barcelona, as it charts how 
a migrant artist and her left-behind boyfriend sustain their compromised 
intimacy, the film illustrates and negotiates the space between them with 
novel, non-gimmicky use of webcams and phone screens. It’s altogether rather 
special: while dealing with eternal human desires, it’s the rare film that 
feels wholly 21st century in its construction.
 