
A former chief executive of the Co-operative Bank has agreed to a six-year ban 
from membership of a key accountancy body after admitting to misconduct during 
his tenure at the top of the troubled bank.

Barry Tootell – who has already been banned from holding senior roles in the 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/15/bank-of-england-bans-co-op-bank-barry-tootell-keith-alderson-top-city-jobs>
 – will not be able to describe himself as a chartered accountant after his 
exclusion from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales 
(ICAEW).

The Financial Reporting Council, which oversees investigations into misconduct 
and has made the recommendation to the ICAEW, will receive £20,000 from Tootell 
to help recoup costs. It is not clear how much the investigation cost. Other 
bans recommended by the FRC, which hadconsidered a seven-year ban for Tootell 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/Our-Work/Publications/Enforcement/Mr-Barry-Tootell-Settlement-Agreement.pdf>
, have ranged from three to 10 years.

Tootell, who could not immediately be reached for comment, was finance 
director and then acting chief executive of Co-op Bank for 14 months. He took 
on the role full-time in September 2012 but was placed on gardening leave in 
May 2013 after the bank wasdowngraded to junk status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/may/10/cooperative-bank-chief-quits-moodys-downgrade>
. The bank, then fully owned by the Co-operative Group, later had to bebailed 
out by hedge funds when a £1.5bn hole appeared in its books in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/17/co-operative-bank-stock-market-listing?CMP=twt_gu>
 .

Gareth Rees, FRC executive counsel, said: “The period of exclusion imposed in 
this case sends a clear message to accountants of the high standards of 
professional conduct expected of them when undertaking important roles within 
business.


“The sanction reflects the significance of the misconduct by a CFO [chief 
financial officer] and CEO of a major UK bank, and the need to promote public 
and market confidence in the accountancy profession and the quality of 
corporate reporting in this sector. Mr Tootell engaged in the FRC’s settlement 
process by accepting his misconduct, which has led to a considerable saving of 
time and cost.”


Tootell was banned by the Bank of England – along with Keith Alderson, who ran 
the Co-op’s corporate and business banking division – in January by its 
Prudential Regulation Authority. They were not found to have deliberately or 
recklessly breached the rules and the regulator did not make findings of 
dishonesty or lack of integrity.

The FRC said the Bank of England’s conclusions were “conclusive evidence of 
misconduct”.The Bank found Tootell contributed to a culture that focused on the 
short-term financial position 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/supervision/enforcementnotices/en150116a.pdf>
 (pdf) and did not adequately oversee the corporate loan book that the Co-op 
took on whenit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/21/britannia-cooperative-banks-building-societies>
merged with Britannia in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/21/britannia-cooperative-banks-building-societies>
. The period of censure covered January 2009 and May 2013.

At the height of the Co-op bank’s crisis, the then chancellor George Osborne 
announced an independent investigation into what went wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/22/co-op-bank-investigation-osborne-chairman-paul-flowers-drugs>
. The review has not yet started as the Financial Conduct Authority’s 
investigation into individuals remains ongoing. The FRC said its investigation 
into the bank’s auditors, KPMG, was also ongoing.

Co-op bank, which reported a £177m loss for the first six months of the yea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/co-operative-bank-warns-brexit-fallout-recovery-plan-threat>
r 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/co-operative-bank-warns-brexit-fallout-recovery-plan-threat>
, said the FRC’s ruling was related to the way it had operated in the past. “We 
have said before, the investigations by the regulators into what went wrong at 
the bank are very important. They indicate the extent of the previous problems 
at the bank and emphasise that the turnaround is a lengthy and difficult 
process,” the bank said.

“The findings relate to previous management and the current management team 
has, over the last three years, progressed the turnaround, having raised 
additional capital, achieved considerable de-risking, delivered mobile and 
digital banking capability and strengthened the bank’s appeal to customers.”
 