
Former Ghana coach Kwesi Appiah has revealed that some of his players kept 
their $100,000 (£61,000)World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> bonuses in their 
backpacks in the dressing room while they were playing their Group G game 
against Portugal in Brasília.

Appiah – who was relieved of his duties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/12/kwesi-appiah-ghana-leaves-post>
 as Black Stars coach earlier this month –was called to give evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/22/ghana-kwesi-appiah-world-cup-inquiry>
 at the presidential inquiry into Ghana’s disastrous World Cup campaign in 
Brazil on Thursday.

Squad members had threatened to boycott the final group stage match against 
Portugal in a dispute over unpaid player bonuses until President John Dramani 
Mahama personally intervened and arranged for $3m in cash to be flown by 
private plane to Brazil on the eve of the meeting with Portugal.

However, speaking to the Justice Dzamefe commission in Accra, Appiah admitted 
that the whole episode had contributed to his team’s eventual downfall after 
they had drawn 2-2 with Germany in their second match.

“Most of the players had their $100,000 in their backpacks. Psychologically 
that hurt the team,” he said.

“In actual fact it did affect them. There are so many factors related to 
performance. Players need to focus on the game. Everything erupted after the 
Germany game.

“I believe if the money had come early, it would have raised their morale. I 
do not know why people claim we are slow starters. We lost against the USA but 
played well and we played at a very high level against Germany.”

An award-winning US writer is planning a Hollywood thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/30/hollywood-ghana-world-cup-drama-cash-3m>
 based on Ghana’s bonus dispute and Appiah acknowledged that a breakdown in 
relations with sports minister Elvis Afriyie Ankrah had been to blame for the 
debacle.

He said: “Before we left for the final game the minister was put on speaker 
phone where they told minister if the money was not in Brasília upon arrival 
they would not train. The minister promised the money would be in Brasília and 
when they arrived and there was no money they went on strike.”

In a separate incident, former Tottenham midfielder Kevin Prince-Boateng 
allegedly came to blows with Appiah during a training session andwas eventually 
sent home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/26/kevin-prince-boateng-sulley-muntari-sent-home-ghana>
 with Milan midfielder Sulley Muntari.

“Yes there was a confrontation and exchange of words, he was using foul words 
and it wasn’t nice,” said Appiah.

“If something that happens only once then we could forget and move on but he 
kept on repeating it in front of the younger players.

“Kevin made me angry and I told him I don’t want to see him. When it happened 
he knew I was angry and so was he.

“I did not report the matter for two days to see whether he would show remorse 
but he did not. Everytime he saw me he would frown and move past me and so I 
went further to report it to management and the decision was taken to send him 
home.”

Meanwhile former Black Stars captain Stephen Appiah – who acted as an 
assistant to his namesake in Brazil – also lifted the lid on some of the 
problems surrounding the bonus payments.

He said: “I called Asamoah Gyan, Dede Ayew and Michael Essien. I told Gyan to 
convince the players and he went and had a chat with them.

“There was no training in Brasília on Tuesday morning because the players were 
tired. We had a meeting with coach Kwesi Appiah and Gyan after which we went 
individually to call the players for training in the afternoon.”
 