
Prosecutors in Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> are 
attempting to detain one of the country’s most reviled politicians, who has 
gone missing amid accusations that he misappropriated public funds.

Javier Duarte, the former governor of Veracruz state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/mexico-elections-governors-veracruz-javier-duarte>
, requested leave from his office earlier this month after the federal attorney 
general’s officeannounced that it was taking over two corruption investigations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/mexico-veracruz-javier-duarte-step-down-corruption>
 involving the outgoing governor.

Duarte and others were under investigation for illegal enrichment, 
embezzlement and breach of duty. He has consistently claimed his innocence.

The interior minister, Miguel Ángel Osorio Chong, told Radio Fórmula on 
Wednesday that officials are not sure where Duarte is, but believe he is still 
in the country.

He added that federal prosecutors were preparing an international arrest 
warrant from Interpol if Duarte is found to have left Mexico.

 “Security agencies are working to locate him,” he said.

At the weekend, incoming governor Miguel Ángel Yunes, who takes office on 1 
December, told reporters Duarte might have used a government helicopter to flee 
the gulf coast state.

Mexico elections cast light on governors – and state systems built on 
corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/mexico-elections-governors-veracruz-javier-duarte>
Duarte took office in December 2010, but soon became a political pariah amid 
soaring crime, and accusations of financial mismanagement and corruption.

During his administration, 19 journalists were killed in Veracruz, prompting 
press freedom organizations to describe the state as the most dangerous place 
for journalists to work in the hemisphere.

An exposé by the online news organization Animal Político revealed state 
officials in Veracruz had diverted some 645m pesos (£28m) into shell companies.

Other journalistic investigations have found Veracruz functionaries purchased 
properties in the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/mexico-veracruz-police-resign-arutro-bermudez-zurita-texas>
, far out of the reach of a public servant’s salary.

President Enrique Peña Nieto had previously praised Duarte an example of the 
new generation of leaders emerging in the PRI. But eventually the steady stream 
of negative press coverage prompted the PRI to suspend Duarte’s party 
privileges.

His suspension came after the party lost seven of 12 states holding 
gubernatorial elections in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/early-results-mexico-elections-ruling-party-unseated-pri>
 – including Veracruz, where the opposition ended 86 years of PRI rule in part 
by promising to imprison Duarte.

“The PRI needed to appear like it was taking measures to distance itself from 
corruption,” said journalist Javier Garza Ramos. “The case of Veracruz became 
unsustainable and Javier Duarte turned into a symbol of one of the PRI’s 
biggest liabilities, which is corruption.”




 