
The grief of losing a child made more unbearable by the knowledge that you 
decided to take them in a boat that capsized; nightmares about torture; 
depression induced by the awfulness of living in a camp, unable to go forward 
or back.

As concern mounts about the conditions faced by refugees and migrants in camps 
across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/28/greece-refugee-warehouses-not-fit-for-animals>
, andmore people die trying to reach the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/700-migrants-feared-dead-mediterranean-says-un-refugees>
, the mental health of those who have risked everything in the hope of starting 
a new life in Europe is gaining more attention.

A report <http://www.bptk.de/aktuell/einzelseite/artikel/mindestens-d.html> 
last year by the German Federal Chamber of Psychotherapists said 40%-50% of 
people arriving in Germany suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
with half also suffering from depression.


50 million years of work could be lost to anxiety and depression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/12/50-million-years-work-lost-anxiety-depression-world-health-organisation-who>
“They have nightmares or flashbacks to pictures or scenes. These memories feel 
very intense, and it is just like they are reliving the traumatising 
experience,” the report said. Other symptoms include jumpiness, sleep 
disorders, problems with concentration, and emotional numbness.

“It is shameful that people suffering with such psychological injuries do not 
get the help they need,” the report said.

Post-traumatic stress is just the tip of the iceberg. “PTSD is very important, 
but it is also the disorder that everyone jumps to, including the media. We see 
much more depression and anxiety disorders, and also, surprisingly, a lot of 
epilepsy and psychotic disorders, including schizophrenia,” said Dr Inka 
Weissbecker, global mental health and psychosocial adviser at theInternational 
Medical Corps <https://internationalmedicalcorps.org/> in Washington.

“There are huge amounts of anxiety – we see children bursting into tears when 
helicopters or airplanes fly over the camps, and we can’t understand why, until 
we realise what they’re associating it with,” said Harriet Zych, a nurse with
Doctors of the World <https://www.doctorsoftheworld.org/> who worked in Idomeni 
–site of Europe’s largest informal refugee camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/idomeni-greek-riot-police-move-in-before-dawn-to-clear-out-refugee-camp>
, on Greece’s northern border with Macedonia – before Greek police moved people 
to other locations in May.

“We came across many people in a state of collapse, whose problems turn out to 
be psychological rather than physical,” she said. “One man hit himself with a 
rock on his head until he became unconscious when he found out he couldn’t 
cross the border.”

Nikos Gionakis, a psychologist with the Athens-based mental health unit Babel 
<https://ec.europa.eu/migrant-integration/intpract/babel---day-centre-for-migrants-mental-health>
, tells the story of Hassan, 34, who fled Syria with his four children. 
“Passing from Turkey to Greece, he was forced to get into a boat by smugglers. 
Two of his kids drowned as the boat sank. He was referred to Babel because of 
depression. He blames himself for not having been able to protect his kids,” 
Gionakis said.

Mental illness one of development's 'invisible crises', says IMC expert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/03/mental-illness-one-of-developments-invisible-crises-says-imc-expert>
The UN refugee agency, the UNHCR, says <http://www.unhcr.org/463b462c4.pdf> 
mental health disorders can hinder integration into host populations, creating 
long-term problems for European countries that are accepting refugees fleeing 
from conflicts in Syria and elsewhere.


In a paper 
<http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/Appendix%201_EPA%20statement%20on%20Refugees%2020151023_sent.pdf>
 to the European commission last year, the European Psychiatric Association 
said: “Acute and long-term psychiatric care needs to be provided to all asylum 
seekers in order to avoid reaching chronic conditions of mental disorders.”

Aid workers in Greece say diagnosis, never mind treatment, is almost 
impossible in the chaosof the camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/26/athens-under-pressure-city-port-refugee-camp-tourists>
 and detention centres in southern Europe.


“You cannot say how many people are suffering from PTSD because diagnosis 
takes too long, and with such a stream of people, it is impossible. I am a 
trained psychologist with 40 years’ experience; it would take me two and a half 
hours to diagnose someone with PTSD,” said Renos Papadopoulos, director of the
Centre for Trauma, Asylum, and Refugees at Essex University, 
<http://www.essex.ac.uk/cps/research/ctar.aspx> who recently returned from 
Greece. “There is no evidence [on the prevalence of PTSD] because there cannot 
be evidence. The situation is complete chaos.”

“We don’t do diagnosis,” said Zoi Marmouri, a psychologist working for 
Médecins Sans Frontières inIdomeni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/migration-crisis-idomeni-camp-greece-macedonia-is-an-insult-to-eu-values>
. Even if diagnosis were possible, World Health Organisation (WHO)guidelines 
<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/297576/MHPSS-refugees-asylum-seekers-migrants-Europe-Multi-Agency-guidance-note.pdf?ua=1>
 stipulate that clinical treatment is not appropriate for refugees on the move.

“Therapies should not be started without assurances that there can be 
follow-up. You have the potential to retraumatise people,” said Claire Whitney, 
Middle East mental health and psychosocial support adviser at the International 
Medical Corps.

The most effective treatments for PTSD include cognitive behaviour therapy 
with a trauma focus, eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing therapy, as 
well as narrative exposure therapy. But these take time as they involve slowly 
exposing people to their trauma, while building up their capacity to deal with 
it. “It cannot be rushed,” said Whitney. “When people actually have PTSD, it is 
one of the most complex problems to treat.”

A funny thing happened on the way to the refugee camp …
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/05/a-funny-thing-happened-on-the-way-to-the-refugee-camp>
The WHO says 
<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/297576/MHPSS-refugees-asylum-seekers-migrants-Europe-Multi-Agency-guidance-note.pdf?ua=1>
 refugees and migrants needing diagnosis should be referred to existing 
non-governmental or state services. But even for those who make it into host 
communities, cost, stigma and language problems can lock them out of treatment.

“We have serious lacks in the services we can provide. If they need 
hospitalisation, there aren’t any specialised units for this,” said Gionakis.

International funds have been pledged for psychosocial support, although 
neither Britain’sDepartment for International Development 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-international-development>
 nor the EU were able to provide a full breakdown.



Some experts warn there is a risk of overdiagnosing PTSD. “They are 
distressed, yes, but is this PTSD? Often it will not be. These are instead 
normal reactions to an abnormal situation,” said Papadopoulos.

The UNHCR and other agencies say 
<https://data.unhcr.org/mediterranean/download.php?id=280> much of the 
emotional suffering experienced by refugees and migrants is directly related to 
present-day stresses and concern about the future.

“People live in very difficult and inhumane conditions here in camps that are 
too crowded. Basic needs are not met,” says Gionakis.

The UNHCR advocates “psychological first aid”, which encourages those 
interacting with refugees to respond in a culturally sensitive and humane way 
that avoids distressing people further.

“The humanitarian principle of ‘do no harm’ is a huge part of it,” said 
Whitney. “What everyone was advising, for the most part, was really to focus on 
the most basic kinds of support, which do contribute to mental health. Often, 
basic needs must be provided before people are ready – and willing – to engage 
with therapy.”

 * This article was amended on 13 June 2016 to add that Harriet Zych works for 
Doctors of the World.
 