
Fires, explosions and collapsing offshore rigs have cost the lives of more 
than 190 workers at facilities run by Mexico’s state-owned oil company since 
2009.

Yet American taxpayers have backed loans to the company worth more than $8.5bn 
during the Obama years, through an obscure agency which hasquietly spoiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/us-fossil-fuel-investment-obama-climate-change-legacy>
 the president’s record on climate change.

Since January 2009, the US Export-Import Bank has signed almost $34bn worth of 
low-interest loans and guarantees to companies and foreign governments to 
build, expand and promote fossil fuel projects abroad.

However, one company benefited more than any other. The Mexican state-owned 
oil company, Petróleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, has collected more than $8.5bn in 
taxpayer-backed loans and guarantees from the Ex-Im Bank.

Obama's dirty secret: the fossil fuel projects the US littered around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/01/obama-fossil-fuels-us-export-import-bank-energy-projects>
During this period, more than 190 Pemex workers and contractors have died and 
more than 570 were injured as a result of fires, explosions and offshore rig 
collapses, according to data compiled by Columbia University’s Graduate School 
of Journalism’s Energy and Environmental Reporting Project and Guardian US.


The Mexican oil company has also suffered at least 31 major accidents since 
2009 involving fatalities, injuries or environmental destruction and 
contamination – including a 2013 gas explosion in the company’sMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City headquarters that killed 37, a 
2015 pipeline leak that contaminated three rivers and polluted the drinking 
water for half a million people, and a 2013 chemical pipeline leak that caused 
the evacuation of more than 1,000 people.


Yet despite this questionable track record and an injury rate that has 
consistently surpassed global standards, the Export-Import Bank has provided an 
average of more than $1bn a year to Pemex in loans and guarantees.


“There’s a history of problems [with Pemex] and yet along comes the US 
Export-Import Bank, who provides financing,” said Karyn Keenan, director of 
Above Ground, an Ottawa-based human rights organization that is investigates 
overseas companies and treatment of foreign workers. “You’d think these are 
things that are in the public domain, and would cause [the bank] to do 
heightened due diligence.”


More than a quarter of all fossil fuel financing by the bank since 2009 has 
been directed toward Pemex, including a $1.3bn guarantee in 2015 for Pemex to 
purchase services from Houston-based Diamond Offshore, an offshore rig 
contractor; and a $1.3bn guarantee in 2013 that was to support the work of San 
Diego-based Solar Turbines Inc, which builds industrial-size gas turbines and 
compressors, and the UK-headquartered Noble Corporation, which builds offshore 
rigs.

Seven workers died on 1 April 2015 and another 45 were injured when, at 
4.30am, an oil rig off the coast of the Yucatán peninsula erupted in flames. It 
took16 hours 
<http://www.pemex.com/ri/finanzas/Reporte%20de%20Resultados%20no%20Dictaminados/150331_transcrip_e.pdf>
, 36 vessels and57 helicopters 
<http://www.pemex.com/en/investors/investor-tools/Presentaciones%20Archivos/PEMEX%20SPE_i_150114.pdf>
 to extinguish the blaze. The incident on the Pemex-operated Abkatún-Alpha 
platformcost 
<https://economia.terra.com.mx/incendio-en-plataforma-abkatun-cuesta-a-pemex-12-mil-mdp,5bbecf491ffe5252df4cd0313c2bf1a1vmuwRCRD.html>
 the oil company $825m, according to insurance reports.

Thirty-four days later, another Pemex offshore rig collapsed, killing two and 
injuring 10. And just seven weeks after that, on 22 June, a third offshore rig 
ignited after an oil and gas leak; in this case, no one was killed or injured.


Yet on 25 June, after this run of accidents, the Export-Import Bank renewed 
its annual financing of Pemex operations – this time for $1.5bn in US 
taxpayer-backed guarantees, which included support for the deadly complex where 
the Abkatún rig had burned, according to the bank’s environmental status 
reports.


That rig burned again eight months later, in February 2016 
<http://www.ogj.com/articles/2016/02/fire-kills-three-on-abkatun-a-platform-in-bay-of-campeche.html>
, when a compression unit on the platform ignited, killing three and injuring 
eight.


Pemex refused repeated requests for comment for this article.

The company’s “platforms have become time bombs”, said Pablo López Figueroa, 
senior mechanical engineer and president of the professional syndicate of oil 
technicians at Pemex,Unión Nacional de Técnicos y Profesionistas Petroleros 
<https://es-la.facebook.com/UNTyPP>.


“Each month we have even more uncertainty,” he said. “There are mortal 
consequences.”


Oil extraction is a dangerous industry. In the US, the industry’s fatality 
rate is seven times higher than for workers in general.


But in Mexico – where Pemex accounts for more than 95% of the country’s oil 
operations – the statistics are even worse. According to the International 
Association for Oil and Gas Producers, an industry-backed group, Mexico has 
ranked consistently worse than the international standard for injury and 
fatality rates.


In 2012, government and news accounts indicate there were at least eight 
accidents, including gas plant explosions and refinery fires, that killed 31 
and injured 52. According to the oil and gas producer trade group, Mexico’s 
rate for lost time due to injury was 14.5 times higher than the global industry 
average.


But that safety record hasn’t seemed to change the bank’s approach toward the 
company, which provided the company with $1.2bn in 2012.


Masud Hasan, environmental engineer at the Export-Import Bank, said safety is 
a primary concern when considering financing. “We review health and safety 
guidelines, spill control mechanisms, trainings – as much as physically 
possible.”


Caroline Scullin, the bank’s senior vice-president for communications, said it 
“has a solid commitment to minimizing the environmental and social impacts of 
projects with the application process and extending to asset monitoring 
throughout the life of financing”.

She added the bank’s financing of the Mexican oil company has supported 
170,000 US jobs since 2009, and that 20% of the bank’s transactions have gone 
to small businesses.


However, it is not just the company’s safety record that is in question.


•••

Locals fry fish in Sánchez Magallanes to avoid the lingering taste of oil. 
Located on northern shore of the Lagoon del Carmen, this fishing town on 
Mexico’s south-western coast was once surrounded by waters containing manta 
rays and huachinango fish.


But drilling by Pemex has spilled oil into the waters and on to the beaches, 
including 12tons 
<http://mural-guadalajara.vlex.com.mx/vid/saca-pemex-grumos-tabasco-79541141> 
in 2005, according to the Mexican government. Fishing yields dropped nearly in 
half in 2011, according toSociedades Cooperativas Acuícolas del Golfo 
<http://www.tabascohoy.com/nota/80995/se-ahogan-pescadores-por-falta-de-apoyo>, 
a fishing organization.


“You would cry if you saw what was happening here,” said Magaly Marzoa, a 
biologist affiliated with the Technological Institute of Boca del Río, who has 
been documenting the impact of Pemex’s oil activity on the marine ecosystem in 
Sánchez Magallanes.


In Tabasco’s interior, environmental groups say Pemex oil production has 
contaminated crops and drinking water.


Common reported health issues include skin lesions, respiratory problems and 
high rates of cancer diagnoses, said Leonor Ramírez Bautista, an advocate at 
the Tabasco Human Rights Committee (Codehutab <http://www.codehutab.org.mx>).


She said funds to conduct an official epidemiological study are scarce. “We 
are looking for remediation – fining the company doesn’t do any good,” she said.

Nearby in the towns of Huimanguillo and Cárdenas, Pemex is facing a class 
action lawsuit for contamination. Several environmental groups – including the 
Mexican environmental groups Fronteras Comunes and Asociación Ecológica Santo 
Tomás – filed suit in 2013, charging Pemex and state regulatory bodies for 
contributing to and then neglecting to address 40 years of oil contamination to 
the soil and water.


Coconut, corn, cacao, chili and squash farmers have seen their crop yields 
diminish over the past decade, and acid rain has contaminated the remaining 
crops. Environmental groups have spent years collecting evidence on the ground 
as well as official government reports for contamination, remediation and 
compensation.


“We try to demonstrate that this is a pattern. These are not isolated acts, 
these are a series of acts over decades,” said Ximena Ramos, an environmental 
lawyer at theMexican Center for Environmental Rights <http://www.cemda.org.mx>.


Silke Cram Heydrich, who is based at the National Autonomous University of 
Mexico 
<http://www.igeograf.unam.mx/sigg/investigacion/personal/personal.php?cual_personal=MTc=>
 and is considered an expert for herresearch 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21376445> into Mexican oil spills, 
performed an independent analysis of those documents.


“The contamination originating from pipeline oil spills has not diminished 
with time. It continues to be the reality,” she said.


Yet documenting the extent of the oil company’s environmental damage is 
difficult.


Manuel Llano, a member of the Mexican Alliance against Fracking and founder of 
CartoCrítica <http://www.cartocritica.org.mx>, has documented more than 1,000 
small- to medium-level pipeline oil spills over the past two years not 
explicitly disclosed by Pemex. His data comes from a database obtained from 
Agencia de Seguridad, Energía y Ambiente, a regulatory agency.


“In the thousands of wells that extract hydrocarbons, many have small leaks. 
The information about the state of upkeep to these wells is totally opaque … 
There is no reason for it to be that way,” he said.


Along with other environmentalists, Llano accused 
<http://www.sinembargo.mx/13-06-2015/1375782> Pemex in 2015 of illegally 
conducting fracking operations in Mexico for 12 years without permits,publishing
 <http://www.cartocritica.org.mx/2015/fracking-en-mexico/> map blueprints he 
obtained through freedom of information requests.


“For Greenpeace, Pemex is one of the most contaminating entities in Mexico and 
most opaque in the way it operates,” said Miguel Soto, of Greenpeace Mexico’s 
toxics campaign.


On 21 April 2016, 32 workers died and more than 130 were injured at the 
Pajaritos vinyl chloride plantblast 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mexico-pemex-idUSKCN0XM06K> in Veracruz. 
Greenpeace Mexico ran independent tests for contamination on site and found at 
least 59 chemicals, including carcinogens, in soil and water samples.


These findings countered government  
<http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/articulo/estados/2016/04/25/descartan-contaminacion-tras-explosion-en-pajaritos>
claims that there was no contamination.


“If we are not asking questions and doing scientific studies, do we not find 
out about it?” Soto said.


The Export-Import Bank “has requested the results/findings of Pemex’s own 
investigations following certain significant incidences”, said Scullin, the 
bank’s spokeswoman. She did not specify which incidents.


If the bank is “financing these actors, they should be careful and call out 
Pemex – especially for the more vulnerable communities that have been affected 
by the activities,” said Karen Hudlet, a researcher and representative for
Business and Human Rights Resource Center <https://business-humanrights.org/en>
, a human rights watchdog group.





•••

The US Export-Import Bank is currently unable to renew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/export-import-bank-fossil-fuel-plants-vietnam-mozambique>
 its annual financial support for Pemex.


The bank’s charter expired in July 2015, and although Congress voted 
overwhelmingly to reauthorize, the Senate has refused to hold hearings for new 
board members. The bank has only two board members, and it needs three to 
approve financial transactions exceeding $10m.


But despite the bank’s crippled state, investors are hopeful for Pemex’s 
future.


On 21 December 2013, the Mexican government officially opened the Gulf of 
Mexico to privatization when its energy reform bill became law.


Foreign oil giants, such as ExxonMobil and Chevron, had the opportunity to bid 
on 5 December 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-28/pemex-seen-attracting-oil-majors-interest-in-deepwater-jv>
 for rights to explore for oil and gas.


“Five years from now, the Mexican oil industry will be a totally different 
industry from what it is today,” said Adrían Lajous Vargas, former CEO of Pemex 
and fellow at Columbia University’s Center on Global Energy Policy.


But while the company’s financial security may be assured, safety and 
environmental oversight is not.


“Pemex has been self-regulating and basically autonomous for decades,” said 
George Baker, whose company, Energia.com, provides back-office consulting to 
investors in the Mexican oil industry.


But since the Deepwater Horizon disaster  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/20/deepwater-horizon-key-questions-answered>
 in 2010, there has been a renewed effort by the industry “to redefine what 
safety really means in offshore operations”, he said, which will only become 
more complicated with the energy reform, as private companies compete with 
Pemex for oil exploration and production.

Asaf Shalev, Michael Phillis and Elah Feder contributed to this report

The Energy and Environmental Reporting Project is supported by the Blanchette 
Hooker Rockefeller Fund, Energy Foundation, Open Society Foundations, 
Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Rockefeller Family Fund, Lorana Sullivan Foundation 
and the Tellus Mater Foundation. The funders have no involvement in or 
influence over the articles produced by project fellows in collaboration with 
Guardian US.
 