
Ten young people from Manchester mental health charity 42nd Street 
<http://42ndstreet.org.uk/> are struggling to spin their legs round their 
bodies while keeping their hands anchored to the studio floor as they’ve been 
shown. Instructor Kevin Turner stops them and explodes into his own 
demonstration of high-speed repetitions of the sequence, while they watch in 
astonishment.

“Look, my legs are all over the place,” Turner pants mid dance. “They are 
going like crazy. When I was ill, I often felt that things were happening that 
were out of my control. Can anyone else relate to that?”


Turner, 34, sits down, perspiring, among the group of young people aged 16 to 
25. Several hands go up hesitantly, and a young woman quietly says, “I can”.


Turner founded Manchester-based Company Chameleon 
<http://www.companychameleon.com/> in 2007 with his friend Anthony Missen. 
Their was aim to make hard-hitting contemporary dance exploring the reality of 
being male in greater Manchester. Turner has bipolar disorder, as does at least 
one of the youngsters in this workshop, and he has told them his diagnosis.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ab22f41bd29df2690e676c2877c967755e652d%2F0_73_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Express%20yourself%3A%20how%20a%20charity%20is%20using%20dance%20to%20improve%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Express%20yourself%3A%20how%20a%20charity%20is%20using%20dance%20to%20improve%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9ab22f41bd29df2690e676c2877c967755e652d%2F0_73_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Kevin Turner’s workshops help young people to use dance to explore their 
mental health problems. 
Three years ago, Turner was sectioned and spent more than a month in hospital 
and almost a year working his way back to the physical and mental health he 
needs to perform.

He wants the young people he’s teaching today to see that they can use dance 
to explore their own mental health problems, and the impact on the people 
around them. Most of them have never danced before, but 42nd Street is 
convinced that dance can help build trust and confidence, without the need for 
words.

Mental health social workers aren't giving up hope, nor are their service users
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/oct/05/mental-health-social-workers-hope-service-users>
Turner’s latest work, Witness 
<http://www.companychameleon.com/production/witness/>, performed by Company 
Chameleon’s five dancers, portrays his own experiences of his breakdown and the 
perspective of his friends and family. It is premiering at Plymouth University 
on 19 October, andtouring <http://www.companychameleon.com/tour-dates/> until 
the end of November. Each performance will be supplemented by a workshop with 
schools, colleges and youth groups.

Sitting in his baggy trousers and T-shirt, this “lad” from Stretford, is 
clearly in control of himself and is a powerful image of hope for the young 
people he teaches. His demonstration was not some kind of ego trip, but to help 
them tap into the shared emotions of breakdown and give them the confidence to 
use their bodies to tell their own stories. They start by using exercises, 
sections from Witness and their own moves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74b7ada5d5c203a5047de428cec4b48f1a3b9073%2F0_75_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Express%20yourself%3A%20how%20a%20charity%20is%20using%20dance%20to%20improve%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Express%20yourself%3A%20how%20a%20charity%20is%20using%20dance%20to%20improve%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fcharity-dance-mental-health-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74b7ada5d5c203a5047de428cec4b48f1a3b9073%2F0_75_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Turner and mental health charity 42nd Street believe dance can build trust and 
confidence. 
“Where dance is different from simply doing exercise – which of course makes 
you feel good because of the endorphins – is that it helps you to use the 
physical to experience your internal world,” says Turner.


He believes his own mental health problems started when he was a teenager, but 
he did not recognise depression and tried to ignore it until it was no longer 
possible.

Dancing helped him handle the pain of his parents’ divorce from the age of 
eight, when he became a member of the Trafford YouthDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> Theatre. He argues that young people 
need to be aware of how creative movement can support good mental health.

There is nothing fluffy about this. Dance work like this should be recognised 
as a pre-crisis intervention
Simone Spray 
Recent figures suggest that last year, nearly a quarter of a million children 
and young people were in contact with mental health services for issues such as 
anxiety, depression and eating disorders. But research also shows that28% of 
children referred for support in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/28/nhs-turning-away-children-referred-for-mental-health-help>
 – including some who had attempted suicide – received no help in 2015.

The number of referrals to 42nd Street is high. The charity, which has been 
running for almost four decades, is commissioned by the NHS to provide mental 
health support, including counselling, to young people across Manchester. 
However, advisers are having to tell suicidal young people they will have to 
wait more than four months for one-to-one support.


“It’s not something we are happy about,” says chief executive Simone Spray. 
She also worries about the short length of therapy, when it does happen, 
leaving young people without support before they are properly well. The 
charity’s solution is to invest heavily in the arts – including the newHorsfall 
Centre for performance <http://42ndstreet.org.uk/news/press-release/>, opening 
in December – to give young people what Spray calls “wrap-around support”.


Mental health services won't help children in temporary care settings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/aug/02/children-mental-health-services-state-care>
Spray says: “There is nothing fluffy about this. Dance work like this should 
be recognised as a pre-crisis intervention, because it has such a positive 
impact on some young people.” In her view, it can prevent them needing to 
access therapy at all, or at least keep them feeling better until more formal 
help is available.


The young people in Turner’s workshop seem relaxed and focused. Kelly (not her 
real name) has bipolar disorder and was initially afraid she would not be able 
to do the exercises, but now she is beaming and keen to continue. “This has 
really drawn me in. At first I thought OMG! But now I’d like to do it again. 
People see bipolar as a joke, but Kevin has shared what happened to him and 
it’s helped us express the way we feel.”

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In Australia, the 
crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan 
be found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

 