Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyudgy30Dd68%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyudgy30Dd68%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyudgy30Dd68%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Rumour Said Fire By the Shore <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h-fWna_aJ3c> 
Jasper Lidang grew up in remote northern Denmark filling long childhood hours 
by intercutting his dad's Paul Simon records with Nirvana and the Cure. This, 
from his band's debut, is touched by the deep drama and exquisite melancholy of 
the Bee Gees' finest late-60s chamber-pop.Rob Fitzpatrick 

Judy Garland Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas My eternal festive fave. 
To experience its full weepy impact, it should only be heard while watching the 
film that popularised it, Meet Me in St Louis.Caroline Sullivan 

Spiro The City and the Stars Systems music meets folk, courtesy of the Bristol 
instrumental quartet who manage to combine complex arrangements with emotion 
and attack. This is on their forthcoming album Kaleidophonica, released in the 
New Year.Robin Denselow 

Lana del Rey Born to Die <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGR1iDuKabU> 
Following up a debut single as strong as Video Games was always going to be 
tricky, but this string- soaked, beat-driven slice of melodious miserablism is 
even better. Her star will surely shine in 2012. Chris Salmon 

Kate Bush Snowflake <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEWMYfcg1o8> The 50 Words 
for Snow opener takes me back to Wuthering Heights. Not because the songs are 
similar, but the feel: windswept Haworth moors, and beautiful desolation.Dave 
Simpson

Adam and the Ants Whip in My Valise 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6rD2fAS3QDw> I saw Adam Ant live for the first 
time this weekend. He was, I'm delighted to report, magnificent: never more so 
than when performing this 1979 B-side, a brutal, feedback-laden paean to S&M 
from the dark, filthy, pre-fame Ants.Alexis Petridis 

Nicki Minaj Roman in Moscow 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?annotation_id=annotation_351266&src_vid=oLLpdEcGocE&v=AZVelDei8vM&feature=iv>
The first track to emerge from the second album of Minaj(pictured) suggests a 
return to the harder edge that defined her earlier stuff, as well as her 
incredible verse on Kanye's Monster. It's not very likely that it will be 
covered by a couple of six-year-old girls from Essex on YouTube, but that's no 
bad thing.Rebecca Nicholson 

The Ghost When You're Dead <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V1Eoh95L1TQ> 
Spinning random old vinyl the other day turned up this berserk prog-psych 
single from 1970 – a staple of my late-80s mixtapes – on a compilation from the 
Bam Caruso label. It starts cheerily – "So, now you're dead" – and it never 
gets any less odd, building to a properly unhinged last 40 seconds.Michael Hann
 