
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is starting to 
bypass adblockers on its desktop website, in the company’s first major foray 
into the war between advertisers and those who would see an internet without 
any advertising at all.

Between them, Facebook and Google control an astonishing 64% 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-22/google-and-facebook-lead-digital-ad-industry-to-revenue-record>
 of the digital advertising market, but that doesn’t mean the two companies are 
immune to the prevailing trend, which has seen usage of adblockersdouble in 
just over two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users>.

But their approaches to the problem has been very different. Google has become 
the key member of the “acceptable ads” programme run by Adblock Plus, the 
leading desktop adblocker. That programme allows selected adverts through its 
mesh provided they are unintrusive and technically secure – and provided the 
advertiser (if they’re above a certain size) pays Adblock Plus a cut of the 
revenue. That has seen the programme branded “extortion” by some, including 
German publishers Zeit Online GmbH and Handelsblatt GmbH,who lost a court case 
<https://pagefair.com/blog/2015/german-court-clears-adblock-plus-of-extortion-charge/>
 on just that claim.

In Britain, culture secretary John Whittingdale described adblocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
 as a “modern-day protection racket”, widely interpreted as a reference to the 
Adblock Plus whitelist.

In its blogpost announcing the change 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/08/a-new-way-to-control-the-ads-you-see-on-facebook-and-an-update-on-ad-blocking/>
, Facebook also made a sideswipe at the acceptable ads programme. “Some 
adblocking companies accept money in exchange for showing ads that they 
previously blocked – a practice that is at best confusing to people and that 
reduces the funding needed to support the journalism and other free services 
that we enjoy on the web,” wrote Andrew Bosworth, the company’s advertising 
head.

“Facebook is one of those free services, and ads support our mission of giving 
people the power to share and making the world more open and connected. Rather 
than paying adblocking companies to unblock the ads we show – as some of these 
companies have invited us to do in the past – we’re putting control in people’s 
hands with our updated ad preferences and our other advertising controls.”

The company will only be bypassing adblockers on the desktop version of its 
website for now, meaning users of mobile adblockers will continue to experience 
an ad-free version. But the vast majority of Facebook’s mobile users use the 
company’s apps, which are largely immune to adblockers.

The new controls allow users to manually remove certain preferences from their 
Facebook profile, ensuring that, for instance, they can opt-out of adverts on 
catseven if the site has profiled them as being a cat lover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/08/cat-people-versus-dog-people-facebook-study>
. Users can also now manually opt-out of certain customer lists, ensuring that 
“liking” a page doesn’t saddle you with adverts from that firm forever.

Facebook hopes that those new controls will sweeten the bitter pill for former 
adblocking users. But the company, which hasn’t disclosed how it will be 
bypassing the adblockers’ technology, is likely to find itself embroiled in an 
arms race with adblocking firms themselves.

Adblock Plus suggested as much 
<https://adblockplus.org/blog/oh-well-looks-like-facebook-just-got-all-anti-user>
 in its response to the announcement, saying that Facebook’s decision was “an 
unfortunate move, because it takes a dark path against user choice”.

The firm’s founder, Till Faida, added that “circumvention of adblockers 
happens every day: since the invention of spam filters, spammers have always 
tried to work around them. So far I haven’t seen anything that was hard to 
tackle.”

Adblock Plus also hit back at Facebook where it hurts: the company’s bottom 
line. “It’s hard to imagine Facebook or the brands that are being advertised on 
its site getting any sort of value for their ad dollar here: publishers (like 
Facebook) alienate their audience and advertisers (the brands) allow their 
cherished brand name to be shoved down people’s throats.”

That assessment has come on a bad day for Facebook’s own ad business, with 
Proctor and Gamble, the world’s biggest advertiser, announcing plans to scale 
back Facebook adverts that target specific customers.

“We targeted too much and we went too narrow,” the company’s head of marketing 
told the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/p-g-to-scale-back-targeted-facebook-ads-1470760949>
, “and now we’re looking at: What is the best way to get the most reach but 
also the right precision?”

P&G won’t yet scale back overall spending on Facebook, but will instead switch 
to the company’s more traditional display adverts, and only use targeted 
adverts when it makes total sense – for instance, baby products for expecting 
mothers.
 