
So, what happens to candle carriers through four coming years of darkness? 
Some distraught warriors – sayOwen Jones in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/trump-win-bigotry-authoritarian-america>
 – call for a “non-violent war of political attrition” against this “would-be 
tyrant … this billionaire plutocrat charlatan” called Donald. But if that seems 
a touch hyperactive, you can always use cash to underwrite truth.

Manhattan’s favourite Brummie comedian, John Oliver, made that precise 
connection as he contemplated the Trump hegemony last week. Fight back against 
fake news by subscribing (and boosting) real news sources. Donate to 
ProPublica, the investigative unit of American first choice. Pay good money for 
theNew York Times, Washington Post and other key barriers along Breitbart Way. 
Don’t just sit there and moan. Put your hands in your pockets.

And – very happily – many readers and viewers seem to have heeded Oliver’s 
call. ProPublica donations suddenly multiplied 10 times over. “The Oliver show 
took us to a different level,” said its president. TheNew York Times has added 
a stonking 41,000 subs since election day. The Atlantic, Mother Jones and the
Guardian in the US felt the same surge. If Trump’s election, in a perverse way, 
is good for the media as a whole, because fascination-cum-obsession drives 
audiences, so hard questioning of the Trump phenomenon may carry an added bonus.

But pause for a second, before the long march gathers too much speed. The 
numbers telling pollsters they didn’t trust Trump before polling day included 
many who then, statistically, went for him when they had to decide. (Of the 67% 
of white women who didn’t revere him, some 53% backed Trump nonetheless.) In 
short, lack of trust was no bust. It wasn’t necessarily the case that those 
consuming fake social media news were oblivious to the “real Trump”. Millions 
knew, but wanted a change more than they didn’t want the candidate.

And though the eruptions over Facebook are significant, they’re surely only 
part of the story of Clinton’s defeat as, last week, Democrats put lack of a 
coherent economic policy top of their own inquest list. Just because the 
pollsters and pundits got it wrong a fortnight ago doesn’t automatically mean 
they’ve got it right now.

Beyond that, too, there’s the question of what kind of coverage – worldwide as 
well as American – can catch the mood in a world where “post-truth” is Oxford 
Dictionaries’ word of the year. The stock response from most press websites, 
after a first sniff of disdain, centres on the greater professionalism and 
resources deployed by newspapers and their allied sites. You know it’s right 
because we’re telling you so. This must, therefore, be the sword of truth for 
future usage too.

But how does that fit with the coverage we saw during the campaign, which 
almost inevitably became more partisan as the weeks of bile flowed by? Trump 
got plenty of attention. Clinton often seemed an afterthought. But the weight 
of such attention was hugely negative. Remember: pro-Democrat endorsements in 
editorial columns ran 27:1.

Of course booming editorials didn’t work. Maybe Facebook marginally tipped 
some things another way, but why should journalism, roaring furiously just as 
it did before 8 November, yield a different basic result? TheWashington Post, 
for one, couldn’t have launched a more deadly series of salvoes against 
Candidate Trump; even theDaily Mail might have envied its visceral hostility.

But who wants four more years of the same in a war of attrition? President 
Trump will only take to Twitter and begin berating theNew York Times again, 
because when the fight is febrile and flaky, he wins. The more his term of 
office seems like his campaign, the better for him.

There’s a danger for journalism itself here. Thousands of newspapers around 
the world will be told (often by their readers) to “give Trump a chance”. 
Loyal, often cautious, conformism will mute American anger, as it did through 
the George W years. But the kind of funding push John Oliver wants also risks 
exactly the kind of hyperbolic response which suitsDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

The peril isn’t Facebook alone. It’s the generalised perception of fake news 
values everywhere you look, including in serious press coverage: the peril of 
its appearance to readers as a spreading infection. And how do you combat that?

By being forensic, detail-perfect and cool. By letting facts lead and making 
sure rhetoric follows. If democracy quivers in the shadow of Trump Tower, real 
understanding of what’s at stake is journalism’s job – a hopefully well-funded 
battle for hearts and minds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcalm-facts-will-cool-trump-triumph-fever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498598bd56982c239c07b856e68313b5e1e719ce%2F0_57_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facts%20will%20calm%20the%20fever%20of%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20triumph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcalm-facts-will-cool-trump-triumph-fever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facts%20will%20calm%20the%20fever%20of%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20triumph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fcalm-facts-will-cool-trump-triumph-fever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498598bd56982c239c07b856e68313b5e1e719ce%2F0_57_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Piers Morgan: diplomatic role? Photograph: ITV/PA 
• Piers Morgan knows Trump well. He said he would win. He’s just had a 
15-minute phone chat with the Donald (roughly the same length as Theresa). So 
frankly, who needs an ennobled Nigel when you’ve got Morgan close by in a 
breakfast TV studio? He’s cheerful, he’s cheap (or cheaper thanfree-spending 
Ukip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/17/eu-set-to-ask-ukip-group-to-repay-almost-150000-in-misspent-funds>
 anyway), the great interlocutor who voted Remain. Arise, Sir Piers?

• Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp, owner of the Wall Street Journal and the Sun, 
plus much else in between, posts a first quarter loss as overall revenues slip 
from $2.01bn to $1.97bn. Well, that’s the pain of sliding print advertising 
revenues affecting newsrooms everywhere, of course. But you can also add one 
new factor – $36m lost to “foreign exchange headwinds from a weakened British 
pound”. Ah! “EU-REKA!”, as theBun might say. It’s an odd headwind that blows 
nobody any good.
 