
Four more Australian athletes including Olympic swim star Cate Campbell and 
world champion slalom canoeist Jessica Fox have had their confidential medical 
informationleaked by cyber espionage group Fancy Bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada-hacking-scandal>.


The information released includes details of therapeutic use exemptions or 
TUEs, which allow athletes to use certain prohibited substances under strict 
rules to treat legitimate medical conditions.


The records are the fifth batch published by the Russian hackers who stole 
them from the World Anti-Doping Agency’s data storage system.


Bradley Wiggins’ former doctor questions use of banned steroid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-former-doctor-questions-use-banned-steroid>
Queensland swimmers Madison Wilson and Taylor McKeown are the other two 
Australians among 41 international athletes whose details are the latest to be 
circulated from Canada, Croatia, Denmark, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, 
Serbia, South Africa, Switzerland, Sweden and the US.


The release has been quickly condemned by the Australian Sports Anti-Doping 
Authority which rejects any suggestion of wrongdoing by the athletes.


“Before being granted, TUE applications are assessed by a number of medical 
experts through a rigorous process,” the body said in a statement issued on 
Saturday.


“In the cases of all four [Australian] athletes named today, this process 
determined that their medication use was both necessary for their health and 
would not give performance enhancing benefits.


“Asada again condemns the malicious attacks. The leaks are a poor attempt to 
discredit these athletes and do not show any wrong doing. Certainly, such 
exemptions do not constitute doping.”


The leaks are a poor attempt to discredit these athletes and do not show any 
wrong doing.

British Olympic star Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/mo-farah-named-fancy-bears-leak>
, who is also among the total 107 athletes who have now had their records 
leaked, said on Monday he had nothing to hide.


Other big names include Spanish tennis great Rafael Nadal, Britain’s Olympic 
golf champion Justin Rose and Tour de France champions Bradley Wiggins and 
Chris Froome along with Australian trio Kim Brennan, Jack Bobridge and 
Alexander Belonogoff.


Asada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> condemned the hackers after 
Rio rowing champion Brennan, cyclist Bobridge and rower Belonogoff featured on 
a third list of 11 athletes whose details were released earlier this month.
 