
Late at night, after sending a story to London, I often walk around the small 
neighbourhood of Delhi that has been home for nearly six years. Here, in the 
centre of this metropolis of 20 million people, the central point of this busy, 
restive region in which a quarter of the world’s population live, it is quiet.

There is the noise of traffic – this is Delhi, after all – and the barking of 
the feral dogs that own many of the narrower streets. Sometimes there is music. 
Perhaps a thudding Bollywood theme tune from a distant wedding, or even the 
discordant blare of a band. More often, it is a haunting Sufi-influencedqawwali
, or a folk tune from distant villages, played on the tinny phones of the 
late-night watchmen who sit, swathed against what passes for nocturnal chill, 
outside every other door. But otherwise there is little noise, except the 
wailing horns of the trains, down at the mainline station only a few hundred 
yards away.

It was on such trains, as well as a few multicoloured buses, that I first 
travelled across south Asia in the early 1990s. By the end of the decade, I was 
back as a reporter, fulfilling a childhood dream. Much of my time was spent in 
Afghanistan, reporting on the last years of the Taliban’s rule, driving on 
battered tracks through deserts and hills, meeting warlords in bunkers and 
clerics in ministries, covering earthquakes and skirmishes, and writing about a
little-known militant group called al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jul/13/alqaida.bookextracts>. In 
Pakistan, where I was based, I watched as the economy slumped, politicians 
squabbled and the military took power.

In India, however, I saw a boom begin to take hold. When I had first visited, 
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> was only slowly waking from 
decades of economic torpor. Factories idled, machines rusted gently. Bookshops 
were full of Marxist-Leninist tracts and Dickens. Stations doubled as 
dormitories for tens of thousands. Kolkata and other cities of the north were 
desperately poor. Rural areas, if often picturesque, were even worse. There 
were crowds, of course, but of people who did little because there was little 
for them to do.

When I returned to the country, as the Observer and the Guardian’s south Asia 
correspondent, economic growth had rendered much of it unrecognisable. In the 
cities, life was lived at a frenetic pace. When the relative quiet comes now 
for a few short night hours, it is all the more shocking against the otherwise 
constant background of deafening noise.

Much is said overseas about the emergence of a new Indian middle class. Such a 
status is defined differently outside Britain. A student in Kolkata once 
explained he was not middle class because he could not afford 30p for a cup of 
coffee in an upmarket cafe and instead paid 10p for tea on a pavement. But, 
however measured, there has still been a massive increase in wealth. This is, 
of course, badly distributed and, if there is less abject poverty,there is much 
greater inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/05/jason-burke-west-too-optimistic-about-india>
.

Good or bad? Positive or negative? Neither, or both. This is a region where 
the good and bad, the uplifting and the ugly, the old and the new do not just 
exist alongside each other, but are so enmeshed as to be indivisible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977bb107f3fc89b5b41511912b90dd9cff717f3c%2F0_51_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farewell%20to%20south%20Asia%3A%20boisterous%2C%20sometimes%20brutal%2C%20always%20extraordinary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farewell%20to%20south%20Asia%3A%20boisterous%2C%20sometimes%20brutal%2C%20always%20extraordinary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977bb107f3fc89b5b41511912b90dd9cff717f3c%2F0_51_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Jason Burke reports from Kashmir in 2010. Photograph: Jason Burke 
Whatever the boosters and marketers claim, there is still an extraordinary 
level of daily violence. This is all the more dispiriting because many of the 
major conflicts in the region – in Sri Lanka and Nepal, for example – have now 
ended while others – such as the unrest in Kashmir – have diminished markedly. 
Nor is this violence limited to the places where you expect death and 
destruction: in insurgent-hit Afghanistan, or in perennially unstable Pakistan, 
or evenBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, where street 
battles have long been an extension of politics.

For India, too, can be a brutal place. One of the first stories I covered was 
an upsurge of violence surrounding local elections in the state of West Bengal. 
I interviewed the widow of a man killed as a spy by Maoist extremists, a victim 
of a savage power struggle over power and money more than ideology. The dead 
man’s six-year-old daughter gazed at a newspaper lying on the dirt floor of 
their poor home, an image of her father’s corpse on its front page.

Then there was sexual violence. In Delhi, in December 2012, a student was 
gang-raped on a bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/12/delhi-gang-rape-death-transformed-lives>
 and later died of horrific injuries. This prompted a week or so of 
demonstrations and a slightly longer debate on the causes of the wave of such 
attacks, and the daily harassment of women, in Indian cities. It also altered 
the narrative about India around the world, much to the irritation of those for 
whom India was shining.

Then there were the continuing attacks rooted in India’s still tenacious 
social hierarchy of caste or motivated by sectarian identity. In October a
Muslim man suspected of eating beef was beaten to death by a Hindu mob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/inside-bishari-indian-village-where-mob-killed-man-for-eating-beef>
. The minister I met at the scene – only an hour’s drive from Delhi – referred 
to the incident as a “misunderstanding”. Some suggest such attacks have become 
more common since Narendra Modi, a Hindu nationalist of humble origins, took 
power after alandslide election in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/19/narendra-modi-india-election-victory-america-china-pakistan-world>
. Others say sectarian violence has always occurred but is now receiving more 
media attention. Neither possibility is very heartening.

Then there was Sri Lanka and the Maldives, each usually seen as an example of 
a “tropical paradise”. In Colombo, the wife of a journalist described his 
abduction during therepressive regime of former ruler Mahinda Rajapaksa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/08/sri-lanka-election>. At an 
adjacent table, British honeymooners ordered mojitos. If the end of the brutal 
25-year civil war was a boon for every ethnicity or faith community in the 
island nation, there are still deep problems. In Malé, the overcrowded capital 
of the Maldives, a world away from the luxury resorts, a leader of one of the 
country’s gangs described how it imported heroin and maimed competitors with 
machetes. On another visit I investigated surging support for Islamic State.

This violence seeps through much else, like monsoon rains through a poorly 
maintained roof, or the toxic polluted air of south Asian cities into a 
classroom. Power is raw and often brutally deployed here to coerce, not 
convince, or to extract, not redistribute. This is true whether its source is 
wealth, office, or birth. Depressingly, the three often go together.

Yet, for all of this, my times in south Asia have been consistently uplifting. 
I now leave more optimistic, about the region, and about our world, than when I 
arrived. In this region you are a witness to a story that is opening, growing, 
developing in a multitude of inspiring ways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff61d2b3f40af3e7aabb1098efd6889c7878425dc%2F0_0_4302_2581%2F4302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farewell%20to%20south%20Asia%3A%20boisterous%2C%20sometimes%20brutal%2C%20always%20extraordinary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farewell%20to%20south%20Asia%3A%20boisterous%2C%20sometimes%20brutal%2C%20always%20extraordinary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffarewell-to-south-asia-india-bangladesh-nepal-jason-burke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff61d2b3f40af3e7aabb1098efd6889c7878425dc%2F0_0_4302_2581%2F4302.jpg>
 The stark contrasts between rich and poor are found everywhere in Mumbai. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
One frequently asked question is: what will India or Bangladesh or any of the 
other countries of the region look like in 10 or 20 years? The assumption is 
often that all are on a journey towards life or urbanism or economy as it is in 
the west. They are not. The region continually creates its own solutions to its 
own myriad problems, and the results do not and will not resemble anything seen 
before anywhere else. But they are solutions nevertheless.

One consequence is that, rightly or wrongly, hundreds of millions of people in 
south Asia believe their lives to be happier and more comfortable than those of 
their parents. Many – indeed most – believe that life for their children will 
be better still. I only need to spend a few weeks in Europe to be reminded of 
what a difference this makes.

It was perhaps most evident in Bangladesh. Even after weeks there reporting 
one of the grimmest stories of my career – thecollapse of a factory making 
clothes for western high street stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/rana-plaza-bangladesh-one-year-on>
 in which more than a thousand workers died – it is the bustling, restless 
energy of Dhaka I remember as much as the sorrow and grief.

In Mumbai, I spent an afternoon with sex workers who, despite the horror of 
their daily lives, spoke proudly of their children’s education. In Delhi, in 
the slum where those who raped and killed the student had lived, I found a 
teenage girl studying fashion with ambitions to join her country’s 
extraordinarily successful creative elite.

And in Nepal, following two long weeks covering the terrible earthquake in 
April last year, I interviewed Mira Rai, a 25-year-old former guerrilla turned 
successful international trail runner who runs to lift her family out of 
poverty, to send a message to all other women in her conservative country and 
simply for the love of the sport. High on the flanks of Everest, the younger 
generation of Sherpa are now wealthy entrepreneurs who are taking control of 
the industry of high-altitude climbing. “We don’t carry loads. We make money 
and learn,” they told me.

And, for all its flaws, south Asia’s version of democracy remains strong. The 
increasingly repressive and populist rule of Rajapaksa in Sri Lanka was ended 
through the ballot box. In Pakistan, the 2013 general election saw the first 
peaceful democratic transfer of power by an elected government that had served 
a full term to another. I covered, on the eastern fringes of the region, 
changes in Myanmar that brought an end to isolation and, eventually, avisit 
from Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/18/burma-waits-barack-obama-expectations>
.

In India, I covered a general election in 2014 that many described as one of 
the most important polls in the country’s history. From Srinagar to Varanasi, 
from Chennai to Meerut, I followed the campaign, the personalities and the 
weeks of phased voting by hundreds of millions. I watched the results in the 
headquarters of the victorious Bharatiya Janata party, and then, story filed, 
joined the inevitable crowds.

It is among this crowd that I have lived for more than half a decade, and it 
has been part of my life for more than 20 years. It is difficult to communicate 
what joy this raucous, boisterous, impossibly chaotic assembly can bring. This 
crowd was there when I, wearing clothes more suited to a beach due to a 
confusion over timing, had tea with India’s vice-president. It was there in 
Kathmandu when I wandered a few weeks before the earthquake, and when I was 
trekking with two small children under Annapurna. It was there when drinking 
whisky with truckers in the Punjab, eating vindaloo with fishermen in Goa, 
interviewing politicians in Jaffna, talking to Tibetan refugees, arguing on TV 
news shows and it is certainly there, in one of my favourite places on the 
planet, on Juhu beach, in Mumbai, among the talking, singing, laughing 
thousands who throng the rubbish-strewn sand at weekends for a little light 
exercise and that most south Asian thing of all: an extraordinary vital 
conversation. It is a conversation in which, for six years, and more, I have 
had the huge privilege of being not just a listener, but, on occasion, a 
participant too.
 