
With the “fash pack” having descended on Sydney last week for the annual 
Mercedes Benz fashion week, the question of whether or not the press pack would 
follow was closely watched by the industry.

The week began with a bang, most major mastheads and news outlets covered the 
first two days and headlines occupied the homepages of all the major newspapers.

But then everything went back to business as usual. It was if fashion was but 
a blip on the news radar.

Now in its 20th year, the Mercedes Benz fashion week has had its teething 
problems and copped its fair share of flack but it looked to have finally come 
of age. If only its age had also helped it gain some respect and airtime among 
the old world media – but it was not to be.

Bikinis and ballgowns: Australian fashion week 2016 – a photo essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/bikinis-and-ballgowns-australian-fashion-week-2016-a-photo-essay>
Fashion is big business in Australia. The local luxury retail market alone is 
worth some$2bn in revenue  
<http://www.ibisworld.com.au/industry/luxury-retailing.html>with an annual 
growth of more than 10%. Indeed, our designers and their designs are fast 
becoming hot exports for the world’s fashion meccas. Earlier this year 
Zimmerman expanded their bricks and mortar stores in New York and the 
Australian Fashion Chamber even installed a showroom last season in Paris for a 
crop of our talents to show to buyers and editors on a global stage.

Yet the mainstream media at home has been slow, painfully so, to catch on to 
the trend. During the week, it was easier to come by coverage from 
international publications and their correspondents than it was local 
powerhouses.

The New York Times 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFldBGFLtB4/?taken-by=nytimesfashion>, 
international fashion-commerce publication theBusiness of Fashion 
<http://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/2017cruise> and a slew of Asian 
outlets 
<http://asia.be.com/fashion/streetstyle/sydney/mbfwa-37-streestyle-looks-spotted-sydney-124536.html>
 seemed to have more feet, if not photographers, on the ground than most of the 
major metropolitan mastheads in Australia. Save for some of the country’s 
weekend glossy inserts and a few online global mastheads, it is hard to come by 
fully-fledged fashion journalism among our dailies.

Bianca O’Neill sums up the general air around fashion coverage in a piece 
about the much-anticipated Oscar de la Renta show for the free street press
Fashion Journal 
<http://fashionjournal.com.au/fashion/news/oscar-de-la-renta-shows-exclusive-collection-sydney-overnight-mixed-reviews>
:

Perhaps the #feels were more about the idea that a weighty international 
designer can draw every media outlet in town out of the woodwork and yet, most 
of our amazing local designers couldn’t dream of that kind of coverage. Even 
during fashion week.

Typically, when fashion events roll around, daily papers tend to cover the 
celebrities, mishaps and misadventures rather than the creatives and their 
clothes. More emphasis is put on the who’s rather than the what’s – or in this 
case, the wares.

Little value has been associated with a serious sartorial discussion among the 
more mainstream mastheads in Australia – an oversight that has had visible 
consequences, with many Australian designers moving abroad to pursue their 
trade in past decades.Kym Ellery 
<http://www.australiaunlimited.com/design/kym-ellery-makes-her-mark-on-paris> 
is the latest local talent about to head abroad, with plans to open offices in 
Paris and New York.

Want to make a style statement while pregnant? Look to Ali Wong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/23/style-statement-pregnant-ali-wong-sloaney-standup-comedian-lycra>
The Australian Fashion Chamber was formed with the aim of keeping talent at 
home and nurturing their brands and business has been paramount to the 
continuation of the country’s rag trade.

At the beginning of fashion week, it was looking like it had paid off with 
some sparkly media coverage. But then things fizzed out again.

It was as if fashion was a new toy for the big papers, interested one minute 
and discarded the next until a hot, new edition was released at the end of the 
week.

Fashion journalism can be more than PR puff pieces. The best fashion writing 
is illuminating and entertaining and certainly goes far for local industry.

But as for its future in Australia, well that remains up in the air among the 
stage lights and house music showtunes.

 