
A US consular official was shot in Guadalajara, Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, on Friday night, prompting the FBI 
to offer a $20,000 reward for information that leads to identifying the suspect.

On Saturday morning, Mexico’s federal attorney general’s office said in a 
statement that it was working with the US embassy “to find the those 
responsible for this unfortunate event”. It added that sate and federal 
authorities had been assigned to protect the victim, who is in a stable 
condition.

A consulate spokesperson told the Guardian: “We are working closely with 
Mexican law enforcement in this matter. The FBI is offering a $20,000 reward 
for information leading to the identification of the shooter. Due to privacy 
considerations we have no additional information to share at this time.”

Guadalajara’s El Informador newspaper reported that the victim, not named in 
the report or by the consulate, was being treated at a local hospital for a 
gunshot wound in the upper chest.

CCTV footage released by the consulate showed a well-built, light-skinned man 
in gym clothes paying at a machine for a parking ticket at 6.16pm. He was 
immediately followed by a man in a purple T-shirt.

A second video shows the man in purple loitering by the car park exit before 
pulling out a pistol, firing once and running away.

“The FBI offers a reward of $20,000 for information that leads to the 
identification of the subject who shot a United States consular official today 
in Guadalajara,” the consulate said in a statement.

“Please call the United States embassy in Mexico City if you recognise him at 
(01-55)5080-2000.”

A source within the Guadalajara police force, who asked not to be identified 
because he was not authorised to publicly discuss the case, said the victim was 
31-year-old Christoper Nolan Ashcraft. The source said authorities found Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA) credentials in his name and that he was 
driving a black Honda Fit when he was shot as he left the city’s Plaza Sania 
mall.

A LinkedIn profile  <https://www.linkedin.com/in/christopherashcraft>for 
Christopher Ashcraft identifies him as a foreign service officer at the US 
Department of State stationed in Guadalajara since June 2015. The profile 
features a photo that closely resembles the man in the video, but the US 
consulate declined to comment about the victim’s identity or position.

The police source said he suspected the shooter was a professional killer. 
“That’s not an easy shot,” he said. “He was probably aiming for the head but he 
missed as he leaned over to put his ticket in the machine.”

The case echoes the murder of the DEA agent Enrique “Kiki” Camarena, who was 
abducted outside the US consulate in Guadalajara in February 1985. Camarena was 
tortured for days at a nearby safe house and his body was found alongside that 
of his pilot Alfredo Zavala in a remote rural area the next month.

That killing exacerbated tensions between the US and Mexican governments and 
sparked the biggest investigation in the history of the DEA. The campaign led 
to the breakup of the Guadalajara cartel, Mexico’s dominant drug trafficking 
organisation at the time.

The US state department has issued a travel warning to Americans for Jalisco, 
the western state where Guadalajara, Mexico’s second-largest city, is located. 
Citing “continued instability 
<https://travel.state.gov/content/passports/en/alertswarnings/mexico-travel-warning.html>
”, the department prohibits government officials from “intercity travel after 
hours” and from using certain highways or stopping in specific towns.
US Consulate Gdl (@USCGGuadalajara) 
1/3 El FBI ofrece una recompensa de $20,000 dólares por información que lleve 
a la identificación del sujeto que disparóhttps://t.co/hazfD53Dkw 
<https://t.co/hazfD53Dkw>
 <https://twitter.com/USCGGuadalajara/status/817754903544115200> January 7, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/USCGGuadalajara/status/817754903544115200>  