
Hillary Clinton lost her bid for the White House, and the National Rifle 
Association’s 2016 championDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is almost certain to leave 
firearm regulations alone. But America’s appetite for guns is more voracious 
than ever.

The FBI’s National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) processed 
more background checks for gun transactions onBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> – 185,713 in total – than 
on any single day since the system launched nearly two decades ago, an agency 
spokesperson told the Trace.

The total on 25 November just barely broke the record set on last year’s Black 
Friday, when theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> processed 185,345 
checks.

'Our moment to go on offense': NRA makes big plans for Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/nra-gun-control-donald-trump-republicans>
There is no single database of gun purchases, so NICS is considered the best 
available proxy of sales.

Retail sales traditionally spike the Friday after Thanksgiving as shoppers 
rush to begin the holiday gift-giving season, often drawn in by special 
discounts. Gun sales have been lifted by the same tide in the past –four of the 
top 10 busiest days 
<https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/nics_firearm_checks_top_10_highest_days_weeks.pdf/view>
 for NICS were Black Fridays, including the most recent Black Friday (four more 
of the top 10 highest-volume days came in the week immediately following the 
2012 Sandy Hook elementary school shooting).

But the new record-breaking day for background checks defied expectations. 
Last week, a spokesman for the FBI told the Trace that the bureau projected the 
number of checks on 25 November would fall to 180,500, a decrease of more than 
5,000 over the past year.

Gun industry sources 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/21/trump-win-sinks-gun-stocks-and-gun-shop-sales/> 
predicted a similar sales slump after Trump’s surprise election victory. For 
more than a year before the election, gun sales were buoyed by several mass 
shootings and the threat of a Clinton presidency. Gun buyers had plenty of 
reason to expect new regulations would soon make it harder to buy exactly the 
weapons they wanted. For18 consecutive months 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2016/11/02/october-gun-sales-see-massive-spike-set-yet-another-record.html>
, NICS charted monthly records for total checks.

Bryan Bryner, owner of the Phoenix Tactical gun shop in Arizona, told USA Today
 <http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2016/11/22/94251768/> that had 
Clinton won, he “would have been out of everything” by Black Friday.

When Trump triumphed, aided by more than $30m 
<https://www.thetrace.org/2016/11/nra-big-bets-election-2016-results/> in 
campaign spending by the NRA, the perceived threat to gun rights posed by 
Clinton evaporated. Without that threat, industry analysts expected the wave of 
panic buying to finally break. Since 8 November, shares of the country’s two 
publicly traded gun companies – Smith & Wesson and Sturm, Ruger & Co – fell by 
16% and 18%, respectively.

“Naturally with the Trump victory, such consumer fears would subside, so there 
will likely be no near-term demand surge any time soon for firearms,” financial 
analyst Rommel Dionisio of Wunderlich Securitiestold the Street 
<https://www.thestreet.com/story/13886681/1/gun-stocks-plunge-following-trump-victory.html>
.

The latest FBI statistics suggest that sales volume hasn’t collapsed at all. 
Sales are continuing apace, even when guns such as the AR-15s often used in 
mass shootings and targeted byproposed assault weapon bans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/smith-wesson-massachusetts-assault-rifles-ban-contribution>
 will be freely available for the foreseeable future. They’re surging even 
though there hasn’t been a high-profile rampage shooting or terror attack in 
months.

Smith & Wesson gives $500,000 to fight Massachusetts assault rifle ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/smith-wesson-massachusetts-assault-rifles-ban-contribution>
There are reports that unconventional buyers have buoyed gun sales after 
Trump’s victory.NBC News found 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/trump-s-victory-has-fearful-minorities-buying-guns-n686881?cid=sm_tw>
 some gun store owners saw a surge in African American customers after the 
election, fearing for their own protection out of a belief that Trump’s victory 
will embolden racists to attack minorities.

But there may be a more prosaic reason for the surging background checks: gun 
stores were trying to move excess inventory they had stocked in anticipation of 
a Clinton win. Rick Friedman, co-owner of RTSP, a gun shop and range in 
Randolph, New Jersey,told reporters 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/25/news/black-friday-gun-sales/> his store had 
accumulated eight to 12 months of stock. On Black Friday, his store offered 
steep discounts on guns, ammunition and accessories.

“We were gearing up for a much different result,” he said.

This article was published in partnership with the Trace 
<https://www.thetrace.org/2016/11/black-friday-fbi-background-checks-breaks-record/>
, an independent, not-for-profit news organization dedicated to coverage of 
guns in the United States
 