
The maximum compensation someone can receive if an investment company goes 
bust could be increased from its current £50,000 to as much as £1m, the UK’s 
main financial watchdog has suggested.

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said a rethink of the official 
compensation scheme relating to financial firms may be needed followingthe new 
freedoms on pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/28/savers-withdraw-6bn-retirement-funds-pension-reforms>
 introduced in 2015.

These have seen many older people turn their backs on annuities – products 
that provide a retirement income for life – in favour of investment products 
such as income drawdown.

Related: Annuities v drawdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/feb/15/annuities-drawdown-key-facts> 

Currently, if an annuity firm fails the saver will receive compensation of 
100% of their loss however much it is, but protection on income drawdown is 
capped at £50,000.

But the FCA also warned that higher protection limits could increase the risk 
of the scheme’s costs becoming “unsustainable,” and might also encourage 
consumers and firms to take greater risks with their and other people’s money.


The regulator has unveiled a wide-ranging review 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-launches-consultation-changes-its-fscs-rules-and-invites-discussion-future>
 of the way the financial services compensation scheme (FSCS) works, and has 
set out a number of ideas for changing the way it is funded and the protection 
it offers.


The FSCS is the official safety net for customers of banks, insurers, fund 
managers and other financial firms that go out of business, and has paid out 
more than £26bn to more than 4.5 million consumers since it was set up in 2001. 
In 2015-16 it paid out £271m in compensation.


At the moment the maximum FSCS compensation relating to investments is £50,000 
per person per firm, but in a case where someone had an annuity, the FSCS limit 
for long-term insurance would apply, which means they would be virtually 
guaranteed to get all their money back if the company providing it was to fail.


During the period July 2015 to March 2016, annuities accounted for less than 
14% of the total number of pension pots that people accessed for the first time 
in order to take an income or withdraw the money. Instead, many more people 
have been investing their pension cash in drawdown products, which allow them 
to take out regular amounts of money while the majority of their savings remain 
invested.


The FCA said it was seeking views on various possible options to deal with 
this, ranging from doing nothing to lifting the £50,000 limit to £75,000, 
£100,000, £150,000 or even £1m.


It added that FSCS data on pension plans for the period 2010 to 2014 showed 
there were only six claims out of a total of 52,000 that exceeded £1m. 
“Therefore, a £1m limit would have provided virtually 100% protection in that 
period,” stated the report.


It added: “With only the lower compensation limit in place, pensioners could 
potentially be placed in financial difficulty with little or no chance to 
replenish their savings. At the same time, any increase in the limits implies a 
potential increase in levies.”


A consultation is already taking place on plans to increase the maximum FSCS 
compensation for people with money in savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/21/fscs-protection-revised-back-to-85000-bank-of-england-brexit>
 accounts from £75,000 to £85,000 from 30 January 2017.

 