
Ours is an age of casual labour. More than a fifth of workers in Britain, 7.1 
million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
, scrape by on temporary, casual or zero-hours contracts, or in what employers 
often euphemistically describe as “self-employment”. That number has risen by 
two million people in the past 10 years. It covers everyone from cleaners to 
carers, baristas touniversity teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/universities-accused-of-importing-sports-direct-model-for-lecturers-pay>
, and many others besides. Women, people of colour and immigrants are 
disproportionately represented in their ranks. They are among the lowest-paid 
people in the workforce.

On their own, casual workers are powerless. Employers and recruitment agencies 
can simply get rid of those who speak out, or refuse to rehire them when their 
contracts end. The fear of benefit sanctions and Jobcentre Plus are potent 
tools to keep people in line. Pit one agency worker against the agency, and the 
agency will win every time.

I’ll tell Theresa May what’s wrong with modern work | Matthew Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/i-tell-theresa-may-working-lives-review-modern-employment-zero-hours-flexibility>
If these workers want to reverse the trend of temporary work and casual 
contracts they need to organise. In large numbers, casual workers can have some 
power, and some protection from their employers. Pit hundreds of agency workers 
against the agency, and they will have some chance of success.

This is easier said than done. Unions have always struggled to organise people 
on temporary contracts. People enter and leave the industry before organisers 
can get hold of them. Even when casual staff do join a union they often leave 
the job and are replaced by someone without any knowledge of the union – and 
the whole process has to start anew.

Nor are all unions of casual and temporary workers successful. When 
unemployment is high, and workers’ protections are low, there is always the 
risk that employers will drop a unionised workforce – however productive and 
skilled – in favour of what they see as more pliable, non-union replacements.

So how do casual staff organise in these conditions, when the threat of 
unemployment is very real and the prospects for success are uncertain?

We need a double strategy. First, casual workers must get together, talk about 
their problems, and then think about solutions. If they do not feel that they 
have some control over how and what they fight for, they will not organise.

Second, unions must take an active role. Organising campaigns need to start in 
all the industries that employ precarious workers. We need leaflets, social 
media campaigns, articles and letters in newspapers across the political 
spectrum (likethe recent ones in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/series/the-new-world-of-work>), drawing 
attention to the plight of the casualised many. Full-timers and union members 
need to show solidarity with them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fzero-hours-contracts-temporary-work-fight-organised-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F028cdcc76f251ac768aa1d59d042f832d791556f%2F0_18_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fed%20up%20with%20zero-hours%20contracts%20and%20temporary%20work%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20what%20to%20do%20%7C%20Steven%20Parfitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fzero-hours-contracts-temporary-work-fight-organised-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fed%20up%20with%20zero-hours%20contracts%20and%20temporary%20work%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20what%20to%20do%20%7C%20Steven%20Parfitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fzero-hours-contracts-temporary-work-fight-organised-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F028cdcc76f251ac768aa1d59d042f832d791556f%2F0_18_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘In some industries, casual workers can take the first step.’ Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Both parts must work in tandem. Casual workers are often reluctant to speak 
out in case they lose their jobs. Unions can give them the legal and other 
protections that they need to do so, and would not have access to on their own. 
Unions need to listen to what casual workers want, and what they think is 
important, otherwise unions run the risk of treating them as charity cases and 
not as people who just need a little help to represent and fight for themselves.

In some industries, casual workers can take the first step. University 
teachers, as I know from personal experience withcolleagues at the University 
of Nottingham <https://nottinghamparttimeteachers.wordpress.com/>, can meet 
relatively easily. In other industries – think Sports Direct – there are 
immediate dangers for casual workers who want to band together. Unions need to 
play a proactive role in organising and defending them.

To do this we can learn from American examples. Part-time teachers at 
universities fromPennsylvania 
<https://theunionedge.com/labor-intensive-the-historic-organizing-campaign-of-pitt-faculty-and-grad-students/>
 toConnecticut <http://uconngradunion.org/> and Oregon <http://gtff3544.net/> 
have successfully organised themselves. Large unions, including the United Auto 
Workers and the United Steelworkers of America, have then stepped in to help. 
In some cases, this has led to pay increases, and to the recognition of 
postgraduate teachers as employees and not just as students.

In the gig economy, recruitment agencies are the gangmasters | Faiza Shaheen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/gig-economy-recruitment-agencies-employment-rights>
The Service Employees International Union and other groups helped fast-food 
workers in New Yorkto go on strike in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/30/fast-food-strike-new-york> for 
higher pay, better conditions and union rights. Four years on, that strike has 
snowballed into theFight for $15 <http://fightfor15.org/about-us/>, a movement 
of low-paid workers across the country. Their campaign for a $15-an-hour 
minimum wage has won victory after victory. Cities such as Seattle and 
Pittsburgh, and states of the size of New York and California, have committed 
to a $15 minimum hourly wage over the next five years.

British unions are catching up. The University and College Union has stepped 
up its anti-casualisation campaign, with its latestday of national action last 
week 
<https://www.ucu.org.uk/article/8534/UCU-day-of-action-against-precarious-work---24-November-2016>
. The Bakers’ Union leads acampaign for fast-food workers 
<http://www.bfawu.org/campaigns> in the UK. Other unions are doing the same in 
other industries, such asUnite at Sports Direct 
<http://www.unitetheunion.org/campaigning/support-sports-direct-workers---sign-our-petition/>
. The double strategy that has worked in the USA can work here too.

Balls are in motion. We need more of them, and we need them to go faster. 
Casual workers cannot wait for the next general election, the next Labour 
government, or some other political solution. We don’t need to wait either. We 
can organise now, agitate now, and with luck and hard work, we can win now too.

• Steven Parfitt is helping the Trades Union Congress Library to organise a 
public exhibition about the shared history of the British and American labour 
movements. It will tour US and UK institutions from 2017: contact TUC librarian 
Jeff Howarth via j.howarth@londonmet.ac.uk for more information
 