
With over 200 million women and girls affected around the world 
<http://data.unicef.org/topic/child-protection/female-genital-mutilation-and-cutting/>
, ending female genital mutilation (FGM) takes enormous dedication, 
perseverance – and funding. In 2013, the UK Department for International 
Development’spledge of £35m 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-to-help-end-female-genital-mutilation> 
on the African continent was the largest amount to date by any individual donor 
to end FGM. However, it is unclear how much of this is reaching those activists 
who are leading social change efforts on the frontline.


UK government's pledge of £35m to end FGM is dwarfed by $34bn from the US to 
tackle Aids

I started campaigning on the issue in the early 1990s, along with a brilliant 
founder of the movement to end FGM, the lateEfua Dorkenoo OBE 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/28/health/efua-dorkenoo-dies-at-65-key-foe-of-genital-cutting.html?_r=0>
 and since then, although funding has increased for international management 
and evaluation, it has barely increased for those groups who are successfully 
ending the practice in their localities.

I met Efua first in London in a small office in Covent Garden at a time when 
she was starting to have success in changing the perception of cutting as a 
human rights violation. At her recommendation we set up an anti-FGM fund for 
African organisations, which helped support their efforts for over a decade – a 
concept which I built on when setting up theEfua Dorkenoo Fund at Donor Direct 
Action <http://donordirectaction.org/2015/02/fgmfund/>.

Efua put me in touch with women on the African continent who were slowly 
building up the grassroots anti-FGM movement. These activists had a clear 
message that change is most sustainable when it comes from local experts. Since 
then, thanks in large part to their combined efforts over many decades, as well 
as significantly increased media attention – including in this newspaper – FGM 
is no longer considered a cultural practice which girls should endure.

But funding for those women and men doing life-changing work at local level is 
still minuscule. The UK’s much-needed £35 million is dwarfed for example by the
$34 billion pledged by the US administration to tackle Aids 
<http://kff.org/global-health-policy/fact-sheet/u-s-federal-funding-for-hivaids-trends-over-time/>
. It is imperative too that existing funding streams do not get used up at 
international level on management and evaluation of programmes, but rather lead 
to those groups and individuals such asAgnes Pareyio in Kenya 
<http://donordirectaction.org/activists/tni/> and Hawa Aden Mohamed in Somalia 
<http://donordirectaction.org/activists/gecpd/>, who have risked their lives to 
ensure that girls at risk are protected.

Pareyio underwent the procedure as a child and has dedicated her life to 
ensure it ends in Kenya. She was known as thewomen with the wooden vagina 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/agnes-pareyio/fgm-comic-relief_b_6840338.html> 
in the 1980s when she travelled throughout the Maasai territory showing Kenyans 
the harmful physical effects of this abuse of girls and women. She received
regular death threats 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/culture/news/a999/female-genital-mutilation/> from 
people who were not used to talking about sexuality and anatomy. In 1999, Agnes 
set up theTasaru Ntomonok Initiative (TNI) 
<http://donordirectaction.org/activists/tni/>, a rescue centre for girls 
running away from FGM. Since then, it has held over two dozen reconciliation 
ceremonies where girls are reunited with their families.

Her work has paid off. Kenya is now leading the way in terms of ending FGM. 
The government is engaged and has set up ananti-FGM board 
<http://www.figo.org/news/anti-fgm-board-step-law-enforcement-kenya-0013971> 
and dedicated helpline for girls at risk. According to themost recent figures 
from the Kenyan Demographic and Health Survey 
<http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR308/FR308.pdf> the country has reduced 
prevalence from over 40% for middle-aged women to just 11% for adolescent 
girls. However, at this tipping point, local efforts are even more important 
than ever. TNI and other local organisationsneed hugely increased funding 
<http://donordirectaction.org/2015/02/fgmfund/> to be able to reduce prevalence 
in Kenya to zero.

The same year Agnes founded her organisation in Kenya, in Somalia, Hawa Aden 
Mohamed co-founded her organisation, theGalkayo Education Centre for Peace and 
Development <http://donordirectaction.org/activists/gecpd/>, having lost her 
sister who died as a result of FGM. The school teaches over 2,000 disadvantaged 
girls and helps protect girls at risk. According toUnicef, progress on ending 
FGM there 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/files/UNICEF_FGM_report_July_2013_Hi_res.pdf> is 
proving to be extremely challenging, with 97% of adolescent girls affected. 
However, a recent commitment by the Somali government atthe first ever national 
forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/somali-government-pledges-to-fight-fgm-at-first-national-forum>
 is a positive indication that things may finally be changing.

The last few years has also seen younger African-born activists join the 
growing movement around the world too. In The Gambia and US,Jaha Dukureh has 
won hearts and minds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/how-the-gambia-banned-female-genital-mutilation>
. In the UK, women such asNimco Ali 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/nimco-ali/nimco-ali-fgm-womens-equality_b_8177734.html>
,Alimatu Dimonekene <http://news.trust.org/item/20140720201748-ysowg> and Leyla 
Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/29/leyla-hussein-the-women-who-made-me>
 have done the same and helped to re-frame FGM as child abuse. It continues to 
be a perilous task, but with so much positive momentum we are getting ever 
closer to a future free from FGM. As Efua often said: “With humility and 
strength, you can achieve anything. But funding helps too.”

Jessica Neuwirth is co-founder of Donor Direct Action 
<http://www.donordirectaction.org/>, an organisation which partners with 
frontline women’s rights groups around the world. She is president of the US 
Equal Rights Amendment coalition and one of the founders of Equality Now, an 
international human rights organisation. She is a former graduate ofHarvard Law 
School, where shehas taught international women’s rights
 