
Cuban President Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro> 
said on Saturday his government would prohibit the naming of streets or public 
monuments after his brother Fidel in keeping with the former leader’s desire to 
avoid developing a personality cult.

The younger Castro told a crowd gathered to pay homage to Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/fidel-castro-ashes-cuba-funeral-procession-havana>
 in the eastern city of Santiago that the country’s National Assembly would 
pass in its next session a law fulfilling his brother’s desire that, “once 
dead, his name and likeness would never be used on institutions, streets, parks 
or other public sites, and that busts, statutes or other forms of tribute would 
never be erected”.

Three generations of Cubans united by gratitude to Fidel Castro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/cuba-fidel-castro-three-generations>
Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>, who died on 25 
November aged 90, kept his name off public sites during his time in office 
because he said he wanted to avoid the development of a cult of personality. In 
contrast, the images of his fellow revolutionary fighters Camilo Cienfuegos and 
Ernesto “Che” Guevara have become common across Cuba in the decades since their 
deaths.

Raúl Castro spoke at the end of a second massive rally in honor of Fidel as 
Cuba neared the end of its nine-day public mourning. Castro’s ashes arrived on 
Saturday afternoon in Santiago, ending a four-day journey acrossCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> that began after a rally in Havana’s 
Plaza de la Revolución.

Thousands of people welcomed the leader’s remains to shouts of “Fidel! I am 
Fidel!” Then hundreds of thousands gathered in Santiago’s Plaza de la 
Revolución on Saturday night, cheering speeches by the heads of state-run 
groups of small farmers, women, revolutionary veterans and neighborhood watch 
committee members.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsouth-american-leaders-join-cuban-mourners-to-send-off-fidel-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20American%20leaders%20join%20Cuban%20mourners%20to%20send%20off%20Fidel%20Castro%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsouth-american-leaders-join-cuban-mourners-to-send-off-fidel-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20American%20leaders%20join%20Cuban%20mourners%20to%20send%20off%20Fidel%20Castro%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fsouth-american-leaders-join-cuban-mourners-to-send-off-fidel-castro-video&media=>
South American leaders join Cuban mourners to send off Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/04/south-american-leaders-join-cuban-mourners-to-send-off-fidel-castro-video>
The event was attended by the Bolivian president, Evo Morales, Nicaraguan 
leader Daniel Ortega and Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, along with former 
Brazilian presidents Dilma Rousseff and Lula da Silva.

Castro’s ashes will be interred on Sunday morning in Santiago’s Santa Ifigenia 
cemetery, ending the official mourning period.

Mourning for Castro has reached peaks of near-religious public adulation 
across Cuba since his death, particularly in rural eastern Cuba. Huge crowds 
have been shouting his name and lining the roads to salute the funeral 
procession carrying his ashes from Havana to Santiago.
 