
El Comandante’s diplomatic pitch

Once upon a time, they say, Fidel Castro played a game of cricket. It was in 
1998, when Castro, then 71, was taking a short tour of Barbados. He and the 
prime minister of Barbados, Owen Arthur, were travelling from Bridgetown up to 
Paynes Bay on the west coast, where they were due to unveil a memorial to the 
men and women who died in the bombing of Air Cubana flight 455 22 years 
earlier. On the way they passed a cricket match. And, as the one eyewitness 
account we have put it, “suddenly, all the security cars and media were put 
into a spin as they were diverted to the cricket pitch”. Castro took up a bat
and asked Arthur to bowl to him 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/blogs/content/story/611359.html>.

Castro had played baseball in his youth, although (sad, this, for those who 
like to speculate aboutthe sliding doors of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/jun/02/andrew-strauss-ashes-england-cricket>
) the widespread rumour that he once had a try-out for the Washington Senators
is not true <http://www.snopes.com/sports/baseball/castro.asp>. Now he found he 
was utterly foxed by the bouncing ball. So he called out “Stop” and asked 
Arthur to deliver it chest-high instead. Arthur did, and Castro duly clobbered 
a cross-bat shot down the ground. Satisfied, El Comandante decided to try 
bowling. He had been a pitcher – southpaw, naturally – when he was studying at 
the University of Havana (he lost his only recorded match, 5-4, to the 
university’s business school). And much as Arthur tried to appeal to the Laws, 
Castro insisted on throwing the ball in on the full.

England’s Haseeb Hameed proves again he is a Test natural | Ali Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/20/england-haseeb-hameed-test-natural-india>
“Like his life,” our eyewitness added, “he played the game but with his 
rules.” If not exactly a natural, Castro did recognise the political value of 
cricket, and he remarked to Arthur on the way in which the West Indies team 
brought the Caribbean nations closer together. They had once played cricket in 
Cuba too, before the revolution. In the early 20th century more than 200,000 
men and women migrated there from across the Caribbean to work in the cane 
fields. And those who came from Jamaica and Barbados brought the sport with 
them. George Headley, the black Bradman, actually grew up inCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> after his family migrated from Panama, 
before they resettled again in Jamaica.

The English entrepreneur Sir Julien Cahn 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/england/content/player/10981.html>, who spent many 
millions on his hopeless infatuation with cricket, took a team to Havana in 
1928. At that point there were five teams in the city, and others playing in 
leagues around the country, in Santiago and Guantanamo. Cahn suggested that the 
local players should find a new ground, and advised they study FAH Henley’s The 
Boy’s Book of Cricket to improve their techniques. He even donated a trophy, 
the Challenge Cup, for which the teams were still playing right up into the 
1950s. After the revolution, though, baseball was adopted as one of the five 
mandatory sports taught in Cuban schools. Cricket withered.

Castro’s match in Barbados came at a time when he was looking to strengthen 
ties with the other Caribbean nations – he visited Jamaica and Grenada on that 
same trip. The Cuban government suddenly decided that there might be something 
to be gained from playing cricket after all. Tentative progress was made. A 
Cricket Commission was set up, a grassroots programme developed, and in 2002 
Cuba joined the InternationalCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket>
 Council. The trouble was that, as Castro himself had already demonstrated, 
there weren’t many on the island now who really knew how to play the game, and 
no one had access to any decent kit.

So began one of Britain’s more curious diplomatic missions. News spread from 
the British Embassy in Havana to the Foreign Office in London. And somewhere 
along the way it was decided (this best expressed in fluent mandarin) “that 
cricket’s unique valency as an individual game encased in the team ethic has 
limitless powers to create a feelgood factor in troubled communities, while 
diverting youngsters from crime and keeping them healthy”. If the project 
happened to grease the wheels of international relations with a little 
goodwill, that, no doubt, was only incidental. Funding was duly secured from UK 
Sport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-cricket-foreign-office-the-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316136f2b31e42009730a7aa89c0b7effc52a643%2F0_21_2280_1367%2F2280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20cricket%2C%20and%20a%20crackpot%20Foreign%20Office%20plan%20for%20Cuba%20%7C%20The%20Spin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-cricket-foreign-office-the-spin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%2C%20cricket%2C%20and%20a%20crackpot%20Foreign%20Office%20plan%20for%20Cuba%20%7C%20The%20Spin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffidel-castro-cricket-foreign-office-the-spin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F316136f2b31e42009730a7aa89c0b7effc52a643%2F0_21_2280_1367%2F2280.jpg>
 Ken Livingstone talks to coaches from the London Community Cricket Association 
in Havana in 2006. Photograph: Claudia Daut / Reuters/Reuters 
The British did not actually recruit a vacuum cleaner salesman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOcRnbGhQqc> to lead their team, but a former 
advertising executive named Tom Rodwell. Really. He’s written a very funny 
account of it in his bookThird Man in Havana 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B00KFEJLLU/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1>
. It was Rodwell’s understanding that the Foreign Office believed cricket would 
be a way to encourage Cuba to “link up with our West Indian former colonies, so 
that post-Castro they’ll be our friends and not patsies of the US”. Rodwell’s 
own qualifications for the job, aside from his work on the Honey Monster 
campaign for Sugar Puffs, were that he was involved with a charity called the 
London Community Cricket Association.

So it was that in 2006 Rodwell set off for Havana, equipped with a manual on 
how to umpire and a Spanish translation of the Laws. The ludicrousness of this 
struck home during his inaugural lecture at Havana Sports University when, 
after a long disquisition on fielding positions, Rodwell was confronted with 
the impossible but entirely logical question “If there’s a third man, then 
where is the first man and the second man”? His teachings were soon put to the 
test in a match between Guantanamo and Havana on the local baseball diamond. 
This was played on a matting wicket which, no joke, the Foreign Office had 
arranged to be flown in from South Africa in the diplomatic bag.

Inevitably, there was a dispute over an lbw. One of Havana’s batsmen refused 
to leave the field after being struck on the pads. It was settled, in the end, 
by the national director of recreation, José Cedeño, who reminded the players 
of Castro’s dictum that “the Revolution must concentrate on sport. Youngsters 
of outstanding talent will be plucked from the masses and will be given the 
best training. On the front line of sport the Revolution will advance. 
Fatherland or death! We will win!” Rodwell understood this to mean that the 
batsman was out.

Cedeño’s wasn’t the only bit of grandstanding the players had to endure. A 
later game was gatecrashed by Ken Livingstone 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/11/04/AR2006110400917.html>
, who was making a stopover on his way to Venezuela to sign a trade deal. Hugo 
Chávez had postponed at the last minute, and now Livingstone and his entourage 
were stuck in Havana and at a loss for a photo-op. His attaché reached out to 
Rodwell, and then suggested “that when Ken arrived I should greet him as a 
long-lost friend, as that’s what he would be doing to me … so as Ken got out of 
his car we hugged. The cameras whirred and snapped as he said some suitable 
words about the power of sport to do good.”

No doubt inspired by Livingstone’s speech, they are still playing cricket in 
Cuba <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jul/06/cricket.comment> a decade 
later. There are 1,150 registered players across six provinces. Sir Julien 
Cahn’s old trophy has even been discovered in the back of a dusty cupboard at 
the British Embassy, and is once again being offered as a prize in local 
matches. Of course the effect of all this on diplomatic relations in the 
post-Castro era will not be clear for some while yet. In the meanwhile we can 
only speculate whether, as Winston Churchill once wrote, “it may be that future 
years will see the island as it would be now, had England never lost it – a 
Cuba free and prosperous under just laws and patriotic administration, throwing 
open her ports to the commerce of the world, sending her ponies to Hurlingham 
and her cricketers to Lord’s.”

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.
 