
The Sunday Times’s front page headline about the death of Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> said “World divides over 
revolutionary icon who became murderous tyrant.”

That view was repeated by the i on its Monday front page, and in the headline 
overthe Times’s main story. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/in-death-as-in-life-castro-divides-the-world-his-people-and-family-2l0m7j77q>
 The Guardian’s leading article made the same point:

“In death as in life, Castro divided opinion. For some he is a revolutionary 
hero who stood up to the US. Others see a dictator who trampled human rights.”

The split view has been evident in the many articles published by the national 
press over the past two days. But, by a considerable margin, the “murderous 
tyrant” has outweighed the “revolutionary icon.”

In the immediate aftermath of the announcement of Castro’s death on Sunday, 
the BBC broadcast interviews with several leftist politicians - and the former 
Guardian staffer Richard Gott - who praised Castro.

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, Ken 
Livingston and the former Labour MP and junior minister Brian Wilson, who 
offered a particularly favourable tribute to the former Cuban president, were 
treated with scorn in newspaper editorials.

What stood out, Gott apart, was the dearth of journalistic sympathy for 
Castro. Simon Tisdall,in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-dead-revolutionary-history>
, viewed him as “a relentless persecutor of those who dared challenge his 
will.” He was guilty of “violent abuses of accepted legal standards and human 
rights.”

Andrew Marr, in the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes>, derided the cool image that 
made Castro an object of fascination in the west. He observed: “There was no 
freedom of the press.”

Rory Carroll, writing in Monday’s Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-dictator-legacy-abuses>
, made a similar point:

“Officials heavily censored books, newspapers, radio, television, music and 
film, stunting discourse even while promoting arts and culture. Only a few 
Cubans were trusted with full internet access. Havana ranked near the bottom of 
Reporters Without Borders’ press freedom index.”

Indeed, in the latest index for 2016 <https://rsf.org/en/ranking#>, which 
covers 180 countries, Cuba is ranked in 171st place, down in the depths with 
Iran, Yemen, China and North Korea.

In an explanatory note <https://rsf.org/en/cuba>, Reporters Without Borders 
(RSF) calls Cuba “Latin America’s worst media freedom violator” and that “the 
Castro family... maintains a media monopoly and tolerates no independent 
reporting.”

It adds: “The few independent bloggers and journalists have to cope with 
drastic restrictions on internet access.”

Furthermore, RSF names Castro’s brother and presidential successor, Raúl 
Castro, as one of its predators of press freedom, pointing to “428 attacks 
against the media from June 2015 to August 2016 
<https://rsf.org/en/predator/raul-castro-0>”, which includes “33 cases of 
confiscation of journalistic material”.

Two Cuban journalists are currently serving prison terms. Yoeni de Jesús 
Guerra García was sentenced to seven years in March 2014 andhas suffered 
torture while incarcerated 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yoeni_de_Jes%C3%BAs_Guerra_Garc%C3%ADa>. 

José Antonio Torres, who worked as a correspondent for the government daily 
Granma, was arrested in February 2011 and latersentenced to 14 years on a 
charge of espionage 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jos%C3%A9_Antonio_Torres_(Cuban_journalist)>. 

The Guardian’s leading article, which said there could be no excuse for “human 
rights abuses and restrictive policies” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/the-guardian-view-on-fidel-castro-man-of-history>
 during Castro’s rule, thought repression lessened when Castro left the stage.

However, with his brother in charge, “freedom of expression remains limited - 
only 25% of the Cuban population can get online. There is no independent media.”

And the Guardian columnist, Zoe Williams, was unimpressed with the tributes to 
Castro: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-policies-dictator>
 “You cannot make a defence of strongman politics, even if he’syour strongman. 

“You cannot fete Castro as a noble failure while deriding Tony Blair as 
irredeemable. Principles are like relationships; they don’t mean anything if 
you won’t put them in order of importance.”

In its leading article 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/cuba-libre-jtw2rjkq8>, the Times 
spoke of Castro having created “a malign myth that has deluded generations of 
western students”. People were blinded to the reality: “mass arrests, firing 
squads, the jailing of priests and homosexuals, and cruel discrimination 
against weaker members of society.”

Alongside the many liberal voices that challenged the portrayal of Castro as a 
hero, the rightwing press criticism was altogether more predictable.

The Daily Mail’s editorial took the opportunity to attack Corbyn, Livingstone, 
John McDonnell andGeorge Galloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgegalloway>. They “have never grown 
up since their student days, when Che Guevara posters and revolutionary chic 
were all the rage among the left.”

The Sun referred to the “nauseating spectacle” of “glowing tributes” paid by 
US presidentBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, 
Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and Ireland’s president, Michael 
Higgins. “He was no hero,” it said. “He was a monster.”
 