
Feted as a revolutionary hero and demonised as an enemy of the free world, 
Fidel Castro also played an unexpected role in global literature. The Cuban 
president, who died on 25 November, acted as unofficial copy editor for the 
acclaimed novelistGabriel García Márquez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gabrielgarciamarquez>, providing 
line-by-line corrections for the writer after the two struck up a close 
friendship in the late 1970s.

Dr Stéphanie Panichelli-Batalla, lecturer in Latin American studies at Aston 
University, told the Guardian: “The president was an avid reader. When they met 
in 1977, they had several conversations about literature and eventually Fidel 
offered to read his manuscripts, because he had a good eye for detail.”

The Colombian Nobel laureate, who died in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/25/gabrielgarciamarquez-fidel-castro>
, was a supporter of the Cuban revolution, support he never relinquished 
despite Castro’s record of human rights abuses. Panichelli-Batalla, who 
co-authored a book about their relationship titled Fidel & Gabo in 2009, said 
the writer would send completed manuscripts to Havana before submitting them to 
his publisher.

Gabriel García Márquez: 'What a kind and always funny man he was'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/26/gabriel-garcia-marquez-life-work-inspired-francisco-goldman>
Castro’s corrections were factual and grammatical rather than ideological, she 
added. “After reading his book The Story of a Shipwrecked Sailor, Fidel had 
told Gabo there was a mistake in the calculation of the speed of the boat. This 
led Gabo to ask him to read his manuscripts … Another example of a correction 
he made later on was in Chronicle of a Death Foretold, where Fidel pointed out 
an error in the specifications of a hunting rifle.” Elsewhere, Castro offered 
advice about the compatibility of bullets with guns used by García Márquez’s 
characters.

The two met in a Cuban hotel in 1977. Though the meeting has been described as 
coincidental, Panichelli-Batalla said Castro may have orchestrated it after he 
heard the Colombian writer was working on a nonfiction book about life inCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> under the US embargo, using 
testimonies from ordinary Cubans. The book never appeared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ffidel-castro-worked-on-gabriel-garcia-marquez-manuscripts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efa908f16f7c7d05bb720fcb52b9f2d78fa3efe%2F0_0_1500_2163%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%20worked%20on%20Gabriel%20Garc%C3%ADa%20M%C3%A1rquez's%20manuscripts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ffidel-castro-worked-on-gabriel-garcia-marquez-manuscripts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%20worked%20on%20Gabriel%20Garc%C3%ADa%20M%C3%A1rquez%27s%20manuscripts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ffidel-castro-worked-on-gabriel-garcia-marquez-manuscripts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efa908f16f7c7d05bb720fcb52b9f2d78fa3efe%2F0_0_1500_2163%2F1500.jpg>
 García Márquez’s signed copy of Castro’s La victoria estratégica: Por todos 
los caminos de la Sierra, published in 2010. Photograph: Pete Smith/Harry 
Ransom Center 
A sign of the closeness of the two men is revealed in a book among García 
Márquez’s personal library acquired by the Harry Ransom Centre at the 
University of Texas this week. A note to García Márquez written by Castro in 
the front of La Victoria Estratégica is addressed to Gabo, the affectionate 
nickname used by South Americans for the writer. Castro wrote the note in 2010, 
taking time out from work alleviating the devastation of the Haiti earthquake. 
“Your book Yo No Vengo a Decir un Discurso [I’m Not Here to Give a Speech] is 
disturbing,” he sold his friend. “Enslaved by other obligations, I abandoned my 
duty and started reading. I missed your stories.” The plague in Haiti, he 
added, “reminded me of Love in a Time of Cholera”.

García Márquez inspired more than one global leader, as shown by the range of 
books acquired by the Harry Ransom Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/21/gabriel-garcia-marquez-archives-open-for-research-at-texas-university>
. A Spanish copy of Bill Clinton’s memoir My Life is inscribed: “To my friend 
Gabriel García Márquez, with thanks for your life, your inspiration and your 
kindness.” The novelist is known to have discussed Cuba with the former US 
president and Dr Panichelli-Batalla said a number of dissidents were released 
as a result of his intervention.

Although García Márquez accepted editorial advice from Castro, it is not known 
whether he attempted a similar service in return.In an 1978 interview 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=8FQ0CgAAQBAJ&pg=PT68&lpg=PT68&dq=Garc%C3%ADa+M%C3%A1rquez+criticise+castro+public+new+york+times+frank+macshane&source=bl&ots=s4925OQA4M&sig=t24EWLrymRt4rWgD2JPe7Pms0zc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjKpMzS49_QAhWkLsAKHfvJBHEQ6AEIHTAA#v=onepage&q=Garc%C3%ADa%20M%C3%A1rquez%20criticise%20castro%20public%20new%20york%20times%20frank%20macshane&f=false>
, he said that he would criticise the Cuban president to his face in private 
but never in public.

Anna Hervé, a publishing editorial manager, said the success of García Márquez 
and Castro’s collaboration was rare. “Most great artists define themselves in 
opposition to the elite in the modern era. And dictators have notoriously poor 
taste, as a rule.”
 