
Justin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, the 
Canadian prime minister, has been mocked and criticised over his praise of the 
late Cuban leader Fidel Castro.

Following the death of Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies>
, Trudeau, whose father had a close relationship with the revolutionary, 
released a statement mourning the loss of a “remarkable leader”.

Guerrilla leader, dictator – and an unrepentant revolutionary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/fidel-castro-dead-revolutionary-history>
Castro, who died on Friday aged 90, won support for bringing schools and 
hospitals to the poor but also createdlegions of enemies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-obituary> for his 
ruthless suppression of dissent.

 Trudeau’s comments were markedly more positive than most western leaders, who 
either condemned Castro’s human rights record or tip-toed around the subject.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20leaders%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Cuban%20revolutionary%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20leaders%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Cuban%20revolutionary%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fworld-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video&media=>
World leaders pay tribute to Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/world-leaders-pay-tribute-to-cuban-revolutionary-fidel-castro-video>
 Instead, Trudeau warmly recalled his late father’s friendship with Castro and 
his own meeting with Castro’s three sons and brother – Raul, Cuba’s current 
president – during a visit to the island nation earlier this month.

 “While a controversial figure, both Mr Castro’s supporters and detractors 
recognized his tremendous dedication and love for the Cuban people who had a 
deep and lasting affection for ‘el Comandante’,” Trudeau said in the statement.

 He called Castro “larger than life” and “a legendary revolutionary and 
orator”.

Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> was an honorary 
pall bearer at the 2000 funeral of Trudeau’s father, former prime minister 
Pierre Trudeau. In 1976, the senior Trudeau became the first Nato leader to 
visit Cuba under Castro’s rule, at one point exhorting “Viva Castro!”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fjustin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48bf54f586b0ce974d93c1b2ffd1ef6a34775245%2F0_313_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%3A%20Justin%20Trudeau%20ridiculed%20over%20praise%20of%20'remarkable%20leader'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fjustin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%3A%20Justin%20Trudeau%20ridiculed%20over%20praise%20of%20%27remarkable%20leader%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fjustin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48bf54f586b0ce974d93c1b2ffd1ef6a34775245%2F0_313_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 Margaret Trudeau smiles as Cuban President Fidel Castro holds her youngest son 
Michel after the Trudeaus arrived in Havana, Cuba in 1976. Photograph: Fred 
Chartrand/AP 
 “I know my father was very proud to call him a friend and I had the 
opportunity to meet Fidel when my father passed away,” Trudeau said. .

His statement was met with puzzlement and derision by some Americans, 
including US Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who is of Cuban descent.

“Is this a real statement or parody? Because if this is a real statement from 
the PM ofCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> it is shameful and 
embarrassing,” Rubio tweeted.

 The statement spawned the Twitter hashtag #TrudeauEulogies, which quickly 
began trending as people emulated Trudeau’s upbeat tone and lack of criticism.

 “While controversial, Darth Vader achieved great heights in space 
construction and played a formative role in his son’s life,” tweeted 
@markusoff, riffing on the Star Wars movie villain.
Kurt Schlichter (@KurtSchlichter) 
With his innovative urban renewal program, Pol Pot bravely confronted the 
pressing challenge of overpopulation.#trudeaueulogies 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/trudeaueulogies?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/KurtSchlichter/status/802621007760531456> November 26, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/KurtSchlichter/status/802621007760531456> 
Reuters contributed to this story
 