
I grew up in Namuwongo, a suburb of Kampala next to a red light district and 
my best friend’s mother was a sex worker. I’ll always remember what my friend, 
Resty, went through to seek medication for her mother. She was rejected at 
every hospital and then her mum passed away. Resty had to look after her 
younger siblings so she went into the same line of work. We lost touch but I’m 
praying that one day we will meet again. She was made me what I am today. Her 
story inspired me to start Rhythm of Life.

We work in two red light districts in Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> helping HIV-positive female sex 
workers to access healthcare and their daughters to access education to break 
the cycle of mother-to-daughter prostitution. We have got five girls into 
education so far, two in primary school and three in secondary school.

There are 500 to 1,000 women working in these districts every night, some as 
young as 15. According toThe Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(14)60931-4/fulltext?rss=yes>
,37% 
<http://www.newvision.co.ug/news/629853-37-ugandan-sex-workers-are-hiv-positive.html>
 are HIV positive, and because they don’t prioritise HIV testing they transfer 
the the virus to their children.

The government is interested in the issue because the women are the major 
source of spreading HIV in Uganda. It passed a bill last year for a lawthat 
would criminalise people who knowingly pass on the virus 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/05/13/uganda-deeply-flawed-hiv-bill-approved>. We 
are strongly against this. We hope that it will be reconsidered.

The government and the entire community blame the sex workers for spreading 
the disease. It’s not fair. There is a mindset that the sex workers deserve to 
die or get ill because of the kind of work they do. When they seek medical care 
the hospitals reject them. The authorities’ only concern is the sex workers 
transmitting the virus to the rest of the population – not for the sex workers 
themselves.

Human trafficking: 'We are haunted by the horror that we have witnessed'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/14/human-trafficking-slavery-india>
The government should work with us to help the sex workers. But as we have 
seen withthe anti-homosexuality bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/01/uganda-anti-gay-law-null-and-void>
, they do not support marginalised groups. We are under scrutiny. They are not 
willing to partner with us. Neither are the local community, the leaders in the 
red light districts see the sex workers as a curse. These are a few challenges 
we face.

I want to see a Uganda where these women and their families can feel a sense 
of belonging. When I say I work with sex workers people look at me like I’m 
crazy. Society has not accepted that a sex worker deserves to get medication or 
social services. That’s why it is so hard to get them to open up to you, 
because they expect to be judged.

My proudest moments so far have been seeing the few girls that we’ve helped so 
far access education and reshape their future. I’m also proud that we’ve 
establishing a trusted relationship with many women. Now they know that even 
though police shout at them and hospitals reject them, they can always call on 
Rhythm of Life.

Low pay and wandering hands: protecting Cambodia’s ‘beer girls’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/18/bad-pay-and-wandering-hands-protecting-cambodias-beer-girls>
The most difficult times are when we are rejected by the women we are trying 
to help. We recently met a 16-year-old girl sex worker who didn’t give a hoot. 
She said: “I’m content where I am. I’m not interested in future plans.” That 
was a hard moment.

But I have hope that she will change her mind. One of the women we work with, 
Dora, rejected us three times when we first got in touch with her. The first 
time she wouldn’t even open the door. But gradually we won her round. Sometimes 
I would think, “Should I give up?” I felt so low. But we went an extra mile, 
and then eventually she accepted our help. We visited her with a former sex 
worker who works with us. She told us: “I know she will open the door”. That’s 
why working with the women’s peers is so important.

The daughter of one our first beneficiaries, Sharifah, is now in primary six. 
When we first met her daughter, Aisha, had missed two terms of school. Now her 
daughter is getting an education, Sharifah is willing to change her path. We 
will support her to find another source of income.

'Beating your wife is a sign of love' - changing norms to end domestic abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/29/domestic-violence-uganda>
We work with girls, not boys, because I wanted to stop the cycle of sex work 
from mother to daughter. I haven’t seen any mother-to-son cycles of 
prostitution. The girls are in the most risky position. If the mother can no 
longer do what she’s doing, she sends off her daughter to bring in an income to 
her family. There’s pressure from the mothers and the entire community for the 
daughters to follow their mothers into sex work. If I am the daughter of a sex 
worker, and my mother passes on, society expects me to take her place.

I’m happy to be able to operate in the first year, but now the question is how 
are we moving on, how are we scaling up? We still have a gap of funds. We need 
more partners to take our work forward and more donors and volunteers to help 
us make our dreams a reality.

The next steps are to open a “health cafe” where the women can access medicine 
and a training centre where they can learn advocacy skills, computer skills and 
online campaigning. We want to see 30 to 50 girls stop working the red light 
district and pursue different careers and start to benefit the community. If I 
meet one of the girls in 10 years’ time and she tell me she’s a doctor, nurse 
or teacher, I will be so proud.

As told to Anna Leach. 

Would you like to share your story of working in the field? Email 
globaldevpros@guardian.co.uk with ‘Field post’ in the headline.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 