
I can think of no more sacred winter tradition than the reigniting of the “war 
on Christmas”, in which tabloid journalists – possessing no higher motive than 
a deep and abiding love for all things Christian – posit that immigration, 
liberalism and political correctness have pushed Christmas to the very brink of 
extinction. (That is, when it’s not coming earlier every year.)

There’s little evidence to support this thesis, but if there’s one place where 
such fantasies can become reality it’s the world of cinema, and in recent years 
a number of God-fearing film-makers have brought the war on Christmas to the 
big screen in a series of films available for next-to-nothing on import DVD.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1A9XIcYUG-8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1A9XIcYUG-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1A9XIcYUG-8&media=>
Each begins by introducing an all-American hero with a love for Christmas as 
fervent as his belief that baby-killing, gun-confiscating, Sharia-abiding 
lefties have all but scrubbed the holiday from the calendar. InChristmas With A 
Capital C, that’s Dan Reed, beloved mayor of Trapper Falls, Alaska, whose job 
it is to ensure that the line between church and state is blurred beyond 
recognition each and every festive season.

That is, until big-shot lawyer Mitch Bright comes to town, countering Dan’s 
piety with a villainous message of spiritual diversity and cultural 
inclusivity. Mitch would have the town allow anyone celebrate their own 
religious holidays alongside Christians, but as Dan is quick to remind him: 
“Just because God’s out of vogue in the big city doesn’t mean we throw him away 
like last summer’s fashion magazine.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5-yA66kaVc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5-yA66kaVc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5-yA66kaVc&media=>
A similarly apocalyptic scenario presents itself in Saving Christmas, in which 
former child star Kirk Cameron attends his family’s annual yuletide gathering 
and finds himself battling not only non-believers but also a grouchy 
brother-in-law who thinks the holiday has strayed too far from its origins. In 
a totally proportional response, Kirk delivers an hour-long lecture exposing 
the biblical roots of all the modern trappings of Christmas, from Santa Claus 
to rampant materialism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaskgwNOjkeI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaskgwNOjkeI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaskgwNOjkeI&media=>
Also preserving the reason for the season is small-town mayor Bob Revere, who 
fights for the right to display a Christmas tree on state property in perhaps 
the ultimate war-on-Christmas movie,Last Ounce Of Courage. In a stunning finale 
that in no way throws into doubt Bob’s fitness for public office, he personally 
hoists a giant cross on to the roof of a local mission, like some kind of 
hulking, leather-clad Christ, before repeatedly screaming, “We fight for 
freedom!” at the anxious crowd below. Merry Christmas one and all.
 