
"Global plus local = glocal." That's how the heat-seeking missile in a 
business suit that is Anna Kendrick in Jason Reitman'sUp in the Air 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/133695/up-in-the-air> (2009) justifies 
her cost-cutting brainwave: firing workers around the world remotely via video 
conference. It's probably the only time "glocalisation" will ever get 
namechecked in a feature-film script. But the ploy of tailoring global business 
to individual countries could be picking up speed in the cinema industry, 
according toa recent Hollywood Reporter article 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/clint-eastwood-nicholas-sparks-talents-395707>
 on a new wave of remakes: rather than cutting a one-size-fits-all global hit 
from foreign material, Hollywood producers are increasingly seeing steady 
revenue from licensing foreign reworkings of US films, like last year's Chinese 
version of Mel Gibson vehicleWhat Women Want 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xhHqflh2kU4>.

Those are individual cases, though. There are signs that the glocally-minded 
film producer can think bigger, namely Paramount's recent announcement that 
it'll be releasing aLatino-targeted instalment 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/paramount-to-tease-latino-paranormal-activity-spin-off-in-post-credits-paranormal-activity-4-scene/>
 of its Paranormal Activity franchise. Interesting move: why not spice up the 
flatpack suburban occultism with some heady Catholic themes, especially if 
there's a target audience out there? There's already been a Japan-producedPA 
offshoot <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hURDigyUF8s>, and with that grainy 
night-vision bedcam keeping the branding consistent, and Paranormal 2 and 3's 
writer there to oversee things – under the provisional title The Oxnard Tapes 
(so Latino-sounding!) – as director, this could be the first glocalised film 
franchise.

Like most new ideas, glocalisation isn't really new. The Japanese apparently 
invented the concept in the late 1980s, calling it dochakuka, and using it to 
drive the spread of J-pop across different Asian territories. And it's a pretty 
familiar philosophy in television franchising, with gameshows (The Weakest 
Link; Who Want to be a Millionaire?), talent shows (Pop Idol), and comedies 
(The Office; Shameless) all budding off new, culturally-pruned varieties across 
the world.

But it's never evolved very far in the cinema. I suppose you could see remakes 
(or indeed any form of translation or dubbing) as the bluntest form of local 
customisation. Having showcase sequences, likeM:I4's Burj Khalifa's jolly 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_-blkp5MbQ> in Dubai, or the now-obligatory 
Chinese blockbuster interlude <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JuW74XZ-gcs>, or 
packing a whole franchise instalment off on holiday (Fast and Furious: Tokyo 
Drift <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112939/fast.and.the.furious>, Dirty 
Dancing: Havana Nights <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0338096/>) are alternative 
ways of adding a bit of glocal spice. But I can't think of a fully fragmented 
franchise that has worked to strengthen the overall brand, along TV lines; when 
film franchises do splinter more comprehensively, the separate versions, 
usually made by different production teams, have effectively been in 
competition with each other, like theJapanese/Korean/American Ringus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/22/ring-nakata-ringu-horror> in the 
00s.

Horror seems to be the genre in which film glocalisation seems nearest to 
fruition, perhaps because it's so often low-budget, intimate and 
character-driven; very different to the blockbuster-spectacle idiom geared to 
steamroller unilaterally across the globe, and closest to the TV model that 
adapts most easily to local demands. The Grudge 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/103422/grudge> franchise tried to deftly 
dovetail its American remakes into the Japanese originals, by having Sarah 
Michelle Gellar's careworker visit the Far East in the first film. The fact 
that director Takashi Shimizu took charge of its English-language incarnation – 
unusually for a Japanese director – helped maintain these links across the 
franchise. And Paranormal Activity looks like it's attempting the same feat of 
cultural transplantation (though the Latino outing won't be in Spanish).

There's no reason why glocalisation has to mean homogenisation by the back 
door: switching proceedings to a new environment should enhance the premise – 
or at least entertain – as with the American version of The Office. Starting 
with a universal idea, like having a titan of cringe for a boss, can help bring 
out the local particulars in even sharper definition. If the new 
reverse-direction remakes are a new phase of glocalisation, then franchising 
could be where things get truly creative. I like the idea of, say, regional 
episodes to introduce a round-the-world cast of martial-arts heroes, who might 
then assemble, Avengers-style, for an Enter the Dragon-esque blockbuster 
tournament. Or Clint Eastwood'sFlags of Our Fathers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116679/flags.of.our.fathers> strategy, 
exploring the same set of events from opposing perspectives, could be put to 
radical use. Global film franchises have descended from above, and let rip with 
the shock and awe, for too long; it's time they put down deeper roots.

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at Abu Dhabi's first horror movie. 
Meanwhile, what global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.

• This article was amended on 4 December 2012. In the original Anna Kendrick 
was called McKendrick. This has been corrected.
 