
Call it the Wallace & Gromit effect. A quirky British film called Head Over 
Heels could be about to upset the natural order in Hollywood and beat Disney to 
the coveted animation Oscar.

Just like A Grand Day Out, Nick Park's first, much-loved 1989 animation, Head 
Over Heels was made at the National Film and Television School (NFTS) and is 
now set to make a similar impact overseas. It is the only student film in 
contention for an Oscar next week.

Describing the animation, directed by Timothy Reckart and produced by Fodhla 
Cronin O'Reilly, as "one of those stand-out little gems that doesn't come 
around that often", Park said: "It's a cleverly conceived but simple idea. A 
clear and inventively told story, very poignant and full of heart. I'm not 
surprised they're winning awards withHead Over Heels. Much deserved."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKHs3Pe32b8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKHs3Pe32b8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKHs3Pe32b8Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The stakes are suddenly sky-high for the young film school graduates who put 
together the 11-minute animation on a tiny budget. So far, it is holding its 
own in the short animation category against the favourite – Disney's 
black-and-white offering,Paperman. While Disney has allegedly contravened 
strict Oscar rules by releasingPaperman in full online, the makers of Head Over 
Heels hit back by editing scenes from their film into the form of a viral 
Valentine email.

O'Reilly, who is already in California for next Sunday's ceremony, said: 
"People seem to really like it because the story itself is quite universal. 
That is why the film has had such a strong reaction." The plot revolves, quite 
literally, around a house where an emotionally distant married couple live 
together – but apart. Their tentative attempts to communicate are repeatedly 
thwarted as they continue to live according to different rules – one on the 
floor; one on the ceiling.

"I have had to pitch the story so often now, I find it hard to remember the 
effect it has," she said. "The meaning is very subjective, as it should be, but 
for me it is about realising what you already have. A couple can certainly 
start to take each other for granted and this is a romance about that." 
O'Reilly made the film with animator and director Reckart as their final 
project at film school. The two invited a group of fellow students to pitch in 
and bring Reckart's vision to life.

"The concept for the film came from Tim and we worked on it together," said 
the 26-year-old from Co Kerry. "We were in the same year and decided to make it 
the old-fashioned way, as a stop-motion animation with clay models."

Reckart has described the idea behind the story as "simple – a husband and 
wife separated by different fields of gravity". However, this does not stop the 
story from having a "really rich and emotional" depth. "Many married people 
have told me that the film rings true with their own experiences of marriage, 
and I think everyone, married or not, can identify with this story of love 
built upon sacrifice,'' he said. Reckart, who is also 26, grew up in Arizona 
and travelled to Britain to study at the NFTS in Buckinghamshire. "He came over 
here because he saw it as the home of animation. And it has been nice to think 
that the first Wallace & Gromit film was Nick Park's graduation film here too," 
said O'Reilly.

Park, who joined Bristol-based Aardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> Animations, also earned an academy 
award nomination withA Grand Day Out, his graduate film, but actually won the 
Oscar that year, 1990, forCreature Comforts. Earlier this month in Los Angeles 
Head over Heelswon an international Annie Award for animation. "We are funding 
the film ourselves, of course, and so we don't have the money to spend huge 
amounts on PR and publicity, but we are trying our hardest to spread the word," 
said O'Reilly.

Since leaving film school she has worked with Parallel Films in London and is 
involved in several new projects, including more animations with Reckart.

Among those who pitched in to help make Head Over Heels was 32-year-old film 
editor James Taylor from Plymouth, who will also attend the ceremony on Sunday. 
"Tim came up with such a simple but beautifully conceived metaphor that lies at 
the heart ofHead Over Heels," Taylor has said.

His family and friends have raised money to fund his plane ticket and hotel 
room for Oscars night. "I'm so excited to be going to Hollywood to mix with 
people who have made the films I have been watching all my life," he said.

Head Over Heels is also up against Adam and Dog, a solo project from Disney 
animator Minkyu Lee,Fresh Guacamole, a film about making a dip out of inedible 
objects, andThe Simpsons spin-off, The Longest Daycare, in which Maggie Simpson 
attends an Ayn Rand-inspired nursery.Head Over Heels remains an underdog, but 
since its powerful ending has been described as "one of the most romantic in 
cinema", perhaps Oscars night will end in the same uplifting way.
 