
Two former directors of iSoft <https://www.theguardian.com/business/isoft>, 
the NHS software supplier, have been barred from practising as accountants 
almost a decade after the one-time FTSE 250 firm was engulfed in an accounting 
scandal.

The action by the Financial Reporting Council <https://www.frc.org.uk/> (FRC), 
the professional regulator, comes nine years afteriSoft shareholders were told 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/isoft-group-plc--iot-/rns/statement-re-accounting/200607201828485353G/>
 of “accounting irregularities”. The company had been booking revenues in its 
financial updates before a major contract had been signed.


Tim Whiston 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/Our-Work/Publications/Professional-Discipline/Settlement-Agreement-Timothy-Whiston.pdf>
, iSoft’s former finance director who also briefly served as chief executive, 
andJohn Whelan 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/Our-Work/Publications/Professional-Discipline/Settlement-Agreement-John-Whelan-(1).pdf>
, who served as finance director for a short period, have been banned for eight 
years.


iSoft co-founder Patrick Cryne may face disciplinary action in role as 
accountant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/aug/13/isoft-cofounder-disciplinary-action-accountant>
The sanction comes six months after the Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/aug/13/isoft-cofounder-disciplinary-action-accountant>
 that the FRC had quietly dropped its investigation into iSoft co-founder and 
former executive chairman Patrick Cryne.


Whiston, 48, who had sold shares in iSoft for £5.2m in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/sep/15/politics.society>, agreed 
this month to pay £50,000 as a contribution towards the cost of investigating 
his misconduct. Neither he nor Whelan were fined by the regulator.

The scandal dates from2006, when iSoft issued a heavy profit warning 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/isoft-group-plc--iot-/rns/statement-re-accounting/200607201828485353G/>
 and admitted the company’s books would need to be restated. Shares in the 
company went on to lose more than 90% of their value before it was bought by 
Australian rival IBA Health in 2007.

Once a stockmarket star, iSoft had been valued at £1bn. As its shares had 
climbed, several directors, led by Cryne, who is best known as owner of 
Barnsley football club, had become millionaires by selling shares. Cryne and 
operations director Steve Graham netted £41m and £30m, respectively, between 
2001 and 2005.

In settlements announced by the FRC on Monday, the regulator found that in 
2003 and 2004 Whiston and Whelan had acted recklessly and had failed to act 
with integrity in relation to one contract with the Irish health service.


Revenues from the contract had been reported in iSoft’s financial statements 
before the agreement had been concluded. There was no finding of dishonesty 
against either Whiston or Whelan, both of whom had been acquitted of criminal 
offences relating to the same allegations.

In 2010, they had been charged, together with Cryne and Graham, with the 
criminal offence of conspiracy to mislead investors.


All four denied the allegations, and were ultimately cleared of wrongdoing 
after theprosecution against three of them collapsed 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/news/fca-v-former-isoft-directors> at trial. The 
prosecution had been brought by the Financial Conduct Authority, the regulator 
in charge of consumer protection.

It emerged in court there was confusion in prosecution records of where key 
evidence had been found in iSoft’s offices. The trial collapsed and the judge 
ordered that the defendants be acquitted. Cryne, who had been due to be tried 
at a later date for health reasons, was also cleared.


The accountancy regulator has already issued an eight-year ban on a former 
junior iSoft accountant 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwj65pSMl-3JAhWJCBoKHXeRAYoQFggdMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.frc.org.uk%2FOur-Work%2FPublications%2FProfessional-Discipline%2FReport-of-the-Disciplinary-Tribunal-Mr-Ian-Storey.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEbDB22Gm29OCelhC5pRW4bGjVaGA&sig2=y9XjO8_2E_TKNbnrhxEERw>
 who later helped blow the whistle on the accounting scandal. The group’s 
auditor, RSM Robson Rhodes, now part of Grant Thornton, also facedsanction for 
failing 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi6htmphO3JAhVKDxoKHRh-Bg4QFggdMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.frc.org.uk%2FOur-Work%2FPublications%2FProfessional-Discipline%2FAnnex-A-Tribunal-Report-RSM-Robson-Rhodes-and-Mr-G.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFiO4FqXRShhvw9-eEPhKcgt8fMZw&sig2=NgTBNfnmlNFiQjKtoNK-kA>
 to make proper checks before signing off iSoft’s financial statements. It was
fined £225,000 
<https://www.frc.org.uk/News-and-Events/FRC-Press/Press/2011/November/RSM-Robson-Rhodes-LLP-and-Glyn-Williams-iSoft-Grou.aspx>
.


Shortly after the criminal case against the former iSoft directors collapsed, 
the FRC unsealed details of the disciplinary action against RSM Robson Rhodes, 
laying bare a catalogue of accounting failures that had misled investors 
between 2003 and 2005. The FRC findings against the former auditor went beyond 
the narrow focus of the single Irish healthcare IT contract which had formed 
the basis of the FCA’s failed prosecution.



 