
We’re in the “last of the summer wine” phase of the DVD release calendar, with 
the qualifier that this summer’s harvest was a pretty thin one.Finding Dory 
(Disney, U) andJason Bourne (Universal, 12) were hardly the most offensive 
rehashes of the season, but months on, they already feel like supersized 
footnotes – capably dotting i’s and crossing t’s on what has gone before, 
without bringing urgent new ideas to the table.

Pixar’s aqua-bright Finding Nemo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-nemo> sequel at least tries a shift 
in emphasis, elevating Ellen DeGeneres’s disarmingly addled clownfish sidekick 
to protagonist status, and neatly reversing the 2003 film’s arc by tracing her 
search for her long-lost parents. That aside, it’s gentle-natured business as 
before, mixing home-is-where-the-heart-is sentiment with elaborate pratfalls in 
the great blue unknown — all of it missing the essential warmth of creative 
investment and invention.

Akira Kurosawa’s Dreams gains in wistful power as its strange, rapturous 
vignettes flow into each other

As for Jason Bourne, the lack of ingenuity that went into the title – Bourne 
Again and Bourne to Run were right there, people – is dispiritingly in evidence 
throughout the latest outing for Robert Ludlum’s stoic, limber ex-CIA gunman. 
The return of Matt Damon and director Paul Greengrass to the stable (after 
sitting out 2012’sThe Bourne Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bourne-legacy>) was auspicious, but 
perhaps it’s been too long. This stern global runaround, adding a moderately 
topical shot of post-Snowden worry to the usual agency skulduggery, is shot, 
cut and performed in a tidy, familiar groove. But the propulsive athleticism of 
the BournesSupremacy and Ultimatum, in particular, has slowed to a brisk jog.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaa59b3b33488eafd24c8d386f420f00d44bde12%2F0_125_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaa59b3b33488eafd24c8d386f420f00d44bde12%2F0_125_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Louis Theroux’s Scientology film has become the biggest-grossing documentary 
in the UK this year. Photograph: Flat Creek Films/BBC Worldwide 
John Dower and Louis Theroux’s My Scientology Movie (Altitude, 15) has quietly 
become the UK’s top-grossing documentary of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/11/girl-on-the-train-bridget-jones-baby-uk-box-office-analysis>
, surprising many who pegged it as an outsize Theroux TV special. Turns out 
it’s very much a film – and a rollicking one too, as the gangly journalist 
probes the bizarre layers of security and insecurity surrounding the holy house 
of Hubbard. Revelations are few, but it’s the machinations of the search that 
provide the dark comic intrigue here, particularly as the lens is flipped and 
Theroux himself winds up under the church’s scrutiny.

Also on the curiouser-and-curiouser end of the doc spectrum is Tickled 
(StudioCanal, 15), which boasts a killer investigative hook as its breezy study 
of fetishistic competitive tickling morphs into a latently violent conspiracy 
thriller. But however strange the truth, there’s something contrived about the 
film’s patchy assembly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68e54d7115cf06a485e1dd4c41252da72ce5ed7%2F0_0_3600_2381%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68e54d7115cf06a485e1dd4c41252da72ce5ed7%2F0_0_3600_2381%2F3600.jpg>
 Depardieu and Huppert in Valley of Love. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Between Things to Come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/06/things-to-come-cemetery-of-splendour-x-men-apocalypse-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge>
 and the upcomingElle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/elle-review-paul-verhoevens-brazen-revenge-comedy-is-a-dangerous-delight>
, Isabelle Huppert may be having the banner year of a banner career. When a 
performance as finely wrought as her work in Guillaume Nicloux’sValley of Love 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 15) can nonetheless be described as the most disposable 
of the three, she’s clearly on a hot streak. As grieving parents ambling out 
their anguish in Death Valley, she and Gérard Depardieu give this metaphysical 
shaggy-dog tale all the weight it has, but it’s still a wisp.

Silky, existential musing is also the order of the day in Akira Kurosawa’s 
Dreams (Sony, PG), the Japanese master’s little-discussed 1990 swansong, now 
lavishly restored for the Criterion Collection. Only moderately admired on 
release, it stands up rather well as a summation of an ageing artist’s vision, 
gaining in wistful power as its strange, rapturous vignettes flow into each 
other. As swirling and bold as Kurosawa’s film is watercoloured, Criterion’s 
other new addition, Paul Thomas Anderson’s romantic tap-dancePunch-Drunk Love 
(Criterion, 15) doesn’t require as much reintroduction, but it’s welcome all 
the same.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf076180c388586bb6f13fa2468716a9eca8863%2F0_0_1822_1198%2F1822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finding%20Dory%3B%20Jason%20Bourne%3B%20My%20Scientology%20Movie%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Ffinding-dory-jason-bourne-my-scientology-movie-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf076180c388586bb6f13fa2468716a9eca8863%2F0_0_1822_1198%2F1822.jpg>
 Salma Hayek and Ryan Phillippe in Mark Christopher’s 54. Photograph: Miramax 
Speaking of reintroductions, Mubi is currently screening 
<https://mubi.com/films/showing> the much-vaunted, much-expanded director’s cut 
of54, Mark Christopher’s 1998 glitter-bomb of disco history that was famously, 
and fatally,edited to shreds by Harvey Weinstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/12/54-the-directors-cut-review-disco-thrusting-delirium-mike-myers-berlin>
. It’s fair to say that Christopher’s approved version (36 minutes longer, yet 
somehow more efficient) is another film entirely: not wholly free of its former 
incarnation’s gauche missteps, but with a human pulse, and an erotic energy 
that somehow ended up on the floor the first time. It’s a heady, messy good 
time – what the tale of history’s most irresponsible nightclub should always 
have been.
 