
Accountants, lawyers and consultants whose multibillion pound industry 
provides advice on how to aggressively avoid tax could face large financial 
penalties under government proposals.

Plans set out in a consultation document released on Wednesday will suggest 
that tax advisers whose schemes are defeated in the courts might pay a fine of 
up to 100% of the money lost to the taxpayer.

It follows prime minister Theresa May’s pledge last month to clamp down on 
corporate tax avoidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/mps-condemn-sticking-plaster-response-to-corporate-tax-avoidance>
 – widely seen as part of an appeal to working-class Britons struggling with 
their finances.

Firms including PriceWaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, Deloitte and Ernst & Young and a 
select band of tax lawyers havepreviously been accused by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/26/accountancy-firms-knowledge-treasury-avoid-tax>
 on the public accounts committee (PAC) of helping major corporate clients to 
minimise tax by exploiting complex schemes.

Thousands of wealthy individuals, meanwhile, were revealed to have avoided tax 
on their Swiss bank accounts throughoffshore companies marketed by HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/10/hsbc-files-swiss-bank-aggressive-marketing-clients-avoid-new-tax>
 and other European lenders.


Currently tax avoiders face significant financial costs when HM Revenue & 
Customs (HMRC) defeats them in court but those who advised on, or facilitated, 
the avoidance bear little risk.

The consultation document is expected to clarify rules around whether proven 
tax avoiders have taken reasonable care to ensure their tax returns do not 
contain inaccuracies, making it simpler to enforce penalties when avoidance 
schemes are defeated.

However, details of the proposals were not released in advance and are yet to 
be seen by tax experts, journalists or campaigners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ffirms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb6bf59a71c527f1dbe67425bdc058295e642ee2%2F0_344_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Firms%20giving%20advice%20on%20aggressive%20tax%20avoidance%20could%20face%20large%20fines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ffirms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Firms%20giving%20advice%20on%20aggressive%20tax%20avoidance%20could%20face%20large%20fines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Ffirms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb6bf59a71c527f1dbe67425bdc058295e642ee2%2F0_344_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Jane Ellison, financial secretary to the Treasury. Photograph: Graham Turner 
for the Guardian 
Jane Ellison, the financial secretary to the Treasury, will on Wednesday open 
a 12-week consultation over new proposals of governance which will be outlined 
to the industry.

“People who peddle tax avoidance schemes deny the country of vital tax revenue 
and this government is determined to make sure they pay. The vast majority of 
their schemes don’t work and can land their users in court facing large tax 
bills and other costs,” she said in a statement.

Whitehall sources said that the proposals could allow HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> officials to stop profiteering 
around aggressive avoidance schemes which have been defeated in the courts. “If 
you are a person who has financially gained from a scheme, then this will 
apply,” the source said.

Earlier this month, HMRC successfully defeated a scheme used by the brewery 
giantGreene King called Project Sussex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/10/appeal-court-battle-greene-king-tax-plan>
, which had been marketed by Ernst & Young. A complex tax avoidance scheme 
being used by transport group Stagecoach to wipe £11m off its tax bill was 
defeatedin the  
<http://network.mynewsdesk.com/wf/click?upn=-2FfM1DNUeCvIOelFbumFeiAt6ltsnlKLEkC3VnTbEjhTtca8NGvg-2B8g9BM-2BO4kitS8y1ol0-2FOcMRSdsgIDC-2B4E-2BLWA99nBKHDVvkJrmTgv4E-3D_AIMRe0EZFYpFUxp-2Fpzz7Eimw3sVAQaN5YWNa4YKBDqlq8TCAy4sy55duJerJcgbGL-2ByjwLERapvR43JD9cL7uWFbRnypUumV9kO4TkSlMXkkGzV4UEJAkPyQfz8ZGi4O8IHF7CoF9lkTk-2BFanEnsd-2BKnXfWEccG65injAeynfnyjz-2FND0Q5yVUxgK0cMmxaTBNB3SrVwOoGllIWTw80TWOa0A5DGiFJPK8ZlW5FBuwPK-2FhYxxZgh5Qrg-2F-2B2jF47KVVzLvgHOJmyhXw7Jh-2Fr-2BvDqI3Fe-2B4w-2FwG3oMRAEsydL7cBlEOU7V-2B-2BXPCJOKJFtwdxTTZXWuMmmgSh-2B3qzeXLsLdb-2Fzovxk-2BOLOxAdr5Lle39IT-2Fl3VplzmGOb6Hk-2B5MpB-2B6vIqmoPSteOcxY8IDj3Fj7o2KBCkqbUyHfjHvK48-3D>
tax courts 
<http://network.mynewsdesk.com/wf/click?upn=-2FfM1DNUeCvIOelFbumFeiAt6ltsnlKLEkC3VnTbEjhTtca8NGvg-2B8g9BM-2BO4kitS8y1ol0-2FOcMRSdsgIDC-2B4E-2BLWA99nBKHDVvkJrmTgv4E-3D_AIMRe0EZFYpFUxp-2Fpzz7Eimw3sVAQaN5YWNa4YKBDqlq8TCAy4sy55duJerJcgbGL-2ByjwLERapvR43JD9cL7uWFbRnypUumV9kO4TkSlMXkkGzV4UEJAkPyQfz8ZGi4O8IHF7CoF9lkTk-2BFanEnsd-2BKnXfWEccG65injAeynfnyjz-2FND0Q5yVUxgK0cMmxaTBNB3SrVwOoGllIWTw80TWOa0A5DGiFJPK8ZlW5FBuwPK-2FhYxxZgh5Qrg-2F-2B2jF47KVVzLvgHOJmyhXw7Jh-2Fr-2BvDqI3Fe-2B4w-2FwG3oMRAEsydL7cBlEOU7V-2B-2BXPCJOKJFtwdxTTZXWuMmmgSh-2B3qzeXLsLdb-2Fzovxk-2BOLOxAdr5Lle39IT-2Fl3VplzmGOb6Hk-2B5MpB-2B6vIqmoPSteOcxY8IDj3Fj7o2KBCkqbUyHfjHvK48-3D>
 in March.

Dame Margaret Hodge, the Labour MP and former chair of the PAC who highlighted 
the role of individuals and firms that profit from tax avoidance ina committee 
report last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/26/prosecute-financial-advisers-tax-avoidance-mps>
, welcomed the consultation.


“These advisers have got away with too many dodgy schemes and often marketing 
tax avoidance wheezes on an industrial scale. If this new measure stops this 
dodgy tax advice it should end much of the aggressive tax avoidance.

“Time will tell whether this measure is tough enough to deal with the 
long-established habits of advisers who act with lawyers, accountants or 
bankers and help rich individuals and large companies avoid tax,” she said.

Richard Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/22/richard-murphy-corbynomics-tax-social-housing-britain>
, the chartered accountant who has advised Jeremy Corbyn on tax matters, 
compared unscrupulous tax advisers and lawyers to a “pinstripe mafia” and said 
the consultation could clean up the profession.

“The people who create and market these schemes won’t be able to get 
professional indemnity insurance, and you can’t practice without insurance,” he 
said.


Pressure group the Tax Justice Network welcomed the legislation but said it 
would need to be enforced in the courts by HMRC. Research director Alex Cobham 
said: “The proposal to go after enablers of schemes that have been successfully 
challenged will have no impact on this major area of tax losses, unless the 
government is finally willing to take on multinationals and the big four 
accountancy firms in court.”

The Chartered Institute of Taxation urged caution and said that the real 
consequences on the industry cannot be assessed until the details are released 
by the government.


Advisers will want to examine how the government hopes to define when planning 
becomes tax avoidance and whether they will face fines even if they have made 
clients aware of any possible risks.

John Cullinane, CIOT’s tax policy director, said: “The government need to be 
careful that in their efforts to wipe out avoidance schemes they don’t prevent 
taxpayers from getting access to honest, impartial advice on the law. 
Definitions will be crucial.”
 