
British businesses have warned that Brexit will trigger investment cuts, 
hiring freezes and redundancies as the consequences of leaving theEuropean Union
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> threaten to destabilise markets further 
this week.

Brexit live: George Osborne tries to calm markets with early-morning speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/27/brexit-live-george-osborne-economy-corbyn-shadow-cabinet>
The survey by the Institute of Directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-of-directors> (IoD), which 
found that the majority of businesses believed Brexit was bad for them, comes 
amid fears that investors will wipe billions more pounds off share values on 
Monday morning, and signs that the pound, which hit a 30-year low on Friday, 
was coming under further pressure from trading in Asia. Sterling was down more 
than 1% as the Asian markets opened late on Sunday.


George Osborne will make a statement on Monday morning ‎to provide reassurance 
about financial and economic stability in light of the referendum result and 
the actions that he and the rest of the government will be taking to protect 
the national interest over the coming period.

The IoD said a quarter of the members polled in a survey were putting hiring 
plans on hold, while 5% said they were set to make workers redundant. Nearly 
two-thirds of those polled said the outcome of the referendum was negative for 
their business. One in five respondents, out of a poll of more than 1,000 
business leaders, were considering moving some of their operations outside of 
the UK.

Market turmoil fears likely to force Mark Carney to abandon ECB meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/market-turmoil-fears-likely-to-force-mark-carney-to-abandon-ecb-meeting>
In preparation for further turmoil on the markets after a record $2tn (£1.5tn) 
was wiped off global share prices on Friday, the governor of the Bank of 
England, Mark Carney,was expected to abandon plans to travel to a meeting of 
central bankers and policy makers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/market-turmoil-fears-likely-to-force-mark-carney-to-abandon-ecb-meeting>
 organised by the European Central Bank in Portugal on Wednesday. He will 
remain in London to oversee the response to the uncertainty.

The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 index of leading 
shares is expected to fall by 2.8%, or around 180 points, when the market opens 
on Monday. City dealers are expected to arrive at their desks early to cope 
with an anticipated surge in orders, and analysts will be closely monitoring 
the pound, after it came under pressure in early trading on Sunday. Central 
bank bosses meeting in Switzerland have said they will carefully scrutinise 
market stability in the weeks ahead.


Meanwhile, fears are spreading that an estimated 100,000 roles  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/brexit-could-lead-to-loss-of-100000-financial-services-jobs-report-warns>
could be lost in the financial sector if banks press on with contingency plans
to move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/15/uk-better-in-reformed-europe-says-hsbc-chair>
 jobs out of the UK <>.

The political uncertainty gripping the UK following the resignation of prime 
minister David Cameron and turmoil in the Labour party has put the City on 
alert for more volatility. With fears that the economic turmoil following the 
result will tip the country into recession, the snap poll of IoD members found 
that company bosses were considering a range of options, including hiring and 
investment freezes and relocating some of their operations.

Simon Walker, the IoD’s director general, said the organisation would not 
“sugar-coat” the damaging outcome: “A majority of business leaders think the 
vote for Brexit is bad for them.”




Brexit triggers Corbyn coup: Watson 'saddened' by Labour departures – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/26/brexit-live-jeremy-corbyn-sacks-hilary-benn-tory-leadership>
“Businesses will be busy working out how they are going to adapt and succeed 
after the referendum result,” said Walker of the group which has 34,500 
members, ranging from start-up entrepreneurs to chief executives of 
multinational companies. “But we can’t sugar-coat this, many of our members are 
feeling anxious.”

In the poll, 36% of IoD members said the outcome of last Thursday’s vote would 
lead them to cut investment in their business whereas just 9% said the opposite 
was true. Just under half said it would not change their investment plans.

The IoD board and its council, which is a conduit for members’ views, will 
meet on Monday to discuss the fallout from the vote. Three-quarters of members 
polled said they felt the priority for business leaders was to take steps to 
protect the economy from the negative reaction in financial markets, with 
securing a new trade arrangement with the EU coming second to that. Business 
lobby group the CBI has also said it was speaking to its members as the UK 
stared at several years of economic uncertainty.

“There is no point crying over spilled milk,” said Walker. “But these results 
highlight the importance of theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> maintaining 
stability in the financial system. It is crucial that the banks do not starve 
businesses of cash. During the referendum campaign we were promised an open and 
outward-looking country after Brexit, now it must be delivered [by David 
Cameron’s successor].”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Carney%20seeks%20to%20reassure%20financial%20markets%20after%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Carney%20seeks%20to%20reassure%20financial%20markets%20after%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video&media=>
Mark Carney seeks to reassure financial markets after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/24/mark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video>
Carney sought to calm jittery financial markets with a public address on 
Friday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
by insisting banks were in better shape than they were before the 2008 
financial crisis and that there was an extra £250bn available to ensure that 
financial institutions did not run short of cash.

Bank of England seeks to limit damage of UK's vote to leave EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-seeks-to-limit-damage-of-uks-vote-to-leave-eu>
He spent part of the weekend with other central bank governors at the Bank for 
International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland.

The last of three extra lending facilities announced by Carney ahead of the 
referendum takes place on Tuesday, while the Bank’s financial policy committee 
set up to monitor risks to the financial system also meets this week.

Banks are preparing to shift roles out of London amid the uncertainty about 
whether the UK can keep its “passporting” rights allowing them to operate 
across the EU.


US bank JP Morgan has warned 4,000 jobs will go and HSBC has said 1,000 City 
jobs will move to France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/15/uk-better-in-reformed-europe-says-hsbc-chair>
. Rumours are sweeping the City that alternative trading sites are being set up 
in a number of other financial centres, including Luxembourg.


Jonathan Hill, who resigned as EU commissioner for finance, told the Financial 
Times <https://next.ft.com/content/2b84027e-3b93-11e6-9f2c-36b487ebd80a> that 
the City should be ready to have rules imposed upon it by eurozone countries.

Analysts said that Brexit should not spark the chaos which followed the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. “Policymakers and companies have 
had time to make contingency plans, even if they can’t fully offset the 
impact,” said analysts at at French bankSociété Générale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/societe-generale>. However, the analysts 
expect the pound to fall another 10% “over time” and the euro by half that 
amount.


Get ready for more market reaction to Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jun/26/get-ready-for-more-market-reaction-to-brexit>
Even so, the markets are being closed watched. Agustín Carstens, the head of 
the Mexican central bank and chair of the global committee of central bankers, 
said he and his colleagues would “carefully monitor market functioning and 
stability” to prevent the shock verdict of British voters spilling over into a 
market panic.

The British Chambers of Commerce warned a prolonged period of uncertainty 
would hit confidence levels, investment and job creation.


Andrew Hood, a senior director at the law firm Dechert and a former adviser to 
the prime minister on international issues, was reported as saying: “Big 
technology and manufacturing firms are concerned that they are going to get 
squeezed if the UK focuses too much on keeping financial services.”

Hood said he had already heard of three deals being put on indefinite hold. 
There were also reports that investors in technology start-ups in the UK were 
pulling out because the funds were contingent on Britain remaining in the EU.
 