
Aaron's verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a first) and who has 
had a bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a first: campaign for financial education

With all the furore surrounding tuition fees, debt, loans and interest rates, 
very little thought has been given to the support, and crucially the education 
given to school pupils about finance and money. So with higher education 
funding rarely out of the headlines, Martin Lewis of the Money Saving Expert 
website haslaunched a campaign 
<http://blog.moneysavingexpert.com/2011/06/03/mse-to-donate-35000-to-the-campaign-for-financial-education-in-schools-%E2%80%93-a-political-donation/>
 to get compulsory financial education into the school curriculum.

While higher education funding may have been the catalyst for the campaign, 
it's evident that financial education wouldn't be limited to information about 
that, in fact the plan would be to cover the basics of personal finance and 
consumer rights. Launching a petition on the government's new e-petition 
website, Martin Lewis describes the current state of affairs as "a national 
disgrace that in the 20 years since introducing student loans, we've educated 
our youth into debt when they go to university, but never about debt. We're a 
financially illiterate nation." Strong words, but then again a comprehensive 
understanding of basic finance is an important issue. A wrong decision, or 
unchallenged misinformation can cost thousands.

Since launching the campaign, the e-petition has quickly passed more than 
50,000 signatures. And with parliament giving consideration to a full debate on 
any petition that passes 100,000 sign ups, it's already over half-way there.

In an economy that already requires an increasingly sophisticated 
understanding as to how to make the right financial decisions, this seems like 
a no-brainer to me. To add your name to the petition, you can sign uphere 
<http://epetitions.direct.gov.uk/petitions/8903>.

Heading for a fail: 2012 university applicants

The government likes to claim they don't understand the system and perhaps the 
financial education they receive isn't up to scratch, but it doesn't take a 
degree to realise that lots of potential university applicants for 2012 are 
going to be deterred from applying due to the hike in fees. The big question 
for universities, but also the government, is how many? Up until now, it's been 
almost impossible to say with any authority how many fewer applicants we could 
see for the 2012 intake. Lessons from history show us that after the previous 
tuition fee rise, from £1,000 a year to £3,000, we saw a 5% drop for the 2006 
intake. But that was quite a different reform that met with quite a different 
reaction and crucially was done at a time when there was record investment in 
the outreach infrastructure such as AimHigher. With that infrastructure gone 
and a hostile reaction on the streets and in the press, initial predictions 
have been for a drop of anywhere between 5% to 20% through university doors 
come 2012.

Anything approaching a double digit fall would be catastrophic for the 
coalition, and for the Liberal Democrats in particular, who are desperately 
hoping that their tuition fee car crash won't cause them any more political 
damage. If the decrease is negligible, they will at least claim it hasn't had 
the damaging impact many feared it would. However, it will do little to allay 
the concerns of thousands of students and their parents who still feel betrayed 
after their very public pledge signing, and then discarding. Anything 
approaching a 10% fall or more, will simply give more ammunition to the 
long-standing critics of the tuition fee trebling.

So this week, findings from the first major study into the applicant 
intentions from theNational Foundation for Education Research 
<http://www.nfer.ac.uk/about-nfer/press/releases/prospective-university-students-are- 
re-considering-their-options.cfm> (NFER), which surveyed over 1,000 secondary 
school pupils aged between 14 an 17, will make uncomfortable reading for the 
coalition. NFER's headline was that 15% of pupils in school years 10 to 12 in 
England who were originally planning to go to university have now decided not 
to, 19% of school pupils have decided to only apply to universities charging 
less than the £9000 a year, and 26% said they will only apply to universities 
where they can live at home. But perhaps most shocking of all, was that 79% of 
respondents said that the tuition fee increase was forcing them to change their 
plans about future study in some form or another. It's going to take more than 
a Simon Hughes sized sticking plaster to remedy this.

So the clock is ticking to see whether the findings from this research project 
will be translated into the real decline many predicted when the government 
first announced their plans, but if this is anything to go by, it does not look 
encouraging.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 2010-11. He 
tweets at@AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 