
The verdict on who has had a good week (heading for a first) and who has had a 
bad week (heading for a fail).

Heading for a first: university admissions tutors

It's probably been a busy week, but it's also been a record week for 
university admissions tutors. As expected, there was a late scramble for 
university places once A-level results were announced. With greater demand than 
ever before, pressure for clearing was unprecedented, with many students 
desperate to secure a place in the September 2011 entry before tuition fees 
treble next year. Places were getting snapped up more quickly than bargains in 
a Christmas sale, and by the start of this week 17,878 had already been 
allocated, a jump of 31% on last year. With places getting filled in record 
time, and pressure from university management to get bums on seats in order to 
balance the books, the pressure was on admissions tutors to deal with thousands 
of frantic prospective students hoping to secure a university place. So this 
week admissions tutors definitely deserve a first.

But for all my admiration of what admissions tutors do, particularly in the 
busy week that follows A-level results, I can't help but think it simply papers 
over the crack of a much bigger problem. The fact that in 2011 we still have a 
system of university admissions based on predictions and followed by an annual 
frenzied clearing auction can not be right. I agree with my predecessor as NUS 
president, Wes Streeting (now chief executive of the Helena Kennedy 
Foundation), writing for theHuffington Post last week 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/wes-streeting/clearing-its-time-to-cons_b_928364.html>
 who said that "it's time to consign this university bargain basement to the 
dustbin of history." The sooner we can move to a post-qualification application 
(PQA) system, the better. The government has signalled its intent to 
investigate PQA in the recent higher education white paper, and this is one 
pledge I'd like to see the government keep.

Heading for a fail: Scottish government

We saw the commencement of a legal challenge against the Scottish government 
this week, for what critics believe is their contravention of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. While the cast-iron guarantee from the Scottish 
National party government in Holyrood to stick to their pledge for free 
education in Scotland is laudable, there is a horrid whiff of hypocrisy about 
it. Despite offering a free education to Scottish students studying in 
Scotland, an entitlement extended to other students coming from the rest of the 
EU, students from the rest of the UK are charged between £1,820 and £2,895 per 
year, set to rise to £9000 next year. Paul Shiner ofPublic Interest Lawyers 
<http://www.publicinterestlawyers.co.uk/> believes this contravenes not only 
the European Convention on Human Rights, but also Britain's Equality Act.

The implications of this legal challenge will be significant. Scottish 
universities are already claiming a funding shortfall somewhere in the region 
of £200m, and with students from the rest of the UK footing much of the bill 
already, the funding black hole will get bigger if the SNP government loses the 
case.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 2010-11. He 
tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 