
The first footage of Martin Scorsese’s major awards contender Silence has been 
released, in the form of a 130-second trailer ahead of itsworld premiere at the 
Vatican 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/global/martin-scorseses-silence-set-for-vatican-world-premiere-1201924625/>
 next week.

Silence, which features Andrew Garfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> and Adam Driver as Jesuit 
missionaries risking torture and execution to spread Christianity in 
17th-century Japan, is adapted from a novel by Shusaku Endo. Scorsese wrote the 
screenplay with his regular collaborator Jay Cocks (Gangs of New York, Age of 
Innocence).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
The trailer appears to sum up the film’s narrative straightforwardly: Garfield 
and Driver prepare for the hazardous trip to search for their mentor, played by 
Liam Neeson; once inJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, they are 
afflicted by doubt over the price they are asking local converts to pay in 
standing up for their faith. The trailer dwells on the Japanese practice of 
executing Christians via crucifixion, including the notoriousmizuharitsuke, or 
water crucifixion.

Scorsese, famously, was brought up a Catholic and had intended to become a 
priest before becoming a film-maker. This religious impulse has registered 
directly in some of his films, such as The Last Temptation of Christ and 
Kundun, and more obliquely in the likes of Mean Streets, Bringing Out the Dead 
and Gangs of New York.Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> 
appears to be a summary of Scorsese’s own experience of faith.

Silence is released on 23 December in the US, 1 January in the UK and 16 
February in Australia.
 