
Amid exploding fireworks and waving flags, a Chinese ship carrying more than 
9,000 containers entered the newly expanded locks that will double thePanama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> canal’s capacity.

Several tugboats pulled the vessel, Cosco Shipping Panama, into the new locks 
at Agua Clara on Sunday under a cloudy sky in Cólon province, about about 50 
miles north of Panama City.

“This is the route that unites the world,” said Panama’s president, Juan 
Carlos Varela.

Story of cities #16: how the US-run Canal Zone divided Panama for a century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/06/story-cities-16-panama-canal-zone-history-us-run-divided-city>
As the ship headed for the Pacific Ocean, the canal administrator, Jorge Luis 
Quijano, said: “This new transit route is the tip of the iceberg in making 
Panama once again the logistic center of theAmericas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>. And it represents a significant 
opportunity for the countries of the region to improve their infrastructure, 
increase their exports.”

Thousands of Panamanians who began gathering before dawn to witness the 
inauguration of the canal’s expansion waved the national flag as a band struck 
up.

“It’s a one-time experience, a great achievement,” said Felicia Penuela, a 
housewife. “Panama is showing the world that even though it is a small country 
it can do great things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fpanama-canal-first-ship-sails-through-newly-expanded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6d8b8784ffc425ce3ffdd3f49d55821b92217f%2F312_552_5704_3421%2F5704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20ship%20sails%20through%20newly%20expanded%20Panama%20canal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fpanama-canal-first-ship-sails-through-newly-expanded%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20ship%20sails%20through%20newly%20expanded%20Panama%20canal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fpanama-canal-first-ship-sails-through-newly-expanded%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6d8b8784ffc425ce3ffdd3f49d55821b92217f%2F312_552_5704_3421%2F5704.jpg>
 The ship crosses the new Agua Clara locks on the Panama canal. Photograph: 
Johan Ordonez/AFP/Getty Images 
Nearly two years late due to construction delays and labour strife, the 
$5.25bn (£3.9bn) project formally launched with the transit of the 158ft-wide, 
984ft-long (48.2 metres by 300 metres) container ship, one of the modern class 
of mega-vessels that will now be able to use the canal.

Nicaragua gives Chinese firm contract to build alternative to Panama Canal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nicaragua-china-panama-canal> 
With 30,000 people and eight foreign heads of state expected to attend the 
daylong festivities, officials were bullish about the future of the canal.

“There is evidence that the Panama canal, with this expansion, is an important 
player not only for regional maritime commerce but worldwide,” said Oscar 
Bazan, the Panama Canal Authority’s executive vice-president for planning and 
commercial development. “The canal is a winning bet. [Clients] will benefit 
from saving not only time but also money, because the canal is a route that 
shortens distance.”

However, the expansion comes amid a lull in global shipping due to the drop in 
oil prices, an economic slowdown in China – the canal’s second-largest customer 
– and other factors that have hit the waterway’s traffic and income.
 