
It’s easy to forget, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> having destroyed what was 
left of Zack Snyder’s reputation earlier this year, that there were many 
excellent things about 2013’s Man of Steel. Those splendid early scenes on 
Krypton, reimagining Superman’s homeworld as a striking vision of 
fantasy-inspired futurism; Michael Shannon’s remarkable General Zod, a raging, 
monomaniacal volcano of spite; even, to a certain extent, the retooling of 
Kal-El for the post-911 age, as an object of fear and fall guy for 
narrow-minded xenophobia.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fapr%2F17%2Fman-of-steel-trailer-superman-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20of%20Steel%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Superman%20film%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fapr%2F17%2Fman-of-steel-trailer-superman-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20of%20Steel%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Superman%20film%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fapr%2F17%2Fman-of-steel-trailer-superman-video&media=>
Man of Steel: watch the trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/apr/17/man-of-steel-trailer-superman-video>
At least this felt like a version of Superman that did more than pay tribute 
to the Richard Donner/Richard Lester movies, unlike Bryan Singer’s insipid 2006 
effort Superman Returns – even if the new, green and ultra-conflicted man of 
steel seemed to lose a little celestial magic for every extra layer of 
complexity he gained. But withreports surfacing that Supes might be getting a 
new solo outing 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/dwayne-johnsons-rock-meet-dany-garcia-woman-behind-hollywoods-highest-earner-497885?rm=eu>
 once he’s helped take down the evil Darkseid in next year’s Justice League, 
here are some subtle (and not-so subtle) shifts we’d like to see when the last 
son of Krypton soars once again on the big screen.

A little starry-eyed optimism

Just as the makers of the James Bond films stripped away all 007’s 
ostentatious smarm on 2006’s Casino Royale to reinvigorate the suave secret 
agent for a new generation, but have since begun to slowly reinject tried and 
test elements of the Bond mythos, it’s about time Warner Bros started 
transforming Superman back into the “big blue boy scout” we all know and love. 
It made sense for mankind to treat Kal-El with initial suspicion, especially 
when the alien interloper appeared to have brought a gang of Kryptonian crazies 
down to Earth, not to mention accidentally destroying half of Metropolis, inMan 
of Steel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel>. But given he’s just 
sacrificed himself to save the world from giant CGI monstrosity Doomsday, and 
will most likely be required to complete more feats of Herculean heroism in 
Justice League, Superman is surely ripe for transformation into the symbol of 
hope and optimism he usually embodies in the comics. The world’s best-known 
superhero is supposed to transcend cynicism and leave even the most 
furrow-browed non-believer reaching for the superlatives. Let him once again 
inspire genuine awe, not endless bitterness and distrust.

A non-CGI villain

Both Man of Steel and Dawn of Justice culminated in an almighty explosion of 
pixels and masonry, but all that spectacle still left critics and filmgoers 
roundly unimpressed. Why not learn from Marvel movies such asIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man-3>, which intelligently dialled down 
the opposition to Robert Downey Jr’s power-suited hero, just when we might have 
been expecting the opposite? I am aware this probably means another run out for 
Jesse Eisenberg’s over-caffeinated Lex Luthor, but at least this means Superman 
will be confronted with a human enemy he can actually talk to, rather than a 
freakish alien zombie thing that just requires impaling on the nearest 
kryptonite spear. Speaking of which …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffive-things-man-of-steel-2-superman-solo-outing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bdf5477f9b3ff826d0104d27ce4773358287bb4%2F225_0_1337_802%2F1337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we'd%20like%20to%20see%20in%20Man%20of%20Steel%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffive-things-man-of-steel-2-superman-solo-outing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%27d%20like%20to%20see%20in%20Man%20of%20Steel%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffive-things-man-of-steel-2-superman-solo-outing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bdf5477f9b3ff826d0104d27ce4773358287bb4%2F225_0_1337_802%2F1337.jpg>
 Michael Shannon as General Zod in Man of Steel Photograph: Courtesy of Warner 
Bros. Picture/Publicity image from film company 
A retooled moral compass

Superman’s decision to kill off Zod at the end of Man of Steel is the biggest 
bugbear fans have with the Snyder version ofSuperman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/superman> right now – up there with 
Warner’s decision to retool Batman as a murderous thug – because it undercuts 
everything we know about the character.

The best of the Donner/Lester films often gave us villains who only came close 
to success because the man of steel refused to use the full extent of his 
powers on moral grounds. And that ultimately made them more interesting. If 
Kal-El can simply snuff out his weaker enemies, these movies lose all their 
joy, because film-makers are forced to pitch tougher and tougher bad guys 
against our hero in a sort of supervillain arms race.

More depth to Lois and Clark

There is little of the brilliantly bumbling small-town doofus of the 
Donner/Lester films in Cavill’s portrayal of the Daily Planet newsman. And with 
Amy Adams’ Lane already aware of her lover’s secret identity, Kal-El has rarely 
been forced to choose between his superhero duties and his human paramour in 
the Snyder movies. Much of the duality of the character has therefore been 
lost: the contrast between the godlike Kryptonian and the Kansas farm boy; the 
decision whether to live his life as a normal human being (with all the 
attendant flaws) or to cut himself off from those he is charged with defending, 
for fear that personal attachments will always get in the way of making 
decisions for the greater good.

Every single thing that is wrong with Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/25/review-batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice>
Without Clark as a clumsy oversized geek, Lane also loses a lot of her spark. 
We don’t get to see her attitude transform when the man of steel pulls on his 
suit, and it becomes even less believable that Superman would be able to 
maintain his secret identity. Man of Steel 2 needs to find new ways to flesh 
out its key relationship, because Adams deserves a little more to work with 
next time out. Where Margot Kidder’s street-smart, cynical Lane lit up the 70s 
and 80s movies, the new iteration has been reduced to little more than 
wide-eyed love interest, a glorified Kal-El groupie.

Some extra-terrestrial adventures

On the other hand, if Warner Bros is incapable of interesting audiences in an 
earthbound man of steel, why not allow him to venture where few of his fellow 
metahumans would be able to follow? The new film could see Kal-El journeying 
into space on a cosmic mission, neatly explaining why his fellow Justice 
Leaguers are no longer around. A big-screen riff on the famous story of 
Brainiac and Kandor might seem far-fetched, but would at least give us the 
Silver Age-inspired Superman movie that no film-maker has yet dared make. It 
would be something new, even if audiences in 2016 might think the idea of 
shrinking Kryptonian cities (along with their entire populations) a little 
hokey and far-fetched.
 