
Imagine veteran journalists in a pub with time on their hands, old friends and 
rivals to prompt countless memories... and as much free drink as they could 
handle.

No wonder the London Press Club’s staging of a Long Lunch in Fleet Street 
<http://londonpressclub.co.uk/long-live-the-long-lunch/> last Friday was a 
resounding success.

It was held to mark the end of all journalistic activity on the street 
following the closure in August  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/aug/05/exit-from-fleet-street-spiritual-home-of-british-journalism-in-pictures>
of the editorial office of Scotland’s Sunday Post.

Former Fleet Street editors, reporters and subeditors who crowded into the 
Punch Tavern on Ludgate Circus were delighted to tell their tales of scoops 
past - and scoops missed - to John Dale, who filmed the event.

Joyful reminiscences tumbled out from editors such as Bill Hagerty (Sunday 
Today and the Sunday People), Eve Pollard (Sunday Mirror and Sunday Express) 
and Paul Connew (Sunday Mirror).

The Daily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> was well 
represented by Liz Gill, Tom Smith, Leon Symons, John Burns, Esther Herring and 
Gill Martin (although, like many of us, she worked for other several titles 
down the years).

Liz Hodgkinson, author of the book about the women who fought against 
journalism’s male domination, Ladies of the Street, was in fine form. Asked by 
Dale what was so great about Fleet Street she said: “High wages.”

Lee Rodwell, once of the London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Evening News and the Sun, recalled boozy lunches, as did her husband, the 
former associate design editor of the Independent, Michael Crozier.

I also spotted London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> city columnist 
Anthony Hilton, and former city reporter, now the Times’s deputy foreign 
editor, Suzy Jagger.

Doug Wills, managing editor of the London Evening Standard who chairs the 
Press Club, greeted the crowd by saying it was “marvellous” to see that so many 
“had found time to take part.”


Marvellous? You would hardly need to pay journalists to spend time in good 
company when their glasses are being continually refilled. And the good news is 
that it might happen again.

David Leighton, the communications chief with the lunch’s sponsors, Associated 
British Ports, told me he hoped it might become an annual event.

Dale’s film can be seen here on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTfD83b-SCA>. On reflection, I think I may 
have had one martini too many before my interview!
 