
Altar Ego by Kathy Lette 353pp, Picador, Â£12.99 Hot on the heels of Mad Cows, 
Kathy Lette's sixth novel comes dressed in one of those covers that should send 
any discerning reader running. But how we lap it up. On every Tube train, in 
every airport departure lounge, you'll find a Lette being devoured by an eager 
Cosmo reader or someone else's mother. And why? Because this is the sort of 
untaxing, easy-lay prose that time and again scores top of holiday 
light-reading lists.

 Altar Ego opens with its heroine, 32-year-old self-confessed shirkaholic 
Becky, pondering 'Is it a serious breach of wedding etiquette to run out on 
one's own wedding?' on the morning of her nuptials. What ensues when she flees 
is a series of disasters that come limping to a denouement only after every vow 
has been dashed on the altar and the knicker elastic stretched to near-breaking 
point.

 Lette has been quick to deny any resemblance between Becky and that other 
contemporary diva of disaster, Bridget Jones (unlike Helen Fielding's simpering 
females, she insists, her wimmin don't need men, they just use them). It's pure 
coincidence, then, that the heroine of Lette's diary should share the same 
neuroses about thighs, calorie consumption and the female orgasm; that she, 
too, is so bewildered by the choices available to her she is incapable of 
making up her mind (except in situations of extreme duress). As if this were 
the condition of every nineties woman . . .

 In fact, Becky is likeable precisely because of her indecision, self-doubt 
and 'flexible' feminism. Here is a woman who rages against building-site 
workers who wolf-whistle at her but is, equally, devastated when they don't. 
And Becky, at least, has the nerve to follow her heart (or hormones, if you 
will) and be damned - ditching her caring partner Julian, a human rights 
lawyer, for the young stud Zachary Burne ('Michelangelo's David without the 
pigeon poop'), cheating on both men, and being careless enough to be dumped 
twice over.

 Between sexual exploits and lengths of the YMCA pool, Becky seeks the counsel 
of her bosom pals: Anouska, a vacuous, tiara-hungry hair-flicker whose one 
ambition is to make the Bystander column of Tatler, and Kate, a 35-year-old 
'professional sceptic' who wears flame-retardant clothes and hates men. It's 
Kate who warns her: 'Marriage is just something to do when you're too bloody 
tired for sex.' The line-up is completed by a cast that reads like something 
out of a restoration farce, including Celestia, the suicide blonde with bra 
cups large enough to accommodate Pavarotti; Darius Gore, the upper-class twit 
with an epiglottal lisp and dubious sexual proclivities (he runs off with a 
South African towel attendant); and Eddy Rotterman, the sleazy agent with 'the 
sort of face you wouldn't wish on a bull terrier'.

 Lette lobs them all in together and sets a pace that rarely lets up. Dialogue 
is delivered in a volley of shrieks, gasps, trills, yaps and growls, the text 
spattered with exclamations, questions, imperatives and one-liners that trip 
off the tongue like they never do in real life. As for the plot, Lette sustains 
climax after climax. So we see Becky defenestrating herself from the bathroom 
window in full wedding regalia, Becky emptying a plate of oysters into the lap 
of the odious Rotterman, Julian discovering Becky and Zach in flagrante in the 
garden shed, Anouska bursting in on her husband and personal trainer at the 
YMCA gym, and so on.

 Amid this chaos and a torrent of trademark puns, Lette taps a humour that is 
universal in its appeal and carefully attuned to our vainest sensibilities. 
Take Anouska's indignant retort to an Estee Lauder assistant in Selfridges: 
'They're not wrinkles. They're fellatio lines.' Or, better still, Becky's 
rejoinder 'Sod off' when wished 'Have a nice day' by the same white- coated 
doll. (There's a sweet, shared revenge here - hands up any woman who has not 
been publicly humiliated by a 16-year-old Boots make-up assistant.) More's the 
pity, then, that this brash Aussie tongue all too easily lapses into dumb, 
adolescent wit ('Someone awful has happened.' 'You saw your bum from the 
back?'). The trouble is, Lette's comedy simply lacks the sophistication, the 
brilliantly executed farce of, say, Tom Sharpe's Wilt (think of Wilt caught 
naked with a life-sized inflatable doll attached to himself, and then of Becky 
hiding under the marital bed while her husband and best friend make love, and 
tell me which incident had you squirming). Which is why, in 10 years' time, 
when his books continue to find their way into holiday hand luggage, hers will 
long since have been left yellowing at the poolside.
 