
A week after the death of Fidel Castro, the jubilant mood among Cuban exiles 
in Miami’s Little Havana neighbourhood is slowly giving way to one of measured 
contemplation, along with some apprehension about what will happen to their 
homeland whenDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
becomes US president in January.


News of Castro’s demise sparked a giant street party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/the-old-man-is-dead-fidel-castros-death-sparks-celebrations-on-streets-of-miami>
 along Calle Ocho that by Wednesday night had morphed into a rally attended by 
hundreds at the Bay of Pigs monument, demanding a restoration of human rights 
and political reforms in Cuba.

The shifting emotions reflect what community leaders say is a renewed hope for 
change on the island among Miami’s almost one million Cuban Americans – the 
majority of whom left the country because of their opposition to Castro’s 
regime –sparked by Castro’s death and Trump’s election in the same month.

“Fidel Castro was more than just a symbol. His physical disappearance will be 
far-reaching, past the celebratory atmosphere in southFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> and of so many who see his death 
as a burial of the worst of Cuba,” said Jorge Mas Santos, chairman of the 
Miami-based Cuban American National Foundation.

“It will unleash the shackles from those within the regime of a different 
generation who want change, who want to project Cuba to be part of a group of 
nations that function. I’m hopeful that the Cuban exile community sees our role 
as helping Cubans on the island, to empower them and be the architects of 
change forCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cuban%20Americans%20celebrate%20in%20Miami%20following%20death%20of%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cuban%20Americans%20celebrate%20in%20Miami%20following%20death%20of%20Fidel%20Castro%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fcuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video&media=>
Cuban Americans celebrate in Miami following death of Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/26/cuban-americans-celebrate-in-miami-following-death-of-fidel-castro-video>
Trump followed a well-trodden path as he courted the votes of Miami’s Cuban 
Americans this year, with a photo-op with acafecito and pastelitos at Calle 
Ocho’s famous Versailles Bakery and a platform at the Bay of Pigs museum in 
Little Havana upon which to deliver a fiery denunciation of Barack Obama for
thawing relations <https://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/foreign-policy/cuba> with 
the Cuban president, Raúl Castro, who formally succeeded his brother as leader 
in 2008.

“If Cuba is unwilling to make a better deal for the Cuban people, the 
Cuban/American people and the US as a whole, I will terminate deal,” Trump
tweeted <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803237535178772481> two 
days after Fidel Castro’s death. But with other priorities now consuming the 
attention of Trump’s transition team, Cubans in south Florida wonder if the 
president-elect really intends to deliver on the pledges he has made to rein in 
Obama’s new accord.

Guillermo Grenier, professor of sociology at Florida International 
University’s Cuban Research Institute, is sceptical. “When Trump began to see 
that the Cuban vote might be significant in Florida, he did what every other 
politician since 1959 has done, come to the Cuban community and said, ‘Next 
year we’re going to do something about the Castro government, next year we’re 
going to be hardline,” he said. “There’s no strong consensus Trump knows what 
to do about Cuba. There’s no compelling reason to mess around with Cuba and I 
don’t think Trump will do anything about Cuba.”

Trump has yet to appoint a secretary of state who will help steer the 
direction of the new era in Washington-Havana relations, and aside from
appointing Mauricio Claver-Carone 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation-world/world/americas/cuba/article116289068.html>
, executive director of a  <http://www.uscubapac.com/index.html>political 
action committee opposed to Cuban engagement, to his transition team  
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation-world/world/americas/cuba/article116289068.html>
for the treasury department, the president-elect has offered few clues.

And there is a generational divide among Cuban Americans on the rapprochement 
with their former homeland, Grenier said. “Younger Cubans, the new arrivals, 
the second-generation Cubans born in the US that voted for Trump, almost all 
are for engagement. You still have that older generation, a smaller part of the 
community today but nevertheless wealthier and more politically connected and 
influential, the same old guard saying we should have a reeling back … The ones 
who have the megaphone are the ones that are going to be heard.”

Nevertheless, Trump’s hard line seemed to resonate with many of Florida’s 1.2 
million Cuban Americans in last month’s presidential election, with 54% voting 
for him,according to Pew Research 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/11/15/unlike-other-latinos-about-half-of-cuban-voters-in-florida-backed-trump/>
, up from the 47% who backed Mitt Romney in 2012.

Among them was Juan Fiol, a Miami-based realtor who was born in the US to 
Cuban immigrant parents, who believes the majority of his community backed 
Trump because they thought he would stand up to Raúl Castro.

“That’s the reason we vote heavily for the Republicans, not Democrats,” he 
said. “Cubans know what a socialist is. The Democratic party is a socialist 
party; they have the same thinking and style.”

Mas was optimistic about future relations between the US and Cuba. “Some of 
the elements of what Obama did will continue under President Trump, there will 
be renewed emphasis on human rights and a potential renegotiation based on the 
experience of the last two years, which has seen little to no investment from 
US companies in Cuba,” he said.

“Cuba has to move, it has to make reforms, it has to do things to entice 
investment and free enterprise. [But] the death of Fidel Castro has lifted a 
dark veil. People here have hope and expectation for a better future. Now the 
work begins.”
 