
We’re so accustomed to watching Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> do things very well that it’s a 
rather refreshing novelty to watch her doing something very badly, even if 
she’s very good at being very bad. That, more or less, is the chief selling 
point ofFlorence Foster Jenkins (Fox, PG), Stephen Frears’s bright, 
bubbleweight biopic of the Manhattan socialite and aspiring but tone-deaf 
soprano who, thanks to immense wealth and a public high on irony, managed to 
sell out Carnegie Hall with her lusty squawking.

Jenkins’s story has already been told, to fictionalised and more nuanced 
effect, in the recent French filmMarguerite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/20/marguerite-review-tragicomic-tale-tone-deaf-singer>
, while Frears’s peppier interpretation glides disappointingly past its 
queasier moral equations. In making a key villain out of her most honest 
critic, and cheering along with her largely condescending patrons, the film 
pertains to be about the triumph of the spirit, though it’s money, above all, 
that is the maker of dreams here. A flub as a fable, then, it’s still a zesty 
actors’ showcase. Streep digs into the character’s essential absurdity with 
beaming, trilling gusto, but hers isn’t even the best performance here: as St 
Clair Bayfield, Jenkins’s sweetly cynical enabler of a partner, a superb Hugh 
Grant gives the film the streak of elegant ambivalence it otherwise sorely 
lacks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc77033a506c62715dd8a9c230d3aa8e1ea5d1f30%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3B%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3B%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%3B%20Les%20cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3B%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3B%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%3B%20Les%20cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc77033a506c62715dd8a9c230d3aa8e1ea5d1f30%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Superhero standoff: Chris Evans and Robert Downey Jr in Captain America: Civil 
War. Photograph: Allstar/Marvel Studios 
At present, Captain America: Civil War (Disney, 12) stands as the year’s 
highest-grossing film, though it doesn’t repay its audience’s adoration with 
much soul of its own. Title notwithstanding, it continues the Avengers’ 
collective war on international terror, with the twist that an ideological 
disagreement has incited a clash between the wholesome eponymous hero and 
Robert Downey Jr’s more slippery Iron Man. That novelty aside, it’s business as 
usual, though the huge, daft pyrotechnics have been scaled down slightly to 
accommodate some political to-and-fro. If anything, the well-choreographed 
combat scenes, of which there are still many, seem to stand in the way of more 
complicatedly compelling drama.

Lavishly acclaimed and Emmy-approved 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/emmys-2016-people-v-o-j-simpson-nominations-fx-nominated-1201814039/>
 in the US, Ryan Murphy’s self-explanatory procedural miniseries The People v 
OJ Simpson: American Crime Story (Fox, 15) isn’t quite the firecracker I was 
led to expect. It’s certainly confidently compulsive stuff, countering 
sensationalism with intricate legal process. But in this supposed golden age 
for US television, I was surprised by how much of it evokes a previous, more 
lurid and lumbering era of TV film, with some dodgy stunt casting (notably John 
Travolta as Robert Shapiro, Simpson’s lawyer) only just redeemed by Sarah 
Paulson’s marvellous Marcia Clark, the prosecutor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2df46b1815a9fce93e02f07714f21e8752109f5%2F458_532_3742_2245%2F3742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3B%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3B%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%3B%20Les%20cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3B%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%3B%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%3B%20Les%20cowboys%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-captain-america-civil-war-people-v-oj-simpson-dvd-reviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2df46b1815a9fce93e02f07714f21e8752109f5%2F458_532_3742_2245%2F3742.jpg>
 ‘Consistently surprising’: Les cowboys. Photograph: Antoine Doyen 
The most interesting film out this week, French screenwriter (and Jacques 
Audiard collaborator) Thomas Bidegain’s directorial debutLes cowboys 
(Studiocanal, 12) coolly meshes American and European cultural sensibilities 
from the title downwards. Riffing off John Ford’sThe Searchers, this story of a 
country-and-western-fixated family on a globe-trotting search for their 
daughter, awol after eloping with a Muslim lad, consistently surprises with its 
balance of rugged genre storytelling and heated, contemporary political 
examination.

I’m writing from the humid, Aperol-soaked climes of the Venice film festival, 
thestar attractions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/venice-film-festival-hollywoods-oscars-launchpad-la-la-land>
 of which will take months to trickle through to cinemas. Those at home craving 
a hint of festival discovery, however, should head to the on-demand site
FestivalScope.com 
<https://www.festivalscope.com/all/festival/venice-sala-web-1/2016>, where 18 
lower-profile titles from this year’s Venice programme will be available to 
stream for 10 days after their festival premiere. They’re so fresh, in other 
words, that I can’t make any first-hand recommendations yet. Among others, I’ll 
be eyeingKing of the Belgians, a surreal political road comedy from directors 
Jessica Woodworth and Peter Brosens (whose 2012 filmThe Fifth Season was a 
dreamy, delirious treat), andThe Orchid Seller, a son-to-father documentary 
portrait by last year’sGolden Lion winner Lorenzo Vigas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/venice-film-festival-2015-golden-lion-goes-to-venezuelas-from-afar>
. This worldwide digital bridging represents the future of the film festival 
experience: have a browse and take a chance.
 