
Views from northern stands: readers' Nordic football photographs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jul/17/views-from-northern-stands-readers-nordic-football-photographs>
The start of the domestic football seasons in Norway, Sweden and Finland is a 
sure sign of early spring in Scandinavia. Last year the three domestic leagues 
kicked their seasons off within a week of each other, but this year the 
NorwegianTippeligaen 
<http://www.fotball.no/Landslag_og_toppfotball/Toppfotball/tippeligaen/> season 
starts three weeks earlier than the others, with the first league fixture being 
played on Friday 11 March. The SwedishAllsvenskan 
<http://svenskfotboll.se/allsvenskan/> and Finland’s Veikkausliiga 
<http://www.veikkausliiga.com/> both follow on Saturday 2 April.

Are you planning on supporting your football team from the stands this year? 
What hopes and expectations do you have for the campaign ahead? Maybe you are 
already deeply engrossed in the current DanishSuperligaen 
<http://www.superliga.dk/> season, or are looking further ahead to Iceland’s 
domestic leagueÚrvalsdeild  <http://www.ksi.is/>kicking off in May? Perhaps you 
are travelling to France to support Sweden or Iceland at this summer’s European 
Championship?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffootball-in-the-nordic-countries-share-your-photos-and-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbfa83b4553a0c2960d6e534ddd7200b0b1e1d43%2F0_0_640_635%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20in%20the%20Nordic%20countries%3A%20share%20your%20photos%20and%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffootball-in-the-nordic-countries-share-your-photos-and-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20in%20the%20Nordic%20countries%3A%20share%20your%20photos%20and%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffootball-in-the-nordic-countries-share-your-photos-and-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbfa83b4553a0c2960d6e534ddd7200b0b1e1d43%2F0_0_640_635%2F640.jpg>
 Malmö FF - Opening day. Photograph: DesiringMachines/GuardianWitness 
Whether cheering on Molde <http://www.moldefk.no/> in Norway, Swedish champions
 IFK Norrköping <http://ifknorrkoping.se/index.php> or SJK  
<http://www.sjk2007.fi/>in Finland this season, from the stands or from afar, 
we would like to hear from Nordic football fans around the world. If you have 
previous memories of watching or playing football in the Nordic countries, we’d 
love to hear about these too.
 Derby day in Copenhagen. The Brøndby fans welcome FCK. Photograph: Stuart 
Fuller/GuardianWitness 
You can share your Nordic football images and experiences by clicking on the 
blue “contribute” buttons on this article.


 * GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/series/guardianwitness> is the home of 
readers’ content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, 
and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. You can also use the
Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for ‘GuardianWitness assignments’ – add it to the homepage to keep 
up with all our assignments.  