
Now that he has taken his place at the right hand of President-elect Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> – himself a 
reality-denying figment of reality TV – it seems like the appropriate moment to 
examine the career of film producer and director Steve Bannon, or Stephen K 
Bannon, as he’s known on IMDb, as a reality-denier and distorter. His skills in 
this area were forcefully on display during the Orwellian, black-is-white, 
two-plus-two-macht-fünf, Backwards Day campaign he ran for Trump this summer 
and fall, but they were honed to a fine gleaming edge during his years in what 
he calls “one of the most Darwinian environments I’ve ever seen”: Hollywood.

How comedians struggled to parody Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-comedians-parody-satire>
Yes, t’was in Sodom by the Sea – that festering sinkhole of liberal amorality, 
sexual license and corruption that conservatives would happily invent if it 
didn’t already exist – that Bannon first made his mark as a political gadfly, a 
rightwing version of Michael Moore or Adam Curtis, churning out two-fisted 
attacks on a series of conservative bugbears and imagined enemies: Hillary 
Clinton, the Occupy movement, the political establishment, “your phoney 
intelligentsia”, the 60s and so on. He has a more hagiographical side as well, 
having slavishly apotheosized Saint Ronnie Reagan and the thrilla from Wasilla, 
Sarah Palin. Taken together, they comprise a fairly coherent if consistently 
one-sided and mendacious worldview worth examining now that Bannon has the ear 
of a deeply inattentive chief exec-to-be.

Bannon’s career in Hollywood began in distribution, offering completion funds 
and assistance to such decidedly un-Trumpy endeavors as Jonathan Caouette’s 
Tarnation, Sean Penn’s The Indian Runner, Vincent Gallo’s The Brown Bunny and 
even the sympathetic 2004 documentary Going Upriver: The Long War of John Kerry 
(the polar antithesis of the Swiftboat movement, where you’d imagine Bannon 
might more eagerly have alit). He stumbled into a steady stream of profits with 
an early share in Seinfeld, subsequently one of the most successful TV shows of 
the 90s – which, considering the sympathetic airing given to antisemitism on 
Bannon’s news site, Breitbart, is equally surprising.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJiFOkBje7cE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJiFOkBje7cE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJiFOkBje7cE&media=>
But since 2004, Bannon has entered into production himself, having written, 
produced and/or directed a series of rightwing documentaries, often in concert 
with David Bossie, one of his Trump co-campaign managers, a deeply divisive 
figure who has for decades bobbed along on the fetid tides of Whitewater and 
the “vast rightwing conspiracy” that dates back to the Clinton presidency and 
reached its culmination on 8 November.

'I had to pull over and take half a Xanax': the toll of documenting US gun 
violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/28/gun-violence-documentaries-91-percent-newtown-under-the-gun>
Bannon’s films seem to sit snugly alongside the works of both Bossie, which 
include the hatchet-job doc Hillary: The Movie (source of the US supreme 
court’s infamous Citizens United ruling), and the convicted election fraudster 
Dinesh D’Souza, who has made a fortune with ineptly produced election-year 
documentaries such as 2016: Obama’s America (2012) and America: Imagine the 
World Without Her (2014). And indeed, they all work the same side of the room, 
trailing their movies on Fox News – usually on Hannity or The O’Reilly Factor – 
and resounding through the echo chamber of movement conservatism while not 
selling that many copies (D’Souza’s work excepted). Their purpose is not so 
much to make profits as to confirm pre-existing biases on the right, to add 
dubious intellectual fuel for rightwing screaming matches and bar fights, and 
to keep moribund, often entirely repudiated arguments insistently alive – or 
simply, as Grandpa Simpson might put it, “to angry up the blood”.

Bossie and D’Souza, though, are indiscriminate hate-peddlers whose work often 
chokes on its own bile and rage. Bannon has a subtler mind and a sense of 
purpose beyond mere self-enrichment or ego fulfillment. His purpose, he has 
stated, is “to weaponize film”. His movies aim to give the illusion of 
authority and thoroughness, and they dig deep into the negatives on their 
enemies (Clinton Cash) and the positives on their idols (Palin biopic The 
Undefeated), without ever offering countervailing opinions or contrary 
evidence. No alternative opinion is wanted or sought. Only haters need apply.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D87vxRyWwFHE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D87vxRyWwFHE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D87vxRyWwFHE&media=>
And they do indeed show up in their droves, the collective talking heads being 
little more than a murderers’ row of well-known Fox News and “alt-right” 
bomb-throwers and long-discredited reality-phobes. Newt Gingrich, Charles 
Krauthammer, the Koch Brothers-backed historian Peter Schweiter, Michelle 
Malkin, Dick Morris, Victor Davis Hanson, Shelby Steele, Dana Loesch (who, 
pricelessly, once sued Bannon’s own Breitbart Inc over contractual conditions 
amounting to “indentured servitude”), and so on, ad nauseam, with mind-numbing 
predictability. No one makes the case for the opposition. Opposing facts do not 
exist in this feverish realm.

As for stylistics, Bannon and his peers simply borrowed them from Michael 
Moore. He, D’Souza and Bossie were all impressed by Moore’s success and the 
techniques he used in Fahrenheit 9/11, the most successful documentary of all 
time. Bossie made an overnight rebuttal named Celsius 41.11 (the temperature at 
which the human brain ceases to function), while Bannon and D’Souza latched on 
to Moore’s satirical use of stock footage and comically repurposed movie and 
news imagery. Subtract the personality and essential decency of Moore’s work, 
though, and the results are hectoring and overblown as well as factually 
challenged.

Bannon’s movies rely on relentlessness: “kinetic”, Bannon has called his 
style, designed “to overwhelm the audience”. Underpinned by music that seems 
inspired only by the Jaws or Psycho themes – suspenseful see-sawing strings à 
la Bernard Hermann and endless tiresome climaxes – the visuals veer back and 
forth between to-camera rants delivered by partisans standing, often shouting, 
before a white drop-sheet (it feels like being attacked by a baseball pitching 
machine) and a sargasso of stock footage of a particularly Hobbesian character. 
Bloodstained dollar bills superimposed on sleazy, unflattering images of Bill 
and Hillary Clinton, shark attacks, lions downing zebras on the veldt, 
crocodiles, vultures feasting on carrion, burning flags, toppling dominoes, 
explosions by the dozen, American flags-amundo – aflame or otherwise – and so 
on. Oh yes, and buildings collapsing again and again and again. This image 
repeats itself so often across his entire body of work that one imagines he 
negotiated the sale of a warehouse full of such footage. On film, as in 
national politics, apparently, Bannon justloves to blow stuff up.

And the polemics take a similar track, with familiar hacks piling on to savage 
favorite old enemies and grievances: Acorn! Hitlery! China! Nafta! Saul 
Alinsky! New Black Panthers! Joe Wilson! Marc Rich! Old White Guilt! The 
Washington establishment! Occupy! The coastal elites! National debts are always 
– always – illustrated by showing how far into outer space a trillion-dollar 
pile of one-dollar bills would soar. Both Generation Zero (about the 2008 
financial collapse) and The Undefeated (Palin) open with flash images of 
ranting, pre-disasterized liberals – Rosie O’Donnell, Moore, et al – succeeded 
by a Bible verse of no particular relevance (“To everything there is a 
season”), and each movie is divided into frighteningly titled sections (“The 
Abyss: September 18 2008”).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtAFiaraA3Bk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtAFiaraA3Bk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtAFiaraA3Bk&media=>
But if Bossie and D’Souza simply peddle hatred and fear, Bannon is at least 
more wide-ranging and, dare I say, more nuanced in his animosities. He claims 
to be against all established power, and does in fact go after Republican 
elites for their share of the blame in our endless wars and the Wall Street 
collapse of 2008. And for the most part, he doesn’t push his luck. He hasn’t 
made a film on Benghazi, for example, suggesting he knows that Republican 
allegations don’t hold water. And Obama comes through much of this unscathed, 
or unexamined – suggesting Bannon knows he’d be on a hiding to nothing going 
after such a revered figure. His movie Clinton Cash, meanwhile, about how the 
Clintons have enriched themselves since Bill left office, is fairly persuasive 
and depressing in its main points, even if it does indulge in wild 
dot-connecting and innuendo at the expense of balance and subtlety. Any claims 
to balance are undermined by repeated images of leeringly larcenous black 
African tyrants and pontificating “lib-tard” villains, to say nothing of the 
complete absence of countervailing opinions.

The hagiographies, like the hatchet jobs, will admit of no dissent, no 
balancing material. The Reagan doc neglects to mention Iran-Contra or Reagan’s 
disinclination to lift a finger against Aids. The Palin mash-note quotes Palin 
mostly through the audio version of her book Going Rogue, keeping her 
scattershot syntax and maniacal singsong delivery hemmed in by her 
ghostwriter’s grammar and literacy.

What Bannon’s work offers, finally, is the illusion of depth and richness, of 
a finely tuned polemic based on real sources and research, the illusion of news 
gathering and truth-telling, but not the real thing by any stretch. For his 
intended audience, his work will feel brainy and well-sourced – but only in the 
way that Gingrich is a high school dropout’s idea of an intellectual. An ounce 
of political or historical knowledge is enough to discredit them wholesale.

I have no notion of how the intended audience reacts to these movies, but for 
this viewer, a sustained, week-long immersion in the fever-dreams of the 
incoming American far-right, coming so soon after the hammer-blow of Trump and 
Bannon’s recent victory, felt like a threat to one’s sanity. The bubble in 
which they were created, however, is the bubble in which we now must all live.
 