
According to Jeffrey Gamble, the luckiest day of his life was when his car hit 
the kerb at the corner of Jefferson and National in Los Angeles while he was 
drunk-driving. It flew over a fence, falling 80ft into a creek below, leaving 
him with a broken neck and paralysed. "If I hadn't had that accident, I would 
be dead – or in jail for the rest of my life, just like my brothers," says 
Gamble, 47. Prison, for the Gambles, is as common a destination as university 
might be for a middle-class family. His two brothers are both in jail. Ricky, 
who was convicted for burglary and assault with a firearm under the three 
strikes law, is in for 110 years to life. Mike got life without parole for the 
murder of a local councillor. His father was in jail for a series of 
alcohol-related offences. His son, Khalif, has also been in jail for dealing 
drugs and possession.

"It's not just that we didn't fear jail," says Jeffrey, who now uses his 
experience to warn youngsters away from gangs and prison. "It was like a rite 
of passage. You needed to go to jail so you could have that badge of honour." 
Three generations of African-American men enmeshed in the criminal justice 
system. A legacy of incarceration passed from father to son. A cycle that just 
won't break.

When Martin Luther King, whose birthday is marked across the United States on 
Monday with a national holiday, adopted Mahatma Gandhi's call to "fill the 
jails" 50 years ago, he didn't mean this. Back then, the aim was to 
delegitimise the prevailing power structure by removing the stigma from 
protesting against unjust laws. Today, imprisonment is not an act of resistance 
but a fact of life. It is both the product and cause of social collapse in many 
black communities, where full jails do not challenge racial inequalities but 
sustain them.

For decades the issue never entered mainstream debate unless an increasingly 
desperate right wing decided to ramp up itsrace-baiting rhetoric 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/165576/gops-blatant-racism>. (The man who 
delivered the racistWillie Horton ad 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTdUQ9SYhUw Willie Horton ad is on 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/31/us/politics/restore-our-future-attack-ads-harm-gingrich-in-iowa.html?_r=>
 for George Bush Snr's campaign in 1988 now works for Team Romney). On a local 
level it isback on the agenda 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/15/opinion/15alexander.html?pagewanted=all> 
because the states simply cannot afford it: Californiaspends $47,102 per inmate 
per year 
<http://www.lao.ca.gov/laoapp/laomenus/sections/crim_justice/6_cj_inmatecost.aspx?catid=3>
. It is a national disgrace. The mass incarceration of African-Americans is the 
civil rights issue of the day. The statistics are horrific.

One in three African-American boys born in 2001 stands a lifetime risk of 
going to jail,according to the American Leadership Forum 
<http://www.cdftexas.org/research-library/>. In 2007, one in every 15 black 
children had a parent in prison. According to Ohio State University law 
professor and author Michelle Alexander, there are more African-American men in 
prison, on probation or on parole in the US nowthan there were enslaved in 1850 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/12/michelle-alexander-more-black-men-in-prison-slaves-1850_n_1007368.html>
. Alexander also calculates that because felons lose the right to vote, more 
African-American men were disenfranchised in 2004 than in 1870, the year male 
franchise was secured. There are now roughly the same number of black men in 
American prisons as the populations of Glasgow and Derby combined.Black women 
<http://www.prisonpolicy.org/prisonindex/prisoners.html> are seven times more 
likely than white women to be in prison. Almostone in 10 young black men 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=129379700> are behind 
bars.

Exclusion does not end with prison but begins there. In many states, felons 
lose the right to vote and sit on juries for ever. Sometimes conviction isn't 
even necessary, arrest is enough. Whether you are eventually found guilty or 
not, the fact you have been arrested can be enough to thwart your chance of 
getting a job or housing.

Broadly speaking, there are two opinions about how so many African-Americans 
could have ended up in this situation. The first is that black people are 
genetically pathological; the second is that societal factors are at play. For 
those who believe the former, turn the page. There are other papers for you and 
other days. The very fact that King's birthday is commemorated indicates that 
such bigotry is no longer officially accepted.

Like many Conservatives, Mike Reynolds, who launched California's three 
strikes initiative after his daughter was murdered by convicted felons, 
believes the key societal factor is an over-generous welfare system that 
encourages black women to have children and black men to abscond. In the case 
of the Gambles, nothing could be further from the truth. Jeffrey's mother says 
she had no idea he was involved in crime from the age of eight because she was 
holding down two jobs.

Indeed, the extent to which the problem is economic means that for most of 
those who end up in jail it's not too much welfare, but too few jobs.Black 
unemployment 
<http://www.bet.com/news/national/2012/01/06/black-unemployment-rate-unchanged-in-december.html>
 currently stands at almost 16%. For young black men between the ages of 16 and 
19 (those at risk of entering the criminal justice system) it is almost 50%. 
"In the past in the civil rights movement, we have been dealing with 
segregation and all of its humiliation; we've been dealing with the political 
problem of the denial of the right to vote," King said, just 10 days before his 
death. "I think it is absolutely necessary now to deal massively and militantly 
with the economic problem." But that shift in emphasis from race to class 
demanded allies who were too few, and too weak.

As Jeffrey saw it when he was growing up, he had two choices: a long life 
scraping by on the minimum wage, if he was lucky, or a shorter one on the 
streets that promised fast money and either death or prison. He grew up in the 
shadow of the university of southern California, but it might as well have been 
a foreign country: "The only thing we went to USC for was to break into their 
cars when there was a game on, and sell weed," says Jeffrey.Khalif's choices 
are not much different. He wants to be a truck driver. But with a criminal 
record, work is as hard to come by as the $500 he needs to enrol in a driving 
course. To escape the lure of crime, he moved 70 miles away to Lancaster, where 
he stands on the street for five hours a day earning the minimum wage for 
holding up a sign directing hopeful house buyers. "It's a struggle," he says. 
"But it's better to go that way than the wrong way."

Each of the Gambles must, and does, take personal responsibility for the 
decisions they make; but society must answer for the options that were 
available to them and others. As King wrote in his"Letter from a Birmingham 
Jail" <http://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html>: 
"We will have to repent in this generation not merely for the vitriolic words 
and actions of the bad people, but for the appalling silence of the good 
people."

• This article was amended on 16 January 2012 to correct the date in the 
subheading from 1870 to 1850; and the date of the Willie Horton ad from 1998 to 
1988.
 