
West African troops will oust the Gambian president if he does not step down 
when his term ends in January, the chair of the regional bloc has said.

Marcel de Souza, the head of the Ecowas commission, said that “if he loves his 
people”, Yahya Jammeh would negotiate a peaceful exit, but if not, Senegal 
would lead the charge to remove him, according to Radio France Internationale.

The Gambia is on a knife-edge. Yahya Jammeh must step aside | Momodou Musa 
Touray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/gambia-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
After 22 years in power, Jammeh lost the presidential election in the Gambia 
this month toAdama Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/african-leaders-back-adama-barrow-as-new-president-of-the-gambia>
, a former estate agent, but afterinitially accepting the result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
, hereversed his position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/gambia-president-yahya-jammeh-will-not-step-down>
 and is planning to challenge it in the courts.

The Ecowas threat follows a defiant television appearance by Jammeh on Tuesday 
in which he railed against the UN, the US, the Commonwealth and the EU, and 
dared Ecowas to intervene.

“They said in fact we should not go to the court,” Jammeh said. “Irrespective 
of the court decision, they will enforce the 1 December election result. Let 
them enforce it today and see. What are they waiting for?”

De Souza, speaking on a trip to Mali, said forces were on standby. “If he is 
not going, we have standby forces already alerted and these standby forces have 
to be able to intervene to restore the people’s wish,” he was quoted as saying.

“Senegal has been selected by its peers to lead the operations, but we do not 
wish to start a conflict. If he loves his people, he has to be able to 
negotiate an exit door calmly. If it doesn’t happen, the most radical means 
will be used.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fforces-on-standby-to-oust-gambian-president-yahya-jammeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a408426374d6d905ab573f58fc96d5a60700e9%2F902_563_1572_1572%2F1572.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forces%20on%20standby%20to%20oust%20Gambian%20president%20Yahya%20Jammeh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fforces-on-standby-to-oust-gambian-president-yahya-jammeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forces%20on%20standby%20to%20oust%20Gambian%20president%20Yahya%20Jammeh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fforces-on-standby-to-oust-gambian-president-yahya-jammeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a408426374d6d905ab573f58fc96d5a60700e9%2F902_563_1572_1572%2F1572.jpg>
 Adama Barrow. Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty Images 
Barrow said in a statement that he “does not wish to preside over a torn and 
tattered country and a divided warring people” and said that “all Gambians 
should leave matters with the president-elect and his team”.

He made it clear that Jammeh had to go before 19 January, but held out an 
olive branch to the long-time leader, saying “justice in a transitional 
administration must be tempered with mercy to avoid a cycle of revenge in a 
country where governments may come and go”.

He said he had “no intention to preside over a country where there will be 
revenge for past injustices”.

An Ecowas delegation to the Gambia led by the Liberian president, Ellen 
Johnson Sirleaf <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ellen-johnson-sirleaf>, met 
Jammeh last week but failed to make him change his mind.

“They said: ‘Leave the country and take a break,’” Jammeh said. “Who are they 
to tell me to leave my country? [They think] if I stay around I may interfere 
with the democratisation process. I will not be intimidated by any power in 
this world. I want to make sure that justice is done, I am a man of peace, but 
I cannot also be a coward. My rights cannot be violated and intimidated to a 
point where I succumb to blackmail.”

He added: “I’m a man of peace but that doesn’t also mean I will not defend 
myself and defend my country courageously, patriotically, and win; emerge 
victorious. Nobody can deprive me of that victory, except the almighty Allah.”

Despite this, the spokesman for Muhammadu Buhari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/muhammadu-buhari-nigeria-ear-infection-medical-treatment-uk>
, the Nigerian president, who was chosen as the chief mediator, said 
negotiations had not been abandoned. “Mediation is still on the cards. It’s 
when it’s exhausted that we can consider that [military action],” Femi Adesina 
said.

The Gambia’s supreme court is set to hear Jammeh’s challenge on 10 January, 
but at the moment it has only a chief justice, a Nigerian, and no sitting 
judges, after the president sacked two for commuting death sentences last year. 
Should Jammeh appoint new ones, as he is reportedly trying to do, it would be 
“tantamount to one being a judge in his own cause”, according to the Gambian 
Bar Association.

Five of the six people thought to have been offered positions as judges are 
Nigerian, but Buhari’s spokesman said Nigeria’s government would not try to 
dissuade them from taking up the positions.

“That wouldn’t happen under a Buhari administration,” he said, adding that he 
would “never put pressure on the judiciary of another country”.

Barrow has said he will be sworn in as president of the Gambia irrespective of 
Jammeh’s position, and all west African heads of state are planning to attend.
 