
The Force is not with them! The Charity Commission for England and Wales has 
stated that Jediism isn’t a “real” religion and, as such, cannot be registered 
as a charitable incorporated organisation. That’s a hell of a thank you to the 
brave knights who died defending the galaxy from the dark side!

One can almost hear the sneering tone of non-believer Admiral Notti (“Do not 
try to frighten us with your sorcerer’s ways, Lord Vader!”) behind the 
double-speak legalese in the60-point decision 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/578931/Temple_of_the_Jedi_Order_FINAL_DECISION.pdf>
 released by the commission. But a lot of good that paperwork will do you when 
you are staring down the maw of a hungry rancor in the bowels of Jabba’s palace!

Jedi order fails in attempt to register as religious group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/19/temple-of-the-jedi-order-application-religion-rejected-charity-commission-uk>
Some kudos must be given to the commission for at least going through the 
formality of taking this task seriously. (Perhaps you’ll be reminded of the 
galactic senate’s vote-for-appearance’s sake granting Senator Palpatine 
increased executive powers, the final transformation of a benevolent Republic 
into a dark, malignant Empire.) But even those with a low midichlorian count 
(or those who don’t much care forStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> films) may see this as a foolish 
decision tainted with bigotry.

To wit: the Temple of the Jedi Order <https://www.templeofthejediorder.org> is 
deemed not acceptable because of its belief in the Force. Though Jedi edicts 
state that the Force is “the ubiquitous and metaphysical power that a Jedi 
believes to be the underlying, fundamental nature of the universe” and that 
“Jedi believe in eternal life through The Force”, the commission feels that 
this observation does not show enough fealty to be considered “a belief in one 
or more gods or spiritual or non-secular principals or things”.

While you are scratching your head about what that means, the report is quick 
to point out that Buddhism and Jainism is still cool. Just not Jediism.

The Commission then continues to rag on Jedis for being “an entirely web-based 
organisation.” Yeah, have you seen what real estate costs in London and other 
major cities? Why do you think they are applying for this certification?

Point 21 is when it gets cruel. Like, scald-the-soles-of-a-power-droid’s-foot 
cruel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CR8fmF0gt8>: “The commission considers 
that a religion/belief system should be characterised by a certain level of 
cogency, seriousness, cohesion and importance.”

Seriousness? Is there anything more serious in our Future Shocked world than 
eschewing technology and finding a higher truth in emotion and natural 
sensitivity? Especially during a final Death Star trench run? (Granted, it’s 
also helpful to have Harrison Ford swoop in at the last minute and blast the 
TIE fighters on your tail.)

The commission cites that “there is no worldwide authority or structure for 
Jediism”. Right, because the various strains of Christian clerics at the Church 
of the Holy Sepulcher don’tsometimes attack one another with brooms 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jn90BNz729k>? (To use one of the very few 
benign examples of sectarian in-fighting.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fwhy-jediism-should-be-recognised-as-a-religion-charity-commission-decision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed562ce60ead1906736a3d9689eba85de77794cd%2F76_64_1619_1906%2F1619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Force%20of%20argument%3A%20why%20Jediism%20should%20be%20recognised%20as%20a%20religion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fwhy-jediism-should-be-recognised-as-a-religion-charity-commission-decision%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Force%20of%20argument%3A%20why%20Jediism%20should%20be%20recognised%20as%20a%20religion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fwhy-jediism-should-be-recognised-as-a-religion-charity-commission-decision%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed562ce60ead1906736a3d9689eba85de77794cd%2F76_64_1619_1906%2F1619.jpg>
 A Jedi religion demonstration in 2006, calling for recognition for their 
faith. Photograph: Tony Kyriacou/Rex 
The worst part – the commission’s equivalent of the sacrifice of the 
Younglings, if you will – comes when the report denies that Jediism fails to 
provide “moral and ethical value or edification to the public”.



Jokes aside, this is where the report shows their aim is as wobbly as 
Greedo’s. In terms of sheer numbers, the amount of people exposed to Jedi 
thought has to compete with most of the world’s “true” religions. Even people 
that don’t like Star Wars end up seeing Star Wars. Theverbiage in the 
commission report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/578931/Temple_of_the_Jedi_Order_FINAL_DECISION.pdf>
 goes round and round on the point about Jediism being a little mercurial, and 
that’s a fair complaint, but its “moral and ethical” philosophy is “edified” to 
people young and old just as well, if not better than a lot of other faiths. 
Master Yoda’s aphorisms up against an inscrutable textbook is a battle that may 
end in a tie.

Despite this setback, the Force will still be with us, always. And if not, we 
can always go and learn Klingon.
 