
“Brush and floss or prepare for loss.” It’s a mantra that has seen many a 
bathroom bin transformed into a sticky snake pit of discarded threads. But an 
investigation by the Associated Press now suggests our dentists may have been 
stringing us along. Freedom of Information requests to the US Department for 
Health and Human Services (HHS)asking for the evidence underpinning its 
recommendation for daily flossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/02/dental-floss-proof-works-guidelines-dropped>
 have prompted the organisation to quietly drop this advice. Public Health 
England has also said that it will be reviewing its own guidance on flossing in 
the New Year. So if dental floss is now dross, what else can we do to keep our 
mouths healthy?

Here are four alternatives.

Invest in interdental brushes

The evidence for interdental brushes reducing gum disease is slightly stronger 
than for dental floss, though still weak. And some people struggle to fit even 
the smallest size of interdental brush between their teeth because they’re 
packed so closely together. But in spite of the lack of strong evidence,it is 
worth trying to get something in there, says the British Society of Dental 
Hygiene and Therapy. “Toothbrushing alone cleans only three of the five 
surfaces of our teeth, so cleaning between our teeth is a critical part of good 
oral hygiene as it helps to prevent gum disease by removing plaque from any 
areas missed by brushing alone,” says Michaela ONeill, president of the BSDHT.


Everything you ever wanted to know about teeth (but were afraid to ask the 
dentist)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/01/health-advice-teeth-dentist-checkup>
Try using “water-picks”

If you can’t squeeze a brush in there, how about a high-pressure jet of water 
to dislodge the plaque? So-called water picks are an alternative to interdental 
brushes. “They’re an expensive option, and I’m not sure the evidence has been 
shown for those,” says Derek Richards,director of the Centre for Evidence-based 
Dentistry at the University of Dundee 
<http://dentistry.dundee.ac.uk/staff-member/mr- derek-richards>. However, the 
same basic principle of dislodging bacteria from between your teeth applies. 
One thing to bear in mind is that it will rinse away the fluoride in toothpaste 
that strengthens your teeth, so if you are going to squirt, do it before 
brushing, not afterwards.

Visit your dental hygienist

Even the most dedicated toothbrusher may routinely miss bits, and when they 
do, plaque can harden into tartar. Not only is it unsightly; it gives plaque 
more surface area on which to grow. The only way to remove it is to scrape it 
off, which is where dental hygienists come into their own. Even so, when the 
Cochrane Oral Health Group – a team of dentists that regularly reviews and 
summarises the best available evidence – recently looked at whether a regular 
scale and polish reduced plaque build-up and gingivitis, itfound insufficient 
evidence <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25343389> to either support or 
refute such claims.

Brush, brush, brush

Regular toothbrushing remains the most effective way to care for your teeth 
and gums. Not only does it remove much of the plaque that causes gum disease, 
but the fluoride in toothpaste helps prevent tooth decay by strengthening the 
teeth. And although manual brushing works, for all-round oral health, the 
strongest evidence is for electric toothbrushes. When the Cochrane Oral Health 
Group recentlycompared the two methods 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD002281.pub3/abstract> 
over three months, electric brushes were associated with a 21% reduction in 
plaque and an 11% reduction in gum inflammation compared with manual brushing.
 