
Jon Savage’s 1966: The Year the Decade Exploded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/20/1966-jon-savage-music-review> is 
an exceptionally good book about an exceptionally good year for pop music. 
Generally, though, picking out great pop years is a subjective pub game. David 
Hepworth hasargued the case for 1971 
<http://whatsheonaboutnow.blogspot.co.uk/2012/09/1971-was-annus-mirabilis-of-rock-album.html>
, as he’s more of a James Taylor man than most; Ben Thompson’s Seven Years of 
Plenty: A Handbook of Irrefutable Pop Greatness plumped for 1991 to 1998 as a 
relatively recent golden age. Me, I’d go for 1981 as a post-60s pinnacle. 
BBC4’s Top of the Pops repeats next year will lay 1981 out on a marble slab and 
give me the chance to work out whether I’m just biased or whether it was a true 
golden age – I was 16, after all, and the world was a peach.

1966: the year youth culture exploded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/15/1966-trip-good-vibrations-pop-revolution>
In 1980 it had been a fascinating but bleak year. The Theme from M*A*S*H 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4gO7uemm6Yo> and Gary Numan’s Telekon were No 
1s respectively in the singles and albums charts that summer, as thedoomsday 
clock <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doomsday_Clock> ticked towards to 
midnight. Everything was entirely monochrome. In December, the kindly Richard 
Skinner hadpresented an episode of Top of the Pops 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4G_pkHC-unE> wearing a grey school shirt and a 
grey v-neck jumper beneath his outgrown, prematurely greying bowlcut.

There had to be a way forward. Scritti Politti’s Green Gartside 
<http://www.scritti.net/> had retired from the post-punk wars in 1980 after 
being hospitalised by a nervous breakdown. While he was recuperating, he began 
to listen to daytime pop radio. The Solar label ( Sound of Los Angeles Records) 
was on a roll in 1981. Shalamar’sMake That Move 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVbF6IzGWuo> became one of the year’s biggest 
club hits, while the Whispers’It’s a Love Thing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fJULtwL5zfY> was such an invigorating, 
Pepsi-bubbled single that it single-handedly helped Gartside out of his funk. 
He emerged from his Welsh mountain hideout at the end of the year with a new, 
barely recognisable Scritti Politti sound.The “Sweetest Girl” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ExC0oK28VLA> was a way out of the grey, 
post-punk conundrum. Don’t be scared of pop, it said, with its floating, 
electro-dub backdrop and Green’s high, sweet voice, which would soon become a 
regular Top 40 presence. The lyric was all about pop music and politics. TheNew 
Pop <http://pitchfork.com/features/articles/6139-now-thats-what-i-call-new-pop/>
 that Paul Morley would christen in a 1982 NME column started here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVbF6IzGWuo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVbF6IzGWuo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVbF6IzGWuo&media=>
Well, that’s the kind of pointy-headed conclusion you’d expect a music 
journalist to come up with, isn’t it? That theory only holds water if you 
ignore the biggest group of 1981, predating the Scritti revamp, who were all 
about manifestos, embracing the popular, and wearing your paranoia on your 
sleeve. Adam & the Ants went straight in at No 1 in May withStand and Deliver, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B2a6l6wM2k> a wildly busy single – one of the 
year’s – which had a dense but laugh-out-loud funny lyric and ended with a 
chorus of diddly-qua-qua’s. Adam Ant was an English eccentric whomEdith Sitwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/27/edith-sitwell-english-genius-richard-greene-review>
 would have recognised, and Adam & the Ants were the most experimental pin-up 
act since the Beatles. No one has come close since. They saw out the year with
Prince Charming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9p__WmyAE3g>, featuring an 
intro that sounded like a Venusian death chant, andAnt Rap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SvtzHxr-7g8>, which didn’t quite predict 
Public Enemy, but still found room for a three-second harpsichord break.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2F1981-pop-year-of-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c461a689e39f854569738639acc951e5da7de6%2F0_156_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%201966%2C%20because%201981%20was%20pop's%20year%20of%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2F1981-pop-year-of-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%201966%2C%20because%201981%20was%20pop%27s%20year%20of%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2F1981-pop-year-of-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c461a689e39f854569738639acc951e5da7de6%2F0_156_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Adam and the Ants … at their peak in 1981. Photograph: Chris Walter/WireImage 
Another way out of post-punk’s monochrome predicament came from Dexys Midnight 
Runners <http://www.dexysonline.com/>. Kevin Rowland spent the year licking his 
wounds after 1980 had ended with his group’s puritan stance being ridiculed by 
the music press. The single Keep It Part Two (Inferioty Part 1) failed to even 
reach the Top 75, and then almost the entire band walked out on him. Happily 
for us, Rowland was keen to lick his wounds in public, and quickly put a new 
line-up together immediately.Plan B 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=27Rdkw34O7I> was a salve released in March 
1981 (“Bill Withers was good for me / Pretend I’m Bill, and lean on me”), and 
Show Me returned them to the Top 20 in July. Even after he had a poke at music 
journalists on late autumn singleLiars A to E 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ay2KKPUASsQ> – a musical no-no on a par with 
songs about new-born babies meant it failed to chart – Rowland came up with a 
masterpiece, and pointed to the soul vision ofCeltic Soul Brothers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sbLiMRBUs_4> that would return him to the Top 
20 on its re-release (after an initial release in March 1982) in March 1983.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsbLiMRBUs_4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsbLiMRBUs_4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsbLiMRBUs_4&media=>

Other post-punk names looked for new ways forward. Barely recalled are a brace 
of remarkable singles by the Skids: bothIona 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhIkgbSZTdg> and Fields 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=78vdXBLuLDQ> looked ahead two decades to the 
folk revival, and suggested Richard Jobson and Stuart Adamson were glued to 
then-regular BBC2 screenings ofThe Wicker Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wicker-man>. In Sheffield, the Human 
League split in two, one half forming Heaven 17 and debuting with the single(We 
Don’t Need This) Fascist Groove Thang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uWs1-2foKoo>, which was witty, timely, and way 
too fast to actually dance to. The rump League members released the album Dare, 
featuring the No 1 single, Don’t You Want Me, and briefly became superstars. 
Everybody won.

With the Human League and Soft Cell at No 1 (the latter with Tainted Love), it 
was the first huge year for synthpop. Gary Numan had been a friendly forebear, 
but 1981’s spirit of optimism saw him in second place to a group who had 
supported him on tour in 1980. Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark released the 
multi million-selling albumArchitecture and Morality 
<http://www.omd.uk.com/discography/architecture_morality> in 1981 which 
included three top five singles (Souvenir 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDIYOiQUi2s>, Joan of Arc – Maid of Orleans) 
and could probably have spawned three more. They took Kraftwerk’s notion of 
instrumental chorus hooks and grafted them onto melancholic melodies that 
sounded simultaneously industrial and suburban.
 The sound of ’81 … Listen to every 1981 song mentioned in this piece. 
1981 was also the year of Britfunk, an intriguing post-disco subgenre. Waiting 
for their moment in the spotlight wereLevel 42 <http://www.level42.com/>. Like 
OMD’s Souvenir, their super-slow, compellingLove Games 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4JXuFM0lnXQ> featured an instrumental chorus, 
but had a metallic, emotional vocal that music journalist Mark Sinker once 
described as a “sad robot”. Equally off-kilter was Freeez’sSouthern Freeez 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=byDRYI86cck>, simultaneously breezy and 
deadpan.Linx’s Intuition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=01qsJ-oZXVQ> was 
Grange Hill funk, while theirThrow Away the Key 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFcLGFvAots> was a forgotten minor-chord 
treasure. Black British faces became Top of the Pops regulars in 1981.

In Scotland, the Postcard label was laying the foundations for 80s indie with 
three singles that could rival almost anything the rest of the decade had to 
offer: there was Aztec Camera’sJust Like Gold 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5jtzu8RdicQ> (a heartbreaker written by 
16-year old Roddy Frame, a schoolboy the same age as me in 1981 – how did he do 
it?); Orange Juice’sPoor Old Soul <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RmpNSpzx2wI>
, with one of Edwyn Collins’ best anti-cliche pop lyrics and shades of Shalamar 
in the production; and, best of all, Josef K’sChance Meeting 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ycPzG062Jbw>, the musical equivalent of Chris 
Marker’s filmLa Jetée 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2014/apr/15/chris-marker-la-jetee-video>
. All mystery, windy hilltops, and intangible emotion, Chance Meeting featured 
a brass section that sounded like it had been recorded in a matchbox and 
strings that came in just on the fade for an extra dash of magic. Independently 
made records on an independently minded label.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2Wa0LdCsvM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2Wa0LdCsvM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2Wa0LdCsvM&media=>
Coming out on American independent label in December was maybe the most 
remarkable single of the year, 1981’s own Good Vibrations: Grandmaster Flash’s
Adventures on the Wheels of Steel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Rp1oINrEuU>
, on Sugar Hill Records. Radio 1 DJs David “Kid” Jensen and John Peel both had 
their minds blown by this when it came out just before Christmas, sounding like 
excitable schoolkids as they swapped notes on air. It was no more than six 
minutes of Flash DJing creatively with records by the Sugarhill Gang, Blondie 
and Queen, but sounded entirely other, as big a break from the past as Little 
Richard must have been in 1955 withTutti Frutti 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F13JNjpNW6c>. Adventures on the Wheels of 
Steel was so different that, unless you were immersed in South Bronx pop 
culture, it was hard to tell on first listen whether it was a joke or a serious 
attempt at something new, whether it was the future of music or just a novelty 
party record. It challenged every preconception, whether you were a year zero 
punk or a music-press smart aleck. This was a genuine revolution and you’d have 
to make your own mind up.

Have I forgotten anything? Of course I have: New Order’s first two singles, 
Ceremony andProcession <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZMZ3E6rWNd4>; 
Imagination’s proto-trip hopBody Talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ZfkVJp8H8k>; Kate Bush’s voyage into utter 
oddness, The Dreaming;Ghost Town <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eXP5psBaOO8> 
by the Specials; evenPhil Collins’s In the Air Tonight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YkADj0TPrJA> … 1981 was a rich and remarkable 
year for pop, and it would need a 600-page book to do it justice. Anyone fancy 
having a go?
 