
The music industry has always basked in a reputation for hedonism and 
self-destruction. Stress has traditionally been dealt with by indulging in sex, 
drugs and alcohol, or possibly the defenestration of a television.

Now, one of the UK industry’s biggest marketing companies believes a new 
approach is needed.Quite Great Music PR,  <http://www.quitegreat.co.uk> which 
has promotedMick Jagger,  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mick-jagger>Van 
Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-morrison>, The Doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/doors>, Stevie Wonder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/steviewonder> and Mariah Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey> among others, is to start 
offering its clients access to a psychotherapist amid concerns about the mental 
health of musicians.

The need to tour frequently, the threat of career-ending reviews, plunging 
incomes and incessant trolling on social media put today’s musicians under 
pressure as never before.

“All musicians, without exception, are driven by strong emotions. Once they 
take their music into the world, they are leaving the safety and structure of 
the recording studio, and allowing their music to be diagnosed in so many 
different ways,” said Pete Bassett, the founder ofQuite Great. 
<http://www.quitegreat.co.uk/> “This in itself can cause elements of mental 
turmoil, especially as so many artists are walking a tightrope of self-doubt 
and on many occasions it only takes a negative review, or now more commonly 
unwieldy interaction on social networking platforms, to tip them in a direction 
where they need to talk at length about their fears and concerns.”

The largest global survey of its kind by the Help Musicians  
<https://www.helpmusicians.org.uk/>charity recently found that musicians may be 
up to three times more likely to have depression 
<https://www.helpmusicians.org.uk/news/latest-news/can-music-make-you-sick> 
than the average person. More than seven out of 10 said that they had 
experienced anxiety and panic attacks.

The singer-songwriter Kate Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kate-bush> 
confessed last week that she had been “terrified” by her return to live shows 
two years ago. She told BBC6 Music that she was “nervous every night” of her 
residency at the Hammersmith Apollo. And former One Direction member,Zayn Malik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/13/zayn-malik-capital-summertime-ball-anxiety>
, cancelled a concert in Dubai in September, citing his “extreme anxiety” about 
performing on his own.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmusicians-mental-health-therapists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5ee9148d84c471ec250f1160c9d58d3b47b605%2F170_107_3503_2101%2F3503.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20drugs%20and%20booze%3A%20stars%20use%20therapists%20to%20cope%20with%20stress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmusicians-mental-health-therapists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20drugs%20and%20booze%3A%20stars%20use%20therapists%20to%20cope%20with%20stress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fmusicians-mental-health-therapists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee5ee9148d84c471ec250f1160c9d58d3b47b605%2F170_107_3503_2101%2F3503.jpg>
 Kate Bush said she was terrified by her comeback shows at the Hammersmith 
Apollo in London last year. Photograph: Ken McKay/Rex 
Helen Brice, a psychotherapist who will work with Quite Great’s clients 
<http://www.stimmungtherapy.com/Stimmung_Home.html>, has specialised in helping 
DJs, musicians and actors for many years. “Musicians tend to be the most 
sensitive people on the planet – and that includes people with narcissistic 
traits,” she said.

“They put themselves out there every day in front of the public. Sometimes 
they can’t work because they’ve lost so much confidence that their self-worth 
is just through the floor.”

She said there were particular issues for classical musicians. “I was 
surprised that, with the classical singers and musicians who came to me, much 
of their stress, anxiety and depression seemed to be triggered by bullying 
within their orchestras and choruses. They’re not like companies with HR 
departments. They don’t seem to have procedures for individuals to go and 
report privately. If they don’t feel listened to, some people have ended up 
being quite ill and this has turned into depression.”

Brice, who charges her musician clients less than half her normal rate, said 
much of her work with them had to be focused on the short term because of the 
costs involved.

“I end up coaching the individual into trying to get a thicker skin; how they 
can better manage their feeling of low self-worth or low self-confidence, but 
it doesn’t get to the root of the problem.”

Adele: 'I'd be happy never to tour again'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/31/adele-would-be-happy-never-to-tour-again>
Bassett said he hoped the new service, primarily aimed at younger musicians 
starting their careers, would help establish a long-term solution to improving 
the mental health of artists. “Care and attention need to start at a much lower 
level, helping artists to overcome everything from stage fright to being able 
to handle label rejection.

“If developing artists can acclimatise themselves to reaching out for support, 
it will help them as their career goes through its many different phases.”

But he acknowledged that some established artists of the past could might have 
benefited from the service. “With success comes a total change in lifestyle, in 
outlook and this in turn manifests itself in not being able to create that 
‘difficult’ follow-up album as their lives have changed and hence their writing 
inspirations.

“Over the decades this has seen them turn to differing types of support 
mechanisms. If therapy had been one of those support mechanisms that artists 
from bygone eras had felt comfortable pursuing, it is likely that some of the 
greatest icons of music would still be here today.”
 