
Two former employees of PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> accused of being 
behind the biggest ever leak of confidential corporate tax deals face criminal 
trial in Luxembourg on Tuesday.

Antoine Deltour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/15/luxembourg-tax-avoidance-whistleblower-conviction>
 and a second man, who is expected to be named in court this week, are charged 
with carrying out the LuxLeaks theft, violating the Grand Duchy’s strict 
professional secrecy laws and other offences. Their criminal prosecution 
follows a complaint to Luxembourg’s public prosecutor by PwC.

The LuxLeaks scandal, which transformed the debate on international tax 
reform, exposed howLuxembourg <https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> 
had for years been secretly sanctioning, on an industrial scale, aggressive 
cross-border tax avoidance by some of the world’s largest businesses.

Last month, Deltour told his supporters 
<https://support-antoine.org/en/blog/2016/03/26/merci/> that together they were 
helping “the fight against unfair tax practices”. However, he added, “those who 
revealed these practices face jail and a fine that exceeds a lifelong income”.

Transparency International 
<http://www.transparency.org/news/feature/luxleaks_whistleblowers_like_antoine_deltour_should_be_celebrated>
 said: “Deltour should be protected and commended, not prosecuted. The 
information he disclosed was in the public interest.”

Luxembourg tax files: how tiny state rubber-stamped tax avoidance on an 
industrial scale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
More than 118,000 people have signed a petition in support 
<https://www.change.org/p/support-antoine-deltour-luxleaks?lang=en-GB> of the 
30-year-old former PwC whistleblower. Last year, the European parliament 
awarded him the Citizens’ Prize for his contribution to the promotion of common 
values.

Among the companies to see details of their complex international tax 
structures exposed were Pepsi, Ikea, Accenture, Burberry, Procter & Gamble, 
Heinz, JP Morgan, FedEx, Shire Pharmaceuticals and Icap.

In many instances, Luxembourg was shown to have approved complex, aggressive 
and artificial tax avoidance structures that drained the tax coffers of other 
countries.

Almost 28,000 tax rulings, returns and other sensitive documents from PwC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 were leaked to the media. The documents disclosed that the Luxembourg 
authorities had helped 340 big firms to minimise their tax payments, in some 
cases to 1% or less.

Also on trial in Luxembourg will be a French investigative documentary-maker, 
Edouard Perrin, who was the first journalist to publish reports based on the 
leaked PwC papers. He is charged with complicity in the violation of 
professional secrecy laws, as well as possession and dissemination of 
confidential papers.

The European Federation of Journalists has said 
<http://europeanjournalists.org/blog/2015/04/24/luxembourg-charges-journalist-over-luxleaks/>
: “It is shameful that the Luxembourg authorities are going after a journalist 
who has acted entirely in the public interest to publish the information. The 
authorities must drop the charges against Perrin immediately.”

In 2014, the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 and media in more than 20 countries published investigations based on the 
LuxLeaks papers in a collaboration organised by theInternational Consortium of 
Investigative Journalists. <https://www.icij.org/project/luxembourg-leaks>

This reporting led to condemnation of Luxembourg’s tax practices from 
politicians around the world, who also demanded urgent, radical reforms to the 
international rules for big businesses.

In the European parliament, the European commission president, Jean-Claude 
Juncker, was forced to defend himself before a vote of confidence in his 
leadership. He had previously served as Luxembourg’s prime minister and haddone 
much to shape its tax policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/10/juncker-amazon-luxembourg-eased-tax-expert-comfort>
. “I am not the architect of what you call the Luxembourgish problem,”he said 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-luxembourg-tax-eu-juncker-idUKKCN0IW19R20141112>
.

Responding to the scandal, finance ministers of Germany, France and Italy 
wrote to the European commission complaining about the “uncooperative behaviour 
between member states”.


Wolfgang Schäuble, Michel Sapin and Pier Carlo Padoan said it was an “obvious 
… turning point”, noting that the LuxLeaks revelations meant “the limits of 
permissible tax competition between member states had shifted”. They added: 
“This development is irreversible.”

In Luxembourg, however, the finance minster, Pierre Gramegna, condemned the 
leak of the PwC papers as “the worst attack Luxembourg has experienced in its 
history”.

Not everyone agreed. Within weeks of the LuxLeaks scandal breaking, further 
revelations were published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/09/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-how-junckers-duchy-accommodated-skype-and-the-koch-empire>
 based on another cache of leaked Luxembourg tax rulings – this time secured by 
Ernst & Young, Deloitte, KPMG and other firms.These exposed tax structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/09/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-how-junckers-duchy-accommodated-skype-and-the-koch-empire>
 used by Disney, Skype, Koch Industries, Reckitt Benckiser and others. No one 
on trial this week has been linked to these leaked papers.

Whistleblowing campaigners argue the LuxLeaks scandal exposes weaknesses in 
protections available for those who leak information.Transparency International 
said 
<http://www.transparency.org/news/feature/luxleaks_whistleblowers_like_antoine_deltour_should_be_celebrated>
: “Luxembourg is one of few European countries with a dedicated law on 
whistleblowing, but it is too narrow. Deltour is not considered a whistleblower 
because the law in Luxembourg is limited to corruption offences and the 
information he revealed did not show blatant corruption.

“In addition, the law only protects whistleblowers against dismissal, not 
against prosecution. An amendment to the law is urgently needed.”

Earlier this month, the European parliament approved new rules to protect 
corporate trade secrets 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/20/opinion/eu-rules-will-chill-reporting.html?smid=tw-nytopinion&smtyp=cur&_r=0>
 which,according to campaigners, risk deterring future whistleblowing 
<https://juliareda.eu/2016/04/trade-secrets-whistleblowers/>. 
 