
In 1996, when he was chairman of Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, Michael Bishop wrote a stiff 
letter to his friend, the then prime minister, John Major, and in doing so was 
credited with saving the broadcaster from privatisation.

Twenty years on, and with Channel 4’s state-owned future yet again in doubt, 
the Conservative peer who took the title Lord Glendonbrook is again entering 
the fray. But this time, his solution is for a public-private partnership, with 
a golden share held by the government.

So what is different? “Britain doesn’t need two publicly owned broadcasters,” 
says the 74-year-old. The BBC is enough, because the market has changed so 
radically, and the internet and social media provide alternative means of 
reaching people as well as offering outlets for creative people with fresh 
content.

He also vehemently disagrees with Channel 4’s emphasis on running as a 
not-for-profit organisation, something he says the broadcaster began doing 
after he was ousted as chair in 1997, and which has since been cemented in the 
past six years under the chairmanship of Lord Burns. Bishop says he regards 
that ethos as a “fig leaf lots of people have used to keep others from finding 
out what was going on”.

Not for profit is not a corporate philosophy that is appropriate for Channel 4
Michael Bishop 
Channel 4 “just has to have private shareholders and it has to be run as any 
other public company” in order to encourage more stringent financial 
discipline, and allow it the flexibility to grow, he says. “Not for profit is 
not a corporate philosophy that is appropriate for Channel 4.”

The reported £75m deal to buy The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/14/channel-4-under-fire-for-poaching-great-british-bake-off-from-the-bbc>
 adds to his concern. This is despite him helping embed the broadcaster’s cross 
subsidy model while he was chairman. “I am critical of C4’s decision. It is a 
huge amount of money, spent on something which is not a part of its remit. I 
can’t obviously be black and white about it, but it raises an awful lot of 
awkward questions.”

His solution derives from his background in the airline industry and the Nats 
deal he helped strike in 2001 with the then chancellor, Gordon Brown, as an 
alternative to privatisation. This saw the UK’s air traffic control system 
reborn as a public-private partnership. The government retains a 49% golden 
share, the airline group investors a 42% stake, with the rest held by staff and 
the UK airport operator.

The golden share is in place because air space is crucial to national 
security. Channel 4 is not in that bracket but some version could be created, 
to protect its public services remit. The company would then run as a 
conventional profit-and-loss business, paying dividends.

Bishop wrote to Major when a sale was under consideration to buttress public 
finances. At the time an ambitious MP, John Whittingdale, had tabled an 
amendment to the 1996 broadcasting bill proposing privatisation.

As a dedicated Tory donor and wealthy founder of airline BMI, Bishop used his 
political capital inhis “Dear John” letter to argue that privatisation of 
Channel 4 was wrong because the broadcaster did not fit into the category of 
needing public support, and was serving viewers well.

“It was a very important decision made in 1996. From time to time you have to 
write passionate letters,” he says, over a series of conversations (including 
one accompanied by his favourite toasted tea cakes in the House of Lords).

But he has changed his mind. He thinks Channel 4 has been treated badly, 
especially by Whittingdale, who was culture secretary in David Cameron’s last 
government. “The only possible excuse [for speaking out] is that I and I alone 
stopped the privatisation last time. Clearly that particular episode is now up 
for review, and possible change.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fformer-channel-4-chair-uk-doesnt-need-two-publicly-owned-broadcasters-michael-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6622328839584846c8739cffa0f6e606001aad%2F0_228_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20Channel%204%20chair%3A%20'UK%20doesn't%20need%20two%20publicly%20owned%20broadcasters'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fformer-channel-4-chair-uk-doesnt-need-two-publicly-owned-broadcasters-michael-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20Channel%204%20chair%3A%20%27UK%20doesn%27t%20need%20two%20publicly%20owned%20broadcasters%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fformer-channel-4-chair-uk-doesnt-need-two-publicly-owned-broadcasters-michael-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6622328839584846c8739cffa0f6e606001aad%2F0_228_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Channel 4 headquarters in London, now a £100m asset. Photograph: Graham Turner 
for the Guardian 
During Bishop’s period as chairman he ensured Channel 4 built its own freehold 
headquarters in London, now a £100m asset. He does not support the threatened 
government imposed move to Birmingham. “London is media city,” he says.

He also says Whittingdale has “used Channel 4 as a bit of a feint for the real 
primary objective to knuckle down a [charter] agreement with the BBC.

“As a basic starting point if you are going to review a significant business, 
which Channel 4 is, I don’t think it is reasonable to leave the board of 
directors and executives knowing you are under scrutiny.

 “It can’t go on like this, pushed from one review to another. The management 
needs to know. So do those who work for Channel 4 and those who supply it. 
There are long-term contracts. It is just something that shouldn’t be allowed 
to happen.

 “It is perfectly reasonable for the board and management to lobby for the 
status quo because what happens in all businesses, nobody likes change.

“You could also make a point it is the duty of a new chairman of the board 
[Charles Gurassa] to come in and look at options, new chairmen don’t usually 
come in to uphold the status quo, especially when [change] has been widely 
canvassed.”

It can’t go on like this, pushed from one review to another. Management needs 
to know. So do those working for Channel 4
Michael Bishop 
 Bishop says the board should take the initiative and present the options to 
government, especially “if you smell in the wind a course has been identified 
by your owner, the government”.

 That is of course exactly what Burns did last year while chairman in 
proposing a mutual company, with bonds paying coupons.

However, Bishop says: “The government didn’t pick it up and run with it. So 
they should bring that back if that is what they feel is right. I don’t. What I 
have always said is that creative business thinking has to take place.”

But does anyone want to pick up his NATS-based solution? Would there be media 
companies, with a common interest, ready to take share stakes?

He outlined his proposal to Whittingdale last year, and has spoken to Gurassa, 
an acquaintance from the airline business. He says Michael Grade, who also 
fought against privatisation in 1996 when chief executive, but is now in 
favour, “believes it is not suitable because of changes in the digital world 
and all the rights issues that surround Channel 4. I think the industry finds 
it too difficult to handle.

“I think if a business has assets and can make a profit, then there ought to 
be suitable partners who would like to be in that venture. Everyone says you 
can’t do, when you suggest something radical. Well go and find out and take a 
look.”

He is also dubious about Channel 4’s growth fund investment in independent 
production companies, saying it is better “in all areas of corporate life” to 
stick with what you are good at.

But underlying his concern, is there a belief there is still a reason for 
Channel 4 and its remit?

 “Yes, because it is a very good brand. C4 is 35 years old, all companies, all 
organisations and culture evolves. And it is not to be expected that the sheer 
fact C4 pioneered so many things that have now come into the mainstream, means 
that it is not time to look at something different or at least carefully 
scrutinise it.

“I am interested in what happens to C4, I felt it was one of the business 
things I did in my life that did change things. And now the next generation has 
pivotal moments of their own, but they are falling back on the old formula.

“Channel 4 does need to think more constructively about exiting from state 
control, but in an orderly fashion. Government could get dividends. I only give 
a view.”


 