
Former BHS employees will have to wait years to find out whether their pension 
scheme will be bailed out bySir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>, experts have warned, after 
the Pensions Regulator begun formal legal proceedings against the billionaire 
tycoon.

The regulator took the dramatic step of starting enforcement action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 this week after failing to agree a deal with Green to inject cash into the BHS 
pension scheme, which has a £571m pension deficit.

John Ralfe, a pensions expert, said Green and the Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator now faced a “long war of 
attrition” and warned it will take years to resolve the standoff. The regulator 
can legally demand Green makes a payment, but the tycoon can appeal against 
their decision all the way to the supreme court.

“This is very significant, very rare, and there aren’t any precedents,” Ralfe 
said. “It will take years. It’s going to be a long war of attrition.”

The Pension Regulator v Sir Philip Green – what happens next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/sir-philip-green-bhs-v-pension-regulator-what-happens-next>
The move also increases the chances of Green losing his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/sir-philip-green-leading-mp-doubtful-can-keep-knighthood>
, following a symbolic vote in parliament last month when MPs demanded the 
businessman be stripped of his honour.

It is understood that the regulator quickly turned down an offer by Green 
because the lump sum he proposed wastoo low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/philip-green-described-as-britains-donald-trump-in-vanity-fair>
, while the structure he suggested was seen as risky and left too much 
uncertainty for pension fund members.

The regulator has not disclosed how much it is seeking from Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/25/regulator-must-chase-philip-green-for-bhs-pension-cash>
, but it is thought to be around £300m and the tycoon’s offer was at least £50m 
short.

But the structure of the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/sir-philip-green-bhs-v-pension-regulator-what-happens-next>
 is also important. It is understood that Green’s offer involved buying out 
pensioners with small savings pots and then setting up a new fund for those who 
want to remain in a BHS pension scheme. The new scheme would not have a 
sponsoring company to secure it, which runs contrary to Pension Protection Fund 
guidelines.

The BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension scheme is currently 
in an assessment period with the PPF. If a deal or settlement with Green cannot 
be reached the scheme will eventually enter the PPF, where the 20,000 members 
will suffer a cut to their benefits of at least 10%.

Ralfe defended the regulator for beginning enforcement action and said it was 
right to reject complex financial arrangements for bailing out pension schemes. 
“You can’t make things up on the hoof, it’s a nonsense,” he said.

Ros Altmann, the former pensions minister, added: “You don’t tell regulators 
what you believe is the right amount – they tell you.

“If I were Sir Philip, I would take back responsibility for the BHS scheme and 
manage it on an ongoing basis to find the best way to meet the liabilities over 
time. But that will be expensive.

“This is what he promised parliament he would do. Putting in a smaller amount 
than the regulator requires will just mean members stay in the PPF and any 
extra money goes into the central PPF pot. To pay better benefits will require 
a bigger amount of money, but it is up to the regulator to decide what that 
amount should be.”

The PPF, which is funded by a levy charged to company pension schemes, backed 
the regulator’s announcement.

Alan Rubenstein, chief executive of the PPF, said: “We welcome any steps that 
may secure more money for the BHS pension schemes. This would reduce the cost 
falling on our levy payers and may provide the potential for members to receive 
higher than PPF levels of benefits.

“Members of the BHS pension schemes continue to be protected by the PPF and 
can be assured that regardless of the current shortfall in the schemes they can 
expect to receive PPF level benefits.”

BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> collapsed into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/25/bhs-collapse-consumers-guide-retailer-administration>
 in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and leaving a pension deficit of 
£571m. Green controlled BHS between 2000 and 2015, during which time his family 
and other shareholders collected more than £580m. In March 2015, Green sold BHS 
to Dominic Chappell, a serial bankrupt with no retail experience, for just £1. 
Chappell’s company Retail Acquisitionscollected an estimated £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/dominic-chappell-bled-bhs-dry-says-paul-sutton>
 from BHS despite owning it for just 13 months until it fell into 
administration.

The regulator said it had sent warning notices to Green, Chappell and their 
companies, Taveta and Retail Acquisitions. The warning notices run to more than 
300 pages and explain why the regulator believes the parties are liable to 
financially support the BHS pension scheme.

Green and Chappell now have around six months to reply to the regulator and 
set out their case. When they do, a Pensions Regulator determinations panel – 
which is independent of the investigations team – will rule whether the parties 
involved should make a one-off payment into the pension scheme, provide 
on-going financial support, or both. However, this decision can then be 
appealed.

The regulator has said it is still open to reaching a settlement with Green. 
The cash sum the regulator is seeking to redress the BHS pension scheme dwarfs 
its previous settlements. Since the Pensions Regulator was founded in 2005 it 
has only issued warning notices in 16 cases and completed 10 of those. It has 
raised £400m for pension schemes, including through out-of-court settlements. A 
similar case to BHS involving Coats Group, a thread manufacturer, has not 
evolved beyond the warning notice stage despite these being issued three years 
ago.

Green insists he made a “credible and substantial proposal” to the regulator, 
despite the regulator saying it was yet to receive a “sufficiently credible and 
comprehensive offer”. A source close to the tycoon said: “There was a 
substantial amount of money on the table that would have improved the position 
of BHS pensioners.”

The warning notices sent to Green and Chappell are different, although the 
regulator declined to provide further details. Chappell said: “There is a huge 
bundle of documents that we need to read through carefully. When we are ready 
to make a statement, we will.”
 