
Jerry Hayes, the rent-a-quote Tory MP for Harlow in Essex for 14 years until 
1997, has belatedly written about his parliamentary experiences.

The hype for his book, An unexpected MP: confessions of a political gossip*, 
describes it as a "no-holds-barred" expos√© of parliamentary scandals. It is 
supposed to be "riotously funny" and "gloriously indiscreet."

In fact, it largely amounts to a string of mundane anecdotes, some of which 
stretch credulity and many of which I suspect are apocryphal. There are, 
however, occasional laugh-out-loud moments. Inevitably, the names of 
still-living people involved in the most scandalous episodes are concealed.

Ahead of publication, extracts were published for four days in the Daily Mail. 
Then its Sunday stablemate revealed in its Black Dog columnan embarrassing 
incident involving Hayes that he had not mentioned in his book. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2576583/BLACK-DOG-Forgotten-scandal-Jerry-Hayes.html>

He once featured in a News of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> story headlined "Tory MP 
two-timed wife with underage gay lover". Hayes was persuaded by the paper's 
then editor, Rebekah Brooks, to be interviewed about his "platonic 
relationship" with an 18-year-old accountant.**

But the Mail itself had been guilty in its serialisation of omitting the many 
mentions by Hayes of his brushes with editors and journalists. For example, it 
did not carry Hayes's view of the Mail columnist: "the ghastly Richard 
Littlejohn", whom he calls "an arrogant bully with a brain the size of a pea" (
as Hugh Muir also recorded in his diary on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/19/hugh-muirs-diary-chris-grayling>
).

The paper did not refer to the occasion when Hayes had to prop up the 
(allegedly) inebriatedMail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> political correspondent, 
Adrian Lithgow, so he could file his copy.

The Mail also overlooked his friendships with an eclectic bunch of 
journalists, who include "friends from the soaraway Sun", "my dear friend" Paul 
Routledge ("one of the most talented journalists I've ever met"), Rebekah 
Brooks ("great fun"), the Mail on Sunday's Peter Dobbie ("a star") and the 
"Glaswegian Mirror Rottweiler, Don Mackay."

He also lists his favourite "giants" of journalism - the Press Association's 
Chris Moncrieff, Gordon Greig of the Daily Mail, Ian Aitken ofThe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>, Trevor Kavanagh of The Sun, 
Geoffrey Parkhouse of The Herald, and David English, the late editor of the 
Mail.

And there is a special mention also for Nigel Nelson, the Sunday People 
political editor for a generation, who has obliged with a generous front cover 
blurb: "ThinkAlan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> 
diaries on crack".

Finally, here's a sample of Hayes's laser-like insight into Fleet Street: 
"Editors are strange creatures who wield enormous power and sometimes they 
become power-crazed megalomaniacs. Get on the wrong side of them and you are 
dead."

*An unexpected MP: confessions of a political gossip 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/an-unexpected-mp-hardback>, by Jerry 
Hayes (Biteback)

**The full, unexpurgated version of this story can be found in Graham 
Johnson's astonishing book about Sunday tabloid journalism:Hack: sex, drugs, 
and scandal from inside the tabloid jungle (Simon & Schuster), which is 
reviewed in the latest issue of the British Journalism Review.
 