
An Argentinian court on Thursday ordered a renewed investigation into a 
prosecutor’s accusation that former presidentCristina Fernández de Kirchner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner> covered up 
the alleged involvement of Iranians in a bombing that killed 85 people.

The attack on a Jewish community center in Buenos Aires in 1994 wounded 
hundreds of others.

The country’s top criminal tribunal accepted a request by a coalition of 
Argentinian Jewish associations to re-examine the charge against Fernández, her 
foreign minister Héctor Timerman and other officials in her government.

Prosecutor Alberto Nisman made the charge against Fernández on 14 January 
2015. He was found dead with a gunshot to the head four days later. Authorities 
never determined if he was killed or took his own life.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> has denied any connection with 
the attack and declined to turn over the suspects in the case.

Spies, cover-ups and the mysterious death of an Argentinian prosecutor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/28/alberto-nisman-death-cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner-argentina-intelligence-agency>
Fernández was president from 2007 to 2015. She has denied wrongdoing in the 
case.

The former president blames the accusation on what she says is the bias of 
judges following the orders of her successor, President Mauricio Macri, who 
took office in December 2015.

Santiago Kaplun, the secretary general of the delegation of Jewish 
organisations, welcomed the court ruling, telling the Todo Noticias cable TV 
channel: “We are very hopeful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fformer-argentina-president-faces-fresh-inquiry-into-bombing-cover-up-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb02aa72f816c8b3499a07240fe0ce6b257a8ebad%2F707_300_2157_1294%2F2157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20Argentina%20president%20faces%20fresh%20inquiry%20into%20bombing%20cover-up%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fformer-argentina-president-faces-fresh-inquiry-into-bombing-cover-up-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20Argentina%20president%20faces%20fresh%20inquiry%20into%20bombing%20cover-up%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fformer-argentina-president-faces-fresh-inquiry-into-bombing-cover-up-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb02aa72f816c8b3499a07240fe0ce6b257a8ebad%2F707_300_2157_1294%2F2157.jpg>
 Alberto Nisman, the prosecutor investigating the 1994 bombing who was found 
with a gunshot wound to the head in 2015. Photograph: Natacha Pisarenko/AP 
The ruling adds to the legal complications facing the former leader. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/cristina-fernandez-de-kirchner-indicted-corruption-argentina>

On Tuesday, a federal judge approved charges of illicit association and 
fraudulent administration against Fernández, and two former aides: ex-planning 
minister Julio de Vido and former public works secretary Jose Lopez. They are 
accused of misusing public money by paying inflated prices for public works 
contracts. Fernandez also denies wrongdoing in that case.
 