
The Bruce Springsteen song 57 Channels (and Nothin’ on) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YAlDbP4tdqc> reflects the popular prejudice 
that television represents quantity without quality.

However, John Landgraf, CEO of the channel FX, argued at a recent industry 
conference 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/fx-chief-john-landgraf-content-813914>
 that the medium is now facing a new crisis of supply. He calculated that 371 
original scripted TV shows were made in the US in 2014, while the tally for the 
current year may pass 400. “There is simply too much television,” he said.

Save me from my TV obsession (but don't forget to record the new Veep) | 
Rebecca Nicholson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/08/save-me-from-my-tv-obsession-veep-louie-mad-men-the-unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-orphan-black>
Whereas Springsteen was complaining about an avalanche of trash – his sample 
included the rise of shopping channels on 1980s cable TV – Landgraf’s 
observations are confined to drama, which generally has higher levels of 
high-end content. While worrying about this rush of stuff including concerns 
about rubbish (“it’s impossible to maintain quality control”), he also fretted 
that gems were being overlooked because viewers will struggle to locate the 
good shows in the torrent.

This situation – 400 dramas and we don’t know what’s on, to paraphrase the 
Boss – feels surreal for older British viewers: those over 40 will remember 
when four terrestrial channels represented a luxury of choice and listings 
magazines had space to print the names of bit-part actors and assistant 
technicians. Until the satellite and then digital revolutions, viewers and 
schedulers in the UK were limited by what was known in the jargon as “spectrum 
scarcity”, a term that reflected the way governments made broadcasters pay 
exorbitant tolls to access a road with limited lanes. But, with the super-wide 
freeway created by the explosions in TV and then online streaming, British 
producers and consumers of television now face a spectrum glut – and the risk, 
raised by Landgraf, of an overwhelming level of content.

The comments of the FX boss echo a longstanding concern in book publishing, 
namely that the supply of titles usually far exceeds the available readers, 
resulting in most volumes going unread.

A crucial difference, however, is that the crisis of quantity in TV fiction is 
exacerbated at the moment by the volume of quality. The playwrightSir Tom 
Stoppard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard> joked recently that he was
hoping a long illness would leave him bed-ridden 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-news/10382283/Tom-Stoppard-I-wish-I-could-remember-how-to-write.html>
 so he could catch up on all the boxsets he had bought. This remark reflected 
the modern equivalent of the Springsteen problem: a surfeit of modern TV 
classics and not enough time to watch them.

Despite being a smug completist of Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> and The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, I currently have multiple episodes of 
Veep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/27/veep-julia-louis-dreyfus-white-house-sitcom-emmy>
,Humans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/10/humans-robot-drama-series>
 andNot Safe For Work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/30/channel-4-not-safe-for-work-drama-this-life-lost-generation>
 in an electronic stack more dauntingly tall than any pile of unread books that 
has loomed beside my bed or desk. Another drawback of broadcast stories is 
that, whereas novels and biographies – with the exception of trilogies and 
multivolume sequences – stay the same size while they wait for you to get round 
to them, a hit TV series keeps growing like a triffid while your back is 
turned. What were four unwatched episodes can easily become eight by the time 
you next check. Soon, like a lagging runner being lapped, you can be two 
seasons behind.

 Landgraf suggested that the overcultivation of TV shows must lead to a 
weeding: “My sense is that 2016 or 2017 will represent peak TV in America, and 
then we will see a decline.”

Again, similar predictions have been made consistently in the book business. 
There, though, the number of products has kept rising and is now impossible to 
quantify because of the torrential addition of ebook self-publishing to the 
traditional methods of distribution.

Due to the huge costs of creating quality TV fiction, it seems unlikely that 
eTV will have a similar effect on broadcasting. And it’s the economics of 
screen production that are most likely to achieve the winnowing that Landgraf 
believes is necessary. With the funding model of Britain’s biggest TV drama 
producer under threat from the government’s current examination of the size and 
scope of the BBC licence fee, and the finances of streaming networks still 
mysterious and unproved, it’s unclear how much money will be available in the 
future.

For the moment, though, the man from FX is right. There has never been as much 
drama on TV and, against the predictions of the cultural snobs who have 
denigrated television for so long, there is too much good stuff for any viewer 
– apart from a childless insomniac with unlimited free time – to get through.
 