
Fox News anchor ED Hill has lost her show a week after suggesting Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and his wife Michelle's 
on-stage victory gesture could be seen as a "terrorist fist jab".

Hill, the anchor of Fox News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> show 
America's Pulse, made the comment last Friday after Obama and his wife 
affectionately bumped fists before his victory speech on becoming the 
Democratic candidate for president.

"A fist bump? A pound? A terrorist fist jab? The gesture everyone seems to 
interpret differently," said Hill in her show. "We'll show you some interesting 
body communication and find out what it really says."

According to US media reports Hill, who has been with Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox> News Channel since 1998, has now lost 
her show although she is to stay with the network in an as yet undetermined 
capacity.

Hill apologised for the gaffe live on-air at the start of her show on Tuesday.

"I want to start the show by clarifying something I said on the show about an 
upcoming body language segment. Now I mentioned various ways the Obama's fist 
pump in St Paul's had been characterised in the media," she said.

"I apologise because unfortunately, some thought I personally had 
characterised it inappropriately. I regret that. It was not my intention. And I 
certainly didn't mean to associate the word 'terrorist' in any way with Senator 
Obama and his wife," Hill added.

Prior to anchoring America's Pulse, Hill hosted Fox News Live. She also 
co-hosts Bill O'Reilly's Radio Factor show.

The "terrorist fist jab" comment is the one in a series of anti-Obama 
incidents in which Fox News has been involved.

Recently an on-screen caption described Michelle Obama as "Obama's Baby Mama" 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/usa/2008/06/foxs_baby_mama_booboo.html>, a slang 
term for black single mothers.

And in May Fox News contributor Liz Trotta apologised for joking that Obama 
should be assassinated, along with Osama bin Laden.

Obama recently launched a website, www.fightthesmears.com 
<http://www.fightthesmears.com>, offering rebuttals of rumours that have 
continued to circulate online and in rightwing news outlets.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 