
A planned £20bn merger between the London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-agree-merger-terms-costs>
 poses a threat to competition and the European economy, the French finance 
minister has claimed.

Michel Sapin said a combination of the two would make it too dominant and 
called on the European commission to intervene. He told Reuters: “I want to 
express the concern of the French government on this tie-up. We have doubts 
about the consequences this could have for the financing of the real economy in 
France andEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“The merger of these two entities will result in a large group which could 
hold within it a majority of the tools that make our markets function 
efficiently. That poses a competition problem, and we want to make sure the 
European commission gets involved to avoid a situation where a dominant 
position arises.”

If the deal went ahead it would create a group similar in size to the 
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) in the US, dwarfing smaller European 
competitors such as Euronext.

LSE's merger with Deutsche Börse will trouble shareholders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-merger-deutsche-borse-trouble-shareholders>
The London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> and Deutsche 
Börse claim that a merger would allow them to cut costs by €450m (£350m). 
Deutsche Börse shareholders would own 54.4% of the new company with LSE 
shareholders owning the remainder.

It is the third time the two have attempted to merge. They agreed to merge in 
2000before a rival bid for the LSE from Sweden’s OM Gruppen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2000/aug/29/1> scuppered the deal, which 
was then rejected anyway.

The LSE then rejected a formal £1.3bn offer from Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/jan/27/germany.money> in January 
2005. After the potential deal wasannounced in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/lse-london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-europe>
, ICE, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange,revealed it was considering 
making a rival offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/nyse-owner-plots-offer-for-london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse>
 for LSE.
 