
I once saw National Lampoon’s Animal House at a back-to-school midnight show 
at the University of California at Santa Barbara in September 1984. I hadn’t 
counted on the entire two rows of frat-boys behind me who recited every single 
line of dialogue, in unison, just seconds before the characters onscreen did. 
It was the first time I realised the term “cult movie” really meant something. 
Here were a group of people who were modelling their lives – for good or ill, 
mostly ill – on a movie that spoke directly to their own college experience. 
One that, as a few epic, real frat-house parties soon showed me, was infinitely 
more colourful than my own, albeit infused with a sinister sense of everyone 
growing up way too fast.

Compared to my monochrome, rain-sodden, provincial redbrick British university 
back home, UCSB was in Technicolor and CinemaScope, and rated R, just like 
Animal House. There was no British equivalent to Animal House or its myriad 
successors, then or now. The only movie thatremotely resembled my UK college 
experience is Withnail And I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/withnail-and-i-review>. Compared 
to the rich tapestry of American college movies, we have Sebastian Flyte’s 
teddy bear, Lucky Jim’s hangovers and Starter For 10.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm8psQi7ScQQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm8psQi7ScQQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm8psQi7ScQQ&media=>
But maybe that’s a good thing, because almost every American college movie is, 
at root, a bro-friendly, sexist Animal House Redux. The original offered a 
template that movie-makers have been reluctant to forsake, and a behavioural 
model – binge-drinking, drug abuse, creepy sexual antics, etc – that students 
today embrace at their peril. The British equivalent of Animal House would be 
hard to imagine, and probably unwatchable.

We're on a mission from God! Blues Brothers the cartoon is coming soon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/04/blues-brothers-the-cartoon-is-coming-soon>
The imbalance in US-UK student movies rises, I think, directly out of the 
comparable student experiences in each country. In Britain, student life always 
seems synonymous with rain, duffel coats, roll-up ciggies and shillings for the 
meter. In California, where, after all, movies are made, it’s keg parties, pep 
rallies, spring break excesses, shorts, bikinis and pre-finals all-nighters. I 
know which I’d choose.

If the Animal House model prevails, it’s because college is no longer like it 
was in the movie, and the whole genre is essentially nostalgic or outright 
reactionary. Today, the prospect of life-long college debt tends to focus the 
least nerdy mind when it comes to actually getting down to studying. And an 
unfairly demonised culture of trigger warnings and safe spaces seeks to 
safeguard against the glorification of sexist, hedonistic excess celebrated in 
that feted film. There are new movies to be made about this real college 
experience but, so far, on both sides of the Atlantic, no one is making them.
 