
The CNC, France’s film certification board, has come under renewed pressure to 
review its practices by conservative organisations angry at what they perceive 
as an overlenient rating given to a Hollywood cartoon.


Sausage Party <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sausage-party>, written and 
directed by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, is an animated fable about the 
delusion of religion in a godless universe. Set in an American supermarket, its 
characters are horny and often blasphemous foodstuffs who at one point engage 
in a mass sex party.

In the US, the film was rated R, and in the UK, it had 15. In France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> it has been given a 12 certificate, 
enabling children to legally watch it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&media=>
Sausage Party trailer: Seth Rogen and Kristen Wiig in adult cartoon comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Said Jean-Frédéric Poisson, president of France’s Christian Democratic party: 
“An orgy scene for 12-year-olds! Everything remains to be done to combat early 
exposure to pornography.”

La Manif Pour Tours, which has campaigned against same-sex marriage, added on 
Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/LaManifPourTous/status/803935650399551488?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “Hello CNC, explain how you can authorise the screening of a giant orgy for 
the whole family?”

Meanwhile the Association of Catholic Families sought to alert parents to any 
potential confusion, warning that while Sausage Party gives “the appearance of 
being intended for young people and children” its “content is not only coarse, 
but also clearly pornographic, under cover of being ‘politically incorrect’”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffrench-film-ratings-board-under-fire-after-sausage-party-granted-12-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb1b8b3e0b510867ba76c62f332fd7c1f4bfa382%2F0_0_3000_1622%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20film%20board%20again%20under%20fire%20after%20Sausage%20Party%20rated%2012&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffrench-film-ratings-board-under-fire-after-sausage-party-granted-12-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20film%20board%20again%20under%20fire%20after%20Sausage%20Party%20rated%2012&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffrench-film-ratings-board-under-fire-after-sausage-party-granted-12-certificate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb1b8b3e0b510867ba76c62f332fd7c1f4bfa382%2F0_0_3000_1622%2F3000.jpg>
 Shocker … Sausage Party. Photograph: Sony Pictures 
In January, culture minister Audrey Azoulay announced that the CNC was to be 
overhauled and ratings regulations tightened.

This was in part in response to lobbying by Promouvoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/french-film-classification-system-overhauled-right-wing-attacks>
, an organisation purporting to strengthen “Judeo-Christian values”, which 
scored high-profile victories against films by directors such asGaspar Noé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/gaspar-noe-erotic-3d-film-love-sex-is-zone-of-danger>
 andAbdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
.

Noé’s film, Love, which contains explicit 3D sex scenes, had its rating raised 
to an 18 certificate three weeks after release because of the pressure group’s 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/06/gaspar-noe-3d-sex-film-love-raised-age-rating-certificate>
. Kechiche’s Palme d’Or-winning lesbian drama,Blue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-review>
, had its 12 rating removed by a Paris court after another Promouvoir appeal, 
while Lars von Trier’s Antichrist, a psychological horror that includes scenes 
of genital mutilation, wasbanned in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/lars-von-trier-antichrist-banned-france-promouvoir>
, seven years after its release.

The French ratings board has traditionally been more lenient when it comes to 
sexual content than its UK and US equivalents, the BBFC and MPAA. The 12 rating 
in France for Fifty Shades of Grey remains in place.
 