
Divines review – exhilarating urban thriller froths with joie de vivre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/divines-review-urban-thriller-debut-houda-benyamina-paris-netflix>
Despite the seemingly limitless resources at its disposal, Netflix has shown 
little interest in forging a brand identity. Instead, with its burgeoning 
parade of Netflix Originals, the platform has attempted to simultaneously 
appeal to everyone, from nostalgic thirtysomethings (Stranger Things 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWxyRG_tckY>) to excitable tweens (Haters Back 
Off <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDDAClMibkM>) via the terminally 
masochistic (high-octane Kevin James rompTrue Memoirs Of An International 
Assassin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E6l4xrEjFY8>, now streaming!).

About the only demographic Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> 
has failed to reach are those sophisticated torch-holders of the seventh art, 
the French. The platform faced massive resistance after launching in France in 
2014, thanks to the incompatibility of its tricksy tax arrangements with the 
country’s commitment to reinvestment in the film industry. Its catalogue was 
also hamstrung by local customs: a French regulation prohibits films from 
streaming until 36 months after their cinema release.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVT4YtWdK01M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVT4YtWdK01M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVT4YtWdK01M&media=>
Eager to break through in the world’s seventh biggest film market, Netflix 
continued to enthusiastically court French viewers, and this year it struck at 
the very heart of French cinephilia by acquiring a raft of titles at the Cannes 
film festival. First out of the gate is Houda Benyamina’s Divines, winner of 
the festival’s Caméra d’Or prize, which began streaming yesterday.

The film follows 15-year-old Dounia as she navigates the Paris banlieues in 
search of an escape from the monotony of school life and a reprieve from the 
poverty of her small shanty town. If that sounds like the perfect framework on 
which to hang cliches, you won’t be surprised to hear that Dounia soon falls in 
with a charismatic but sporadically terrifying drug dealer and takes a shine to 
a tough but sensitive dancer.


Divines director Houda Benyamina: 'It's better to make a film than a bomb'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/divines-director-houda-benyamina-its-better-to-make-a-film-than-a-bomb>
Familiar tropes aside, the film is a commanding coming-of-age story, thanks to 
its forthright refusal to deny the pressures exerted by gender and race in 
every aspect of Dounia’s existence, and its low-key understanding of the 
particulars of contemporary youth culture. For my money, Divines is never more 
alive than in the not-insignificant portions of its running time that take the 
form of triumphant, youthful Snapchats.

The film feels like just the thing to heal the bad blood between Netflix and 
France’s reluctant industry gatekeepers, but if Divines does represent an 
attempt to woo French detractors with content tailored directly to them, the 
platform must be playing the long game. As per government policy, the film 
won’t be available to stream in its home country until August 2019.
 