
When Halt and Catch Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/31/halt-and-catch-fire-computer-drama-second-season>
 premiered last year, it was considered, at best, a muted success. A period 
drama based on the tech boom of early-80s America, it was clear AMC was angling 
to repeat the feat it pulled off withMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> – that of making a 
workplace serial set in the recent past seem somehow compelling. But muddy 
plotting, erratic pacing and occasionally daft writing prevented it from being 
the runaway hit you could tell it was desperate to be. It wasn’t until the 
second season, which wrapped up last week and ironed out most of the irksome 
creases of the first, that it grew into itself. Reviews so far have been 
gushing: itscurrent rating on Rotten Tomatoes is a whopping 94% 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/tv/halt-and-catch-fire/s02/>. “Halt and Catch 
Fire became the new Mad Men when it stopped trying to be,”as Time magazine 
adroitly put it 
<http://time.com/3980486/review-halt-and-catch-fire-season-2-finale/>.

With so many shows getting nobbled at the first sign of a drop in viewing 
figures, it’s refreshing to see a show such as Halt and Catch Fire being given 
time to grow and find its feet. As it showed withRubicon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/07/rubicon-episode-one>
, AMC has no qualms about giving the Old-Yeller treatment to underperformers 
after one season, either. But its patience in this case, it would seem, has 
paid off.

Sometimes it does take a season for shows to get going. A dry run, if you 
will. It happens. It took these shows a season to get the engine ticking over, 
too.

It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438706812620%2Fdbf0b581-0aac-4985-a167-0a3601980b68-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Breaking%20Bad%20to%20Blackadder%3A%20the%20great%20TV%20shows%20with%20patchy%20first%20seasons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Breaking%20Bad%20to%20Blackadder%3A%20the%20great%20TV%20shows%20with%20patchy%20first%20seasons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438706812620%2Fdbf0b581-0aac-4985-a167-0a3601980b68-2060x1236.jpeg>
 It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia Photograph: Everett/REX_Shutterstock 
It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia | Your next box set
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/14/its-always-sunny-in-philadelphia>
Few comedies make it to season 10, but the foul drunken exploits of five 
narcissistic reprobates in a Philly pub have done just that. It had a bumpy 
start, though: in comparison to the nine that followed, the first season feels 
cold. Formulaic. Underdone. It was deeply and visibly in thrall to the 
cringe-comedy ofCurb Your Enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/curb-your-enthusiasm>, and seemed to 
be operating from a taboo checklist – race, abortion, cancer – of topics to 
poke at. Sure, it would come back to all of these topics eventually, just in a 
more novel, It’s Always Sunny... sort of way.

The show circled the plughole of cancellation until FX decided to give it 
another chance. The president of the channel was friends withDanny DeVito 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-devito>, so asked him to guest star. 
DeVito is still there. The second season upped the silliness: the “scheme of 
the week” aspect gave each character a unique deplorability and demanded at 
least one amazing meltdown per episode. Just like that, it was fixed, and the 
programme is now one of the best-loved comedies of the past decade.

Red Dwarf
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bugSGlLDDs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bugSGlLDDs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2bugSGlLDDs&media=>
 Red Dwarf series one trailer 
Red Dwarf’s rude run of form lasted five fairly untouchable seasons, from the 
second up to and including the sixth. Even to its its staunchest fans, no 
amount of nostalgia or goodwill can change the inescapable fact that anyRed 
Dwarf <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/red-dwarf> made post-1993 
(season seven onwards) is toilet. But it’s easy to forget that, in comparison 
to its golden age of 1988 to 1993, the first season wasn’t much cop, either.

In its defence, what it did have was the writing duo of Rob Grant and Doug 
Naylor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grant_Naylor>, so the dialogue had the 
nascent crackle for which the show would become famous. But, in hindsight, the 
tone of the first season feels darker than it should; more oppressive, more 
desolate. This is a show about the last human alive, so you can see why, but it 
wasn’t until the second season – fairly similar to the first in most respects – 
that the actors bedded into their roles. The Lister/Rimmer dynamic reached its 
bitter peak, the original Holly’s role was expanded to superb effect, and 
storylines became lighter, more fantastical and more, well, sci-fi.

Parks and Recreation
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcNlL9FWs_KA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcNlL9FWs_KA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcNlL9FWs_KA&media=>
 Parks and Recreation season one trailer 
Parks and Recreation: another acclaimed US show without the UK audience it 
deserves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/27/parks-and-recreation-another-acclaimed-us-show-without-the-uk-audience-it-deserves>
The characters were there in the municipal comedy’s first season, they were 
just inchoate, shallower, less likeable versions of the cheek-pinchable bunch 
they eventually became. Leslie was a preening jobsworth, Andy was a douche, Tom 
was impulsively punchable, and Ron Swanson was, with the deepest appreciation 
of the Moustachioed One, a libertarian chump.Parks and Recreation 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCEQFjAAahUKEwirk6Dm0ZHHAhXkstsKHR5dClQ&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fparks-and-recreation&ei=stjBVavyF-Tl7gaeuqmgBQ&usg=AFQjCNGpw_HZO7aR69V6nNyIteJJIa7xLg&sig2=Mip6GG-KdTIGEjsuzHrrnA&bvm=bv.99261572,d.ZGU>
 eventually sanded down its characters’ more abrasive edges, leaving chummier, 
cheerier ones in their place. As with It’s Always Sunny..., Parks and 
Recreation’s second season also benefited from the introduction of a big-name 
new cast member, in its case Rob Lowe’s Chris Traeger, who would go on to 
become a series regular.

Anyone starting the episodes currently showing on Dave – season four through 
to seven – should rest safe in the knowledge that they’re seeing the show at 
its best. The first is fine, it just isn’t indicative of the rest.

Blackadder
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNa4v8CeKnxM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNa4v8CeKnxM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNa4v8CeKnxM&media=>
Blackadder – your country needs you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/06/blackadder-michael-gove-historians-first-world-war>
It’s bizarre nowadays to think that anything besides a bottomless ditch could 
be improved by the presence of Ben Elton. And yet, Blackadder’s first season is 
a bit of an oddity: Rowan Atkinson’s titular Duke is the simpering, gormless 
buffoon, while it’s Tony Robinson’s Baldrick who is the wily schemer. It just 
doesn’t work. With all its costumes and locations, it was also quite an 
expensive misfire for the BBC: it took three years, a slashing of the budget 
and a writing-room switcheroo to get the show recommissioned.

Richard Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis> brought in 
Ben Elton <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-elton> to replace Atkinson 
on writing duties, newfound thriftiness-by-necessity turned it into a more 
conventional studio-based sitcom, and the rest was history. It was, you could 
say, a cunning plan.

Justified
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438766864303%2F117fd639-d02b-4a6f-bf36-d9bbddc3b9ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Breaking%20Bad%20to%20Blackadder%3A%20the%20great%20TV%20shows%20with%20patchy%20first%20seasons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Breaking%20Bad%20to%20Blackadder%3A%20the%20great%20TV%20shows%20with%20patchy%20first%20seasons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Ffrom-breaking-bad-to-blackadder-the-great-tv-shows-with-patchy-first-seasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438766864303%2F117fd639-d02b-4a6f-bf36-d9bbddc3b9ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Justified Photograph: Prashant Gupta/FX Network 
Justified: television's best kept secret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jun/30/justified-five-usa>
Recommending a series with the caveat “just get through the first season and 
you’ll be hooked” doesn’t pique many people’s interest. But this modern western 
starring Timothy Olyphant as trigger-happy US Marshal Raylan Givens is worth 
the effort. Justified’s opening run is little more than a fairly conventional 
procedural: it introduces the people and the place, so it is – unfortunately – 
essential, and there are longer arcs bubbling away in the background, but it’s 
solid without daring to try to be anything more.

Season two bumped Walton Goggins <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0324658/>’s 
loquacious criminal Boyd Crowder up to a main cast member role and dropped the 
case-of-the-week format in favour of season-long serialised narratives. The 
show had found its niche. If you haven’t seen it, you really should: it’ll 
snare you. But you’ll have to get through that pesky first season first.

Breaking Bad
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhesaQXLuRY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhesaQXLuRY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHhesaQXLuRY&media=>
 Breaking Bad season one trailer 
Inside the Breaking Bad writers' room: how Vince Gilligan runs the show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/20/breaking-bad-writers-room-vince-gilligan>
Season one of Breaking Bad 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCEQFjAAahUKEwjS8teR0ZHHAhWpKdsKHe2pCiE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fbreaking-bad&ei=AdjBVZLuAqnT7Abt06qIAg&usg=AFQjCNEcO1eRS9K7JIqnK1I9FFAcqNaq8g&sig2=t3KEU04azN2Gk1zIGYYhsQ&bvm=bv.99261572,d.ZGU>
 definitely had its moments: some of the most memorable cold opens in recent 
memory, or any timeTuco <http://breakingbad.wikia.com/wiki/Tuco_Salamanca> was 
on screen, for instance. But, considering it was only a lean seven episodes 
long, the fresher’s run of Walter White’s odyssey felt stodgy and sluggish in a 
way subsequent seasons never had time to. Marie’s kleptomania, Walt Jr’s 
half-arsed foray into teenage rebellion and Jessie’s family issues all felt as 
if they were unnecessary sashays away from the infinitely more diverting 
central story.

From season two onwards, the show hit a canter, then a gallop, and then all of 
a sudden it was over. The first is no disaster – its clutch of awards and the 
fact that my mum likes it is incontrovertible evidence of that. But it was the 
later seasons that turned the show from a diverting, well-acted drama to a 
genuine worldwide phenomenon.

 * Which other shows took a while to get going? Have your say in the comments 
section below
 