
Malala Yousefzai is the youngest Nobel laureate 
<http://news.discovery.com/history/youngest-nobel-prize-winners-131011.htm>. 
Her prize is inspiring – it recognises her bravery and the importance of girls’ 
education.


But Yousefzai’s story includes violence that cannot be understood without 
awareness of the politics of weak political institutions, poverty, geopolitics 
of war and fragile economies. To improve girls’ access to education we need to 
connect politics to policy.

By making visible the connections between economic and political empowerment, 
we can understand why education of girls remains a problem as we approach the 
end of the millenium development goals.

Of all of the world’s parliaments, women represent over 50% in just one of them
 <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SG.GEN.PARL.ZS> – Rwanda. Young women are 
an even tinier percentage. Does it matter? It does – descriptively, 
substantively and symbolically.

Descriptively

Should our representative systems – political parties, social movements and 
parliaments be representative? There are1.8 billion young people in the world 
<http://social.un.org/youthyear/docs/fact-sheet-girl-youngwomen.pdf>. 
Approximately half of them – 900 million – are adolescent girls and young 
women. So, should representative institutions at all levels not reflect this?

Substantively

It is only when more young women enter political institutions that we will be 
able to assess whether their presence translates into progressive education 
policies for girls.

Symbolically 

The greater the number of young women in politics the more it can be an 
inspiration to others to join. But how we present girls and young women in our 
public and political spheres also matters.

Making policies is not sufficient; we also need progressive laws. In most 
countries there are tensions between state laws and cultural practices,which 
can hinder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/15/fgm-africa-criminalisation-ethiopia>
 implementation of laws and policies – laws against forced marriages, child 
marriage, dowry and bride price, violence against women, FGM, can be framed in 
ways that do not challenge gender inequality. They can also be undermined by 
cultural practices legitimised through parallel legal systems. This negatively 
affects the education of girls and young women.

Holding our politicians accountable is one way of ensuring that this doesn’t 
happen, for which political participation is important. It means mobilising in 
the public sphere – issues of mobility, violence against women, lack of 
political education and access to economic resources and cultural support are 
barriers to such political mobilisation.

Access of young women to work and the right to education is often undermined 
by contexts where economic independence for women is not prioritised. The fact 
that care work within the home, largely done by girls and women, is not counted 
as work also undermines their status in society and their wellbeing.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are then seen as recipients of 
welfare, rather than contributors to society. Girls and young women can feel 
physically and mentally weak with long hours of unrecognised work, leading to a 
double burden, poor health and barriers to education.

Economic barriers to education

The male breadwinner model makes men feel that when jobs are scarce, men 
should have first access; state policies tend to reflect this. Laws are often 
inadequate to ensure that young women have equal opportunities for work. 
Economic crises result inhigher rates of unemployment for young women 
<http://www.mediaglobal.org/2010/08/17/educated-and-unemployed-for-young-women-in-developing-countries-global-crisis-is-personal/>
, insecure and poor conditions of work and increased burdens of care as 
austerity measures hit women hard.


Class matters too – middle class and rich women benefit from the depressed 
wages during economic crises. Women are not a homogenous group. Moreover, focus 
on male employment has discriminatory effects on decisions about educating 
girls. If education don’t geteasily into jobs, then why educate them at all?

So, can anything be done to challenge and remove these political and economic 
barriers to educational empowerment for girls and young women?

Solidarity and collective action is one way to address these critically 
important issues. Inmy work 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/pais/people/rai/publications/> I have called 
this working in and against the state – participating in decision-making 
institutions, but also holding them accountable from the outside through 
democratic mobilisation. This means that the ambivalence we feel about powerful 
institutions can be addressed. Collective action takes the focus away from 
individual strategies of advancement – the lean in strategy of Sheryl Sandberg 
that places the burden of change on individual women rather than on systemic 
analysis.

Does the individual matter? Of course she does – as an actor in her own right 
– but no individual stands alone. We are all part of a complex network – 
economic, political, social and cultural at different levels, from local to the 
global. To make change happen we need to recognise this connectedness – as 
critics, as participants in organisations and social movements, through direct 
and indirect routes. While today many girls are living better lives than their 
mothers and grandmothers, this is not true for many others – the challenges of 
a violent, unequal world remain.

Professor Shirin M Rai is co-director of the University of Warwick Global 
Research Priorities <http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/research/priorities/> on 
International Development.


Read more stories like this: 

• Criminalisation will not stop FGM in east Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/15/fgm-africa-criminalisation-ethiopia>

• Ziauddin Yousafzai: learn from Malala, use your own voice to demand rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/09/ziauddin-yousafzai-malala-girls-education>

• Girls brave violence for their education in northern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/northern-nigeria-school-girls>

• Advertisement feature: We need to talk about violence against girls  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/oct/16/talk-about-violence-against-girls>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.



 