
Any channel hoping to make a decent splash with a foreign acquisition must 
hope it arrives propelled by a wave of hype and admiring reviews. Cop show
Battle Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/26/battle-creek-odd-couple-cop-drama-breaking-bad>
 – which makes its UK debut this week, tucked away on the Universal Channel – 
is an example of a different sort of import: one that washes up on these shores 
having already washed up at home. Despite being created by Breaking Bad’sVince 
Gilligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/27/vince-gilligan-better-call-saul>
, the offbeat US drama set in the eponymous, economically depressed Michigan 
city was cancelled by CBS after 13 episodes. That might make it sound like a 
tough sell, but here are six reasons you might want to visit Battle Creek after 
all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsWFQZ5nHT3I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsWFQZ5nHT3I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsWFQZ5nHT3I&media=>
It’s Due South V2.0

A square-jawed, straight-arrow law enforcement agent rides into unfamiliar 
territory and finds himself partnered with a scuzzy, street-smart cop. If that 
brings back fond memories of a certainMountie-flavoured cult hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/13/your-next-boxset-due-south>
, you may well click with Battle Creek.Transformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jul/27/actionandadventure.sciencefictionandfantasy>
 star Josh Duhamel is dreamy new arrival Milt, setting up a one-man satellite 
office in Michigan after leaving the FBI’s Detroit field office in mildly 
mysterious circumstances. Dean Winters from30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/30-rock> is Agnew, the convincingly 
rough-and-ready local detective who takes an immediate and intense dislike to 
Milt, even as everyone else in town is charmed by his old-fashioned good 
manners and future-tech investigative hardware.

It’s a TV team-up between Vince Gilligan and the creator of House

Gilligan originally developed Battle Creek way back in 2002 – after his time 
on The X-Files but long before Breaking Bad. Perhaps it’s no wonder that CBS 
dusted off his old pitch, but even if the man himself was too busy withBetter 
Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/better-call-saul-episode-by-episode>
 to do anything more than take an executive-producing credit, at least they 
hired David Shore as a showrunner. There’s no such thing as a surefire hit in 
TV but teaming up the creators of Breaking Bad and House must have seemed like 
a reasonably good bet, and the pedigree shows. Battle Creek juggles its 
colourful character moments and procedural beats with a competence that stops 
just short of being off-puttingly slick.

It’s stuffed with interesting actors

While the focus is on its central mismatched partnership, there are plenty of 
notable actors doing good work in the margins of Battle Creek, including 
Meredith Eaton as a diminutive but scene-stealing coroner with the hots for 
Milt. Two-time Oscar nomineeJanet McTeer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/janet-mcteer> is the quizzical police 
commander while former House star (andWhite House staffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/deadlineusa/2009/jul/06/kal-penn-white-house>
) Kal Penn pops up as a self-medicating detective. There’s also an impressive 
list of guest stars, including Patton Oswalt as Scooter Hardy, a party-hearty 
mayor who bears more than a passing resemblance toRob Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rob-ford>, and Candice Bergen as Agnew’s 
con-artist mother.

It turns out less meth equals less stress

Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, for good 
or ill, could be an incredibly stressful viewing experience, characterised by 
sequences of unbearable tension, bursts of shocking violence and a low-level 
but pervasive vibe of fate sharpening a very large axe. In Battle Creek, there 
are drug busts, kidnappings and even the odd assassination attempt, but they’re 
more likely to involve medical marijuana, knock-off sneakers or grand romantic 
gestures gone awry than life-changing moral compromises that will go on to 
haunt your ever-waking hour.

It pushes good cop, slob cop to the extreme

The mismatched buddy trope may be uncommonly well-worn on screen but, to his 
enormous credit, Winters absolutely throws himself into the battered, unkempt 
role of Agnew: a volatile and abrasive personality who – even when everything 
you’ve ever seen on TV would suggest he’s just about to develop a grudging 
respect for his saintly partner – is so stubborn that he clings onto his 
hostility with a dogged death-grip. Duhamel (who admittedly wasn’t called upon 
to show much range in the Transformers franchise) is just as good, playing the 
ramrod-straight, immaculately tailored Milt as a slyly self-aware and 
practically simultaneous combination of Clark Kent and Superman.

It’s a Battle that’s already over

We’re all time-poor in a content-rich age. Committing to Battle Creek will 
only take up 13 hours, meaning you can enjoy the ridealong without worrying it 
will take over your life. And you’ll have some killer context to drop the next 
time someone mentions they’ve just started watchingBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>.

Battle Creek airs on Universal Channel 
<http://www.universalchannel.co.uk/shows/battle-creek> tonight at 10pm.
 