
I’d be surprised if there’s a more unlikely attempt to update a classic text 
this year than Linda Marshall Griffiths’s take onVillette at West Yorkshire 
Playhouse <https://www.wyp.org.uk/events/villette/>, which relocates Charlotte 
Brontë’s novel to an archaeological dig in the future and recasts Lucy Snowe as 
a clone. If some reimaginings are mere nudges, this is an almighty kick. 
Marshall Griffiths’s attempt to reinvent a 19th-century novel that seems firmly 
set in the past may not quite come off, but it’s part of an honourable 
theatrical tradition.

Villette review – cloned Brontë heroine looks back from the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/29/villette-review-charlotte-bronte-clone-linda-marshall-griffiths>
As Simon Stone observed in the programme for his own updated version of Yerma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/yerma-review-young-vic-billie-piper-simon-stone>
 at the Young Vic: “There’s a moment, about 100 years after the work of an 
artist, when you can either say, ‘You are now condemned to the ranks of a 
footnote’ or ‘We are going to make you the centre of an international culture 
by keeping on telling your stories.’” Stone suggested that it is in the act of 
reinvention that “you liberate someone from their original cultural context and 
elevate them to the level of myth-maker”. It was a point explored in Anne 
Washburn’s brilliantMr Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/21/bart-of-darkness-mr-burns-common-culture>
, which asks what might endure in a post-apocalyptic world: Homer? Or perhaps 
Homer Simpson, from the TV series that itself so cleverly steals from 
everything from Shakespeare to B-movies?

Here are five examples of improbable relocations that shouldn’t work but do.

The House of Pootsie Plunket

In Mourning Becomes Electra, Eugene O’Neill relocated Aeschylus’s great 
trilogy The Oresteia to New England at the end of the American civil war, 
leading one reviewer to observe: “It is uneven, but so are the Himalayas.” 
Catalyst Theatre took the Electra story andreimagined it as a tragicomedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/mar/29/theatre.artsfeatures> played out 
in the icy wastelands of Canada with the dysfunctional Plunkett family who, 
after the discovery of returning patriarch Agamemnon (here renamed Buster), 
dead in the septic tank with a bullet in the brain, are plunged into a cycle of 
revenge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecab078063b87fa2847ea9e11f1073ba6e681b00%2F0_5_2157_1294%2F2157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20sci-fi%20Bront%C3%AB%20to%20Hamlet%20on%20the%20savanna%3A%20when%20classics%20are%20relocated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20sci-fi%20Bront%C3%AB%20to%20Hamlet%20on%20the%20savanna%3A%20when%20classics%20are%20relocated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecab078063b87fa2847ea9e11f1073ba6e681b00%2F0_5_2157_1294%2F2157.jpg>
 Frederick Ruth and Diana Croft in Return to the Forbidden Planet. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Return to the Forbidden Planet

Shakespeare’s The Tempest is often referred to as one of the original sci-fi 
dramas, so propelling it into the future and setting it in space is not too big 
a leap. Certainly not for writer Bob Carlton, whosemusical mashup of 1950s 
B-movies and Shakespeare has proved hugely successful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/dec/18/theatre.artsfeatures2> and is 
frequently revived. No doubt when he first proposed it somebody said it was a 
stupid idea, but it’s likely that somebody said the same about amusical version 
of Romeo and Juliet relocated to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/08/musicals-we-love-west-side-story>
 in the early 1950s too. How wrong they were.

The Lion King

Yep, it’s Hamlet played out on the African plains with lions instead of humans 
and Elton John songs instead of poetry. OK, so the only real similarities are 
in the plot, although young Simba does seem as conflicted as any Hamlet and is 
slow to act against his uncle. But it reminds us that Shakespeare fits into 
Simon Stone’s notion of myth-maker (even though the Bard stole most of his own 
plots) and the plays are plastic enough to be reimagined in many forms, whether 
it’sRomeo and Juliet with cyborg Montagues 
<http://herocomplex.latimes.com/comics/romeo-and-juliet-the-war-stan-lees-cosmic-shakespeare/>
 and the Capulets as genetically modified humans,King Lear relocated to 
medieval Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/ran-review-re-release-of-kurasawas-dark-epic-version-of-king-lear>
, or theDanish royal family as big cats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/04/lion-king-michael-billington-review>
.

The Erpingham Camp

There have been lots of updates of Greek tragedy but probably few as strange 
and spot-on asJoe Orton’s rewrite of The Bacchae, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2000/aug/07/theatre.artsfeatures> set in a 
holiday camp on an August bank holiday in the 1960s, where the residents 
increasingly come under the influence of the demonic Don (short for Dionysus). 
Soon they are throwing off their British reserve and running riot. Originally 
written as a TV play (“H Pinter says it like Battleship Potemkin,” wrote Orton 
proudly in a letter to a friend), it was subsequently staged at the Royal Court 
and continues to be revived, its savagery more than matching Euripides’s last 
play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4191c1d42900b2169214c2dd0f8b621e3bd2bb99%2F0_160_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20sci-fi%20Bront%C3%AB%20to%20Hamlet%20on%20the%20savanna%3A%20when%20classics%20are%20relocated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20sci-fi%20Bront%C3%AB%20to%20Hamlet%20on%20the%20savanna%3A%20when%20classics%20are%20relocated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fbronte-hamlet-classics-relocated-villette%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4191c1d42900b2169214c2dd0f8b621e3bd2bb99%2F0_160_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Kobna Holdbrook-Smith (Ken) and Sharon Duncan-Brewster (Peggy) in Playboy of 
the West Indies at the Tricycle, London, in 1994. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 



The Playboy of the West Indies

Playwright Mustapha Matura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/15/play-mas-orange-tree-review> had 
a stab at Chekhov with his Trinidadian Sisters, but his real triumph was in 
transposingJM Synge’s 1907 comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/23/playboy-western-world-old-vic> 
The Playboy of the Western World to a1950s Trinidadian rum shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/dec/07/theatre> where cane-cutting Ken 
arrives, boasting of having killed his father. It may seem a long way from 
cold, boggy rural Ireland to the sun-filled Caribbean, but this success for the 
Tricycle theatre (in the 80s and again in 2004) proved a perfect match, with 
many of Synge’s lines effortlessly translating into the Caribbean vernacular, 
as Matura played up the comedy of the original without sacrificing the play’s 
underlying melancholy.
 