
It’s Saturday night and I’m standing in a crowded bar talking to a man dressed 
as a Pokémon. This isn’t a Tinder date gone wrong; rather, I’m on aPokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> pub crawl. These are now “a 
thing”, attracting hundreds, sometimes thousands, of participants. They’re just 
one of the many weird symptoms of Pokéfever: a mania currently afflicting large 
swaths of society.

If you’re yet to be infected then you may be somewhat sick of the incessant 
Pokémon headlines <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> and hokey 
Pokéjokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/24/pokemon-go-quiz-can-you-catch-the-fake-news-story>
. You may well feel an urge to stab (or at the very least poké) yourself in the 
eye when you come across yet another Pokémanteau. Please don’t. Rather, I urge 
you to join me in an annotated-reality game called “Pokémon Go: the Quest for 
Sociohistorical Perspective”. Traverse paragraphs and collect points as you 
uncover the millennia of meaning behind the recent madness! Ready? Let’s go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54aff89fbd0ce026a3cb45c9a35da940b773ae67%2F0_0_1504_1431%2F1504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54aff89fbd0ce026a3cb45c9a35da940b773ae67%2F0_0_1504_1431%2F1504.jpg>
 A Pokémon character 
The speed with which Pokémon Go has risen from mobile game to cultural 
phenomenon is a reminder that games both reflect and shape our world in ways we 
often overlook. The most popular games of an era can act as cultural 
milestones, indicating shifts in beliefs and behaviour. Twister, for example, 
was described as“sex in a box” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/feb/24/how-we-made-twister> 
after it was created during the sexual revolution of the 1960s. Tetris, 
released in 1984, was a quite literally a product of Soviet Russia; for many 
years the state owned the rights to the game. For its American audience, 
Tetris’s brutalist blocks were both a compelling puzzle and a thrilling 
dramatisation of cold war tensions.A 1988 review in the Chicago Tribune 
<http://kotaku.com/5967467/flashback-this-new-soviet-tetris-game-is-a-rubiks-cube-of-software>
 declared the game so addictive you might wonder if it “isn’t really part of a 
diabolical plot hatched in the Evil Empire to lower worker productivity in the 
United States”.

Games aren’t just a reflection of the past; they can provide a glimpse into 
the future. “If you’re paying attention, games write the first draft of human 
history,” says Jamin Warren, the founder of videogame arts and culture company
Kill Screen <https://killscreen.com/>. “There have been many examples of games 
presupposing market adoption. Games were the first time we had a dynamic 
interaction with a television screen. Games drove the public adoption of 
virtual reality. Games were an early mover in social networks … [and] 
regardless of whether Pokémon Go lasts through the summer, it’s now the first 
global use-case of augmented reality.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7728fb7147f7a512325151ad18b5c87e77acd6%2F0_0_3000_2438%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7728fb7147f7a512325151ad18b5c87e77acd6%2F0_0_3000_2438%2F3000.jpg>
 Soviet conspiracy? Tetris played on the Nintendo Entertainment System in 1990. 
Photograph: Richard Drew/Associated Press 
Perhaps it shouldn’t be surprising that games serve as a catalyst for the 
wider adoption of new technology; they have always been a way of bridging gaps 
and diffusing differences. We used them to communicate with each other long 
before written language.Dr Irving Finkel 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/about_us/departments/staff/middle_east/irving_finkel.aspx>
, a curator at the British Museum and an authority on ancient games, notes that 
archaeologists have found evidence that board games have existed since 7,000BC, 
during the Neolithic period. It’s almost impossible, Finkel says, to find a 
culture without games. They’re a “universal human activity and a unifier of 
humanity”.

Games can be particularly useful during difficult times. According to the 
ancient Greek historian Herodotus <http://www.ancient.eu/article/81/>, 
thousands of years ago there was a terrible famine in the land of Lydia. But 
the Lydians were a resourceful bunch; life didn’t give them any Pokémon lemons 
so they invented dice games. For several years, they distracted themselves from 
their hunger by playing the pain away. It’s possible that the bleakness of the 
news cycle over the last few months has factored into Pokémon Go’s success. At 
a time when reality seems so dark, it is no wonder that people are welcoming 
the chance to augment it with a little magic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbafb0c430d36b205d387166ffe7fb3b843fe27a%2F258_150_4504_4510%2F4504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbafb0c430d36b205d387166ffe7fb3b843fe27a%2F258_150_4504_4510%2F4504.jpg>
 Monopoly was initially called the Landlord’s Game and was invented to teach 
people about social inequality. Photograph: Judith Collins/Alamy 
But Pokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go’s success is 
not simply a case of millions of millennials fiddling with their iPhones while 
the world burns. Games can be a form of escapism, but their real power is as a 
tool of engagement. “Games have always provided a common vocabulary and a 
shared space for bonding,” says Mary Flanagan, a professor of digital 
humanities at Dartmouth College. “Early board games gave everyone a role to 
play, and a time and space to talk. Chess was used as a medium of courtship in 
the middle ages.”

Cards Against EUmanity: government leaflet fits perfectly with card game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/cards-against-humanity-government-leaflets-eu>
Flanagan is director of the Tiltfactor lab <http://www.tiltfactor.org/>, which 
makes games for social change. Harnessing the interactive and immersive 
qualities of games to change minds and behaviour is a rapidly growing area of 
research interest; however it’s also ingrained in the history of play. 
Monopoly, for example, was initially called the Landlord’s Game and was 
invented at the turn of the 20th century to teach people about social 
inequality. “It is a practical demonstration of the present system of 
land-grabbing, with all its usual outcomes and consequences,” wroteElizabeth 
Magie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/11/secret-history-monopoly-capitalist-game-leftwing-origins>
, its inventor, in a political magazine. “In a short time, I hope … men and 
women will discover that they are poor because Carnegie and Rockefeller, maybe, 
have more than they know what to do with,”she added 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/monopoly-was-designed-teach-99-about-income-inequality-180953630/?no-ist>
.

The Landlord’s Game was popular with leftwing intellectuals. However, over the 
next few decades less pedagogical versions of the game popped up. It seems that 
during the economic depression of the 1930s, people were more interested in 
playing at being a tycoon than interrogating tycoonism. In 1935, Parker 
Brothers (now a subsidiary of Hasbro) purchased the rights to a version of the 
game created by Charles Darrow, and this became the one we know today: a 
training ground for tiny Trumps. Ironically, and perhaps inevitably, the 
Landlord’s Game was subsumed by the very power structures it was criticising. 
As the game went on to sell more than 250 million copies worldwide, its female 
inventor was forgotten, while a man monopolised the glory and the profit.
Monopoly <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/monopoly> is a practical 
demonstration of the way in which capitalism doesn’t just grab land but minds; 
appropriating its critics and turning counter-culture into consumer culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0710e012a09ddd68aaf6c8f9bedb924d8a7f7a8c%2F0_0_2992_1978%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0710e012a09ddd68aaf6c8f9bedb924d8a7f7a8c%2F0_0_2992_1978%2F2992.jpg>
 Settlers of Catan played by competitors in the Mind Sports Olympiad, London 
2015. Photograph: Chung/LNP/Rex/Shutterstock 
If games really can write the first draft of history, then the sort of 
greed-is-good capitalism of which Monopoly is a microcosm may have seen its 
final days. Over the past 10 years, a German game called The Settlers of Catan 
has been encroaching on Monopoly’s turf. The objective of Catan – which gained 
a cult following on release in 1995 but whose popularity really started to rise 
in 2008 – is to build settlements on a fictional island; it’s Monopoly for an 
Airbnb generation. The gameplay requires and rewards collaboration; the goal 
isn’t a mad grab for resources but strategic trading with other players. It’s 
the sharing economy in a box; capitalism dressed up as cooperation in an 
increasingly interconnected world. No wonder it is a favourite amongthe tech 
set; one Silicon Valley exec has called it the new golf.

Catan’s success – it has sold 23m copies worldwide – comes amid a broader 
resurgence of board games. The world may be increasingly digital, but it’s 
clear we still crave tangible interactions. “Catan [was] poised to be the ying 
to video games’ yang,” says board game designer Gil Hava. Catan, he notes, 
isn’t just a physical game, it’s a game you physically build; assembling the 
board anew each time out of 19 pieces. Further, it’s inherently social; you 
don’t play it passively, waiting your turn, you have to interact with the other 
players throughout.

Another pop culture phenomenon that speaks to our enduring need for real-world 
interaction is Cards Against Humanity. Launched in 2011, this self-described 
“party game for horrible people” has grown from a niche obsession to a 
mainstream success. It is now a bestseller on Amazon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68f8d38875deac7f677ade12c3adfcd4a15247a3%2F0_0_1500_939%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68f8d38875deac7f677ade12c3adfcd4a15247a3%2F0_0_1500_939%2F1500.jpg>
The game involves answering fill-in-the-blank statements with beyond-the-pale 
combinations of the crass and politically incorrect words and phrases printed 
on the cards. Rotating players then choose the funniest combinations; this 
means it’s best played with people you know well, as winning is a matter of 
figuring out which of your friends will laugh at a paedophile joke.

Cards Against Humanity holds up a middle finger to the system. Max Temkin, one 
of the game’s founders, told me over the phone that he started working on the 
game with seven of his childhood friends as they were finishing high school 
around 2006, during the Bush administration. “The political climate in [the US] 
was dark. It felt like the world was going crazy. So, in a time when 
politically we felt as though there was misuse of authority and nothing made 
any sense, it felt empowering and subversive to poke fun at the whole 
construction of language itself.”

As politics has changed, so has Cards Against Humanity. It has become more 
knowing – although some would argue that it is not knowing enough. Whether the 
game is subversive or just stupid is a matter of opinion. However there is no 
denying that it has struck a chord. The game reflects a modern impulse to mock 
rather than to mend; reflected in the way that millennials increasingly get 
their news from satirical comedians such as John Oliver or The Daily Show. 
Since we can’t seem to stop the world burning, we live-tweet it instead. “It 
will be amazing for our business if Donald Trump gets elected,” Temkin muses. 
“It will be a great four years for comedy but a terrible four years for 
democracy.”

While Cards Against Humanity demonstrates millennial disillusionment in the 
guise of cynicism, Pokémon Go represents a sentimental grasp for the past. The 
game’s success owes much to an outpouring of nostalgia among millennials who 
associate Pokémon with their childhood.

Why Pokémon Go is a game-changer for us all | Hari Kunzru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/pokemon-go-augmented-reality-game-changer>
Patrick, for instance, the man in the Pokémon costume at the pub crawl, is 22. 
Just one year older than the Pokémon franchise itself, which launched in 1995 
with a Gameboy game and then branched out into trading cards, TV shows, movies, 
toys and books – building an army of loyal fans as it went. These loyal fans 
now have smartphones, credit cards and probably early-onset ennui.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcea96030c05e4d58765ec0199d1cc1b62eab2ece%2F0_200_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Twister%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98sex%20in%20a%20box%E2%80%99%20to%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%E2%80%99s%20new%20reality%20%E2%80%93%20how%20games%20define%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Ftwister-sex-box-pokemon-go-new-reality-how-games-define-the-times%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcea96030c05e4d58765ec0199d1cc1b62eab2ece%2F0_200_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 In Pokémon Go, the imaginary Pokémon you’re trying to catch look on your phone 
as if they are there in real life. Photograph: Paul Hackett/Reuters 
The game has also attracted a whole new set of Pokémon fans – providing a case 
study in modern-day viral appeal. Augmented reality technology means that the 
imaginary Pokémon you’re trying to catch in the mobile game look, through the 
lens of your phone, like they are actually there in real life – perched on a 
pint at the bar or sitting on your friend’s shoulder. These make 
super-shareable pictures that have spawned a slew ofPokémemes 
<http://geek.cheezburger.com/pokememes>. Because the game mechanics also 
require you to go outside and explore, as well as congregate around certain 
landmarks, the game has spread across the real world. Indeed, it’s this 
convergence of the real and virtual worlds that marks the game out out as a 
first draft of history. Over time, we can expect the digital and the physical 
worlds to become ever more indistinguishable.

Ultimately, however, Pokémon Go is less a sign that augmented reality will 
change our future than a reminder that games are constantly changing the world. 
Whether they’re providing analog escapism or digital distraction, games have 
been augmenting our reality for thousands of years.
 