
On 28 July 1951, representatives of 19 nations, including Britain, signed the 
1951 Refugee convention. The convention, which has since beensigned by 145 
countries 
<http://www.unhcr.org/uk/protection/basic/3b73b0d63/states-parties-1951-convention-its-1967-protocol.html>
, defined the term “refugee” as well as their rights and the obligations of 
nations to protect them, including, crucially, a protection against refoulement 
– returning people to countries where they face serious threats to life or 
freedom.

“The Refugee convention isn’t just a piece of paper; it’s one of the most 
powerful ideals in the world,” says Maurice Wren, chief executive of the 
Refugee Council, the UK’s leading organisation working with refugees and asylum 
seekers. “It’s saved millions of lives, some of them right here in Britain.”

Thursday marks 65 years to the day that the convention was signed and, at a 
time when there are more than65 million displaced people 
<http://www.unhcr.org/statistics/unhcrstats/576408cd7/unhcr-global-trends-2015.html>
 in the world,the highest number since records began 
<http://www.unhcr.org/uk/news/latest/2016/6/5763b65a4/global-forced-displacement-hits-record-high.html>
, we look back at the UK’s history of movement, and those who have come to 
Britain over the decades seeking refuge.

1950s: George Szirtes from Hungary

‘The welcome we received was extraordinary’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa06d68437dac3cb5dd46f88f6e7b3c40e84787e%2F0_0_1622_1255%2F1622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa06d68437dac3cb5dd46f88f6e7b3c40e84787e%2F0_0_1622_1255%2F1622.jpg>
 George Szirtes and his family (far right) with other refugee families in 
London, Christmas 1957. Photograph: Marzena Pogorzaly 
George Szirtes, 67, was seven in 1956 at the time of the Hungarian revolution. 
His parents were Jews who had suffered badly during the second world war, and 
left the country fearing an undercurrent of fascism in Hungary.

The welcome, and the assistance they received in setting up a life in England 
was extraordinary, says Szirtes. “Everything was well set up at this end. We 
came to London and there were various councils who offered extraordinary help. 
They helped my parents find a job. My father applied for a grant and they lent 
us money to raise a mortgage on a house.”

Szirtes thinks he was helped by a general understanding of the political 
situation in Hungary and sympathy with Hungarian refugees. “This was the cold 
war and I think the Hungarian nation was much admired for putting up a stand 
against the Russians. We Hungarians were regarded, to our surprise, as somewhat 
heroic. One story comes to mind is in a playground: some boys were kicking a 
ball around and I asked to play and they said: ‘No you can’t.’ I started crying 
and they said: ‘Sorry, we thought you were Russian, but you’re Hungarian, 
that’s fine.’”

Soon after arriving in Britain, Szirtes’ parents decided to stay permanently. 
They learned English and spoke it at home. But there was sadness: Szirtes’ 
mother killed herself in 1975. There were, says Szirtes, a variety of factors 
that led to her death, but he thinks one was a sense of cultural displacement. 
“Everyone was terribly nice, but they had a completely different background. 
There’s a difficulty forming friendships at depth, which I can imagine is not 
uncommon among refugees.”

Szirtes went to art school and, at 21, married an artist he met there. They 
have two children and two grandchildren.Szirtes is an award-winning poet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/george-szirtes>, with several published 
volumes, and before his retirement he also worked as a translator and 
creative-writing teacher.

He returns to Hungary regularly and was there last summer as refugees were 
camped in Keleti railway station in Budapest, desperate to travel to Austria 
and Germany. “I felt a terrible pity and kind of anger that it should be like 
this. It wasn’t just the sight of them, it was reading the rhetoric against 
them. They were being described essentially as hate objects, they were all 
potential terrorists, they were all potential scroungers, we shouldn’t do 
anything for them, we should in a sense keep them out.”

1960s: Gillian Slovo from South Africa


‘Becoming a refugee is not a choice’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e84d94704ee31c1ed6c284eea3d09442236d320%2F0_489_7260_4356%2F7260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e84d94704ee31c1ed6c284eea3d09442236d320%2F0_489_7260_4356%2F7260.jpg>
 Gillian Slovo, whose family sought asylum in the UK after leaving South 
Africa. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
Gillian Slovo’s parents were prominent anti-apartheid campaigners in South 
Africa. Her father, Joe Slovo, helped Nelson Mandela to found the ANC’s army, 
and her mother, Ruth First, was a journalist who was blacklisted by the 
government. Banned from working in her field, First was retraining as a 
librarian when she was arrested, the police accosting her in the library 
itself, and imprisoned in solitary detention for 117 days.

When First was released from prison, she packed up her two daughters and 
mother and travelled to Britain, where her husband had already sought asylum. 
They arrived on Slovo’s 12th birthday.

“Because my parents were quite well-known anti-apartheid activists, when we 
arrived at Heathrow, we didn’t have to do what most refugees do, which is 
declare ourselves,” saysSlovo, now 64 and living in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gillian-slovo>. “The authorities were 
expecting us. We were taken almost immediately to a TV station and put in front 
of a television camera.”

Slovo’s first impressions of Britain were “a great disappointment”. She had an 
image of England formed by Jane Austen and Charles Dickens. “I imagined snow 
nestling in beautiful houses, yellow lights in the darkness. And, in fact, it 
was snowing, but it was that half-snow that London can get that melts as soon 
as it hits. That journey from Heathrow was incredibly grey and dull, I wasn’t 
used to a sky that is as grey as an English sky is.”

Slovo says she felt incredibly different as a child in Britain.

“I came with an accent that nobody particularly liked and they didn’t know 
anything about South Africa. I was asked things like: ‘Were there lions and 
tigers walking around your garden?’, and I’d never seen a lion or tiger. It 
just felt like I was an alien, it wasn’t that anyone was particularly cruel, 
it’s just at that age, they notice difference and I was different.”

After school in London, Slovo went to university in Manchester and after a few 
years started writing. She has written 14 novels and has just had a play, her 
third, performed at the National Theatre. She has a partner and two children. 
Slovo says that as she watches news of refugees attempting to come to Europe, 
she is struck by how lucky she is.

“I took an aeroplane into a country that welcomed me. They gave me refuge 
here. I don’t think anybody particularly chooses to up and leave their country 
unless there are very good reasons to do it.

“I wasn’t what most people would think of when they imagine a refugee – I’m 
white, I speak English, I’m well-educated, I arrived on an aeroplane, I didn’t 
have to risk my life in a flimsy boat. But it’s important to remember that 
becoming a refugee is not a choice. It is something that can happen to anyone. 
It happened to me.”

1970s: Raju Bhatt from Uganda


‘There was a lot of racial abuse’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a7ee7a82ca0373910eaaa091902b94bff67742%2F0_261_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a7ee7a82ca0373910eaaa091902b94bff67742%2F0_261_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Raju Bhatt, who came to the UK as a refugee from Uganda. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
In August 1972, Idi Amin expelled the entire Ugandan-Asian population who were 
not Ugandan citizens – about 60,000 people – giving them 90 days to leave the 
country. Many Asians in Uganda had families who had been in the country since 
the 19th century. Raju Bhatt’s family had been there since the early 1950s. 
“[My parents] didn’t have property or business to lose when we were expelled, 
but nevertheless it was a shock to them. They had built their lives there,” he 
says.

Many Ugandans had British passports and roughly 30,000 were granted asylum. 
The first night after Bhatt, then 15, and his family arrived in Britain he 
turned on the TV to see a National Front march in London. “We saw this march on 
the television – people with placards saying they didn’t want us. We’d had some 
preview of that while we were still in Uganda, there were advertisements that 
had been taken out by local authorities [saying] that we shouldn’t go to them, 
that we weren’t welcome.”

On Bhatt’s second day in the country he was assaulted while walking with his 
sister in the street and at school. He says he got used to physical and verbal 
attacks, often racially motivated. “There was certainly a lot of very explicit 
racial abuse.”

Bhatt and his siblings were forced to grow up quickly. Their father got a job 
in Switzerland and sent money home to the family, but their mother couldn’t get 
a job, because of a health condition. The children all had to chip in. Bhatt 
got a job at Woolworths after school and he and his siblings functioned as 
interpreters for their mother, who didn’t have much English, and, almost 
immediately after arriving in the UK, they were negotiating leases and utility 
bills.

Bhatt, now 58 and living in north London, became a solicitor, “by accident”, 
after he started working with young people who had been arrested during the 
disturbances around the country in the early 80s. In 2010, he was asked to join 
theHillsborough independent panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster>, which produced a 
report that led to the quashing of the original inquest’s finding and leading 
to a new verdict this year. Bhatt says he is extremely grateful for the support 
his family has received from Britain over the years. “Despite the racism, 
despite the bullying, the education we were able to receive from the state was 
something else. I’ll always value it. And the medical help my mum was able to 
receive from the NHS, that’s something we’ll always cherish. I’ll always bring 
up my daughters to fight for the welfare state because it’s given us so much.”

1980s: Shash Trevett from Sri Lanka


‘As a refugee, you feel such pressure to make something of your life’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0f8d184d6a2af13b22eba646c96982e8b783198%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0f8d184d6a2af13b22eba646c96982e8b783198%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Shash Trevett, who fled from Sri Lanka with her family in 1987. Photograph: 
Gary Calton/Gary Calton for the Observer 
Shash Trevett’s family fled Sri Lanka in 1987, after a group of Indian 
soldiers stormed their house one night and lined up Trevett, then 13, her 
mother and grandmother to be shot. “We waited for 12 hours for them to shoot 
us. They said they’d shoot us after counting to three, then they’d count ‘one, 
two …’ and then they would laugh or go and do something,” says Trevett.

Now 41, she says this attack was the culmination of a campaign of abuse 
perpetrated against her family by Indian soldiers, who targeted them under the 
mistaken belief that their family home was a Tamil Tiger base.

Trevett and her mother fled to Colombo, hoping to be granted exit visas by the 
high commission to leave the country and join Trevett’s father in Jersey, where 
he was working as a surgeon. They cycled most of the way to the capital, 
Trevett fearing she would be shot at every checkpoint. Three months later, 
Trevett and her mother were on a plane to Britain.

“I remember flying into London and, as we were landing, I finally felt safe. I 
thought, right, we’re safe now and nothing bad can happen,” says Trevett. But 
she arrived in Jersey deeply traumatised and stopped speaking for six months. 
Since that time, she hasn’t spoken a word of Tamil. My parents just wanted me 
to forget, so they handled it badly, and my school had no idea I’d been through 
a war.”

Trevett left Jersey in 1993 and moved to York, where she still lives. While at 
university she met her now husband, a history teacher, and they have two young 
children – a daughter aged eight and a son, 11. While doing a PhD, Trevett had 
a breakdown, caused by the trauma she suffered during the conflict in Sri 
Lanka, which led to years of agoraphobia and anxiety. With her husband’s 
support she is recovering and has started writing poetry.

“You feel such pressure to make something of your life if you’re a refugee. 
Sometimes it’s all right for you not to make a celebrated success of your life, 
it’s all right to just survive. All these people leave their homes and they 
face so many perils and heartache and they survive, and I think they should be 
celebrated for that.”

1990s: Emina Hadziosmanovic from Bosnia


‘The community was welcoming’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e224968669ed84c73797010e3d2afcc8e3e2921%2F0_1793_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e224968669ed84c73797010e3d2afcc8e3e2921%2F0_1793_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Emina Hadziosmanovic, who left Bosnia to come to the UK. Photograph: Emina 
Hadziosmanovic 
When war broke out in Bosnia in 1992, Emina Hadziosmanovic was four. The war 
meant that her sister, who was not yet a year old, was not able to get the 
specialist medical treatment she needed. For this reason, the family were 
evacuated to Croatia. Hadziosmanovic’s father, who was in the army and wanted 
to fight for his country, stayed in Bosnia, finally joining the family 10 years 
later. Hadziosmanovic, her mother, sister and grandmother spent six months in 
Croatia as refugees before they got the opportunity to move the UK.

Hadziosmanovic, 28, says her family’s reception was mixed. “Charity 
organisations like the Red Cross would take us out on trips and invite us to 
parties for Christmas and Easter. In that sense, the community was very 
welcoming. It wasn’t until my later years of primary school that I saw some 
hostility from children at school. There was a lack of understanding. I’m from 
Bosnia and I’m white, but I’d have people saying: ‘Go back to Pakistan.’”

After school, she studied psychology, developing an interest in trauma in the 
context of war and conflict. She did a master’s at Oxford and a PhD at 
Nottingham, and is motivated largely by her experience as a young refugee. “I 
think it has affected to a huge extent my passion for psychology and 
understanding why conflict happens. As a child you have so many questions that 
your parents can’t answer.”

2000s: Fabian and Fortunate Frizell from Zimbabwe


‘We are profoundly British’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ee7e51ac3e29ed6432b771cd9d45dbf79c6fea%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ee7e51ac3e29ed6432b771cd9d45dbf79c6fea%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Fortunate and Fabian Frizell, twins who came from Zimbabwe as refugees. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Fabian Frizell and his twin sister Fortunate Frizell, both 25, fled their home 
in Zimbabwe on their mother and stepfather’s wedding day. Their parents had 
been receiving threats for a while – due to their stepfather’s political 
involvement and mother’s activism in education and women’s rights – but on the 
day of the wedding it became clear these threats were serious. Trucks full of 
men with guns and knives began driving by their house. The family of four left 
the house during the wedding reception, taking just their passports, and hid in 
the mountains. Their house was destroyed and their bank accounts cleared out.

After a month of living with a friend in a remote area, being followed each 
time they left the house, they decided to leave the country. Fabian and 
Fortunate’s stepfather is South African and had a British passport. He went 
ahead to England, in the hope that they would be able to join him there later. 
When Fortunate and Fabian arrived, aged 10, at Gatwick with their mother, they 
were taken off and quizzed about whether their mother was really their mother, 
and whether she and their stepfather had a genuine relationship. But mostly the 
twins remember that the immigration officials offered them Kit-Kats. “They kept 
lining up Kit-Kats on the table and I was just focused on eating the 
chocolates,” says Fortunate. “And we didn’t get into trouble, because we just 
told them the truth.”

The family settled in Canterbury. Fabian says he and his sister are “Kent 
garden England people”, although he adds that they did encounter some hostility 
as the “only black family for 10 miles”.

The twins describe themselves as “profoundly British”, citing a childhood in 
colonial Zimbabwe where they learned the history of the royal family and 
watched Keeping Up Appearances, Blackadder and Mr Bean.

“You know everything,” adds Fabian. “My mother passed her British citizenship 
test, she got 100%, she didn’t need to revise, she was like: ‘I know this 
stuff’.”

Both twins did well at school and studied PPS at Cambridge University. They 
have just graduated and are on their gap years. They are currently living in 
London and both think that they might like to one day go into politics, and are 
planning to set up a social enterprise, founding self-sustaining schools in 
Zimbabwe.

Both are worried about the tone of the discourse around refugees and 
immigration in the UK, citing the Brexit debate and NigelFarage’s Breaking 
Point billboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
.

“Real social grievances are being misdirected into the immigration issue. 
There are real social problems, but instead of solving them, they’ll say, ‘Oh, 
it’s because of high immigration,’” says Fortunate.

2010s: Ahmad from Syria


‘No one wants to be a refugee’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1355c52ed3c08f2e6a870151e4525fca754281ca%2F0_953_2322_1392%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20cold%20war%20to%20Syria%3A%20seven%20decades%20of%20refugee%20stories%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Ffrom-the-cold-war-to-syria-seven-decades-of-refugee-stories-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1355c52ed3c08f2e6a870151e4525fca754281ca%2F0_953_2322_1392%2F2322.jpg>
 Ahmad, who risked the journey from Syria to live in the UK. 
Ahmad arrived in the UK in July 2015, one of a large number of Syrians who 
made the journey across to Europe in the summer last year. The 26-year-old did 
not want to leave his homeland, where, before the war, he had a good life. He 
is married, with two young children, and was studying English literature. “I 
had just a normal life. I had friends, I liked music, football, cinema,” he 
says.

Ahmad is a Syrian Kurd, so was targeted by both the Syrian government and the 
opposition. He discovered he was on a government hit list and after attacks on 
his town, in which some young men were rounded up, imprisoned and beheaded, he 
decided to leave the country, fearing he would be next. “No one wants to be a 
refugee, it’s not something that you choose. In my case, you wake up and find 
yourself in the situation,” he says.

Ahmad left his wife and children in Syria, not wanting to risk their lives on 
the boat journey from Turkey to Europe, and hoped he could secure refugee 
status in the UK and then bring them over to join him.

“Before I made this journey [my wife and I] agreed, we are dead anyway – 
either through the knives or the extremists or drowning. For me, it was 
impossible to see my family sink in the sea in front of my eyes. I have a 
friend who had his five children and wife drown in the sea [while crossing the 
Mediterranean].”

Ahmad travelled from Syria to Turkey, then crossed the Mediterranean on an 
overburdened, leaky boat, and arrived in Kos in May 2015. From there, a 
smuggler he met through Facebook arranged a fake passport and he flew from 
Athens to Marseilles. He travelled to Calais, and spent two weeks at the camp 
trying to get to Britain. At one point a smuggler got him and six other people 
into a flour tanker and promised they would be in London by dinnertime. After 
10 hours, the men, fearing suffocation, began banging on the truck, when the 
driver let them out they were in Italy – the truck had been going the wrong 
way. Eventually, after three days in the back of a lorry, he arrived in the UK 
in July 2015. Ahmad was granted refugee status four months later. Four months 
after that, his wife and children were able to join him.

“I always wanted to go to the UK. The first reason was that I spoke some 
English. But the main reason is the family reunion system in the UK is super 
quick, the fastest in Europe. After a while I was able to get my family out of 
Syria, which might take two or three years in Sweden or Denmark or Germany, 
which means I could lose my family at any moment.”

Since arriving in Britain, Ahmad says the reception has been mixed. He has 
been made more fearful of hatred and abuse since the EU referendum, and for 
this reason asked for his surname not to be used. But he has also encountered 
great generosity. After he was granted refugee status and so forced to leave 
his government-supplied accommodation, a family took him into their home and 
let him live with them for five months. Later, when his wife joined him, a 
landlord let him live in a flat she owned for free until he was able to earn 
enough to start paying rent.

Ahmad has settled in London and now works as a campaigner, advising on the 
refugee crisis and travelling around the country raising the profile of 
refugees. He has also been offered a scholarship at the University of London to 
do a master’s in conflict and development, a degree he hopes will help him when 
he eventually returns to Syria.

“I want to get a degree in this country,” he says. “But I plan to go back to 
the Middle East to help rebuild the nations.”

• This article was amended on 28 July 2016 to remove some personal details at 
the request of one of the interviewees, and to correct Ahmad’s age.
 