
As long ago as 1869, the English biologist Thomas Henry Huxley first suggested 
that birds might be closely related to dinosaurs. He noted similarities between 
the hindlimb of Megalosaurus and ostriches. Yet it took more than a century for 
Huxley to be proved right.

The key was Archaeopteryx, an extraordinary-looking creature that lived almost 
at the end of the Jurassic period 152m years ago. Although it shared many 
skeletal characteristics with theropod dinosaurs - sharp teeth, three clawed 
fingers on each hand (its "wing claws") and a long, bony tail - it is, in fact, 
the oldest bird ever identified. Unlike any dinosaurs, there was clear evidence 
thatArchaeopteryx <https://www.theguardian.com/science/archaeopteryx> was able 
to fly.

The first skeleton was unearthed in 1861, two years after Darwin published On 
the Origin of Species, and now resides in the Natural History Museum. But it 
was only in the 1970s that the US palaeontologist John Ostrom began, with the 
help of Archaeopteryx, to persuade the scientific community of the veracity of 
the link between dinosaurs and birds.

To fierce opposition, Ostrom described significant similarities between it and 
the carnivorous dinosaur Deinonychus (the creature mistakenly known as 
Velociraptor in Jurassic Park). By the mid-1980s, Ostrom's work had gained 
significant support.

Then, in 1998, the theory received a massive boost when fossilised remains of 
the theropod dinosaurs Caudipteryx and Protarchaeopteryx were unveiled. 
Discovered in China's Liaoning province, these turkey-sized creatures possessed 
the fossilised remains of feathers that formed quills - very similar to modern 
bird feathers. Here, at last, was unambiguous evidence that birds evolved from 
theropod dinosaurs - backed up by numerous further discoveries in China over 
the past decade.
 