
I remember being in a press screening for The Force Awakens late last year at 
the exact moment Han Solo burst on to the deck 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aa2SEz-4bQA> of the Millennium Falcon for the 
first time in more than three decades, blaster raised just so, Chewbacca 
bringing up the rear. The audience at Leicester Square’s Empire, almost as one, 
cheered till their throats were sore and applauded till their palms stung. From 
that moment, just 20 minutes or so into the movie, you knew this onewas going 
to do rather well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/21/star-wars-the-force-awakens-takes-517m-as-box-office-records-tumble>
.

Is Ridley Scott making up Alien: Covenant as he goes along?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-reboot-script-filming-troubles>
Disney will be hoping for a similar reaction when Darth Vader, whose return 
was confirmed by anEntertainment Weekly article 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/06/22/star-wars-rogue-one-cover>, first struts 
on to the deck of an Imperial Star Destroyer in the forthcoming prequel Rogue 
One: A Star Wars Story, presumably accompanied by the doom-laden orchestral 
refrain of John Williams’ Imperial March. We don’t yet know for certain if the 
evil Sith Lord will boast the opulent velvety baritone of James Earl Jones, but 
the venerable 85-year-old actorsounded pretty decent 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uc_G03kx0A4> in his recent return to the role 
for the animated series Star Wars: Rebels. What’s certain is that if Disney 
gets the moment right, Rogue One is almost guaranteed to be a hit, so palpable 
is the passion out there for classic Star Wars iconography.

This is, presumably, the reason the studio authorised Entertainment Weekly to 
confirm Vader’s debut, despite the fact that he was only glimpsed briefly in 
the debut trailer for Rogue One. In the face of bad press over reports that 
Gareth Edwards’ tale of the rebel grunts who stole the plans to the first Death 
Staris undergoing extensive reshoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/09/the-rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-reshoots-jaws-back-to-the-future-et>
, Disney has pulled out the biggest gun available in a slightly desperate 
effort to turn things around.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAa2SEz-4bQA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAa2SEz-4bQA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAa2SEz-4bQA&media=>
 Scene from The Force Awakens 
Was this really the original plan? A rather more sensible one might have been 
for the studio to keep its powder dry and build a “will he, won’t he” buzz of 
anticipation around the involvement of the masked creature formerly known as 
Anakin Skywalker. But in an era when bad buzz can kill a movie before it has 
even been screened for critics, Disney did what every other Hollywood studio 
has been doing recently, namely rolling out its biggest beast as early as 
possible in the publicity process. It’s all about keeping appetites whetted to 
ensure no amount of critical carping will stand a chance of persuading fans to 
give the movie a miss.

Disney will truly know the power of Star Wars' dark side if it ruins Darth 
Vader and Han Solo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/star-wars-disney-expanded-franchise-dark-side-darth-vader-han-solo>
Warner Bros is currently engaged in a similar campaign to cut through the bad 
buzz surrounding the studio’s struggling DC Comics-based superhero universe, 
home of the critically excoriatedBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>, and forthcoming sequel 
Justice League. In the wake of complaints that Ben Affleck’s dark knight was a 
whiney, ultraviolent, gun-toting twerp in Zack Snyder’s execrable big-screen 
beat-’em-up, the studio recently staged a meet and greet set visit for bloggers 
and critics at which director and star promised to try really, really hard to 
do better next time.

Just as Darth Vader in Rogue One looks like being the menacingly monstrous 
cyborg known from the earlyStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>
 movies, rather than the whingey, mini-Darth version essayed by Hayden 
Christensen in the finale of 2005’s Revenge of the Sith, Batman in Justice 
League will be miraculously restored to the brooding good guy, the world’s 
greatest detective persona that has always been so popular in the comics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpjigBxuXpww&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpjigBxuXpww>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpjigBxuXpww&media=>
 Scene from Star Wars: Rebels 
“Definitely, in the last movie, Batman went to a very dark place,” Affleck 
told a gang of respected bloggers 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/06/zack-snyder-set-justice-league.html> who spent 
most of last month doing their best to end his career. “He’s no longer extreme 
in that way … He’s feeling like he wants to redeem himself and he’s wanting 
mankind to be redeemed. He’s wanting to make the world better.”

Meanwhile, Snyder admitted to being caught off-guard by the response to Batman 
v Superman. “I have had to, in my mind, make an adjustment,” he said. “I do 
think that the tone of Justice League has changed because of what the fans have 
said.”

Snyder’s wife and producer, Deborah, was also clear that the Batman we’ll see 
in Justice League will be very different to the one in Dawn of Justice who 
decided to kill Superman just for existing, and only changed his mind because 
both superheroes’ mums were called Martha. “Superman’s death helps Batman 
regain his faith in humanity,” she said. “Here’s this alien who just gave his 
life for us. It really changes who Batman is, and he also feels a 
responsibility to honour him, because he didn’t feel like he did it while they 
were living.”

As other observers have noted 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/06/zack-snyder-set-justice-league.html>, this is 
quite a turnaround. But if Justice League is heading towards being the kind of 
righteously silly Marvel-style knockabout superhero ensemble that it surely 
always had to be in order to get away with throwing multiple preposterously 
costumed heroes together in one movie, that surely has to be a good thing, 
right? Just like Vader coming back for Rogue One, and the news that Edwards’ 
film is being retooled with extra funnies, the fans are getting what they want.

The answer is yes and no. Justice League certainly sounds like it will be a 
better movie with Snyder’s peculiar passion for comic-book ultraviolence reined 
in. Rogue One will probably build more buzz now that we know everyone’s 
favourite shiny Sith madman is due to return, just as Ridley Scott’s Alien: 
Covenant is more likely to pull in the opening weekend numbers following the 
veteran film-maker’s decision last year to make a U-turn andgive us more of HR 
Giger’s hideous xenomorphs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-reboot-script-filming-troubles>
.

But there are issues with this kind of reactive film-making. It leaves very 
little room for the kind of singular auteurism that made Christopher Nolan’s 
Dark Knight trilogy such a visionary, zeitgeist-shifting treat. And it has the 
unfortunate habit of sometimes pulling movies down a level or two from where 
they might have been if the film-makers had simply been allowed to pursue their 
original vision.

Take, for example, the Harry Potter books, which Steven Spielberg once planned 
to film as a single movie. Can anyone argue, given the Warner Bros saga’s 
slavish devotion to the slow-burning, Enid Blytonesque pacing of the original 
novels, that the three-time Oscar winner might have magicked up a single 
classic film, rather than eight middling episodes that range in quality with 
the awkward randomness of a packet of Bertie Bott’s Every Flavour Beans? Still, 
the fans were happy.

Or how about the more recent Warcraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/25/world-of-warcraft-the-beginning-review-end-already-nigh>
, which certainly hit all the right marks in terms of staying true to the video 
game’s binary battle between tribes of Tolkienesque humans and CGI orcs, yet 
failed to inspire much interest outside of quality-starved China? One imagines 
the hardcore fans were pleased there, too.

At least Duncan Jones seems to have delivered a movie that he was happy to get 
behind. The sense surrounding Justice League is that Snyder has been so beaten 
down by the negative critical reception (Vulture reports he has noticeably lost 
weight), that he’s been effectively pushed into the role of a lame-duck 
director in thrall to the studio and the fans. A better solution would have 
been to find a more sensible film-maker for the project in the first place, and 
segue Snyder into areas where his love of hardcore comic-book blood and thunder 
makes more sense. Perhaps Marvel could employ him to make a Punisher movie?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWji-BZ0oCwg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWji-BZ0oCwg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWji-BZ0oCwg&media=>
 Rogue One: A Star Wars story official trailer 
Likewise, Edwards’ Rogue One looks like it will be a rather more cheerful film 
than theMonsters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/02/monsters-review> 
director had initially anticipated. Perhaps they’ll also find a way to 
resurrect old favourites such as Alec Guinness’s Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, too.

For that matter, let’s bring back Boba Fett, Jabba the Hutt and Emperor 
Palpatine. Everyone loves them, and their presence in the movie won’t undercut 
Edwards’ attempts to build the next generation of Star Wars stories in any way, 
even if all those combined cameos do end up taking up three-quarters of the 
total running time, leaving only a brief chapter in which Felicity Jones’s Jyn 
Erso saves the known galaxy, most of which we’ve already seen in the trailers. 
After all, it’s what the fans want that counts.

 