
Ex-Tsar shot - local Soviet decision
It is now announced by the Bolshevik Government that the ex-Tsar has been shot 
by the order of the Ural Regional Council, who state that they decided upon 
that course owing to the threat of the Czecho-Slovaks against the capital of 
the Red Ural, and their discovery of a counter-revolutionary plot in which the 
former monarch was involved.The following message has been transmitted through 
the wireless stations of the Russian Government. 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/7/17/1437133106722/22-July-1918-001.jpg>

Editorial: The ex-Tsar Nicholas
Last Tuesday the ex-Tsar NICHOLAS was shot at Ekaterinburg, in the Urals, by 
order of the local Soviet. He was not given even the formality of a drum-head 
court-martial. The pretext was the danger that he might fall into the hands of 
the Czecho-Slovaks, but as it was possible to remove the rest of his family it 
was clearly possible to remove him also to a safe place. Even revolutionary 
violence has its conventions of decency, but they get as little respect inRussia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to-day as most other conventions. 
The crime is as stupid as it is brutal, for the slaying of the ex-Tsar removes 
no danger to the Soviet regime, while it brings one nearer. The ex-Tsar has 
powerful kinsmen in Germany; Germany has in her hands the most plausible 
candidate for the succession; a movement, of which the discussions with Russian 
Cadet leaders is one symptom, is brewing to divert German policy against the 
Soviet Government. Moscow cannot afford this new complication, which is 
evidently not welcomed there. But this belongs to the future, if not the 
distant future.

NICHOLAS’s wretched end was of a piece with his life. His reign began with the 
ghastly tragedy at his coronation, when thousands of peasants lost their lives 
in the struggle for some mugs. Its middle term was the disastrous 
Russo-Japanese War, with its revolutionary sequel. Its close was the 
catastrophic European War, which has cast down the throne and the Empire of the 
Romanoffs. He saw before his death the utter undoing of all the labours of his 
House during three centuries. It would be difficult to gather out of the 
records of history a completer tale of disaster crammed into so few years. The 
constitutional creed of his dynasty and himself was autocracy, so he must 
accept the legal or theoretical responsibility for this cataclysm. At no point 
or stage is there any hint or suggestion of any statesmanship on his part to 
avert it. Was he not merely the witness of and the seal upon so much error, 
folly, and ruin, or was he a principal architect of his own and his country’s 
misfortunes? Observers differ in their judgements.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftsar-nicholas-executed-1918%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437393736977%2Ffce7a0f3-ae7b-48fc-b71b-b06278a210bb-1636x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex-tsar%20Nicholas%20II%20executed%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2022%20July%201918&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftsar-nicholas-executed-1918%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex-tsar%20Nicholas%20II%20executed%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2022%20July%201918&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftsar-nicholas-executed-1918%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437393736977%2Ffce7a0f3-ae7b-48fc-b71b-b06278a210bb-1636x2040.jpeg>
 Tsar Nicholas in Cossack uniform, inspecting Cossacks. Hulton Archive 
Photograph: Hulton Archive 
Some pronounced him a mere echo of the last voice in his ears; others saw him 
actively malevolent. Probably he was in most things passive, and only 
occasionally the instigator. But he never had a good idea of his own, and never 
held by a good idea offered to him. Nobody felt gratitude towards him, still 
less respect, and although less than eighteen months ago he was Tsar of All the 
Russias, at his death he seemed a relic of a very remote barbaric antiquity. 
The whole system of government of which in Russia he was the last 
representative has, it is to be hoped, seen its last months in Europe. 
Assuredly this war will have failed of one of its chief justifications if 
absolutism in its more refined or its less refined forms still cumbers the 
western earth when the peace settlement is made.

 