
In 1850 Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> 
finally outed the brilliant but obscure brother authors Currer, Ellis and Acton 
Bell, and neatly analysed why centuries of authors have chosen to shelter 
behind entirely invented names or ambiguous double initials.

The brothers Bell were her and her extraordinary sisters, Emily and Anne. The 
shy sisters were, she wrote, "averse to personal publicity". But asGeorge Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>, born Mary Anne Evans, and the 
newly revealed as multi nom-de-plumed JK Rowling would entirely have 
understood, there was more to it: "we did not like to declare ourselves women 
because – without at that time suspecting that our mode of writing and thinking 
was not what is called 'feminine' – we had a vague impression that authoresses 
are liable to be looked on with prejudice".

Any reader, and indeed the publishers to whom the sisters sent the 
manuscripts, would have assumed that Currer, Ellis and Acton were men, but 
Brontë claimed that the first names had been chosen with "a sort of 
conscientious scruple" as not "positively masculine". The sisters' own surname, 
which would become one of the most famous in the history of English literature, 
had already been gentrified by their clergyman father from his Irish birth 
name, Patrick Prunty.

Some authors use versions of their own names, often a middle name and a mother 
or grandmother's surname, but some are entirely invented: the American Samuel 
Langhorne Clemens, creator of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn, took the pilot's 
two-fathoms measure from the Mississippi river boats he worked on, and became 
Mark Twain. A century later Eric Blair took the name of a river he loved and 
becameGeorge Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell> but, after 
offering his publishers a choice of names, could have been either Kenneth Miles 
or H Lewis Allways.

Jane Austen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> first published 
modestly as "A Lady", but double initials are a common camouflage. PD James, 
creator of policeman and poet Adam Dalgliesh, was born Phyllis Dorothy. Anthony 
Clifford Grayling writes as AC Grayling, and has said that his pen name – 
before he was well known – stopped readers from making instant assumptions 
about him. The Booker prizewinning novelist and critic AS Byatt was originally 
Antonia Susan Drabble. She acquired the Byatt by marriage, and her nom de plume 
also conceals that she is the sister of the equally well known novelist 
Margaret Drabble – famously the sisters do not get on.

Writers of erotica have often adopted a veil. Erika Mitchell, married name 
Erika Leonard, wrote theFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fifty-shades-of-grey> trilogy and became a 
publishing phenomenon as EL James. The real identity of Belle de Jour, author 
of the Diary of a Call Girl series, was claimed to be unknown even to her agent 
until she came out herself, learning that her identity was about to be leaked, 
as the British scientist Brooke Magnanti. Anonymity had been no fun, she said; 
"I couldn't even go to my own book launch party."

Many authors write under two or more names. Baroness Rendell of Babergh is 
both the crime writer Ruth Rendell and Barbara Vine: both authors have separate 
sets of passionate admirers. William Makepeace Thackeray was also a whole shelf 
of other authors, including Michael Angelo Titmarsh, Arthur Pendennis and the 
Fat Contributor. The Booker prizewinning Irish writerJohn Banville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville> is also the crime writer 
Benjamin Black, and regards one as an artist, the other as a craftsman – but 
says they sometimes overlap: "Sometimes, in the middle of the afternoon if I'm 
feeling a little bit sleepy, Black will sort of lean in over Banville's 
shoulder and start writing."

However, Nicci French is one name but two authors: the husband and wife team 
Nicci Gerrard and Sean French, "one writer, two minds",as their website 
describes them <http://www.niccifrench.co.uk/>.

Many have been nudged into name changes by agents or publishers: Alison Potter 
wrote recently in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/07/writers-pen-names>that she was 
sternly informed by a publisher: "It's your name. It's just not right. We need 
to change it. Your first name and your surname, I'm afraid." She is now the 
thriller writer Ali Knight.
 