
The Guardian relaunches Guardian documentaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2016/sep/16/the-guardian-relaunches-guardian-documentaries>
As long as there have been films, a few have had the temerity to be about 
stuff that actually happened in the real world. Yet across the course of the 
last century, documentaries were relegated to the bottom of the industry’s 
cultural hierarchy, coming to be seen as something less than cinema – glorified 
television perhaps, or the hallmark of a slow release week.

In the last decade, all that’s been turned on its head, as a handful of 
factors have conspired to render non-fiction film-making the liveliest pocket 
of the cinematic coat. For one thing, the films themselves – singular creations 
such as The Arbor,Citizenfour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/citizenfour> 
and Banksy’s Exit Through The Gift Shop – have fought tooth and nail to expand 
not just their audiences but their horizons. They’ve rejected the insipid 
library music and staid talking heads of yesteryear and instead borrowed from 
the rainbow of stylistic devices available to dramatic film-makers.

Technology has also levelled the cinematic playing field. As more and more 
films have left the cinema and arrived in our homes, or on our phones, 
documentaries have been spared the Sisyphean task of competing with the latest 
Marvel Studios megalith for each potential ticket sale. Instead, fiction and 
non-fiction are now thrown together on low-cost subscription services that draw 
no distinction between the two. And while new camera and editing technologies 
have been adopted across the film industry, they’ve been especially beneficial 
to doc-makers, who can now effortlessly sift through 10 hours of dung beetles 
in search of one perfect shot for Planet Earth II.
Desert Fire 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/docs-desert-fire-card/embed.html>
Our appetite for documentaries has changed, too. Viewers will today 
binge-watch serialised doc OJ: Made In America in a single weekend, and push 
Louis Theroux’s first big-screen outing towards the £1m mark at the UK box 
office. At the same time, dyed-in-the-wool fiction film-makers – from MOR 
kingpinRon Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ron-howard> to leftfield 
darlingJim Jarmusch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jim-jarmusch> and Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma> director Ava DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay> – are scrambling to jump aboard 
the non-fiction bandwagon.

Institutions that continue to distinguish between docs and dramas, meanwhile, 
feel increasingly anachronistic, as the line between fiction and non-fiction 
films begins to blur. Indeed, many of the key works of this burgeoning 
documentary golden age have blended real and fictive elements with abandon.
Joshua Oppenheimer <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joshua-oppenheimer>’s 
The Act Of Killing <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-act-of-killing> 
remains perhaps the only Oscar nominee in which a confessed murderer performs a 
song-and-dance number under a waterfall.

That kind of nuance seems to be spreading, with audiences welcoming a new 
definition of documentary that’s broader and livelier than ever before. Here 
are just a few of the vibrant scenes springing up in the land of the real…CL

STAR VEHICLES
 Michael Moore, outside Trumpland. 
Sometimes it’s less about the story than who’s telling it – and you trust the 
brand even if you don’t know exactly what you’re getting. Some film-makers 
literally have a voice:Werner Herzog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wernerherzog>’s films wouldn’t be the same 
without his trademark Teutonic disdain;Adam Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis>’s lecturing style adds 
to the portent of his revelations. It’s difficult to imagine others getting the 
same results if they stayed behind the camera. And theydo get results. 

Michael Moore in TrumpLand review – part dingus, part holy roller aiming to 
help Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/michael-moore-in-trumpland-revew-trump-hillary-clinton-film>
Michael Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore>’s campaigning 
films might not swing elections but they shape national debates (as with his 
recentMichael Moore In TrumpLand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/michael-moore-in-trumpland-revew-trump-hillary-clinton-film>
).Grayson Perry  <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>has a 
disarming way of getting along with absolutely anyone. Louis Theroux’s 
excruciating silences force people to talk. AndNick Broomfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nick-broomfield>’s shambolic investigations 
often get to truth (his last film for HBO targeted serial killer The Grim 
Sleeper, who’s since been apprehended). They’re accused of seeking the 
limelight but it’s never easy or safe making films like this. After all, 
putting yourself in the frame often means putting yourself on the line.

NOW SHOWING: Grayson Perry explores transgender identity in Born Risky, a 
series of shorts on All 4. Werner Herzog’s latest Lo And Behold: Reveries Of 
The Connected World is out on DVD and Blu-ray on 5 Dec, while his Into The 
Inferno is currently on Netflix. Book in some time for HyperNormalisation, Adam 
Curtis’s 166-minute study of where we are now via BBC iPlayer.SR

NEW-GEN ROCK DOCS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78191b993072043f46a9d4070fa8e3dedc82390%2F99_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78191b993072043f46a9d4070fa8e3dedc82390%2F99_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Liam Gallagher of Oasis in Mat Whitecross’s Supersonic. Photograph: 
Ignition/eOne 
Dust swirls over Nick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave>’s 
piano in 3D as the grief process and the creative process collide in Andrew 
Dominik’s One More Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
. Wilko Johnson plays chess with Death in Julien Temple’s 11th-hour biopic 
about the Dr Feelgood guitarist. Wolf Alice share their bus with actors in
Michael Winterbottom’s part-fictionalised tour diary, On The Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/10/on-the-road-review-michael-winterbottom-music-documentary-wolf-alice>
. The sheer quantity of music documentaries being produced today is 
overwhelming – but notable too is their quality. No longer just a part of the 
album promo cycle, they are flashing a AAA pass at the realm of high art.

Supersonic review – Oasis pop history lesson ignores battles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/supersonic-review-oasis-documentary-noel-gallagher-liam-gallagher-mat-whitecross>
The last three years have produced two masterpieces of archival profiling in 
Amy and Cobain: Montage Of Heck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/12/cobain-montage-of-heck-observer-film-review>
. Meanwhile, Cave has invited the cameras in not once but twice (first for 
intimate portrait20,000 Days On Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/21/20000-days-on-earth-nick-cave-review>
). This year,Mat Whitecross’s cunningly edited Supersonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/supersonic-review-oasis-documentary-noel-gallagher-liam-gallagher-mat-whitecross>
 reunited Oasis in spirit rather than reality. The BBC4’s recent investment in 
music stories – their Kate Bush docs have proved particularly popular – also 
speaks volumes about the medium’s burgeoning appeal. You no longer have to dig 
the subject’s back catalogue to fall under a music doc’s spell.

COMING SOON: Gimme Danger. Jim Jarmusch’s new Stooges doc is out in cinemas 
from 18 November; One More Time With Feeling is in limited cinemas on 1 
December.BT

ARTISTIC ACTIVISM
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005f17f40e080f04b984b4060ad9f0239e747f02%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005f17f40e080f04b984b4060ad9f0239e747f02%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Cowspiracy. Photograph: PR 
The revolution will be televised, it seems – maybe even on the big screen. 
Activist docs have risen in the 21st century to encompass varied voices, 
spanning Michael Moore’s blockbuster style to smart unions such as Brit 
director Michael Winterbottom and Canadian activistNaomi Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiklein> (The Shock Doctrine), historic 
archives and modern revelations.

13th review – Ava DuVernay's angry, persuasive film about the jailing of black 
men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/13th-review-ava-duvernay-jailing-black-men-netflix-selma-13th-constitutional-amendment-slavery>
Most of these films highlight grassroots issues; many now command powerful 
platforms. Writer-director Ava DuVernay recently released 13th, examining the 
US constitution’s treatment of slavery, incarceration and race relations, which 
recently opened the New York film festival.Dawn Porter’s Trapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/11/trapped-sxsw-review-documentary-abortion-texas-supreme-court>
, about US abortion laws, has been tipped for the Oscars. Cowspiracy, an 
agriculture industry doc, inspired a new version, exec-produced byHollywood’s 
foremost eco warrior Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/01/leonardo-dicaprio-climate-change-film-before-the-flood-barack-obama>
.

The mainstream impact of independent docs can be startling and their scope can 
prove galvanising, whether it’s the Aids activism docHow To Survive A Plague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/how-to-survive-a-plague-review> or
Dreamcatcher’s stories of Chicago sex workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/08/dreamcatcher-review-unflinching-view-chicago-sex-workers-kim-longinotto-documentary>
. There’s also Everyday Rebellion, about global non-violent resistance, 
described by its directors the Riahi brothers as “a celebration of life”. An 
optimistic idea drives the heaviest docs: that film can effect real change.

NOW SHOWING: There’s more eco-Leo in climate change treatise Before The Flood, 
currently streaming on Nat Geo’s YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=codqzJ4onGc>. AH

THE INSIDERS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b905b2d7ce597e9d78437309841ffccc4a53c5%2F12_10_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80b905b2d7ce597e9d78437309841ffccc4a53c5%2F12_10_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
 NYC mayoral hopeful Anthony, disgraced star of Weiner. Photograph: 
Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
These days you can’t call yourself an institution without a documentary 
exposing your inner workings.The September Issue famously made a star out of 
Grace Coddington and gave Vogue a human face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/10/the-september-issue-review>, while
Page One: Inside The New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/page-one-new-york-times-film-review>
 showed the Grey Lady attempting to adjust to a digital world. 
Documentary-makers are sharing space with investigative reporters: it’s 
arguable thatBlackfish has damaged SeaWorld beyond repair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/20/killer-whales-not-suitable-captivity-seaworld>
, an environmental feat that DiCaprio (yup, him again) will be hoping to 
emulate with his exec-produced elephant crisis docThe Ivory Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/the-ivory-game-review-elephants-china-hunted-extinction>
. Scientology docGoing Clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/going-clear-scientology-observer-review>
, of course, was a global headline spinner.

Weiner review – mayoral motormouth makes for painfully compelling viewing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/weiner-review-anthony-new-york-mayor-documentary>
Early bets for 2017 Oscar glory should go to Josh Kriegman and Elyse 
Sternberg’sWeiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
, an extraordinary fly-on-the-wall doc about the disgraced politician Anthony, 
and if the giddy pace of present-day politics isn’t enough to have you reaching 
for the tinfoil hat, Laura Poitras’s Citizenfour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/16/citizen-four-review-edward-snowden-documentary>
 tells the paranoia-inducing story ofEdward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> and the NSA. Even British 
TV is getting in on the information overload – fixed-rig television has ushered 
in a new era of intimacy in which all facets of life, from school days (the 
Educating… series) to romance (First Dates), are served up for your analysis 
and dissection.

NOW SHOWING: The Ivory Game is on Netflix now. RN


EXPERIMENTAL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe238d4272c51774995dcab76629c16e455b81555%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe238d4272c51774995dcab76629c16e455b81555%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Heart of a Dog director Laurie Anderson. Photograph: Dogwoof 
Back in the age of cinéma vérité, it was felt that feature-film techniques had 
no place in documentaries. The turnaround since then – post-Errol Morris, say – 
couldn’t be more complete, and formal experimentation has run riot in the last 
20 years, and more so in the last five. One imagines old ideological purists 
wincing at the visual pyrotechnics of Adam Curtis, or Joshua Oppenheimer’s use 
of that erstwhile documentary taboo, dramatic re-enactment. Andrew Dominick and
Wim Wenders <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/wim-wenders> have both 
incorporated 3D into wildly contrasting docs about mourning and ballet (One 
More Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
,Pina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/21/pina-review>), while Clio 
Barnard’s The Arbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/the-arbor-film-review> used 
lip-synching to deeply eerie effect.

One More Time With Feeling review – undeniably moving contemplation of loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
And with movies such as Roger Ross Williams’s Life, Animated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/life-animated-review-how-disney-films-helped-a-boy-with-autism>
 (out here on 9 Dec), Brett Morgen’s Chicago 10 andAri Folman’s Waltz With 
Bashir <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/16/the-congress-review>, even 
animation has been bent to serious documentary purposes. Simplicity also works: 
bothJafar Panahi’s This Is Not A Film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/29/this-is-not-a-film-review>, 
filmed while he was banned from film-making, andLaurie Anderson’s Heart Of A Dog
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/heart-of-a-dog-review-laurie-anderson>
, a meditation on grief, are self-conscious anti-home movies, both making a 
virtue of limitations. Often these once-proscribed techniques can come closer 
to other kinds of truth than mere “verite”.

NOW SHOWING: Alexander Sokurov’s eerie Louvre/Nazi doc-drama Francofonia, out 
in selected cinemas. JP

TRUE CRIME
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff0698b99ee53a73579f35e6717903ac66791ce%2F0_295_5844_3507%2F5844.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff0698b99ee53a73579f35e6717903ac66791ce%2F0_295_5844_3507%2F5844.jpg>
 OJ: Made in America. Photograph: Publicity image 
True-life crime stories have long been a tabloid staple, with nosey-parker 
sensationalism often reframed as cautionary tales. But a resurgence in 
thoughtful, meditative and often quietly furious examinations of crime and 
punishment has made this storied subgenre the current kingpin of on-screen 
non-fiction. Who’s the culprit? You could point an accusing finger atSerial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>, the 2014 megahit podcast 
that patiently walked the world through the evidential minutiae of a horrible 
1999 murder and subsequent shoddy prosecution. Certainly, many of the recent 
ascendant breed of true crime docs seem to share some of Serial’s questing DNA.

Amanda Knox review – intriguing but flawed Netflix documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/amanda-knox-review-netflix-documentary>
These features and, increasingly, TV series re-examine high-profile murders 
(the monumental eight-hourOJ: Made In America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/oj-made-in-america-espn-review>
; Netflix’s recentAmanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/15/amanda-knox-trailer-for-netflix-documentary-video>
), reignite cold cases (procedural hitMaking A Murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/07/making-a-murderer-the-netflix-documentary-beating-tv-drama-at-its-own-game>
, mumbled manhuntThe Jinx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/18/robert-durst-wrong-man-jinx-finale-hitchcock>
), unpick the war on drugs (from  <>Cartel Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/cartel-land-review-alarming-account-mexican-drug-vigilantes>
’s volatile border vigilantes to the gamed US systems ofThe House I Live In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/22/the-house-i-live-in-review>) and 
even – in the case of the disturbing(T)error 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/sundance-2015-review-terror-is-entrapment-always-this-boring>
 – ride shotgun with a steamrollering FBI sting. Guilt trips have never been so 
addictive.

COMING SOON: Alex “Going Clear” Gibney’s docuseries The Killing Season starts 
22 November on Crime & Investigation.GV

LEGACY DOCS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1d1704be362c42402a89012e06781b52f17fea%2F33_292_3034_1821%2F3034.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f1d1704be362c42402a89012e06781b52f17fea%2F33_292_3034_1821%2F3034.jpg>
 Crytic rocker Orion, the subject of Orion: The Man Who Would Be King. 
Photograph: Sun Records 
When celeb bio-docs are 10-a-penny, it’s no wonder directors are drawn to 
putting culture’s unsung heroes in the frame for the first time. Often it’s 
about crediting those who influenced from the sidelines:Everything Is Copy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/03/fiction> profiled Nora Ephron, 
the unsparing writer who later defined the modern romcom. In Life Itself, a 
beautiful movie about Chicago film criticRoger Ebert 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Ebert>’s vivid life and dying days, no 
less thanMartin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> 
cites him as an inspiration.Bill Cunningham New York marvelled at the tireless 
81-year-old New York Times street photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/27/bill-cunningham-obituary>
, and featured Iris Apfel, the eccentric 93-year-old “geriatric starlet” and 
subject of Albert Maysles’s Iris. 

Orion: The Man Who Would Be King – poignant story of Elvis soundalike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/24/orion-the-man-who-would-be-king-jimmy-ellis-elvis-presley>
Other docs make previous unknowns into icons: Searching For Sugar Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/26/searching-for-sugar-man-review> 
exposed Mexican-American songwriter Sixto Rodriguez’s surprising role in the 
anti-apartheid movement, Jeanie Finlay’sOrion: Man Who Would Be King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/27/orion-man-who-would-be-king-review-jeanie-finlay-elvis-jimmy-ellis>
 last year unmasked Elvis sound-and-lookalike Jimmy Ellis, and Finding Vivian 
Maier established the children’s nanny among the 20th century’s finest 
photographers. These empathetic studies of fleeting eras remind us that 
influence doesn’t always equal fame.

COMING SOON: The Eagle Huntress follows a young girl’s journey to become her 
Kazakh family’s first female eagle hunter, out in cinemas on 16 December.LS

CURIOSITIES
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ec3b2393cd85b7a3d59fb38b871c914655e3c7%2F0_7_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Weiner%20to%20Making%20A%20Murderer%3A%20this%20is%20the%20golden%20age%20of%20documentaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fgolden-age-of-documentaries-michael-moore-amy-making-a-murderer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ec3b2393cd85b7a3d59fb38b871c914655e3c7%2F0_7_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Tickled Director: David Farrier & Dylan Reeve Starring: David Farrier, Dylan 
Reeve, David Starr Photograph: A Ticklish Tale Limited 
In an age when any hobbyist can meet friends with the same quirks online, 
documentarists find gold in unseen, teeming subcultures. Niche docs thrive on 
TV, especially on Channel 4, where sex generates the easiest buzz. But good 
fetish-gawp docs have more than titillation, from the wistful escapism of the 
dog-people inSecret Life Of The Human Pups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/25/secret-life-of-the-human-pups-the-men-who-live-as-dogs>
 to the psychosexual darkness of lonely Brits yanking each other’s trackie 
bottoms down inDogging Tales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/05/dogging-tales-the-intern-channel-4>
. The fully clothed enthusiasts inThe Secret World Of Lego 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-secret-world-of-lego/on-demand/61158-001>
are just as revealing. Some programmes give a singular human a flash of 
immortality: nobody who sawThe Lost Gold Of The Highlands 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05n756x> on BBC4 will forget bounty-hunting 
outcast Garnet Frost. On the big screen, strange nooks lead somewhere else. 
Sinister power games lie behind a weird video craze inTickled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/tickled-david-farrier-dylan-reeve-tickling-fetish-documentary>
; inFinders Keepers, a bizarre spat over a severed leg ends up being a story 
about how ordinary oddballs are affected by these moments in the light.

NOW SHOWING: Sonita, the recently released doc about the titular Iranian 
refugee-turned-rapper.JS
 