
Not everyone finds the same things scary. As a small child I was terrified 
into a quivering wreck, forced to hide behind the family sofa in a state of 
dread at the merest glimpse of Sam the Blue Eagle from The Muppets. Something 
about that beaky, austere countenance just gave me the heebie jeebies.


Is Ridley Scott making up Alien: Covenant as he goes along?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-reboot-script-filming-troubles>
Little was I to know that far worse things lay in wait in the darkest corners 
of the cinema. In celebration ofMichael Fassbender’s revelation that the 
creature in Ridley Scott’s upcoming Alien: Covenant will be known as the 
“neomorph” 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/news/1576780/what-alien-covenants-new-creatures-are-called>
 – in tribute to its acid blood-spewing, slimy and phallic second cousin the 
xenomorph from Scott’s original 1979 Alien movie – here’s a Halloween-themed 
rundown of some of the nastiest beasties ever to hit the multiplexes.

The “crawlers” (The Descent 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/lists/20-scariest-movies-you-need-to-see-20141029/the-descent-2005-20141029>
, 2005)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlb7nkDYuvd0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlb7nkDYuvd0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlb7nkDYuvd0&media=>
If Gollum from The Hobbit got his own R-rated movie, it might look a little 
like Neil Marshall’s cult 2005 horror about an all-female band of spelunkers 
who find themselves trapped in an uncharted cave system populated by 
flesh-eating subterranean abominations. The Descent works so well because it 
adds a creepy Darwinian overtone to the well-worn horror staple of the inbred, 
bestial backwoodsman. Monsters are often most terrifying when we can see our 
own DNA beneath the skin, and the thought that the crawlers may only be a few 
generations from Leatherface and his clan is what really makes the blood curdle.

The mutant baby from Eraserhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/12/horror1> (1977)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVzZ2BM7sQVA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVzZ2BM7sQVA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVzZ2BM7sQVA&media=>
If David Lynch’s surrealist masterpiece is already a grim viewing experience 
for its bloodless vision of Spencer’s cold, alienated and dissonant existence, 
it is even harder to watch when our hero’s whimpering, snakelike “child” is 
introduced, shivering like a baby rat born before its time. As if testing the 
boundaries of his viewer’s endurance, Lynch then has his protagonist cut 
through the layers of bandages to reveal the hideous skinless organs beneath in 
a deeply ghoulish parody of everyday parental trepidation.


Nosferatu 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmCUW4SwmfGc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmCUW4SwmfGc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmCUW4SwmfGc&media=>
FW Murnau’s silent-era horror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/24/nosferatu-eview> is an 
expressionist masterpiece, Max Schreck’s operatic performance as the vampire 
Count Orlok simply unmatched for gothic intensity.But Klaus Kinski’s mad-eyed 
pantomime turn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-5PzpOj57g> as the undead 
creature in Werner Herzog’s 1979 remake Nosferatu the Vampyre comes a close 
second, if only for the excruciatingly glacial bite scene.


Pale Man (Pan’s Labyrinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/24/sciencefictionandfantasy.worldcinema>
, 2006)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSsfuEG4GMA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSsfuEG4GMA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlSsfuEG4GMA&media=>
If Guillermo Del Toro’s bravura 2013 intro for The Simpsons’ annual Halloween 
episode <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtgYY7dhTyE> wasn’t enough to convince 
you the Mexican film-maker has a taste for the works of Lewis Carroll, his 
dark, supernatural period fable is packed full of references to the Englishman. 
Like Alice, Ivana Baquero’s Ofelia also finds herself in a phantasmagorical 
underworld, and just as her literary forebear shefinds herself in trouble after 
eating the local produce 
<http://illuminatimovies.net/wp-content/uploads/illuminati-movies-alice-in-wonderland-cartoon-eat-me.jpg>
. But nothing in Wonderland ever came close to Doug Smith’s Pale Man for wormy, 
fetal repulsiveness as the giant humanoid grub plops its eyes into fleshy 
sockets and transforms into an all-seeing demon butterfly by fanning out its 
fingers like a monstrous crown.

Frankenstein’s monster (Frankenstein, 1931)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1qNeGSJaQ9Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1qNeGSJaQ9Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1qNeGSJaQ9Q&media=>
Boris Karlof’s hulking, flat-headed, bolt-necked brute remains the classic 
screen incarnation of Mary Shelley’s creation more than 80 years on. Rarely has 
an actor risen to such notoriety on the back of a mute performance, but Karlof 
did at least get to speak in original directorJames Whale’s 1935 sequel Bride 
of Frankenstein <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o1Izq-E3o7Y>, which is 
surprisingly now considered by many critics to be the superior picture.

Norris Spider-Head (The Thing, 1982)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfdRTvytNvY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfdRTvytNvY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlfdRTvytNvY&media=>
Nothing shot using CGI ever looked so grimly realistic as Rob Bottin’s 
stomach-churning organic special effects for John Carpenter’s 1982 sci-fi 
horror about a parasitic extraterrestrial life-form that turns up to cause 
chaos at an Antarctic research station. The scene in which a man’s head sprouts 
spider-legs and hideous antennae is the climax of an extended orgy of body 
horror the likes of which has never been seen before or since on the big 
screen. The most spine-chilling thought: what if poor Norris is still alive in 
there somewhere?

Brundlefly (The Fly, 1986)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNH-8L1iZq20&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNH-8L1iZq20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNH-8L1iZq20&media=>
Jeff Goldblum’s transformation is such a shocker because it’s so sudden. One 
minute he’s still just about recognisable as the slightly manic guy who we saw 
earlier doing genetically assisted acrobatics around his apartment, the next 
the dread carapace that was once his face is falling off to reveal the 
repugnant giant insect beneath. The final moment, as the creature asks 
pitifully to be put out of its misery, is a nightmarish reminder of 
Brundlefly’s enduring humanity.

The xenomorph (Alien, 1979)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2XTmjjhC5U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2XTmjjhC5U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2XTmjjhC5U&media=>
Ridley Scott’s inspired decision to borrow his phallic, flesh-ripping 
extraterrestrial from the work of Swiss surrealist painter HR Giger’s turned 
out to be the foundation upon which a Hollywood legend built his entire career. 
Giger’s visions of hellish monstrosities gave the original slasher in space an 
enduring veneer of infernal threat, of unspeakable things from cursed 
netherworlds. Scott himself is due to give us an updated version, the neomorph 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/xenomorphs-predecessors-get-new-name-alien-covenan-244752>
, in Alien: Covenant, but it remains to be seen whether the new creature can 
compete with the original for slimy, feral barbarity.
 