
Eighty-three-year-old Maurice Micklewhite is the latest victim of the global 
war on terror. After renewed security checks meant hours having his passport 
thumbed by baffled border guards who knew him better asMichael Caine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-caine>, one amateur Italian Job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36279/italian-job> impression too many 
has meant that he has finallylegally changed his name to Michael Caine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/22/michael-caine-isis-islamic-state-changes-name>
.

The Blue Ice <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0103848/> star’s stage name came to 
him while he was standing in a London phonebox on a drizzly evening, calling 
his agent, while Humphrey Bogart’sThe Caine Mutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76682/caine-mutiny> was showing in the 
Odeon opposite.

It was Caine’s second attempt at a moniker – the call was about how he could 
no longer use “Michael Scott” because another one had turned up in the West 
End. And he is certainly not the first star to have made his name through 
making up his name. The US has a long and slightly depressing history of Jews 
rebranding to fit in with a WASP star system –Jon Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jon-stewart> (Leibowitz), Winona Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/09/stranger-things-winona-ryder-netflix-horror-has-the-fright-stuff>
 (Horowitz),Gene Simmons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/19/gene-simmons-i-still-fly-up-to-the-top-of-the-rafters-and-spit-fire>
 (Chaim Witz), just to pick a few.

But Whoopi Goldberg <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whoopi-goldberg> is 
perhaps the only star to havegone the other way 
<http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,2093588_2093587_2093597,00.html>
. The first part of Caryn Johnson’s stage name comes from her reputation for 
breaking wind (like a whoopee cushion), and the latter half from her mother’s 
injunction that if the first half of her name was super silly, the second half 
should be super serious (and probably an understandable desire to keep the 
family name out of it).

Sometimes, they come from even less likely places than Goldberg’s. Sid Vicious 
took his name from a hamster belonging to John Lydon – which bit him, causing 
him to exclaim “Your Sid is vicious!”, a remark Lydon found so hilarious he’d 
soon wrapped it around his childhood pal.

The artist formerly known as Paul Hewson was once known by the street gang he 
hung around with as Steinhegvanhuysenolegbangbangbang, so no doubt he 
appreciated it when one of his pals noticed a hearing aid shop in Dublin called 
Bonavox, Latin for “good voice”, and adapted it as Bono Vox – orBono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bono> for short.

Fellow store-front lover John le Carré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre> claims 
<http://www.people.com/people/archive/article/0,,20064386,00.html> he plucked 
his made-up last name from a shoe shop he spied in Battersea from a passing 
bus. Although this has never been confirmed, and double-agent that he is, there 
are a lot of question marks over whether he made the whole yarn up. Likewise, 
Vincent Furnier’s claims to have been contacted by a 16th-century witch doctor 
while playing a ouija board seem mildly dubious. The doctor’s name wasAlice 
Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper>. Furnier made it the 
name of his band, but somewhere along the line it transferred to him personally 
– meaning that he still pays royalties to the original band members for loaning 
it out every year.

Having to loan out your name is one thing, but having it sold out from under 
you is quite another. Glamourpuss Lucille LeSueur was told by her film studio, 
MGM, that it would be holding a public competition to choose a new name for 
her. Readers of Movie Week voted for Joan Crawford – a name LeSueur detested, 
as itmade her think of crawfish 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=eSIhzKnNUf4C&pg=PA123&lpg=PA123&dq=Lucille+crawford+crawfish.&source=bl&ots=C6LOE9zkpK&sig=z_gJJg6GjXdeNen52QerMrPK-GU&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiNs6HIpIfOAhWGC8AKHRqVBowQ6AEITjAM#v=onepage&q=Lucille%20crawford%20crawfish.&f=false>
.
 