
She is best known as Ellen Ripley, the heroic, xenomorph-battling warrant 
officer of the doomed Nostromo spacecraft in 1979’s Alien, or perhaps as 
chain-smoking scientist Grace Augustine in 2009 box office megalith Avatar. But 
Sigourney Weaver has reportedly taken on a rather gentler role after the cult 
American actor wasspotted moonlighting on the set of cosy ITV drama Doc Martin 
<http://haignet.co.uk/doc-martin-series-7-filming.htm>.

Weaver, who also attended the London Film and Comic-Con event on 20 July, was 
captured by an amateur videographer during filming in the picturesque Cornish 
fishing village of Port Isaac last week. Sporting a floppy fisherman’s hat, 
camera and backpack, the actor looked the very picture of an American tourist 
exploring the English countryside, though details of her character have not 
been revealed. She appeared to be filming a scene outside a local pharmacy with
Martin Clunes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-clunes>, who stars as 
the title character in the long-running series.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpi7zRllHZA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpi7zRllHZA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEpi7zRllHZA&media=>
Doc Martin centres on a successful vascular surgeon at Imperial College London 
who obtains a post as a GP in the sleepy Cornish village of Port Quin after 
developing a fear of blood. The doctor has his own celluloid roots, with a 
slightly different version of the character having debuted in the 2000 British 
independent comedy Saving Grace, starring Brenda Blethyn as a widow with green 
fingers who begins growing cannabis to relieve a financial crisis. The TV show 
is currently shooting its seventh series.

Speaking at a panel on Monday at London Film and Comic-Con, Weaver revealed 
that Alien directorRidley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> 
was poised to return to the sci-fi saga before the release of 2004’s 
much-maligned Alien vs Predator spin-off film, which was directed by Britain’s 
Paul WS Anderson and failed to find critical favour.

“[He] was about to direct a third one, until this was announced, and he 
dropped out,” said the actor. “Because he also wanted to do anAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> sequel … I think it caused more 
problems than it was worth.”

Alien is go: Neill Blomkamp confirms stalled project is officially greenlit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
Weaver confirmed longstanding reports that it had been her choice to have 
Ripley killed off at the end of 1992’s Alien 3. “I heard that [Twentieth 
Century] Fox was gonna do Alien vs Predator, which really depressed me because 
I was very proud of the movies,” she said. “I’ve nothing against building a 
movie on a video game, but at the time it was, as [Aliens director] Jim Cameron 
said, I think publicly, ‘Why would you want to do that’? It’s like making Alien 
meets the Wolfman.”

The Ghostbusters star also praised District 9 director Neill Blomkamp, who is 
making a new Alien film starring Weaver which will return to the style of the 
saga’s earlier instalments. “I’m so excited about Neill — because Neill is like 
you guys! He broke the tapes of these movies when he was a kid, he watched them 
so much,” she told the audience,in comments first reported by the Radio Times 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-07-19/sigourney-weaver-alien-vs-predator-really-depressed-me>
. “I love the fact that Neill’s fulfilling his childhood dream of what he hopes 
will be the popcorn movie, the Alien popcorn movie that he wanted as a kid to 
see.”

Weaver also hinted that Ripley might finally get a happy ending. “Well — it’s 
certainly something we’ve discussed,” she said. “I agree, she’s had kind of a 
crap life. Many interruptions.”

 