
Can films be inspirational? Well, the good ones all are. And, in a broader 
sense, going to the cinema is a narcotic, luxurious experience that makes you 
feel inspired, uplifted and stimulated. But when people talk about 
“inspirational” films – underdogs achieving spectacular sporting success, 
charismatic teachers winning over pupils, people overcoming disabilities – I am 
sometimes a bit agnostic. An inspirational film often feels soupy and syrupy, 
schematic and cliched, faintly coercive and reactionary. Inspirational means 
aspirational, no arguments – and it brings out my ironic, grumpy Brit. When I’m 
asked for my favourite inspirational scene, I nominate Tom Courtenay’s final, 
miserable act of defiance inThe Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/may/15/loneliness-long-distance-runner-book-club>
.

One movie that was lauded as inspirational, The Blind Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/25/the-blind-side-review>, features 
Sandra Bullock in an Oscar-winning performance as a well-to-do Christian 
Republican mom in the Sarah Palin mould. She takes in a troubled African 
American teen and helps mould him into a top football player. This was a huge 
hit in 2009, with great swathes of America undoubtedly deeming it to be 
inspirational (perhaps the “inspirational” movie is itself an American genre). 
Personally, I felt it unwise to leave the sick bag beyond arm’s length. The 
same goes, incidentally, for Clint Eastwood’s terribleInvictus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/04/invictus-review>, about the South 
African Springboks’ earnest battle for the 1995 Rugby World Cup, under the 
kindly eye of Nelson Mandela.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6661e361a6e3671f13c437c4f8bb0967b72743f0%2F0_74_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6661e361a6e3671f13c437c4f8bb0967b72743f0%2F0_74_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Keep the sick bag handy … The Blind Side. Photograph: 
Allstar/Warner/Sportsphoto 
I like Rocky as much as anyone, but I’m quite sure Raging Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/24/favourite-film-raging-bull>
, with its dark, mysterious poetry of defeat and survival, is in a different 
weight class. And there is something inspiring in the final audacious quotation 
from the Gospel of St John: “All I know is this: once I was blind and now I can 
see.”

My favourite film: Raging Bull | Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/24/favourite-film-raging-bull>
Yet sometimes films are genuinely inspirational, specifically because they 
don’t indulge irony or nuance (it could be that inspirational, like comedy or 
romcom, is a genre that isn’t critically acceptable). I have a soft spot for 
that fierce heartwarmer,The Pursuit of Happyness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/12/willsmith.drama>, directed by the 
Italian master ofdolce, Gabriele Muccino, and starring Will Smith. It is a true 
story about a guy called Chris Gardner who once faced poverty as a jobless 
single dad, got an unpaid internship at a prestigious firm, and had to keep up 
appearances alongside the pampered yuppies competing for a permanent job, while 
he and his son slept in hostels or even subway toilets.

Yes, it’s treacly and unashamedly premised on the idea of material success, 
the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. But it’s forthright and well made. 
It doesn’t exactly inspire you, but it is touching and successful in its 
sentimental-euphoric inspirational mode. In this vein, I have to give credit to 
a sweet and good-natured movie based on a true story:October Sky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxJQgYPXjN4>, with Jake Gyllenhaal as a 
grim-faced coalminer’s son who is inspired by Russia’s Sputnik to go into 
rocket science when he leaves school.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3fed12ef15081f3f52f58ae0e50ef298ad04fed%2F0_129_2792_1675%2F2792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3fed12ef15081f3f52f58ae0e50ef298ad04fed%2F0_129_2792_1675%2F2792.jpg>
 The King of Inspirational … Robin Williams in Dead Poets Society. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex Shutterstock 
As for the inspirational-teacher films such as Good Will Hunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/08/matt-damon-ben-affleck-good-will-hunting-screenplay-reading>
 andDead Poets Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/21/favourite-film-dead-poets-society>
, again I am agnostic. They garnered a lot of awards-season euphoria, but I am 
not sure they have aged well. They certainly show thatRobin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams> was the King of 
Inspirational, in the same way you might call Fred Astaire or Gene Kelly the 
King of Song and Dance. Something in his hyperactive funniness – vulnerable, 
secretly wounded, dripping with empathy, morally strong – made him the 
incarnation of inspirational: the teacher figure who wasn’t distant or fierce, 
but often a kind of rocket-fuelled version of the class clown who was on the 
kids’ side. Williams did this so well that he was never quite convincing in the 
“darker” roles he tried at the end of his career.

Laurent Cantet’s Entre Les Murs (The Class) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/27/the-class-entre-les-murs> is a 
French film about a tough inner-city school. Maybe it’s too tough to count as 
inspirational, although its seriousness is inspiring in a way – as is the 
final, enigmatically moving shot of the empty classroom. And a mention should 
go to Goodbye, Mr Chips, the 1939 version, with Robert Donat as the much-loved 
public schoolmaster who teaches generations of boys right in the decades 
leading up to the first world war; despite his own poignantly short and 
childless marriage, he thinks of all these boys as his children. Goodbye, Mr 
Chips is an example of how the inspirational movie is a cousin to the weepie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda2900c1f055bd0821c4165206866b149723b0b8%2F0_124_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda2900c1f055bd0821c4165206866b149723b0b8%2F0_124_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Where inspirational triangulates with the weepie and the Christmas film … 
James Stewart in It’s a Wonderful Life 
It’s a Wonderful Life <https://www.theguardian.com/film/it-s-a-wonderful-life> 
deserves a kind of peripheral inclusion here, for being where inspirational 
triangulates with the weepie and the Christmas film. Part of the agenda of the 
sentimental Christmas movie is to inspire characters and audience to lead 
better lives. That is very much the point of Frank Capra’s celebrated work, in 
which George Bailey is shown a vision (not dissimilar to those vouchsafed to 
Scrooge) of what his hometown would have been like if he had not sacrificed his 
own ambitions to help the community.

Just as inspirational – and brilliant – is Harold Ramis’s Groundhog Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/groundhog-day-perfect-comedy-for-ever>
. Bill Murray’s misanthropic weatherman is trapped in a repeating day, made to 
go through it again and again, and inspect his own life in all the detail he 
had arrogantly ignored, with an infinite amount of time to acquaint himself 
with every square millimetre of the hokey small town he had presumed to 
despise. He becomes a better person, but the film’s own comic miracle is that 
it doesn’t labour this point, despite Murray’s hilariously laborious ordeal, or 
even make it explicit. And I think that is inspirational.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b9f72f84da7ab8cb772e7bbef62cc0b90e3c0e2%2F0_21_3623_2174%2F3623.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Groundhog%20Day%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20Raging%20Bull%3F%20%E2%80%93%20films%20to%20inspire%20and%20uplift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffrom-groundhog-day-to-raging-bull-films-to-inspire-and-uplift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b9f72f84da7ab8cb772e7bbef62cc0b90e3c0e2%2F0_21_3623_2174%2F3623.jpg>
 Self-fulfilment … We Are The Best! 
But for me, the one genre I find really and truly inspirational – without 
having to claim it as a “guilty pleasure” – is any film about people forming 
bands at school. Movies such as John Carney’sSing Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/sing-street-review-teen-zero-to-hero-in-three-chord-wonder-from-once-director>
 and Lukas Moodyson’sWe Are the Best! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/17/we-are-the-best-review> are 
genuinely inspirational because they are about self-betterment and 
self-fulfilment, in their way, but no one is telling the pupil musicians they 
have to do it to get good grades or be a more responsible person.

Groundhog Day: the perfect comedy, for ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/groundhog-day-perfect-comedy-for-ever>
In fact, the grownup world is usually frowning at the whole idea of being in 
something as disreputable as a pop group. So there is something 
entrepreneurial, creative and rebellious about it. Under this heading, I would 
also includeGood Vibrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/28/good-vibrations-review>, an 
excellent film about Terri Hooley, the record shop owner who nurtured Belfast’s 
punk scene and broughtthe Undertones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/04/the-undertones-teenage-kicks-michael-bradley-punk-classic>
 to the world.

Isolating a moment of inspiration in a film is an interesting challenge. 
Alexander Payne’sAbout Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jan/24/artsfeatures2> is a 
relentlessly dark film on the painful theme of family dysfunction. Jack 
Nicholson’s performance is dyspeptic and despairing: his face (like Paul 
Giamatti’s inSideways <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sideways> or Bruce 
Dern’s inNebraska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/05/nebraska-review>
) is on the point of becoming an immobile mask of disappointment or despair. 
Yet every time I see him burst into tears at his letter from the little African 
boy, I find the moment euphoric … and, yes, sort of inspirational. There is 
something irresistible in the possibility of Schmidt’s redemption, even in its 
broad implausibility. So maybe About Schmidt is my favourite motivational film.

 * More uplifting culture for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/uplifting-culture-for-2017>  