
Extra protection for consumers of financial products has been written into 
legislation presented to parliament yesterday, overturning a key provision of 
the original bill which would have made savers and investors responsible for 
their own actions. Regulators will have 'to take into account consumers' needs 
for advice and accurate information'.

The reversal followed a plea in April from consumer representatives for the 
buyer-beware principle to be removed from the Financial Services and Markets 
Bill, the legal instrument setting up the new City regulator, the Financial 
Services Authority. Unveiling the revised bill yesterday , Patricia Hewitt, 
economic secretary to the treasury, said, however, that more experienced 
clients would be expected to shoulder more responsibility than vulnerable ones.

Asked whether the rewritten bill would be able to stop future financial 
scandals such as the near Â£1bn Barings Bank rogue trading affair or the 
multi-billion pound mis-selling of pensions, she said: 'No regulator or 
government can promise that nothing will go wrong.' But she said the FSA would 
be 'a modern world-class regulator', whose activities would span all the 
interests of increasingly complex financial supermarkets.

A draft of the bill was unveiled a year ago, giving the FSA wide-ranging 
powers to question people, search premises and levy punitive fines. Human 
rights concerns raised during its period before a joint Lords-Commons committee 
have led to some of the watchdog's teeth being pulled.

Nevertheless, it retains powers of both criminal and civil prosecution, and 
will be charged with four main tasks: market confidence, consumer protection, 
public awareness and the fight against fraud. The treasury hopes the bill will 
pass into law next spring.
 