
Airline shares are flying high after an upbeat statement from Lufthansa.

The German carrier lifted its full year earnings target after saying business 
bookings were better than expected in September, with analysts saying the 
statement was much better than anticipated. Deutsche Bank said:

We expected a solid third quarter from Lufthansa but clearly this ad hoc 
statement is substantially better.

Lufthansa shares have jumped 8%, and the positive news has seen British 
Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group climb 3% to 405.4p, while easyJet has 
added 2% to 946.5p. A rise in profits at Heathrow has also helped sentiment, 
despitethe UK government still vacillating on whether the airport should get a 
third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/call-for-immediate-parliamentary-vote-on-heathrow-third-runway>
.

The recent strong oil price gain has helped push BP 0,3p higher to 490.45p 
whileRoyal Dutch Shell B shares have risen 15p to 2179.5p.

Overall though the FTSE 100 has dipped 11.14 points to 7010.78 after the final 
US presidential debate and strong, but lower than expected UK retail sales. 
Investors remain cautious ahead of the latest monetary policy news from the 
European Central Bank. Lee Wild, head of equity strategy at stockbroker 
Interactive Investor, said:

 A shock drop in US crude supplies midweek continues to underpin both the 
latest rally in oil prices and demand for risk assets. The third and last US 
presidential debate overnight also looked to give stockmarket favourite Hilary 
Clinton a clear path to the White House next month.

 Now, focus shifts to the ECB, and central bank president Mario Draghi who is 
widely tipped to sit on his hands in terms of action this meeting. Crucial will 
be comments made on future policy, and the discussion around tapering asset 
purchases to wean the sickly eurozone economy off of QE.

 But just as likely is a possible relaxation of rules governing what assets 
policymakers are currently allowed to buy. Nearing self-imposed limits, they 
may buy extra time for increasingly ineffective QE to work.

A number of major companies have gone ex-dividend including BAE Systems, down 
11.5p at 542p, andSmiths Group, 38p lower at Â£14.42.

Sky has fallen 14p to 842p as it unveiled more details of its mobile service, 
while rival broadcasterITV is down 7.4p at 172.4p on worries about weaker 
advertising markets. TheITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> fall 
comes despite buy notes from Jefferies, which set a 195p target and Liberum 
(albeit with a reduced price target from 360p to 350p). Liberum said:

We cut our2016 net advertising estimate to -1.6% (from 1.1% previously) as we 
reflect the latest comments from media buyers into our forecasts, which suggest 
a weaker advertising momentum into the fourth quarter. We keep our 2017 net 
advertising estimates unchanged and reiterate ITV as our top buy in the sector. 
At 10 times 2016 PE the stock looks attractive.
 