
Leading shares have moved higher, with commodity companies boosted by a rise 
in base metal prices andGlaxoSmithKline lifted by a broker upgrade.

With copper hitting a three week high and Brent crude adding 1.55% to $60.20 a 
barrel - despite many analysts advising cashing in on the recent revival - the 
FTSE 100 has risen 46.31 points to 6872.42.

Tullow Oil is up 12.5p to 397.6p while among the mining shares, BHP Billiton 
is 41p better at 1535.5p andGlencore has climbed 8.05p to 284.95p. Anglo 
Americanhas added 21p to 1186.5p despite a $3.9bn write down, as it held its 
dividend.

Meanwhile Glaxo has added 49p to 1534.5p after UBS moved from sell to buy with 
a target price raised from £12.50 to £17. The bank said:

GSK has been a difficult investment case for years, with declining earnings 
since 2010, as sales growth has been anaemic and the operating margin trended 
steadily down despite several rounds of restructuring. In 2014 GSK’s outlook 
dramatically deteriorated further as changes in the US pricing environment 
revealed the extent to which GSK’s profitability depended on US price 
increases; this raised concerns about sustainability of the dividend given 
GSK’s fast-deteriorating cash generation.

 However, after a dramatic re-basing of GSK’s earnings expectations (2015-17 
consensus estimates were cut by 30-32% during 2014), we believe earnings have 
reached an inflection point.

For the first time in over a decade, we see scope for substantial earnings 
growth in the coming 3-5 years, driven by new products in ViiV and Vaccines. We 
raise our core earnings per share for 2016-18 by 5-17%. Despite respiratory 
forecasts well below guidance/consensus, our 2016E-18 estimates are 5-10% ahead 
of consensus, and imply a 2015E-18 core earnings per share compound annual 
growth rate of 12% – albeit from a much reduced 2015 base of 87p. GSK’s pay-out 
ratio remains high, but a flat 80p dividend out to 2020 (current yield: 5.3%) 
now seems plausible.

Barclays was also positive on the group, saying:

Fears over declining margins due to Advair discounting along with an earnings 
rebase at the Capital Markets day (late second quarter) are likely to weigh on 
sentiment in the near-term but we remain focused on the medium to long-term 
outlook where two-thirds of incremental earnings before interest and tax growth 
is set to be driven by GSK’s non-pharma franchises consumer/vaccines/ViiV. We 
reiterate our overweight rating, with a revised price target of 1690p [from 
1700p].

Hopes that Greece could negotiate a deal with its creditors before the cash 
runs out also helped support the market, despite comments from various 
politicians and EU officials suggesting it would be a long haul before any 
agreement. EU growth figures are also, generally, better than expected. Chris 
Beauchamp, senior market analyst at IG, said;

Reports of the death of the eurozone economy have been greatly exaggerated. 
GDP figures from across the currency union were much better than expected. The 
engine appears to be running again, and ECB quantitative easing should 
supercharge European markets yet further. A three-week high for the FTSE 100 
finds the index on the cusp of 6900 once again, as a general resurgence in 
mining shares comes despite hefty writedowns fromAnglo American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> this morning. As a highly 
leveraged play on a global upturn, the mining sector is not for the 
faint-hearted, but monetary stimulus from China could reignite enthusiasm for 
commodities and lift them from their current doldrums.

BT has fallen 8.3p to 441.7p, a day after a placing to raise £1bn to help fund 
its purchase of EE. There was also news thatVirgin Media is increasing spending 
to boost its UK broadband presence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/13/virgin-media-bt-cable-network-project-lightning>

AO World, the online domestic appliance specialist, is down another 10.3p at 
294.3p in the wake of Thursday’s sell note from Panmure Gordon.

But Afren has added 9% to 7.755p ahead of the latest deadline for Nigeria’s 
Seplat to decide whether to bid or not.
 