
Leading shares are edging higher after stronger than expected UK inflation 
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 and another rise in the oil price.

The FTSE 100 is 13.21 points higher at 6903.63, with ITV leading the way on 
hopes it could be a takeover target followingthe bid for Sky from Rupert 
Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/12/pressure-grows-to-refer-rupert-murdochs-sky-bid-to-ofcom>

The free-to-air broadcaster is up 6.2p at 191.4p and although 9.9% shareholder 
Liberty Global has seemingly played down talk of making a move, analysts have 
suggested US group Viacom could be interested after a merger with CBS was 
abandoned.

Elsewhere British Airways owner International Airlines Group has climbed 12p 
to 444.5p after Panmure analysts began coverage, saying:

IAG probably merits core holding status in this space given strong market 
positions and management track record. We are cautious on UK demand, and our 
flattish 2017 profit forecast, although free cash flow of 12% is attractive. We 
are wary of cost saving and shareholder return expectations running high whilst 
the new BA Captain [Alex Cruz] has it all to prove. We initiate with a hold 
rating and 450p target price.

Housebuilders have been lifted by a positive update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/housebuilder-bellway-restarts-land-purchases>
 fromBellway, 56p better at £24.26, with Taylor Wimpey adding 2.2p to 151.8p and
Persimmon putting on 15p to £16.82.

Banking shares across Europe have been boosted by the €13bn cash call from 
Italy’s Unicredit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/italian-banking-crisis-unicredit-to-raise-13bn-euros>
, withBarclays 1.05p better at 228.6p and Lloyds Banking Group 0.5% higher at 
61.71p despitethe UK government trimming its stake again. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/government-lloyds-share-sale-bank>

Among the fallers Antofagasta is 21.5p lower at 753p as copper dipped ahead of 
Wednesday’s US interest rate decision from the Federal Reserve, widely expected 
to see the first increase in borrowing costs for a year. Joshua Mahony, market 
analyst at IG, said:

[The] Federal Reserve Open Markets committee meeting continues to dominate 
market sentiment, with many worrying that we could see something similar to 
last year, where a rate hike marked the beginning of a sustained correction in 
the Dow. However, we are looking at a different situation, with markets 
perceiving a rate hike as a near certainty. There is a good chance that a rate 
hike is fully priced in and as such the real interest will come from how the 
FOMC sets out their plan for 2017.

Meanwhile the strong UK inflation figures are likely to dispel any talk of 
another Bank of England rate cut, which is helping to support the pound. The 
rise in oil prices is also expected to continue feeding through into the 
inflation figures.

Precious metal miner Fresnillo has fallen 28p to £11.17 while Randgold 
Resources is down 115p to £56.65 as gold and silver prices slipped back.

Among the mid-caps Balfour Beatty is up 6.5p at 280.6p as it issued a positive 
trading statement. Analysts at Liberum said:

We believe that Balfours is well placed to benefit from increased 
infrastructure investment both sides of the Atlantic. We do not overly worry 
about the impact of rising yields on infrastructure values. A recovered PE of 
9.0 times is attractive.

But energy services group Hunting is down 6% at 591p after its latest update, 
saying its 2017 outcome was highly dependent on a continued and sustained 
improvement of both north American and international markets.
 