
Leading shares have shrugged off the No vote in Italy’s referendum and the 
subsequent resignation of prime minister Matteo Renzi, preferring to 
concentrate on the far right’s defeat in Austria’s presidential election.

European luxury goods groups have been boosted by positive broker notes, which 
has helped liftedBurberry more than 2% to £14.42. The company has also been 
lifted by a reportit had rejected several takeover approaches from US fashion 
accessories group Coach 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-burberry-group-coach-idUSKBN13T0Z3>.

Banks are also in demand with Barclays 6.15p better at 219.1p and Royal Bank 
of Scotlandrising 4.1p to 197.5p after it settled claims with a group of 
shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/rbs-agrees-multimillion-pound-settlement-with-shareholders>
.

With copper prices on the rise, mining shares benefitted. Antofagasta has 
added 18p to 711.5p whileBHP Billiton was 30.5p better at 1334.5p. But gold and 
silver slipped back as investors moved away from safer sectors, leavingRandgold 
Resources down 180p at £56.45 and Fresnillo 33p lower at £11.65.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently 55.24 points higher at 6785.96, with the 
latest UK services sector survey showing a better than expected performance in 
November.

Among the mid-caps, Polypipe has added 4% to 315.9p after Jefferies issued a 
buy note with a 350p price target. It said:

Polypipe trades at around 11 times calendar 2017 PE, with earnings per share 
set to grow 9% in 2017 and 5% in 2018. Volumes should be solid, supported by 
growing new-build and infrastructure markets, while the natural substitution of 
plastic pipes should help offset slower RMI [repair, maintenance and 
improvement] markets. A rising oil price will increase polymer costs, but 
history suggests this can be passed on to customers.

Lower down the market Purplebricks has put on 19p to 124.25p as the online 
estate agent’s profits jumped 153% to £10.4m.
 