
Leading shares are falling back on a cocktail of concerns.

Investors are nervous ahead of the debate later between US presidential 
candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, as well as uncertain over the 
state of play of Brexit. On top of that, oil producers are meeting in Algeria 
with the possibility of an agreement to support prices, albeit a slim one, 
which as seen crude prices edge higher.

The biggest faller is InterContinental Hotels, down 142p or 4% to £31.43 after 
Morgan Stanley cut its recommendation from equal weight to underweight on 
worries about the outlook for the US. The bank’s analysts said:

IHG has outperformed peers year to date (in US dollars) and now trades in line 
despite its weaker revenue per available room /system growth. Meanwhile, 
multiple signals are flashing that the US hotel cycle is peaking. We cut RevPAR 
forecasts, partly offset by an assumed $500m buyback, but IHG looks fully 
valued so we move underweight.

IHG has enjoyed a strong re-rating. [It] has an attractive and resilient 
business model, with an attractive 5.6% free cash flow yield, and M&A is a 
theme, but it has historically traded at a discount to peers, partly as its 
RevPAR and net system growth have underperformed.

... meanwhile there are multiple red flags over the US hotel cycle ... US 
RevPAR growth has been slowing for some time (2014 8.3%, 2015 6.4%, year to 
date 2.7%), and we think it will weaken further given declining occupancy, 
anaemic rate growth, accelerating supply growth, one-fifth of submarkets in 
RevPAR decline, ‘compression nights’ analysis suggesting Airbnb now having an 
impact, and independent hotels outperforming brands. If we match these 
occupancy/RevPAR trends to the last two cycles, IHG shares are holding up much 
better.

IHG is a quality operator, but when RevPAR turns, all hotel stocks de-rate 
sharply, which in the last downturn was to 8-9 times EBITDA (versus IHG 
currently on 12 time 2017e). M&A speculation may continue to provide support, 
but we think that IHG sees itself as more of a buyer than a seller, and it no 
longer owns ‘trophy’ assets.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 81.03 points at 6828.40, with banks 
under pressure. UK mortgage approvals came in at their lowest level since 
January 2015 in August, while in Europe Deutsche Bank shares hit a record low 
after costly US litigation claims and reported comments from German chancellor 
Angela Merkel ruling out state aid.

Barclays is 4.9p lower at 166.5p and Royal Bank of Scotland is down 3.5p at 
179.1p.

In addition Lloyds Banking Group, down nearly 3% at 54.34p, was hit by a sell 
note from Goldman Sachs which said it faced increased competition from HSBC and 
challenger banks with a decline in its mortgage market share.

The mortgage approval figures have also left housebuilders lower, with Taylor 
Wimpey down 6p at 149.5p and Barratt Developments 17.4p lower at 479.8p.

Moving higher is Micro Focus, up 18p to £21.42 as UBS raised its target price 
from £20.90 to £24.20.

Commenting on the market, Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at Interactive 
Investor, said:

European markets have started the week lower, following Asian markets down, 
despite a slight recovery in oil prices. The rally in markets started to come 
unstuck on Friday after investors became significantly more bearish about the 
prospect of any OPEC deal, with short positions escalating sharply. While oil 
prices have bounced slightly this morning, on hopes that Saudi Arabia may be 
prepared to cut output at a later date, fears are growing that oversupply in 
the oil market will subdue prices for the foreseeable future.

Possibly the most significant risk event for markets this year, the US 
election is already compelling and tonight’s first televised US Presidential 
debate is likely to prove must-watch TV. So far, the only markets and sectors 
to pay much attention to the upcoming election are US healthcare stocks and 
Mexican assets - but with a little over a month before November’s vote, 
investors need to start trying to establish what the result might mean for 
markets more widely.
 