
Leading shares are edging lower on the day but still look like posting a more 
than 1% gain for the month.

Banks are among the main gainers, boosted by a number of positive economic 
signals from the UK despite the Brexit vote, the latest being consumer 
confidence figures.

So Barclays is 4.1p better at 173.25p while Lloyds Banking Group has been 
lifted 0.82p to 59.68p.HSBC, 10.7p higher at 568.2p, has also been helped by 
Deutsche Bank analysts raising their target price from 514p to 525p, albeit 
with a hold rating.

The analysts believe the bank may benefit from being broken up, saying the 
costs of running a global business appear to outweigh the benefits. They said:

The announcement of a $2.5bn share buyback at HSBC’s interim results surprised 
market consensus that had been factoring in the prospect of a dividend cut. In 
this report we lay out a “Capital Map” for theHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> Group that shows clearly 
where the group allocates capital geographically, what the returns generated on 
that capital are & what the cash dividend paying capability is of each 
operating company up to the group. This we believe not only helps shed greater 
light on the sustainability of group dividend but illuminates the areas where 
the group still has large sums of capital allocated inefficiently.

We believe our “Capital map” exercise also sheds greater light on the cost of 
“being HSBC”. Our analysis identifies two clear costs: 1) capital trapped in 
subsidiaries making sub-cost of equity returns but viewed as essential to 
generating group-wide synergies (e.g. GBM in the US); 2) the cost of group 
centre (we estimate this alone is around 2-3% drag on group return on equity). 
At present we believe there is little compelling evidence that the benefits of 
running a global HSBC are outweighing these costs. Whilst this remains the case 
it is hard to see HSBC’s shares out-perform peers with cleaner and less complex 
business models.

The estimated S$4.5bn annual bill for [the holding company] that we estimate 
in this report plus the capital trapped making sub-par returns in subsidiaries 
to generate the “network effect” raises more fundamental questions for HSBC. 
Unless this bill comes down meaningfully in the coming years, or “network” 
related revenues increase, it remains a considerable drag on group returns, and 
thus valuation.

It may not be the right moment for HSBC to consider a wholesale breakup of the 
group into 3-4 separate companies – some Hold Co / central costs would 
undoubtedly trickle down into the separate business. Indeed there may never be 
a perfect time, given the risks and frictional costs involved. However, we 
struggle to think of a time in recent history when the case for a breakup of 
HSBC has been stronger.

Ironically a report in a German newspaper that Deutsche Bank was considering a 
merger with rival Commerzbank has also helped lift the banking sector.

Housebuilders are also higher after Nationwide said house prices rose in August
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/31/uk-house-prices-edge-up-in-august-nationwide-says>
.Berkeley Group, likely to be ejected from the FTSE 100 at today’s reshuffle in 
favour of miner Polymetal International, is 81p better at £26.76 andPersimmon 
has put on 7p to £18.40.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 10.43 points at 6810.36, with mining groups 
pushing the index lower as the strength of the dollar continues to weigh on 
commodity prices.Fresnillo has fallen 52p to £16.38 and Anglo American is down 
215p at £71.45.

Elsewhere equipment rental group HSS has slumped 5p to 80p despite a 13.5% 
rise in half year revenues, as analysts worried about lower operating margins.
Investment group Toscafund wants rival Speedy Hire to merge with HSS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/888-buying-bookies-win-some-lose-some-gambling>
. Peel Hunt said:

[The] outlook remains cautious and we reduce our December 2016 profit before 
tax from £13.0m to £9m (cons £11m) to give earnings per share of 4.6p from 
6.7p. We assume progress remains challenged in 2017 and reduce our December 
2017 profit before tax from £21.8m to £12.0m to give earnings per share of 6.2p 
from 11.0p. Despite clear strategic progress, these material downgrades (after 
a poor 2015) are likely to leave investors slightly nervous.
 