
With investors continuing to be unnerved by the prospect of Donald Trump 
winning next week’s US presidential election, leading shares are on the slide 
again.

Pharmaceutical shares are under pressure after US lawmakers called on federal 
regulators to open a probe on potential price fixing for insulin and diabetes 
drugs.

Although not mentioned, Hikma is the biggest faller in the FTSE 100, down 146p 
at £15.99 after HSBC analysts cut their target price from £25.25 to £19.85 and 
warned all generic drugmakers could become caught up in a US Department of 
Justice investigation.

But Numis moved from hold to buy ahead of an update from Hikma next week:

Hikma’s shares are down 35% over three months and have significantly under- 
performed UK Mid-Cap Healthcare (+6%) and Global Specialty Pharma (-2%). The 
key risk to the investment case following the downgrades in August to 2016 
forecasts are margin expectations from Generics that have disappointed since 
the acquisition of Roxane, which completed in early 2016.

A third quarter update is expected next week and in the short term, a 
reduction to group revenue expectations for 2016 would be a disappointment, but 
in the absence of competition for Glycopyrrolate, view this as unlikely. A 
further reduction in margins for generics in 2016 is entirely possible, 
although we would argue this is now in the price.

We take a more cautious stance on Generic margins into 2017, and reduce our 
earnings per share forecasts by 13% to 136c (consensus 156c). We see third 
quarter results on 10th November and the “Meet the Management” event on 15th 
November as the catalysts for a re-rating. The shares trade on 16 times 2017 PE 
for 23% earnings per share growth on our downgraded assumptions. We reduce our 
target price to 2,350p, which equates to 21 times 2017. This implies 35% upside 
on a 12- month view and so move to buy.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 95.11 points to 6695.40, on track for its 
biggest one day fall since the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote. Connor 
Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadex, said:

Despite the continued Brexit brouhaha muddying the waters it is hard to see 
anything challenge the election for market dominance from now until next 
Wednesday, if Clinton wins, or god knows how long, in the eventuality of a 
Trump victory.

The falls are across the board. British Airways owner International Airlines 
Groupis down 16.1p to 434.7p despite telling investors it was sticking to its 
earnings and margins growth targets for now to 2020 despite the difficult 
trading environment.

Dixons Carphone is down 12.6p at 328.9p on concerns about a coming squeeze on 
UK consumer spending, while Randgold Resources has fallen 220p to £68.90.

But Paddy Power Betfair has bucked the trend, up 285p to £88.65 after it 
increased its full year profit forecast from £365m-£385m to £390m-£405m, citing 
the benefits of a weaker pound on its euro revenues. It reported earnings of 
£113m in the three months to the end of September, up 53%.

Among the mid-caps DFS Furniture has fallen nearly 13% to 230.1p as US private 
equity firm Advent International sold a 12% stake in the business at 240p a 
share, cutting its investment in the retailer in half.
 