
Leading shares have recovered ground, helped by commodity stocks rebounding as 
metal and oil prices rose, partly due to some weakness in the dollar.

But Burberry has missed out on the gains, falling 114p or more than 7% to 
£13.98 following its latest update. The luxury goods group said the slump in 
the pound had boosted sales to tourists in its London stores by 30%. In all it 
reported a 2% rise in like for like retail sales in the second quarter. However 
its wholesale revenues missed forecasts, which has prompted some profit taking 
in the shares. Analysts at Liberum issued a sell note, saying:

A solid second quarter update, as expected, albeit against weak 
comps...Burberry is a beneficiary of weak sterling and if £/$ stays at current 
levels will see a £90m benefit over 2015/16. £50m of this is already in our 
forecasts.

Wholesale was weak, down 14%. We expect similar in the second half as US 
department stores remains depressed. Foreign exchange benefits aside,Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> struggles to drive 
meaningful growth. Long term earnings per share compound annual growth rate is 
low versus the peer group while the valuation remains at a premium.

A new chief executive starts next summer which brings the risk of expectations 
being lowered.

Pearson is also on the slide again after it warned on Monday about a slowdown 
in the US education market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/pearson-shares-sales-publisher-trading-conditions>
, down another 24.5p at 738p.

There is a mixed picture for airlines, with Ryanair shrugging off news that the
weakness in the pound would hit its profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/ryanair-warns-fall-in-pound-will-hit-profits>
. Its shares are up 1.6% at €12, while rivaleasyJet is 32p better at 905.5p. 
But British Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group is down 0.6p at 376.9p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently 74.35 points higher at 7021.90, with 
sterling rising after a larger than expected rise in the UK consumer price 
index to 1% year on year, the highest since November 2014.

Among the commodity companies, Polymetal International has put on 27p to 877p 
whileRandgold Resources has risen 200p to £70.20 and BHP Billiton is 23.5p 
better at £12.17.
 