
Leading shares are holding firm despite the terrorist attacks in Brussels, 
albeit in quiet trading ahead of the Easter weekend.

AstraZeneca has added 2p to 3917p, shrugging off disappointing results from a 
clinical trial. Its Brilinta heart drug failed to help stroke patients, with 
the blood thinning treatment not significantly better than aspirin. Further 
trial data is expected in the second half of the year, but this latest outcome 
dents hopes the treatment could reach sales of $3.5bn by 2023. AstraZeneca’s 
Ludovic Helfgott told Reuters:

It’s a setback but at this stage we are not providing any new guidance on the 
overall [sales] number.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 7.05 points to 6199.79, with Kingfisher leading 
the way afterbetter than expected full year profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/kingfisher-to-expand-screwfix-stores-diy>
, adding 11.4p to 362p.

Sky has climbed 27p to £10.40 as Exane BNP Paribas moved from neutral to 
outperform.

But bookmakers were on a losing streak after a profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/william-hill-issues-profit-warning-after-cheltenham-and-online-losses>
 fromWilliam Hill, down 49.8p at 321p. The company blamed poor results at 
Cheltenham races and problems with its online business. Newly promoted FTSE 100 
contituentPaddy Power Betfair has fallen 150p to £90.90 while Ladbrokes is 5.4p 
lower at 115.1p.

Outsourcing Capita has fallen another 7p to £10.16 following a sell note on 
Tuesday from Stifel amid some restructuring of its businesses. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/mar/22/capita-drops-2-on-growth-worries>

Mining shares are also under pressure, with Randgold Resources down 110p to 
£64.25 andFresnillo falling 14.5p to 979.5p as gold and silver slipped back 
after climbing on Tuesday as investors sought havens after the Belgium bombs.

Travel shares, which fell back in the wake of the attacks on fears that 
tourists could abandon their trips, have recovered some ground. British Airways 
ownerInternational Airlines Group is up 1.5p at 551p and cruise company Carnival
has climbed 80p to £35.36.

Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at Interactive Investor, said:

European markets continue to show remarkable resilience in the face of 
yesterday’s terrorist attacks, moving higher in early trade and continuing 
their defiant stance from yesterday which saw markets shrug off their early 
flight to safety and finish in positive territory.

After sinking into the depths of despair in January and February, are markets 
now starting to become complacent? Perhaps the best measure of fear versus 
greed is the US VIX index, which effectively measures the cost of downside 
protection for equity portfolios. After rising to a high of over 30 in early 
February, the VIX has since dropped to its lowest levels since last summer’s 
sharp market decline, slipping to just 13.8 in trading yesterday. The last six 
weeks have seen commodity markets stage a remarkable recovery and central banks 
have stepped up their support - but investors need to start asking difficult 
questions about whether the global macro outlook has changed so much in such a 
short space of time to support further upside?
 