
Leading shares have shrugged off a 6% fall in Shanghai shares, preferring to 
concentrate on a late rally on Wall Street as oil prices recovered.

But with key economic data due, the G20 meeting in China from tomorrow, and 
another fall in crude as investors worried about Saudi Arabia suggesting there 
would be no production cuts, the mood remains volatile.

And outsourcing group Capita is missing out on the day’s rise, down 49p or 
4.5% to £10.23 after mixed full year results. Revenues rose 7% but reported 
pretax profits fell from £292.4m to £112.1m after impairment charges and the 
costs of exiting lower growth businesses.

The company said its total contract value had slipped from £5.1bn last year to 
£4.7bn. But it raised its margin target range from 12.5%-13.5% to 13%-14%. 
Analysts at Stifel said:

Earnings per share of 70.7p was in line with expectations but there is plenty 
in today’s prelims for both the bears and bulls to get their teeth into.

Starting with the negatives: organic growth of 4.3% in 2015, as forecast, but 
commentary that for 2016 the target is at least organic revenue growth of 4%. 
Compare that to December’s trading update when management was confident they 
could deliver an acceleration in organic growth in 2016.

Bid pipeline is down to £4.7bn from £5.1bn in December following the loss of 
UK Asset Resolution [mortgage servicing unit bid] but the statement highlights 
a large active prospects lists with a number of opportunities expected to enter 
the pipeline shortly.

A high level of exceptionals related to business exits (£163m total charge 
incl. goodwill impairment, provisions and loss on disposal and other 
non-underlying charges of £122m (goodwill impairment & provision) related to 
the life & pension, insurance and asset services divisions. These exceptionals 
had been flagged at the time of the December trading update but still the size 
of the charges may take some by surprise today.

Turning to the positive: Today’s eye catching announcement is news that the 
margin guidance range is being increased from 12.5%-13.5% to 13%-14% following 
business disposals in the year.

In a sell note, Michael Donnelly at Panmure Gordon said:

The impairment is probably not as large as we had feared, but the risk now is 
that further impairments in other divisions will further occlude what is 
already an increasingly incomprehensible set of accounts.

Capita’s exit from weaker businesses has clearly driven a marginal improvement 
in metrics, but falling cash generation and conversion should remain a concern 
for investors as the portfolio is further rebalanced.

But rival Serco has risen 15% to 94p after trading profits of £138m beat 
expectations amid signs its turnaround plan after a series of contract problems 
and scandals could be working.


Overall the FTSE 100 has climbed 105.70 points to 5972.88 as UK economic 
growth for the fourth quarter came in as expected at 0.5%.

Lloyds Banking Group is leading the risers, up 9% at 67.94p following its 
results and dividend payout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
, while close behind isRSA Insurance, rising 35.5p to 430p after its figures.

Theme park group Merlin Entertainments has risen 4.6% to 454.8p as reported 
flat profits for 2015, in the wake of the rollercoaster crash at Alton Towers. 
Panmure Gordon said:

This is a seasonally quiet time of the year but trading is in line with 
expectations and importantly planned investments and developments are on track. 
We reiterate our buy recommendation and 480p target price.

Mining companies have built up some gains, with the exception of Rio Tinto, 
down 49.5p at 1824.5p after a downgrade from Moody’s. The company’s shares have 
also gone ex-dividend.

Falling for the same reason are easyJet, 37p lower at £14.77, and Diageo, down 
12.5p at £18.56.
 