
Leading shares are struggling for direction ahead of US data and a public 
appearance by Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen.

On top of that, investors are cautious ahead of the long weekend after G7 
leaders added to the chorus suggesting that the UK leaving the European Union 
would be a threat to global growth.

So the FTSE 100 is virtually unchanged, up just 0.25 points at 6265.90.

Outsourcing group Capita is among the fallers, down 1.6% at £10.80 after 
analysts at Exane BNP Paribas cut their rating from neutral to underpeform, 
with a target price of £10.50. They said earnings quality remained weak and 
liabilities had continued to rise.

Mining shares have moved higher, helped by dollar weakness and the suggestion 
that Japan may delay a sales tax, a move which would help consumer confidence 
and economic growth in the region.

Rio Tinto has risen 23.5p to 1992.5p while Mexican precious metals miner 
Fresnillois up 10p at £10.42 as gold and silver prices moved higher. Tony 
Cross, market analyst at Trustnet Direct, said:

It’s a broadly flat start to trade in London once again as the FTSE-100 
attempts to cling onto the gains we saw posted at the start of the week. Brent 
Crude may have failed to regain its hold on the $50 a barrel mark, but 
commodity stocks are still finding favour, helped in no small part by US dollar 
weakness amidst the idea that the Fed may not be in a position to hike rates 
next month as had been earlier thought.

Utilities were also in demand, with United Utilities up 12p at 967p as 
recovered from the fall which immediately followed Thursday’s results.Severn 
Trent has added 14p to £22.96 while National Grid has climbed 7p to £10.07.

Banks have mostly edged higher, despite Thursday’s surprise rights issue from 
Spain’s Banco Popular.Barclays is 0.7p better at 185.5p and HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> is 0.55p higher at 446.5p. 
ButStandard Chartered has dropped 7.2p to 542p.
 