
Mining shares are supporting the UK market despite a series of disappointing 
updates elsewhere putting pressure on shares.

A strong production update from Anglo American has lifted its shares 4% to 
£11.10 and also pushedAntofagasta 18p higher to 543p, Rio Tinto up 79.5p to 
£27.55 andGlencore 6.15p better at 243.75p. Recent signs of stability in the 
Chinese economy has also helped sentiment.

But Whitbread has fallen 98p to £37.45 after the Premier Inns and Costa Coffee 
reported slowing sales at the drinks business.

GKN is down 8.2p at 315p as the engineering group said growth rates were 
easing in its major markets.

Meanwhile Intu Properties has dropped 2.9p to 288.3p as it said occupancy 
levels at its shopping centres had fallen since June by 0.6% to 95.6%. It said 
new lettings in the year had more than offset the 1% impact from the closure of 
BHS.

It also agreed to sell its 63% stake in a Bromley shopping centre for £177.9m, 
which it said was around 1% higher than its value before the Brexit vote. The 
property market was one of the main victims of the turmoil in the immediate 
aftermath of the referendum result. In a reduce note, analysts at Numis said:

In a deal that we see as being a short term positive for sentiment, Intu has 
sold Bromley slightly ahead of book value. Trading through the third quarter 
did not see a material change versus the half year and management has 
reiterated its 3-4% like for like net rental income guidance. Our key issue is 
that Intu remains highly leveraged and capital consumptive, and we see better 
value elsewhere.

Royal Bank of Scotland is under pressure on continuing concerns about fines it 
may be liable for, down 5.7p at 182.3p.

Overall, with the rise in mining shares, the FTSE 100 has added 36.10 points 
to 7022.50.

Among the mid-caps, Petra Diamonds continues to benefit from its recent 
update, 5.8p better at153.5p, but pubs groupMitchells & Butlers is down 14.8p 
at 267.8p after Citigroup issued a sell recommendation.
 