
Leading shares have recovered much of the fall seen on Thursday, as worries 
about a possible US interest rate rise in June recede.

Mining shares were among the main risers, regaining some lost ground as copper 
prices moved higher after signs of more demand from key commodities consumer 
China.Anglo American has added 30.7p to 610p while Glencore is up 5.2p at 
133.3p.

Elsewhere Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling has climbed 56p to £13.42 after 
Citigroup issued a buy note, saying its recent share price decline meant much 
of the concerns about the outlook were priced into the shares.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 92.60 points to 6145.95, on course for its 
biggest one day rise since the middle of April.

At the moment there are no fallers at all in the leading index. Tony Cross at 
Trustnet Direct said:

The FTSE-100 has opened with gains of more than 1%, recovering much of 
Thursday’s losses as commodity prices start forging their way higher once 
again. That rally we had seen for the US dollar off the back of the prospect of 
a US rate hike has stalled, whilst supply disruption fears are driving the 
price of oil, pushing Brent crude to within a whisker of $50 a barrel.

Takeover speculation has helped lift asset management companies, with Aberdeen 
Asset Managementup 12.4p to 281.6p, Henderson Group 13.4p better at 259.3p and 
Schroders rising 53p to £25.73. The catalyst appears to be comments from 
Aberdeen chief executive Martin Gilbert, who told Bloomberg he had seen 
interest from rivals in Europe and Australia, although no formal offers had be 
received and he would be unlikely to sell anyway.

Meanwhile a positive third quarter trading update has lifted merchant bank 
Close Brothers by 53p to £12.78. Numis said:

Following the slightly better than expected third quarter performance we are 
modestly upgrading our forecasts for Close. Earnings per share moves to 123p 
this year from 118p and to 122p next year from 119p. Our target price increases 
from 1565p to 1580p and our recommendation remains buy from our change this 
morning. We continue to believe that Close will outperform the lenders 
sub-sector through the cycle.

Ladbrokes is up 14p at 133.5p as the regulator said its planned merger with 
Coral may win approval provided 350 to 400 shops were sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/20/ladbrokes-coral-merger-sale-of-up-to-400-betting-shops>
. This is lower than previous estimates of 500.

But Spectris has dropped nearly 7% to £16.52 after the electrical engineering 
group reported a weaker than expected first quarter update and said conditions 
remained challenging. Investec analyst Michael Blogg said:

As Spectris <https://www.theguardian.com/business/spectris> traditionally 
delivers most of its sales and profits in the second quarter and (especially) 
the fourth quarter, it is hard to draw conclusions from trading in the first 
four months of the year. However, a 4% organic revenue decline is not 
encouraging and it is worse than our relatively downbeat estimates for the 
first half and 2016. With guidance unchanged (we assume for profits), the onus 
is likely to be on aggressive shaping of the cost base and capabilities to 
deliver a more efficient business. Our estimates, target price and 
recommendation are under review.
 