
Leading shares are losing ground following recent falls in the oil price, but 
building materials groupCRH is bucking the trend.

Its shares have climbed 2.5% to £25.33, the biggest riser in the FTSE 100, 
after it reported better than expected half year earnings of €1.12bn, double 
the figure this time last year and better than the company’s forecast of €1.1bn 
made last month.

It saw a strong performance in the US, and also benefitted from last year’s 
acquisitions including assets bought from Lafarge Holcim. It announced an 
increased half year dividend - up 1.6% - for the first time since 2009. Chief 
executive Albert Manifold said:

With continued positive momentum in the Americas and the modest impact of 
early-stage economic recovery in Europe, and assuming normal weather conditions 
for the remainder of the season, we expect further progress in the second half 
with full year reported EBITDA in excess of €3bn.

However CRH <https://www.theguardian.com/business/crh> said the impact of the 
Brexit vote remained unclear.crh

Canaccord Genuity analyst Aynsley Lammin issued a buy note, saying:

The group has delivered a strong set of results, as expected, with the first 
half benefiting from acquisitions, a particularly strong US and modestly better 
markets in Europe...These results are consistent with our investment thesis 
that the group would enjoy good underlying trading, benefit from the recent 
acquisitions and start to de-leverage relatively quickly. Shares have enjoyed a 
strong bounce recently and now trade on a fuller rating at around 9 times 
EBITDA for 2017, but we believe this is supported by today’s good results.

Overall though the FTSE 100 has fallen 52.07 points to 6783.71, as investors 
remain cautious ascentral bankers gather in Jackson Hole in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/25/central-bankers-gather-in-jackson-hole-business-live?page=with:block-57be8de1e4b0fe30498a48ce#block-57be8de1e4b0fe30498a48ce>
 for their annual symposium, with all eyes on Federal Reserve chair Janet 
Yellen and any comments she makes about US interest rates.

Oil prices are flat after recent falls, with the market torn between hopes of 
a production agreement at next month’s OPEC meeting and data this week showing 
growing US crude stocks.

So commodity companies are among the losers, with Glencore down another 4% to 
176.75p followingWednesday’s fall in profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/aug/24/ftse-falters-as-glencore-leads-mining-shares-lower>
.

A number of companies have gone ex-dividend including Dixons Carphone, down 
12.7p at 374.3p,Hammerson, 17.5p lower at 573p, the London Stock Exchange, off 
67p at £27.55 andPrudential, 31p lower at £13.49.

But WPP continues to climb after this week’s figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/24/wpp-profits-uk-growth-brexit-sir-martin-sorrell-advertisers>
, up 30p at £18.10.
 