
Leading shares are on track for their biggest daily rise since the end of 
September, as investors welcomed news that Hillary Clinton was cleared by the 
latest FBI probe, raising her chances of victory against Donald Trump.

Mining and banking shares are heading the risers as investors piled back into 
riskier assets, withBHP Billiton 47p better at £12.13 and Antofagasta adding 
21.5p to 553p.

But with gold and silver slipping back, Randgold Resources is down 95p at 
£66.95 andFresnillo has fallen 31p to £15.94.

Amid the banking stocks, HSBC is 26.8p higher at 621.6p following its latest 
update, <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/hsbc-profits-fall>but 
Tesco has dropped 2.15p to 200.35p after its banking service was hit by 
fraudulent activity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-freezes-transactions-online-attack>

Overall the FTSE 100 has climbed 103.27 points to 6796.53, with its exporters 
and overseas earners helped by a boost to the dollar from the latest US 
election news. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker Interactive 
Investor, said:

 In yet another extraordinary twist in what has already been the most dramatic 
US election campaign ever, the clearing of Clinton has seen confidence return 
to equity markets and safe havens slump, as the market starts to price in a 
Hilary victory. However, while the polls have widened and the expectation is 
that the US electorate will deliver a Trump defeat, many investors are still 
sitting on significant levels of cash as the possibility of a surprise 
Brexit-like result is simply too risky to contemplate - with the upside 
potential of a Clinton victory markedly lower than the downside risk of a Trump 
win.

Elsewhere insurer Lancashire Holdings is heading the mid-cap fallers, down 16p 
to 704p after analysts at Bernstein cut their recommendation from market 
perform to underperform after its recent results.
 