
Leading shares continue to shrug off worries about Italy’s banking system 
following the weekend referendum and subsequent resignation of prime minister 
Matteo Renzi.

But worries about Europe as well as Brexit are not far from the surface, and 
support services groupCarillion is the latest to warn about the outlook when 
Britain leaves the European Union.

The company, which helps maintain railways and roads, said the pace of new 
orders had slowed in the second half, and it expected their value to be lower 
than the £2.5bn won in the first six months of the year. Total orders for the 
year were forecast to be £16bn, down from £17.4bn last year.

It said the slowdown followed the new UK government reassessing its spending 
priorities ahead of the Autumn statement. It also said orders from the Middle 
East, especially Oman, were weaker due to the prolonged low oil price.

Its shares have dropped 5.5% to 241.8p following the update, and analysts at 
Peel Hunt said the modest order intake in the second half was slightly 
concerning:

Carillion <https://www.theguardian.com/business/carillion> has much to offer 
and the shares are not expensive on a headline PE and yield basis. Although 
debt is high by peer group standards (especially if we allow for the pension 
liabilities) it is supported by the cash flows from support services. Near 
term, worries over the order intake and modest progression beyond services will 
mean there are likely to be better buying opportunities. We move to hold from 
add. Target price of 275p .

Overall, as hopes continue that Italy’s troubled banks - notably Monte dei 
Paschi - will be bailed out somehow, theFTSE 100 has added 81.42 points to 
6861.26. Weaker than expected UK industrial output has seen the pound fall on 
the basis that interest rates will remain low for longer, and helped lift 
shares. Meanwhile investors are hoping for an extension to the European Central 
Bank’s quantitative easing programme when it meets tomorrow, following the 
referendum in Italy.

Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

The only way appears to be up, with global equity markets continuing their 
ascent, punishing any bears who may have thought that the market was 
over-valued. With significant liquidity caught on the side-lines in the wake of 
the Italian referendum, prices have subsequently squeezed higher, as they have 
done with every major political event this year. It appears as if the festive 
party season is extending to equity prices, which look set for the oft-quoted, 
but rather erratic, Santa rally.

WPP is the biggest faller, down 39p at £16.55 as advertising companies were 
hit by a report the US Department of Justice was looking at their conduct in 
bids. Liberum analysts said:

The US listed media agencies Omnicom and IPG have traded down yesterday by 
circa 2.5% on average on the back of Wall Street Journal article mentioning 
that the US Justice Department is investigating whether some of media agencies 
“inappropriately steered business for producing commercials to their in-house 
units over independent firms by rigging the bidding process for those 
contracts”. While we don’t expect any number changes on the back of this 
article it does add to the negative sentiment re-transparency that has built up 
through the ANA [US advertisers trade body] report earlier this year.

Elsewhere Unilever is down 17p to £31.18 after JP Morgan reduced its 
recommendation from overweight to neutral and cut its target price from £41 to 
£32.

Pearson is 5p lower at 788p after a poor update from US business Barnes and 
Noble. In a sell note onPearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson>, 
Liberum said:

Barnes and Noble Education, one of the major US college bookstore sellers, 
were trading down 13% yesterday after they lowered their full year revenue 
guidance on a comparable store basis and suggested that enrolment trends were 
likely to remain muted, particularly in Community College where Pearson is 
over-exposed. For us, though, the real threat is from book rentals, which 
threatens to structurally weaken the publishers’ business model.

But banks continued to be buoyed by hopes that the Italian situation will be 
resolved, withStandard Chartered up 28.4p to 685.4p.

Mining shares benefited from a rise in copper prices, with Antofagasta adding 
25.5p to 753p.

Lower down the market Paypoint has fallen 44p to 913.5p as Barclays issued an 
underweight rating on the business.
 