
Tobacco shares are in focus, both for their defensive qualities in a down day 
for the market and also in the wake of last week’s $47bn offer by BAT for US 
group Reynolds.

BAT is up 42p at £46.53 while Imperial Brands is 21p better at £39.59 after 
Deutsche Bank raised its price target from £43 to £46. The bank said:

Global tobacco may consolidate further with the USA now a theme. Around 27% of 
Imperial’s 2017 estimated EBITA is generated in the USA. Imperial’s ex-USA 
growth will be pedestrian; its cash flow generation anything but. The valuation 
is undemanding; especially so when we consider dividends of around 7% will be 
paid in the next 16 months [or so]. Bid scenarios incorporating -1% perpetuity 
growth suggest a valuation between £47 and £51. What may be considered more 
realistic assumptions as to perpetuity growth dictate valuations considerably 
higher. We raise our price target to £46 and retain our buy recommendation.

On the results front British Airways owner International Airlines Group has 
climbed 10.8p to 424.3p,despite cutting its forecast for 2016 profit growth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/ba-owner-cuts-profit-forecast-after-bumpy-ride-in-third-quarter>
from a low double digit percentage to around 7%, due to the fall in the pound 
and weaker trading in the wake of the Brexit vote.

Royal Bank of Scotland has rise 0.5p to 196.9p after better than expected 
results, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/rbs-reports-469m-loss-for-the-third-quarter>
 whileWhitbread has regained some ground following this week’s figures, up 66p 
to £35.97.

But overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 56.10 points to 6930.47, as investors 
remain cautious despite Thursday’s better than expected UK GDP. The positive 
data makes another rate cut by the Bank of England next week increasingly 
unlikely.

ITV is down 3.6p at 168.5p as Credit Suisse cut its price target from 240p to 
210p but retained its outperform rating.

Among the mid-caps, Unite has dropped 22.5p to 559.5p as Morgan Stanley moved 
its recommendation on the student accommodation specialist from overweight to 
underweight and cut its price target from 700p to 590p.

The bank said the company could be hit by falling student numbers, partly due 
to the effect of Brexit on overseas entrants:

Fundamentals are holding up for now... Unite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/unitegroup> has so far benefited from a 
flight to quality as its exposure is skewed towards better quality 
institutions, which are seeing growth in student numbers. ... but several 
headwinds could affect student numbers medium to long term:

#1: We think that international student numbers could fall as a result of 
potential stricter visa rules for non-EU students, who make up 25% of Unite’s 
tenants, and because EU students, which make up 9% of Unite’s tenants, face 
tuition fee hikes post Brexit vote – university applications from EU students 
are already down 9% for the academic year starting Sep 17.

#2: Falling affordability for UK students: UK students have formed the 
majority of the increase in undergraduate student numbers in recent years, and 
penetration has grown more among the less affluent than the more affluent. Less 
well off students are likely to face increasing affordability issues: i) 
maintenance grants have been converted to repayable loans, affecting 20% of 
students (half of whom see the grant as essential for their studies); ii) 
tuition fees may rise more from 2017; iii) 77% of recent graduates are worried 
about their student debt.

#3: Risk of oversupply and softening yields: We estimate the current pipeline 
of purpose built beds equates to about a quarter of existing beds. According to 
our channel checks, pockets of oversupply are appearing in some markets and 
demand for secondary assets is softening.
 