
Leading shares are heading back towards a new peak, as the continuing slump in 
the pound pushes exporters and overseas earners higher.

The flash crash in sterling in the early hours of trading may have been an 
anomaly but the pound remains under pressure on fears of a hard Brexit, 
especially after tough talking from German chancellor Angela Merkel and French 
president François Hollande. Last weekend’s comments from UK prime minister 
Theresa May suggesting the focus in Brexit talks would be immigration controls 
rather than remaining in the single market started the rot in the pound.

But weakness in sterling has lifted dollar earners like mining stocks, so the 
FTSE 100 is up 43.27 points at 7043.23. This is not fall off its intra-day high 
of 7122 and its closing high of 7103.

Anglo American has added 34.1p to 1032.5p, BHP Billiton is 38.5p better at 
1240.5p andRandgold Resources has risen 170p to £70.55. In all, seven of the 
top ten risers are mining shares.

Burberry, whose luxury goods are in demand in Asia, is up 29p at £14.54.

But easyJet continues to slide, down another 44.5p to 889p after Thursday’s 
profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/easyjet-set-for-annual-profit-fall-year-extraordinary-events>
. British Airways ownerInternational Airlines Group has fallen 14.2p to 367.1p.

Among the mid-caps Fidessa, which provides technology for the financial 
industry, has fallen 87p to £23.77 after UBS cut from neutral to sell. UBS said:

We upgraded Fidessa to neutral in July, still cautious on its end market, 
investment banking, but arguing that its share price had corrected sufficiently 
post the UK referendum. We also noted that the sharp depreciation in sterling 
would benefit Fidessa’s bottom line and make it cheaper in non-sterling terms 
(Fidessa had been the subject of media reports as a takeover target earlier in 
the year; e.g. FT on 9th March). Since, however, although the pound has fallen 
further, the re-rating has overshot, we think, and we would advise investors in 
Fidessa to take advantage of the corresponding rally in its share price to sell 
the shares at the present current level.
 