
Leading shares are slipping back following recent disappointing economic data 
- the latest being poor construction figures - and continuing weakness in the 
oil price.

But Direct Line and InterContinental Hotels have bucked the downward trend 
after their latest updates.

Insurer Direct Line has jumped 8% to 383.8p as first half profits fell 5% to 
£316.9m after lower investment gains and a new levy to cut insurance costs for 
homes in flood-risk areas. But the figure was more than 20% than consensus 
forecasts, and the company also said it would pay a special dividend of 10p a 
share on top of its interim payout of 4.9p a share. Peel Hunt analyst Andreas 
van Embden said:

Direct Line surprised with an increase in reserve releases, a large part of 
which is one-off but provides strong support to solvency and the dividend. The 
solvency ratio was a healthy 184%, well above the usual 150% level following 
the approval of its partial internal model. This has allowed the company to 
offer an interim special dividend of 10p on top of the basic dividend per share.

After a weak share price performance, these results will go down well and 
whilst guidance is unchanged, 2016 underwriting results should come in at the 
top end of the range. At a PE of 14 times, the shares are fairly valued but 
offer a ‘best in class’ dividend yield (around 7%).

UBS analysts said:

A 20% pretax profit beat, an interim special well ahead of expectations, 
strong capital position, improved outlook, should be taken well, albeit the 
shares are not cheap on 1.9 times 2016 estimated total net asset value (top end 
of its historical range).

Direct Line is the biggest riser in the FTSE 100, and not far behind is rival 
Admiralwhich has added 50p to £21.99.


Meanwhile InterContinental Hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/intercontinentalhotelsgroup> is up 95p at 
£31.09 after faster growth in its global room revenue in the second quarter. 
Revenue per available room rose 2.5% in the three months to June compared with 
a 1.5% increase in the first quarter. Operating profit rose 2% to $344m. Chief 
executive Richard Solomons said:

The fundamentals for our industry, and particularly for IHG as one of the 
largest branded players, remain compelling...Despite the uncertain environment 
in some markets, we remain confident in the outlook for the remainder of the 
year.

Numis analysts said:

Underlying earnings before interest and tax of $344m represented growth of 10% 
and was marginally ahead of consensus expectations of around $331m (Bloomberg). 
The key drivers were RevPAR growth of 2.0% and net system growth of 3.6%, 
consistent with medium term guidance. Following the return of $1.5bn to 
shareholders, net debt of $1.8bn was as expected and represents leverage of 2.3 
times EBITDA.

 Group RevPAR grew by 2.5% in the second quarter of 2016, faster than +1.5% in 
the first quarter, and more comparable to 2.4% from the fourth quarter of 2015. 
Part of the improvement reflected an earlier Easter. Also weakness in oil 
producing states in the US is starting to annualise: RevPAR in oil producing 
states fell by 6.3% and the remainder grew +3.7%.

Overall the FTSE 100 has fallen 31.98 points to 6661.97 ahead of this week’s 
Bank of England rate decision, with growing anticipation of a cut, and despite 
a new Japanese stimulus package to try and boost its economy.

With gold and silver prices edging up as investors look for less risky asset, 
Mexican precious metal minerFresnillo is up 60p at £19.83 - helped by a 
positive update - andRandgold Resources has risen 175p to £90.85.

Consumer goods groups were also in demand, with Unilever up 45.5p at 3579.5p 
andReckitt Benckiser 80p better at £74.31.

But valve control specialist Rotork has slumped nearly 10% to 193.4p. Its 
profits were in line with expectations but it warned that low oil prices would 
continue to affect its performance.
 