
Leading shares are drifting as the week comes to a close, as investors paused 
for breath after the excitement of the Federal Reserve’s interest rate rise.

Micro Focus is leading the fallers, down 55p to £21.80 on profit taking 
following its well received figures earlier in the week. UBS analysts cut their 
rating from buy to neutral and their target price from £24.20 to £23.50. The IT 
group is buying Hewlett Packard Enterprise’s software business, and the bank 
said:

Notwithstanding the first half’s good results and a $400m planned return of 
value, we see the upside for the shares as limited now.

We see several risks in 2017: (1) HPE has to execute a significant ($700m) 
carve-out process on its software assets to make them ready to pass-on to Micro 
Focus. There are risks of delays to the deal’s closing (due in August 2017) and 
of disruption to sales execution within HPE Software before or around closing. 
We note that Micro Focus is due to take on the assets at the start of HPE 
Software’s fiscal fourth quarter which last year accounted for nearly 40% of 
full year licence sales and profits. (2) Micro Focus’s cash flow, meanwhile, is 
likely to show the effects of significant legal and advisory fees related to 
the deal ahead of its closing, and restructuring commitments are likely to be a 
feature thereafter; (3) There are flow-back risks around the deal which will 
see HPE shareholders own half the combined company on closing.

Meanwhile Dixons Carphone continued to decline after its cautious comments on 
the outlook on Thursday, down 8.3p to 337.6p.

Miners were also under pressure again as the dollar strength hit commodity 
prices.Antofagasta is down 11p at 672.5p while BHP Billiton has fallen 13p to 
£12.99.

Reckitt Benckiser has lost 87p to £65.88 after it received an increased fine 
from Australian authorities. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/nurofen-makers-fine-for-misleading-consumers-increased-from-17m-to-6m>

Overall the FTSE 100 has dipped 1.12 points to 6997.89.

Among the mid-caps, Rentokil Initial has jumped 85p to £65.90 after the 
company formed a joint venture to combine its workwear and hygiene units with 
those of Germany’s Haniel. Peel Hunt analysts said:

The transaction should improve Rentokil’s organic revenue growth, profit 
growth and EBITA margins. Furthermore, the cash received provides increased 
capacity for investment in the core Pest Control and Hygiene businesses, and 
guidance for bolt-on acquisition expenditure in 2017 has been increased to 
£100m [from £50m].
 