
Leading shares are edging higher after their recent tumble, but the moves are 
not convincing.

And British Gas owner Centrica is missing out, dropping nearly 8% to 213.5p 
after it announced it planned to raise around £750m with a placing of 350m 
shares. It said the funds would be used to cut its debt mountain and also to 
pay for two acquisitions, energy management group Neas for £350m and another 
“customer facing” business worth around £15om.

It said low commodity prices and a challenging environment meant its credit 
ratings were under pressure, and it wanted to keep its high ratings. Analysts 
at Jefferies said:

Centrica’s two proposed acquisitions are in line with its strategy of 
strengthening its mid- and downstream operations. Raising a modest amount of 
equity to fund these acquisitions is understandable.

Where there is some surprise with today’s announcement is with the additional 
£400m being raised to pay down net debt. Raising equity is an expensive way of 
paying down debt. NeverthelessCentrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica> will clearly be in a modestly 
stronger financial position post the placing, albeit with existing shareholders 
facing a near 7% dilution. Centrica’s new management have been trying to 
establish a reputation for tight capital management; it is difficult to say 
whether today’s announcement enhances or diminishes that reputation.

Angelos Anastasiou at Whitman Howard said:


In a surprise move, Centrica has today announced that it is looking to issue 
around 7% of its equity in a placing. It says that the strategy is on track, 
but this will allow it to shore up its BBB+ credit rating in the weak 
commodities environment, while also allowing it to pay for two acquisitions 
with a combined value of £350m (Neas already announced for £200m and one to be 
confirmed soon for £150m). Today’s move was not expected, but there does not 
appear to be any hidden warning in this statement, which reconfirms the 
guidance that was given in last month’s trading update. So overall, we still 
believe that Iain Conn and his team are moving Centrica in the right direction. 
The yield on the final dividend is 3.5% in its own right, and the share will go 
ex of this on 12 May (payable 23 June).

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 36.15 points at 6148.17, despite worse than 
expected UK service sector figures.

Elsewhere there have been a raft of trading statements, issued to a mixed 
reception.Rolls-Royce is down 30.5p at 614.5p but Morrisons has jumped 7.3p to 
194.8p andBT is 14.15p better at 453.65p following its figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/bt-roll-out-superfast-broadband-4g-6bn-investment>
.

Greggs has gained 64p to £11.12 while Tullow Oil has climbed 15.7p to 258p on 
this week’s news that production had restarted at its Jubilee field off Ghana.

A number of companies have gone ex-dividend including Kingfisher, down 5.6p at 
356p, theLondon Stock Exchange, 31p lower at £25.45 and BP, off 2.4p at 360.15p.
 