
Leading shares are in positive territory ahead of the US Federal Reserve’s 
latest interest rate decision and following reports of a major boost to the 
Japanese economy by the country’s government. Stronger than expected UK GDP 
growth of 0.6% in the second quarter has also helped support the market.

But outsourcing group Capita is missing out, falling 22p or 2% to 967p after 
it warned the Brexit vote was having negative effects on its business. Chief 
executive Andy Parker said:

While it is too early to know the impact of the recent EU referendum, it has 
created uncertainty, particularly in the financial services sector, and we are 
continuing to experience some delays in decision making in the short term.

But it said it hoped that would be offset by further opportunities in the 
medium term. Half year profits roe by 8% to £285.3m on revenues up 5%. The bid 
pipeline rose from £4.7bn to £5.1bn. Stifel analyst Caroline de La Soujeole 
said:

Headline numbers a touch ahead of consensus (2% beat at earnings per share 
level) with organic sales growth of 5%, return on capital employed stable and 
cash flow improving. However the outlook statement strikes a cautious tone for 
the remainder of the year noting increased uncertainty following the EU 
referendum and delays in decision making.

[The] outlook statement highlights increased uncertainty created from the 
Leave vote resulting in delays in decision making in the short-term 
particularly in the financial services sector. The company expects this to be 
more than offset by increased medium-term incremental opportunities. We are 
more circumspect.

The stock has underperformed the FTSE All Share by 8% over the past month and 
7% on a 3 month view reflecting investor concern over the likely impact of 
Brexit on tendering activity. In light of today’s statement this seems to have 
been warranted.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 14.66 points at 6738.69.

ITV is the biggest riser, up 15.1p to 199.9p after its results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/itv-profits-itv-studios-brexit>, 
whileTaylor Wimpey is leading housebuilders higher after recent share price 
weakness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/jul/26/ftse-edges-higher-but-barratt-leads-housebuilders-down-on-brexit-fears>
 on Brexit worries. Taylor Wimpey is up 6.3p at 151.2p as it said the 
referendum result had yet to impact demand.Barratt Development is 15.6p better 
at 420.9p whilePersimmon has put on 57p to £16.45.

Elsewhere St James’s Place has added 27p to 911p after the wealth manager 
reported a better than expected 15% rise in net inflows to £3.1bn.

But a recent dip in the gold and silver price has left Fresnillo down 31p at 
£18.36 andRandgold Resources 135p lower at £85.50.

Among the mid-caps cigarette filter maker Essentra is down after JP Morgan cut 
from overweight to neutral.
 