
Leading shares have headed higher again as global jitters eased, but mining 
shares were still under pressure.

The sector continued to subside as commodity prices ease as a consequence of 
the stronger dollar, the US currency being boosted by a growing expectation 
that a Federal Reserve rate rise is not off the agenda.

But there are some specific issues. Anglo American has fallen 50.4p to 763.2p 
after it lowered its full year production guidance for iron ore and copper. 
Similarly,BHP Billiton is down 24.2p at 924.3p after its iron ore production 
guidance for 2016 came in 3m tonnes short following a disaster at its 
half-owned Samarco business, where a dam burst in early November.

But Fresnillo has edged up 1p to £18.78 as it lifted its forecast for full 
year gold production from 775,000-790,000 earlier to 850,000-870,000.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 27.11 points at 6724.48, heading for a new 11 month 
high, as UK unemployment came in slightly better than expected and the Bank of 
England said there was no clear evidence of a post-Brexit slowdown.

Among the risers HSBC has added 8.4p to 495.5p after UBS raised their target 
price from 450p to 535p.

The bank also helped lift car insurer Admiral 30p to £20.75 after moving its 
recommendation from neutral to buy:

UK car insurers have been the best performing sub-sector in 2016, re-rating 
due to defensive characteristics, yield attractions and a rising rate 
environment. We now expect greater appreciation of the growth opportunity, 
ultimately driving near term earnings surprises and further multiple expansion. 
As we have seen at our recent Disruptive Innovation conference, we think that 
some nimble and innovative insurers can begin to reposition as far more 
customer-centric product providers.

Hikma Pharmaceuticals is 35p higher at £25.86, as its US subsidiary launched 
generic equivalents for a range of cancer treatments.

Elsewhere TalkTalk has climbed 3.3p to 226p after the company, which was 
hacked last year, issued a better than expected trading update, losing fewer 
broadband customers than had been feared.

Wizz Air is up 56p at £15.99 as the budget airline, which is focused on 
Eastern Europe, said it was confident of meeting its full year net profit 
forecast. But it said it would cut its UK growth plans after the Brexit vote 
and the weakness in the pound, and redeploy planes elsewhere.

An upbeat trading statement has lifted Electrocomponents 20.2p to 278.6p. 

But Man Group is down 5.4p at 116.9p after a surprise announcement that chief 
executive Manny Roman would leave in November to join bond specialist Pimco. 
Luke Ellis, currently president ofMan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mangroup>, will replace Roman.
 