
Mining shares are leading the market lower, with Glencore under pressure after 
a sharp drop in first half profits.

The company reported a 13% drop in underlying profits to $4bn, but said its 
disposal programme was on track. Like other commodity companies,Glencore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> has suffered from a upheaval in 
the market amid concerns about global growth, not least in China, a key 
customer for mining groups.

But Glencore cut its forecast for year end debt from the $17bn-£18bn it 
expected in March to $16.5bn-$17.5bn. Chief executive Ivan Glasenberg said:

We have already largely achieved our asset disposals target of $4bn-$5bn with 
a diverse and material pool of asset sales’ processes also ongoing..

After a difficult start to the year, the more constructive tone of markets in 
recent months has helped support the pricing of many of our key commodities. 
While we are highly cash generative at current spot prices, we remain mindful 
that underlying markets continue to be volatile.

Along with the results, Glencore also announced an agreement to sell a 30% 
stake plus all of the gold output from its Ernest Henry copper mine in 
Australia to Evolution Mining for $670m.

The company’s shares have fallen 4% to 181.7pafter the profit decline, as 
investors took profits following a doubling of the price in the past year. 
Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

Despite the 66% drop in net profit, Glencore’s results - including the 
potential resumption of dividends next year, alongside a more aggressive debt 
reduction target, are a step in the right direction. However, with Glencore’s 
share price having more than doubled year to date, after slumping 70% last 
year, we are seeing some profit taking in early trade.

Analysts at Liberum issued a sell note, but Canaccord remained a buyer and 
Investec said:

At first pass a reasonable result, although concensus numbers suggest that 
some of the market will have expected better.

Other miners were dragged back with Glencore. Anglo American is down 27.3p at 
848.8p while Rio Tinto is down 51.5p at 2398.5p and Fresnillo has fallen 49p to 
£17.87.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 21.49 points at 6847.02, as investors remain 
cautious ahead of this week’s central bank meeting in Jackson Hole in the US.

But housebuilders continue to gain ground after this week’s results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/23/persimmon-shares-rise-housebuilder-shrugs-off-brexit-vote>
 fromPersimmon, up 48p at £19.18. 

Meanwhile advertising group WPP has jumped 102p to £18.49 following its latest 
update. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/24/wpp-profits-uk-growth-brexit-sir-martin-sorrell-advertisers>

Among the mid-caps, Onesavings has jumped more than 9% to 259.9p as the group, 
which offers residential mortgages and buy-to-let loans reported a 36% increase 
in first half profits to £64.6m.
 