
Shares plunged and the pound plummeted to a 31-year low as panicked traders 
reacted tothe UK’s vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 and theprospect of recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/brexit-vote-leaves-uk-on-brink-of-recession-economists-say>
 amid months of market turmoil.

The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 fell more than 8% 
within the first few minutes of trading on Friday, with shares in banks 
particularly hard hit and nursing their biggest falls since the collapse of the 
US investment bank Lehman Brothers in 2008.

At the opening bell on Wall Street, US shares were down sharply, with the Dow 
Jones industrial average shedding more than 500 points, down nearly 3%. There 
were even sharper falls on bourses in mainlandEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, where economists said Brexit 
would hurt an already fragile recovery.

After the heavy early losses, UK markets were calmed somewhat by David 
Cameron’s announcement that he would resign, and apledge from the Bank of 
England that it would take any measures needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
 to stabilise markets and the economy. More assurances to step in where 
necessary followed from the US central bank, the International Monetary Fund 
and from finance ministers in the G7 group of big economies.


The Bank of England’s governor, Mark Carney, said:“Inevitably, there will be a 
period of uncertainty and adjustment following this result.”

“But we are well prepared for this,” he added in a televised statement 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/056.aspx>. The 
Bank will not hesitate to take additional measures as required as markets 
adjust and the UK economy moves forward.”

The G7 finance ministers said they would consult closely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/24/global-markets-ftse-pound-uk-leave-eu-brexit-live-updates?page=with:block-576d3444e4b0f43038109a98#block-576d3444e4b0f43038109a98>
 on market moves and financial stability and cooperate as appropriate.
George Osborne (@George_Osborne) 
Discussed with G7 colleagues market consequences of UK's decision to leave EU. 
@hmtreasury <https://twitter.com/hmtreasury> and @bankofengland 
<https://twitter.com/bankofengland> monitoring situation closely
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/746320699724292098> June 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/746320699724292098> 
Those assurances calmed jittery markets somewhat and by afternoon trading, the 
FTSE 100 had erased some of its early losses. It was down 220 points, or 3.5%, 
on the day to 6,117, with shares in banks and housebuilders among the worst 
hit. That meant it was actually up for the week as whole.
FTSE 100 since 1984 graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jun/2016-06-24T16:14:05/embed.html>
The moves on currency markets were sharper, with the pound under pressure from 
worries about the UK’s economic outlook.


The referendum result triggered chaos for anyone seeking to exchange pounds 
for foreign currency as companies offering a bureau de change service were 
caught off guard.


Thomas Cook suspended its online currency exchange over fears that it would 
not be able to fulfil a flood of orders for euros that came in overnight. The 
firm also put a temporary £1,000 limit per customer on online purchases of 
foreign currency for collection in its high street shops.

Anyone hoping to change money with Tesco or the Post Office also ran into a 
brick wall. Customers trying to use the Post Office’s foreign currency service 
were met with technical difficulties, and Tesco Bank’s exchange site displayed 
an error message.

Chris Towner, chief economist at the money transfer firm HiFX, said the volume 
of currency being transferred increased more than sixfold overnight as 
consumers and businesses reacted to the result by transferring money.

Global markets plunge after UK votes to leave EU – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/24/global-markets-ftse-pound-uk-leave-eu-brexit-live-updates>
There were also sharp drops for the FTSE 250 index of midcap shares, which is 
seen as a better barometer than the FTSE 100 for domestic business prospects. 
The midcaps index was down 7.6% at 16,013.

Business leaders, who had overwhelmingly called for Britain to remain in the 
EU,urged the government to take “immediate and unambiguous” action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/brexit-vote-business-leaders-call-for-urgent-action-to-shore-up-uk-economy>
 to shore up the economy and said ministers needed to guarantee that EU 
citizens had the right to remain in the UK.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzk48wgZj5g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzk48wgZj5g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzk48wgZj5g&media=>
Mark Carney tries to reassure the markets – video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzk48wgZj5g> 
There were warnings for homeowners that the vote to leave the EU could spark a 
short-term fall in house prices – although lower house prices will be welcomed 
by first-time buyers struggling to get into an expensive market. Property 
experts also predictedsterling’s slump could lead to a “Brexit bubble” in the 
most expensive pockets of the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/24/house-price-fall-could-follow-brexit-say-experts>
 given that the UK would become cheaper to overseas investors.

There were heavy losses across other European stock markets, with the main 
index in Germany down almost 7%. In France, the main share index lost more than 
8%.


Underscoring the global ramifications for markets of Britain’s leave vote, 
Japan’s main stock exchange plunged overnight. Tokyo shares lost 7%, the 
biggest one-day fall since the Fukushima disaster in 2011.

Brexit vote leaves UK on brink of recession, economists say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/brexit-vote-leaves-uk-on-brink-of-recession-economists-say>
The referendum result was a rude awakening for investors after they had spent 
recent days buying the pound and UK shares on the back of opinion polls showing 
a narrow lead for the remain camp. As it became clear that those bets were 
misplaced, the value of sterling slumped.

Trading was volatile, with the pound initially higher as voting closed on 
Thursday night and some opinion polls pointed to a remain vote. Those gains 
evaporated as results came in from across the country and the pound fell as low 
as $1.32 against the dollar. In afternoon trading, the pound was down almost 8% 
at just below $1.37, the lowest since 1985. Against the euro, the pound was 
down around 5%.

With markets braced for further turmoil over the coming days, safer assets 
such as gold were in high demand. The metal, a long-time favourite investment 
in uncertain times,soared as much as 8% at one point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/gold-jumps-22-percent-eu-referendum-vote>
 to hit a two-year high.

City economists warned that a hit to trade and investment from Brexit would 
spark recession in the UK with repercussions for neighbouring economies. During 
campaigning,the Bank of England had issued a warning that Brexit could spark 
recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
 andthe International Monetary Fund predicted a sharp fall in shares and house 
prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/imf-warns-stock-market-crash-house-price-fall-eu-referendum-brexit>
.

Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, 
commented: “UK voters have opted for Brexit. If fully followed through, this 
will be an act of economic self-harm with global ramifications.”

But Mark Littlewood, director general of the Institute of Economic Affairs 
thinktank, highlighted potential economic benefits from leaving the EU. 
“Today’s vote to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
presents the UK with a great and exciting opportunity to look outwards to the 
rest of the world, to take a more internationalist approach and move towards a 
position of free trade on a global basis, with the EU but also beyond it,” he 
said.
 