
Leading UK shares have slipped back after the Federal Reserve raised US 
interest rates and talked of three rises next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
.

The news has pushed the dollar higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/15/fed-hike-dollar-bank-of-england-interest-rates-business-live?page=with:block-58524ac5e4b0d14acd717c8e#block-58524ac5e4b0d14acd717c8e>
, and in turn hit commodity prices and dragged the mining heavyFTSE 100 18.15 
points lower to 6931.04. European markets, less dominated by commodities, are 
managing to cling on to their slight gains.

Among the biggest fallers in the UK are Antofagasta, down 25.5p at 695.5p, and 
BHP Billiton, 40p lower at 1315.5p. With gold and silver also falling, precious 
metal minerFresnillo has dropped 112p to £10.68 and Randgold Resources is 415p 
down at £55.25.

But Centrica has climbed 7.5p to 226.4p after the British Gas owner raised its 
full year guidance on cost cutting and a strong trading performance. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/british-gas-centrica-variable-tariffs>
The news comes asenergy companies continue to be accused accused of 
profiteering and face government calls to treat customers better.

Lower down the market Just Eat has jumped 17p to 614.5p after the online 
takeaway specialist announced two acquisitions. It is paying an initial £200m 
with another potential £40m to buy UK rival Hungry House from Delivery Hero, a 
Berlin company backed by Rocket Internet. Analysts said the Competition and 
Markets Authority was likely to look at the deal.

It is also buying Canada’s SkipTheDishes for an initial £66m, with another 
£54m payable subject to performance. It said Hungry House would boost earnings 
per share in the first year, but SkipTheDishes would weigh on earnings in 2017 
and 2018. Canaccord Genuity analysts said:

Just Eat is a highly cash generative business, with a clear strategy of using 
M&A to expand market share in its existing territories. Today’s acquisitions... 
both look to be broadly sensible deals which should help shore up market share 
in two of Just Eat’s key territories, helping to drive economies of scale and 
strengthening the group’s presence here. It’s consistent with management’s 
strategy, and looks like it will be largely funded from internal resources, so 
at first glance a positive development for the business.

Elsewhere temporary power supply company Aggreko has added 26.5p to 903p after 
Deutsche Bank moved from hold to buy and raised its target price from 780p to 
£10. The bank said:

From 2012A-16E, we estimate that Aggreko’s trading profit will have declined 
by almost 40%. This has been largely driven by (i) the roll-off of certain 
one-off contracts (Japan/US military, London Olympics), (ii) pricing pressure 
and (iii) a drag from oil and gas. While risks still remain for 2017E, mainly 
with the well flagged contract renewals in Argentina, we expect an inflection 
in earnings momentum in 2018E. We see upside with a return to earnings growth.
 