
Pubs and brewing group Fuller, Smith & Turner is toasting the success of craft 
beers and gin, despite a fall in total beer and cider sales.

The company reported a 6% rise in half year profits to £22.8m, but said total 
beer and cider volumes fell by 4%. The half started badly, due to a poor start 
to the summer season and worries about the EU referendum, but good weather in 
August and September gave a lift to its business. And it faced a tough 
comparison, thanks to the boost given to business by the Rugby World Cup in 
2015.

Trading since the end of the half had been good, the company said, althoughit 
admitted that beer volumes continued to decline. Its managed pubs business, the 
largest contributor to profits, outperformed the market. During the half, it 
bought two well known London pubs, the Gun in Docklands and the Half Moon in 
Herne Hill.

But the company warned of possible problems ahead. Chief executive Simon Emeny 
said:

There is no doubt the UK economy is facing some significant challenges. The 
impact of increases in business rates and the National Living Wage, combined 
with uncertainty around the UK’s departure from the EU, make for changing times 
ahead.

However Fuller’s has a long-term stategic vision, a solid balance sheet and a 
predominantly freehold estate.

It said Christmas bookings were strong, but the overall cautious tone has 
pushed Fuller’s shares down 1% to 980p.

On staffing, it said it would cover the cost of applying for a permanent 
residence card for any EU or EEA nationals who had worked for the company for 
five years or more:

We are very proud of the cosmopolitan workforce we have in our business and we 
have a clear position of supporting and rewarding the loyalty shown by all our 
team members, regardless of nationality.

On the results Numis analyst Tim Barrett said they were in line with 
forecasts, with an impressive second quarter:

The managed estate reported like for like growth of 3.4% which implied more 
than 5% growth in the second quarter. A small margin decline in the managed 
business (-20bp) was offset by cost efficiencies elsewhere. Overall earnings 
per share growth of 6% reflects the strong positioning of Fuller’s estate. In 
the next 12 months the industry faces several cost headwinds but given the 
strength of the first half our 2017 forecasts are unchanged.
 