
Science fiction has, arguably, been the mainstream of pop culture since the 
internet displaced TV at the centre of our lives. The younger, geekier internet 
audience is living in a weird, complicated world, and sci-fi provides the 
metaphors that let us talk about it. Young audiences aren't stupid, andThe 
Hunger Games: Catching Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/the-hunger-games-catching-fire-review>
 isn't killing the box office just because it's the latest teen sensation. It's 
how a generation growing up in the ruins of late-stage capitalism are
articulating the experience <http://k-punk.org/remember-who-the-enemy-is/>. And 
SF today is articulating an ever wider range of experiences.

SF is changing, and radically. When the old school fans of the British Science 
Fiction Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/18/british-science-fiction-awards-finalists-shortlists>
 and the judges of the Arthur C Clarke awards put forward their 2013 awards 
shortlists it wasn't just that they were 100% old, white and male. They were 
backward looking, intent on defining what science fiction was and blind to what 
it was becoming. Adam Roberts – one of the white males in question – hit the 
nail on the head atNew Genre Army 
<http://www.drcarolineedwards.com/2012/11/13/new-genre-army/>, an academic 
conference dedicated to his work. When asked how he saw his work evolving in 
the future he answered frankly: towards increasing irrelevance, eclipsed by new 
voices from other countries and other experiences than the white male's.

Monica Byrne's The Girl in the Road 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/233838/the-girl-in-the-road-by-monica-byrne> 
is a work harvested from the author's experience of our radically changing 
world. Two young women travel across damaged worlds towards Ethiopia. Meena 
awakes with a mysterious snakebite that sends her on a journey across a 
futuristic India. Mariama is on a similar flight from danger, but in very 
different times and with a caravan crossing Saharan Africa. Byrne is a science 
writer and graduate of MIT, but her insight into our near future is as much 
informed by her extensive travels as her grasp of science. Kim Stanley Robinson 
calls The Girl in the Road a "brilliant novel – vivid, intense, and fearless 
with a kind of savage joy" and it's a book you will certainly be hearing a lot 
about in 2014.

Lavie Tidhar has built a startling reputation as a writer who does not flinch 
from representing the truth of modern experience. His breakthrough novelOsama 
won the World Fantasy award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/nov/08/2012-world-fantasy-awards-triumph>
 in 2012 for its controversial analysis of the ways in which we mythologise 
terrorism for political purposes.The Violent Century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/25/violent-century-lavie-tidhar-review>
 brings Tidhar's often acerbic, satirical style of science fiction to bear on 
British history. If John Le Carré had ever written for Marvel Comics, the 
outcome might read a little like Tidhar's alternative history of Britain with 
superheroes. Like all of Tidhar's work, it's a book split between the author's 
fascination with geek culture, and its more serious thematic concerns. But 
that's appropriate for a generation of readers who are just as split in their 
interests.

Helen Wecker's The Golem and the Djinni 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Golem-Djinni-Helene-Wecker-ebook/dp/B009QU9Z60/ref=dp_kinw_strp_1>
 was by far my favourite book of 2013, and is one of those slow-burning books 
that will go off like a bomb this year. Wecker is a simply beautiful prose 
writer. There isn't a wasted word, poorly considered paragraph or a single 
chapter in this high-concept fairytale that doesn't deliver some new 
enchantment. Two fantastic creatures, a Golem woman liberated from her husband 
creator, and a quixotic Djinni trapped by magic, are cast adrift in late 
19th-century New York. As a story about the immigrant experience, The Golem and 
the Djinni is a parable for our times, when populations are again churning 
between nations.

Ancillary Justice 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780356502403>
 by Ann Leckie is a book about which I am profoundly divided. It is a homage to 
the many great space opera novels that inspired it, and comes complete with the 
clunking prose style that scars so many of those books. But it is also a smart 
reworking of the genre tropes those books made commonplace. Leckie doesn't hold 
back from exploring the very alien consciousness of the novel's central 
character, Breq – once the mind of an entire starship, now reduced to a 
somewhat more human body. If you enjoy the logic puzzles that this kind of 
speculative fiction raises, and Leckie layers one upon the next with 
considerable skill, then Ancillary Justice is a must-read.

Jeff VanderMeer has been one of the best known indie stars of weird fiction 
for over a decade. He has made stylistic experimentation part of the handbook 
of contemporary fantastic fiction in novels such asVeniss Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/29/featuresreviews.guardianreview22>
 and Shriek: An Afterword. Two years ago, VanderMeer hinted to followers on 
social media at a new project he had been writing at near-fever pitch that 
seemed to have bubbled up from the farthest reaches of his imagination. 
February sees the publication of the project asAnnihilation, the first of the 
Southern Reach trilogy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007550715>
, from Farrar, Straus and Giroux. To say there's a palpable excitement among 
VanderMeer's fans would be underestimating the buzz around Annihilation. And if
early previews 
<http://www.tor.com/blogs/2013/08/annihilation-jeff-vandermeer-cover-reveal> 
are any indication, there's a lot to be excited about.
 