
Latin American cinema can and must challenge the “racism and hatred” embodied 
by Donald Trump’s ascent to the White House, according to two of its leading 
lights.

The actor Gael García Bernal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gaelgarciabernal> and director Pablo Larraín 
have warned that a climate of tension and threat in the US could trigger 
political violence, even war – but also a vibrant artistic response. “Trump has 
the nuclear codes and the US army. What do we have? A camera. And I’m going to 
use it,” said Larraín, the Chilean director whosebiopic about Jackie Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, starring Natalie Portman, is attracting awards buzz.

Bernal, the Mexican star of The Motorcycle Diaries and Mozart in the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/mozart-in-the-jungle-amazon-show-review>
, said Latinos with sway in creative industries should stand up for the less 
privileged. “We have rights, and we have to defend … the people that don’t have 
rights, who are many. Our role is to be very vigilant and very honest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-pablo-larrain-donald-trump-we-have-a-camera%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ece389d0be68d8cf3f7e02348a037ed36394664%2F0_94_2213_2766%2F2213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%20and%20Pablo%20Larra%C3%ADn%3A%20'Trump%20has%20the%20nuclear%20codes%20but%20we%20have%20a%20camera'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-pablo-larrain-donald-trump-we-have-a-camera%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gael%20Garc%C3%ADa%20Bernal%20and%20Pablo%20Larra%C3%ADn%3A%20%27Trump%20has%20the%20nuclear%20codes%20but%20we%20have%20a%20camera%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fgael-garcia-bernal-pablo-larrain-donald-trump-we-have-a-camera%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ece389d0be68d8cf3f7e02348a037ed36394664%2F0_94_2213_2766%2F2213.jpg>
 Pablo Larraín: ‘Cinema is always a political act. Always.’ 
Larraín and Bernal made the exhortations in an interview with the Guardian to 
promote the filmNeruda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/neruda-review-unconventional-drama-constructs-rather-than-retells-chilean-poets-life>
, about the Chilean government’s hunt for Pablo Neruda, a poet and communist 
senator forced into hiding after the second world war.

They warned that the US has entered a dark and dangerous era by electing a man 
who fanned xenophobia and anti-minorities sentiment. During the campaign,Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> called Mexican immigrants 
rapists and criminals, and vowed to deport millions of undocumented people and 
seal the southern border with a wall. He also assailed Muslims.

That tone, combined with easy access to guns, could prompt vigilante violence, 
said Bernal, who played a migrant in the dramaWho Is Dayani Cristal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/24/who-is-dayani-cristal-review-gael-garcia-bernal>
? “Anyone can grab a gun and start to take matters into their own hands now 
that racism and hatred have been empowered and legalised, in a sense.” A single 
spark could trigger a conflagration, he said. “Genocides are spontaneous.”

Asked if he really considered genocide possible, Bernal nodded. Not so long 
ago, the notion of a Trump presidency seemed outlandish, he said.

Larraín, who chronicled Augusto Pinochet’s downfall in No 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/no-film-review>, said the world 
appeared not to have learned from conflicts wrought by hatred and xenophobia in 
the last century. “Do we need another war to bring peace and respect? We are 
just not able to understand each other. It’s very scary and very weird.”

The director said he was glad his children lived in Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>. “We’re not in this threat and 
tension that is in the northern hemisphere.”

Mexico reels at nightmare vision of a Donald Trump White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mexico-trump-white-house-nafta-border-wall-remittances>
In advance of next month’s inauguration, president-elect Trump has softened 
his rhetoric, but Latino communities still fear his administration could ramp 
up deportations and fuel discrimination and racial profiling. Robert Crooks, a 
Minuteman-style militia leader from Arizona, said Trump’s victory had boosted 
his movement. “We’re reaping the reward for our labour. A lot of the illegals 
have already started self-deporting because they know a change is coming.”

So far there is scant evidence of so-called self-deporting, but parents and 
teachers across the US have observed Latino children expressing fear and 
uncertainty.

Bernal, who lives in Argentina, said Mexican friends in the US were struggling 
to explain Trump’s comments to their children. “It’s heartbreaking. This is not 
something that gets solved in one day or two days, or a whole presidential 
term. There are kids out there that are growing up with that.”

School boards in Los Angeles 
<http://www.scpr.org/news/2016/11/15/66177/la-school-board-if-trump-administration-asks-for-s/>
, Santa Ana and other Democratic-controlled cities have vowed to resist any 
White House-directed attempt to target undocumented schoolchildren.

Even before Trump’s victory, Latino film-makers were sounding the alarm. 
Alejandro González Iñárritu, who won Oscars for Birdman and The Revenant, said 
the tycoon had “spat upon” and unleashed hate against Mexicans. Jonás and 
Alfonso Cuarón, who won an Oscar for Gravity, used a Trump speech as a
soundtrack for the trailer for their film Desierto 
<http://www.thewrap.com/donald-trump-narrates-the-murders-of-migrants-in-desierto-international-trailer-video/>
, about a homicidal sniper targeting border crossers – including one played by 
Bernal.

Larraín, who has mined Chile’s conscience in films like The Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/the-club-chile-catholic-church-child-sex-abuse-pablo-larrain-film>
, about paedophile priests, andPost Mortem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/08/post-mortem-film-review>, about 
Pinochet’s 1973 coup, said strong, interesting voices can emerge from 
oppression. “When there’s crisis, there’s art; when there’s pain, there’s art; 
when there’s suffering, there’s art. When we struggle we create things, as a 
humanity.” Neruda depicts events from 60 years ago which still resonate today, 
he said. “Cinema is always a political act, always.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oNyvmnVE6g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oNyvmnVE6g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-oNyvmnVE6g&media=>
 The Latin American trailer for Desierto, Jonás and Alfonso Cuarón’s 
forthcoming thriller about border crossings starring Gael García Bernal. 
Larraín vowed to use his camera to protect the truth as he understood it. “I 
don’t know how effective it is. I don’t know how penetrating and transformative 
that can be. But I’m going to go out there and keep filming. That’s what we do. 
That’s why we’re here.”

Bernal said Latin America has suffered – and learned from – its turbulent 
history of revolutions, dictatorships and messianic leaders.“We are more 
mature, in the sense that we know there is no shamanic answer to things.”

For all its enduring problems, Latin America now boasts a vibrant cultural 
force and sophisticated political discourse that is no longer in thrall to the 
US, said the actor. “The US culturally used to be an axis that we all rotated 
[around]. It’s where the gravitational pull was coming from. Now, it’s not an 
indispensable country. It feels satisfying to say that. It is not indispensable 
in the sense that it is not something that we have to take. It is not the 
centre of the cultural world.”

The Y Tu Mama Tambien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/12/1> star 
says state support gave Latin American film-makers freedom to experiment. “With 
that funding, it’s up to us to make a good movie, and up to us to defend that 
freedom.”

Larraín had been tipped to remake Scarface, setting it in modern LA with a 
Mexican protagonist, but he has parted ways with the project. With Jackie 
earning rave reviews might Larraín consider profiling another first lady, say
Melania Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/melania-trump>, the 
president-elect’s Slovenia-born wife? The director’s eyes widened. “No, no, no,n
o. I need to feel love for the characters that I work with. That would be very 
hard. And I wouldn’t call her the first lady. I’d call her the immigrant lady – 
which is a great title for a film.”
 