
The president of The Gambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia> has 
declared a state of emergency in the west African country two days before he is 
due to leave office.


The declaration is the latest in a series of attempts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
 by Yahya Jammeh to hang onto power beyond his current tally of 22 years. Adama 
Barrow, a former estate agentwho beat Jammeh in the December election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
, is due to be inaugurated on Thursday, but the incumbent is refusing to leave.

Related: Adama Barrow says inauguration as Gambia president to go ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/adama-barrow-says-inauguration-as-gambia-president-to-go-ahead-thursday-yahya-jammeh>

Meanwhile, four government ministers, including the foreign and finance 
ministers defected on Tuesday, leaving Jammeh increasingly isolated.

Thousands of Gambians are fleeing the country or sending their children 
abroad, afraid that the regional organisation ECOWAS will make good onits 
promise to resort to force to remove Jammeh if necessary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/african-leaders-back-adama-barrow-as-new-president-of-the-gambia>
. Hundreds of women and children balancing suitcases on their heads took the 
ferry out of Banjul, the country’s capital, on Tuesday, many bound for the 
border.


“Everybody’s leaving,” said one Gambian immigration official. “They’re worried 
there might be war.”


Jammeh said he was making the order “to prevent a constitutional crisis and 
power vacuum”, although Barrow,who is currently in Senegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/pressure-gambia-leader-step-down-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow-ecowas>
, is poised to return to Gambian soil at midnight on Wednesday under heavy 
security to be sworn in as The Gambia’s first new president in more than two 
decades.

 Adama Barrow is due to return to the Gambia just before his inauguration. 
Photograph: SEYLLOU/AFP/Getty Images 
“I hereby declare a state of public emergency throughout The Gambia, as a 
situation exists, which if it is allowed to continue, will lead to a state of 
public emergency,” Jammeh told the nation over national radio and television. 
As the president’s voice boomed out from an old radio in Churchill’s Town in 
Serrekunda, welders stopped their work momentarily to listen.

“This declaration is necessitated by the unprecedented and extraordinary 
amount of foreign interference in the December presidential election and in the 
internal affairs of The Gambia, and the unwarranted hostile atmosphere 
threatening the sovereignty, security and stability of the country.”


Under the state of emergency, the constitution and citizens’ rights can be 
suspended, and the president can rule by presidential decree. Jammeh made the 
order despite the fact that parliament had not yet agreed to it.

However, as he spoke, the matter was being discussed by the national assembly, 
and with most of the country’s opposition lying low, every member spoke in 
favour of it. By the constitution, a state of emergency last seven days, but in 
the same order, the national assembly extended it until July.

 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Gambians flee capital as state of emergency is declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/18/gambians-flee-capital-as-state-of-emergency-is-declared-video>
Jammeh initially accepted the results of the election but later declared it 
null, saying the electoral commission had made errors. He took his case to the 
supreme court, but there were no judges to hear it, so it has been delayed 
until May. Then Jammeh tried to bring an injunction to stop Barrow attending 
his own inauguration, but the country’s chief justice said he could not rule on 
it.


Several mediating missions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/west-african-leaders-banjul-end-gambian-crisis-president-yahya-jammeh-elections>
 by the Nigerian and Liberian presidents have failed to result in a deal.


“He’s trying every trick he can think of to appear strong to local supporters 
and to appear peaceful to the international community, but he can’t change 
what’s coming. There are so many deals he should have taken,” a legal expert in 
Banjul said. “Perhaps he will wait until the last possible minute and then take 
a deal.”


One of these deals offered to Jammeh is a “golden retirement” in Morocco, 
according to local reports, as long as he steps down. Nigeria has also 
apparently offered him asylum.

 