
Yahya Jammeh, the autocratic ruler of the Gambia, has moved to resist his 
presidential election defeat, sending armed soldiers to take control of the 
electoral commission headquarters and filing a petition to the supreme court as 
a delegation of African leaders urged him to stand down.

The petition said the electoral commission had “failed to properly collate the 
results” of the election, which Jammeh lost to challenger Adama Barrow.

It came after the president of the electoral commission was thrown out of his 
office shortly before the leaders’ delegation arrived in the country.

“I got there by quarter to eight and when I was going up to my office, one of 
the cleaners told me they were not allowed in,” Alieu Njie told the Guardian. 
“I went to my office and a military man came and said I was not allowed to 
touch anything, so I took my briefcase, got into my car and went home.


“Let’s just hope and pray that now these heads of state are here President 
Jammeh will decide to step down. The only legal way is for him to step down.”


The Gambia's president urged to accept defeat by new government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/the-gambias-president-urged-to-accept-defeat-by-new-government>
Making up the most important delegation ever to descend on the Gambia, the 
presidents of Nigeria, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Ghana flew in on Tuesday to 
meet Jammeh, who has ruled an increasingly isolated nation for 22 years and 
last week vowed to stay on despite losing the presidential election.


Asked if Jammeh had been receptive after their hour-long closed-doors meeting, 
the Liberian president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, said that no deal had been 
reached.

“We come to help Gambians find their way through a transition. That’s not 
something that can happen in one day. It’s something that one has to work on.”

Sirleaf said that Jammeh had assured the delegation that “peace and stability 
will remain in the Gambia, as the transition process proceeds to a conclusion”.




Until now, Jammeh has refused to see dignitaries who have come to the Gambia 
to try to mediate between him and president-electBarrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
, a former estate agent who led a coalition of eight opposition parties to 
defeat Jammeh, sparking celebrations in the west African country.


Jammeh surprised many when he initially accepted defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 in a televised call to Barrow on 2 December but he made an extraordinary 
televised U-turn, in which he said that the election had been “fraudulent and 
unacceptable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/the-gambia-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow-troops-banjul>
”, and then deployed extra troops on the streets.

Adama Barrow, the president-elect, told the Guardian he was “not so 
disappointed” that there was no deal yet. “These are very important heads of 
state fromAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, and in their 
countries they will always accept the will of the people. I think he will 
listen to them,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fgambian-military-takes-over-offices-of-electoral-commissionyahya-jammeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d027b1919e9e2381bcc89eae72a9e458edac724%2F127_354_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20military%20takes%20over%20offices%20of%20electoral%20commission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fgambian-military-takes-over-offices-of-electoral-commissionyahya-jammeh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian%20military%20takes%20over%20offices%20of%20electoral%20commission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fgambian-military-takes-over-offices-of-electoral-commissionyahya-jammeh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d027b1919e9e2381bcc89eae72a9e458edac724%2F127_354_3196_1918%2F3196.jpg>
 Gambian president-elect Adama Barrow in Banjul. Photograph: Afolabi 
Sotunde/Reuters 
“The best thing is for [Jammeh] is to accept the reality – that he has lost 
the elections.”


On Monday, the chairman of the regional west African organisation the Economic 
Community of West African States (Ecowas) said that if persuasion did not work, 
it would consider sending in the military.

“We have to use persuasion to get Mr Jammeh to respect the principles,” Marcel 
de Souza told RFI. “After that, we will see about putting on pressure via the 
UN security council, the AU [African Union] and Ecowas in order to avoid 
conflict.


“And if none of that works, we will consider more draconian options. We have 
done it in the past. We currently have troops in Guinea-Bissau. We have had 
troops in Mali. And therefore it is a conceivable solution.”


Sirleaf did not respond to questions about a possible military intervention, 
saying only: “We hope that the will of the people will prevail.”

Although the country’s chief of defence staff, Ousman Badjie, said last week 
he would support Barrow, he told the Guardian on Tuesday that Jammeh paid his 
salary, so he had the backing of the armed forces.


“I’m supporting the commander-in-chief of the Republic of the Gambia – of the 
Islamic Republic of the Gambia – whosoever it may be,” he said.

“My job is security, to make sure this country is peaceful and is secure, that 
is my primary role and that is what I’m paid for. As we speak now, I’m paid by 
the government of the day, that is Yahya Jammeh’s government. He’s my 
commander-in-chief as we speak now. I have only one commander-in-chief as we 
speak.”

Hamat Bah, one of the party leaders in Barrow’s coalition, said he thought 
Buhari had the best chance of changing Jammeh’s mind, as he was a military man.


“Remember, President Buhari is from the military. Jammeh is from the military. 
I think that will make a difference,” he said.
 