
HBO stuck to showcasing new shows during the premium cable network’s 
star-studded panel at the Television Critics Association presentation in 
Pasadena, California, on Thursday. After quickly announcing that 24 April will 
see the return ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, Silicon Valley and 
Veep, the panel placed the focus on new programs airing on the channel in the 
coming months, including two feature films, one documentary, and one highly 
touted new series from executive producer Martin Scorsese. Here’s what they 
discussed.

Nothing Left Unsaid: Gloria Vanderbilt and Anderson Cooper
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4df84a682c60bfb2a550ec1dfcc80503be606767%2F0_164_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4df84a682c60bfb2a550ec1dfcc80503be606767%2F0_164_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Gloria Vanderbilt, Liz Garbus and Anderson Cooper speak at a panel for the HBO 
documentary Nothing Left Unsaid. Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters 
The premium network’s first major documentary release of the year, which 
premieres at the Sundance film festival before airing in April, is an intimate 
profile of heiress-designer-artist-writer-socialiteGloria Vanderbilt 
<http://www.interviewmagazine.com/culture/gloria-vanderbilt/>, who at 91, 
appears to have lost none of her vitality and sass. She’s accompanied by her 
CNN anchorman son,Anderson Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/13/anderson-cooper-new-oprah-winfrey>
, in the film as the two look back on her life through a series of candid 
conversations. Vanderbilt was joined by the film’s Oscar-nominated director Liz 
Garbus (What Happened, Miss Simone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/23/sundance-2015-first-look-review-what-happened-miss-simone-liz-garbus-nina-simone>
) onstage, with Cooper video-conferenced in from George Mason University in 
Fairfax, Virginia, where he was about to interview President Obama live for CNN 
about the president’s recent executive actions on gun control.

Vanderbilt and Cooper spoke at length about how the process of making the film 
brought them closer. “I know my mom in a way I didn’t know her before we 
started this process,” Cooper said. “I realize how much like my mom I am, which 
I never would have believed.”

Vanderbilt said the experience of being documented was “very freeing”. “If one 
is telling the truth, there is nothing to fear,” she added.

To coincide with the release of the film, the pair have penned the joint 
memoir, The Rainbow Comes and Goes: A Mother and Son Talk About Life, Love and 
Loss, which will be available for purchase in April. Cooper called the upcoming 
book an “extension of the documentary”.

 * Nothing Left Unsaid: Gloria Vanderbilt and Anderson Cooper debuts 9 April 
on HBO.

All the Way
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0628e599413bbc6b53955f88001840251429e2%2F0_72_4302_2580%2F4302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d0628e599413bbc6b53955f88001840251429e2%2F0_72_4302_2580%2F4302.jpg>
 Bryan Cranston and Anthony Mackie discuss All the Way. Photograph: Richard 
Shotwell/Invision/AP 
This film adaptation of the award-winning play of the same name about 
President Lyndon B Johnson’s tumultuous first year in office finds Bryan 
Cranston reprising his role as Johnson, which won him a Tony for best actor in 
2014. The project reunites Cranston with his Trumbo director Jay Roach, who 
last worked with HBO on the Emmy-award-winning filmGame Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/09/game-change-sarah-palin-hbo-television>
.

Cranston said he had no qualms in revisiting the role for HBO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo>, because he was so energized at the 
chance to “reach millions more”. “It’s an important story to tell,” he said. 
“That’s how this all started.”

Bryan Cranston going All the Way with Lyndon Johnson movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/17/bryan-cranston-going-all-the-way-with-lyndon-johnson-movie>
Writer Robert Schenkkan, who also penned the play, stressed that the screen 
adaptation is inherently more cinematic, and that in order to make it work as a 
film he cut scenes, and added new sequences to “go deeper than we were able to 
get onstage”.

Cranston was also able to immerse himself further in the project by donning 
prosthetics to resemble Johnson more closely than onstage. For the film, 
Cranston said he and the crew went for total visual accuracy, which in turn, 
said the actor, boosted his confidence on set.

“I’d ad-lib and joke around as the character,” said Cranston. “It helped me 
stay in character through the logistics of making a movie.”

Johnson’s first year in office found him balancing opposing interests to 
launch his landmark Civil Rights Bill, with the support of Martin Luther King 
Jr in 1964. Anthony Mackie, who plays King in the film, revealed that he’s been 
asked to play the activist before, but that Schenkkan’s script was the first to 
portray the “Martin Luther King Jr that I knew.” Added Mackie: “This was the 
first time I saw Martin Luther King Jr as not being a pushover. That man was 
not a pushover.”

 * All the Way debuts in May on HBO.

Confirmation
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3f95b322763a26e32e2dbb3af9006a0852072b%2F0_29_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3f95b322763a26e32e2dbb3af9006a0852072b%2F0_29_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Kerry Washington speaks at a panel for the HBO film Confirmation. Photograph: 
Mario Anzuoni/Reuters 
Kerry Washington leads the cast of the second HBO film showcased at the 
network’s panel.Confirmation <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4608402/reference>, 
from Dope director Rick Famuyiwa, features the Scandal Emmy nominee as Anita 
Hill, the former aide to Clarence Thomas (played by Wendell Pierce in the 
film), who caused his nomination to the supreme court to be called into 
question when she testified that the judge had sexually harassed her.

Washington, who also served as executive producer on the project, recalled 
being 14 years old when the case made national headlines. “My mother was an 
academic and had very passionate feelings,” she said. “So did my father, as a 
black man. It always stuck with me how passionate they were [about the case], 
and how differently they looked at the situation.

“It was such an important moment in our country,” added Washington. “These 
events really transformed the way we consume our news.”

Washington said that she met with Hill, who now works as a professor of social 
policy, law and women’s studies at Brandeis University, prior to embarking on 
the project. “I felt that was something we shared,” Washington said. “The 
circumstances of life thrusting you in the public eye without it really being 
your choice.”

Washington admitted at being “terrified of playing her”. “Portraying somebody 
who is real is a different kind of responsibility especially when they’re 
alive,” she explained. “That significance was not lost on me.”

 * Confirmation debuts in April on HBO. 

Vinyl
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4eebf270ca40721a035bf53d9bc028bd8adad21%2F0_144_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20to%20return%20in%20April%20as%20HBO%20unveils%20new%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgame-of-thrones-april-return-hbo-new-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4eebf270ca40721a035bf53d9bc028bd8adad21%2F0_144_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
 Mick Jagger of Vinyl speaks via satellite. Photograph: Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic 
HBO played it wise to leave the most anticipated panel for last for their 
hugely anticipated new showVinyl <http://www.hbo.com/vinyl>, which reunites the 
network withMartin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>, 
who previously executive-producedBoardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/boardwalk-empire> which ended its run 
on HBO in 2014. He’s back assuming the same role on Vinyl, a drama about a New 
York music executive played by Bobby Cannavale in the late 1970s who does all 
it takes to make a name for himself in the cutthroat business. Vinyl finds the 
director working alongside Mick Jagger, a producer on the project.

Cannavale was joined by his onscreen wife on the show, Olivia Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/olivia-wilde>, at the panel, but it was 
Scorsese and Jagger who commanded the most attention despite being 
video-conferenced in via satellite.

HBO lines up 70s rock romp Vinyl with drugs and sex-filled trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/aug/07/hbo-vinyl-martin-scorsese-mick-jagger>
Jagger, looking thrilled to be talking about Vinyl, revealed that he and 
Scorsese had initially tried to develop the material as a feature film. The 
pair previously collaborated on the Rolling Stones concert documentaryShine a 
Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/11/therollingstones.popandrock> in 
2008. “We wrote scripts, and it was a very sprawling idea,” said Jagger. “When 
TV series came online and started to become interesting, respectable and 
moneymaking, we started to make a TV series of it.”

Scorsese, who directed the pilot, said he hopes to find time to direct more 
episodes in the future, but that he remains involved in all stages of 
production, including selecting the directors for each episode, and aiding in 
the selection of the music along with Jagger.

The Rolling Stone frontman credited Scorsese for changing the way directors 
use music in TV and film. “He more or less invented the use of music the way 
we’re now used to, and at home with,” said Jagger. Of their enduring rapport, 
the singer said, “I don’t think we find it very difficult to communicate, even 
though it appears we come from different worlds. I suppose we do, so we meet 
somewhere in the middle.”

For his part, Scorsese said that music is “very much a part of my life”, while 
adding that Jagger’s music initially served as “the inspiration for a lot of 
the visualisations” in his early work.

 * Vinyl premieres on HBO 14 February
 