
The Football Association <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> is 
increasingly open to the idea ofGareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> taking the England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> job on a full-time basis despite 
the two disappointing performances so far in his brief period as caretaker 
manager.

Southgate has impressed his employer with the manner in which he has 
approached the job since he was promoted from his usual position with the 
under-21s in the aftermath ofSam Allardyce’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-return-football-management-england-exit-fa>
 and there is a feeling within the FA that it would have been unfair to expect 
too much improvement in the games against Malta and Slovenia.

Six problems facing England: From lack of goals to leadership questions| 
Daniel Taylor and Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/england-gareth-southgate-wayne-rooney-fa-world-cup>
While Southgate has been candid enough to recognise both performances could 
have been considerably better, he has also talked about inheriting “a mess” on 
the back of Allardyce’s ignominious 67-day spell in charge andEngland’s galling 
experiences at Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
.

He has subsequently backtracked on that word, saying he should merely have 
called it “difficult circumstances” but the FA does recognise there are 
mitigating factors. Southgate’s chances of being offered the job properly will 
hinge more on England’s games against Scotland and Spain next month and the 
former Middlesbrough manager sounded like he was growing into the idea of 
taking on the position, in stark contrast to his admission after Roy Hodgson’s 
departure about not being ready for it.

“It’s been a remarkable experience,” Southgate said. “I feel stronger and more 
confident for it, and I recognise the responsibility it brings.

“I could not have been happier with the approach of the players or the staff, 
and I think we have prepared them to be in the best possible place to get the 
results we wanted. That hasn’t quite happened, but I would temper that by 
pointing out everything they have had to contend with.

“I haven’t had charge of the team before. I had not been preparing for these 
two matches until the last two weeks and I had not worked with all of the staff 
or the players before. With all the injuries as well, there have been so many 
things we have had to deal with over 10 days.

“It was difficult for anybody to know what success would have looked like 10 
days ago because there was so much to take on board. I have to be realistic 
about how much progress you can make in that situation, on the back of what was 
a difficult summer for everybody. But I see huge potential in them as a group, 
a real willingness to work, a real desire to play for their country and a real 
pride in playing for their country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgareth-southgate-joe-hart-england-slovenia-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southgate%20praises%20Hart%20after%20England%20draw%20with%20Slovenia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgareth-southgate-joe-hart-england-slovenia-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southgate%20praises%20Hart%20after%20England%20draw%20with%20Slovenia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgareth-southgate-joe-hart-england-slovenia-video&media=>
Southgate praises Hart after England draw with Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/12/gareth-southgate-joe-hart-england-slovenia-video>
. 
“They are not going to get everything right at the moment and their heads were 
down [afterthe Slovenia game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovenia-england-world-cup-qualifying-match-report>
] because they know the expectation to win. I don’t want to take that away. We 
want to aim for excellence. There are things to improve on, but I do have to 
temper that with what must have been a difficult situation for them as well.”

The dispiriting case of how ‘new’ Theo Walcott disappeared for England | 
Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/theo-walcott-disappearing-england-duty>
The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> likes the calm way Southgate 
has approached a difficult situation and the caretaker manager also appears to 
have the backing of his players, with the stand-in captain Jordan Henderson 
among those voicing support after the goalless draw in Ljubljana.

“The players have got on really well with him,” Henderson said. “The manager 
has been brilliant with us, so we need to put in the performances not just for 
ourselves but for the fans and him, and the coaching staff as well, to make 
sure we keep working together for a long time.”

Southgate intends to watch the midfielders Ross Barkley and Jack Wilshere in 
the next few weeks to determine whether they deserve to be recalled but he does 
not anticipate many changes for his next squad – “I’m not sure how many other 
players there are” – at a time when he does “not think any of the under-21s are 
ready to move up just yet”.

England play Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> in a 
World Cup qualifier on 11 November followed by a friendly againstSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain>, also at Wembley, four days later. 
“I feel pleased with how I have handled a number of situations,” Southgate 
said, when asked directly if he wanted the job. “That’s been a great challenge 
because it’s obviously a level up from what I have had to deal with before. I 
feel confident. The rest needs serious consideration from everybody’s point of 
view.”
 