
Gary Cahill believes England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
will travel to next summer’s European Championship finals spurred on by 
“unfinished business”, with the experience of suffering past World Cup traumas 
improving their chances of success in France.

Jack Wilshere admits he needs to score more goals for England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/15/jack-wilshere-england-slovenia-goals>
Roy Hodgson’s side are unbeaten since being knocked out of the World Cup in 
Brazil a year ago, and boast a pristine record to date in Group E ofEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> qualifying. Victory against 
San Marino when their campaign resumes in the autumn should in effect secure a 
place at the tournament, where the national side will hope to make a better 
impression.

Despite having gone through an entire season unbeaten for the first time since 
1990-91, an achievementsecured with the 3-2 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/14/slovenia-england-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 against Slovenia on Sunday, Cahill admitted the failure to win a game in 
Brazil still plays on his mind.

“When you suffer a disappointment in the Premier League, another game comes 
around in two or three days or, at most, a week,” he said. “If you have a 
disappointing tournament then you have to wait two years [to put it right]. 
That’s a long time, but we keep working hard, keep moving in the right 
direction and gaining experience all the time; that’s all you can do.

“We don’t talk too much about the future, but the team are moving in the right 
direction. Everyone is gaining more experience, the younger players in the 
Premier League and, come next summer, they’ll have another year under their 
belt and more England caps. Experience is key going into the tournament and 
there is a lot of unfinished business from last summer. It’s something 
personally I cant wait to come around and put right. I’m sure everyone feels 
the same way.”

England’s qualification group is hardly onerous. But having already visited 
Scotland and Italy in high-profile friendlies, the side will face France and 
Germany, then potentially Holland and Spain next season as they gear up for 
Euro 2016. That will provide a proper test of progress, though the squad are 
taking heart from their 11-match unbeaten run.

“It’s been fantastic and the year we’ve had shouldn’t be overlooked,” added 
Cahill. “It’s a great achievement, something we are very proud of and something 
we spoke about before this game. When we went 1-0 down against Slovenia it 
wasn’t ideal, but we responded in the right way. We didn’t want to waste all 
our hard work.”
 