
Every year, on the feast of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, 
throngs of people move through the streets of Managua inNicaragua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicaragua> to visit altars of the Virgin in 
private homes and public spaces. In return for their devotion, they receive 
party favours – bags of sweets or rice and beans. The Virgin Mary has many fans 
in Latin America, and most countries have a day or two devoted to festivities 
in her honour.

But when they are not paying homage to the Virgin Mary, the reality is that 
Latin American men, in general, have been raised in cultures that diminish 
women and objectify their sexuality. It’s hard to change widespread cultural 
values that establish men as the dominant and authoritarian figures in society. 
And as women have advanced in their independence and self-affirmation, men seem 
to be more defiant and violent in denying them their rightful place. The region
has the highest numbers of femicides in the world 
<http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/why-does-latin-america-have-the-world-s-highest-female-murder-rates>
. Seven of the 10 most dangerous countries for women in the world are in Latin 
America: Mexico, El Salvador, Colombia, Brazil, Guatemala, Puerto Rico and 
Suriname.

Why has 'macho' Latin America elected more female leaders than the US?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/07/macho-latin-america-elected-more-female-leaders-than-us>


It is true that the cult of the “strong man” who can get away with horrific 
behaviour is not just a problem for Latin America. One of the most dispiriting 
things about the recent electoral campaign in the United States was to realise 
how little it mattered for Donald Trump supporters to hear their candidate talk 
about women in a hideously demeaning and offensive way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fviolence-against-women-mens-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e148d45ad8008f82ce7be6cca1afedf7be4f14%2F0_0_3008_2008%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender%20violence%20is%20not%20just%20a%20'women%E2%80%99s%20issue'%20%7C%20Gioconda%20Belli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fviolence-against-women-mens-issue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender%20violence%20is%20not%20just%20a%20%27women%E2%80%99s%20issue%27%20%7C%20Gioconda%20Belli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fviolence-against-women-mens-issue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e148d45ad8008f82ce7be6cca1afedf7be4f14%2F0_0_3008_2008%2F3008.jpg>
 Women march during a protest against the gang rape of a 16-year-old girl in 
June 2016 in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Photograph: Cris Faga/CON/LatinContent/Getty 
Images 
Around the whole world, the cultural legacy of male power works against the 
gains achieved by feminism. According to recent UN Women facts and figures, one 
in every three women in the world “experience physical or sexual violence, 
mostly by an intimate partner 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/ending-violence-against-women/facts-and-figures>
”. Violence against women is a pandemic, in spite of harsh legal measures 
against men who engage in it.

Women all over the world have reacted by staging powerful demonstrations 
<http://www.presstv.ir/Detail/2016/11/26/495236/Spain-France-protest-rallies-violence-against-women-Argentina>
 to demand that states take a forceful role and put in place measures to stop 
this kind of male violence.

But the real cry, in my opinion, should come from men. Up to now, too many 
have been happy to marginalise this as a “women’s issue”. In Brazil and 
Nicaragua, there have recently been private efforts to approach the problem by 
working directly with menin the construction of a new masculinity 
<https://www.feminist.com/resources/artspeech/mensvoices15.html>, based on an 
identity that does not require them to be aggressive or dominant.

I think we should realise that punishment is not the only way to deal with 
this problem. We need to dedicate more thought and effort to change the 
mentality and culture that drives men to commit these crimes. Educational 
programmes and institutions have a major role to play.

Violence against women harms us all: will measuring the pain help prevent it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/28/violence-against-women-harms-us-all-will-measuring-the-pain-help-prevent-it>
School curriculums should include subjects that prepare young people for 
parenthood – one of the most important responsibilities adults have in their 
lives and for which, so far, there is no advance preparation. Learning, from a 
young age, about the effects of violence for children in the home and the 
importance of caring for a child’s self-esteem, would go a long way in 
establishing some theoretical basis to start changing attitudes and behaviours. 
In these aspects men have to take an active role. They are the agents of this 
issue and they have to join the crusade to rid the world of this horrible 
remnant of an uncivilised world.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 