
George Osborne has in effect abandoned the linchpin of his economic strategy – 
toreturn the government finances to a surplus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-at-a-glance-key-points>
 by 2020 – following the Brexit vote.
Brexit explained: Labour leadership 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=labour_leadership>
The chancellor, who campaigned to remain in the EU, said there were already 
“clear signs” of shock in the economy a week after the referendum result 
wrongfooted the market, sending the pound to more than 30-year lows andcosting 
the UK its last AAA credit rating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/property-and-financial-shares-slide-as-referendum-fallout-hits-stock-markets>
.

His admission that he would have to push back his key goal for getting the 
public finances back in the black was seized upon by Labour as evidence of 
“failed Tory austerity”.

Speaking a day after the governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, hinted 
at an imminent interest rate cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/interest-rate-cut-likely-brexit-bank-of-england-mark-carney>
 to shore up the economy, Osborne spelled out the government’s role in keeping 
money flowing following the EU referendum result.

Addressing the Greater Manchester Chambers of Commerce, Osborne said: “The 
referendum result is as expected likely to lead to a significant negative shock 
for the British economy. How we respond will determine the impact on people’s 
jobs and on economic growth. TheBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> can support demand.

“The government must provide fiscal credibility, so we will continue to be 
tough on the deficit, but we must be realistic about achieving a surplus by the 
end of this decade. This is precisely the flexibility that our rules provide 
for.”

That marked a turnaround from the chancellor’s pre-referendum warning on the 
campaign trail that a vote for Brexit wouldforce him to call an emergency budget
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/osborne-predicts-30bn-hole-in-public-finance-if-uk-votes-to-leave-eu>
, with increases in income tax, alcohol and petrol duties, and cuts to the NHS, 
schools and defence.


After the vote to leave the EU, against the backdrop of weakening business and 
consumer confidence, and volatile financial markets, Osborne ruled out an 
emergency budget.

The chancellor’s latest announcement was not entirely unexpected, given that 
his fiscal rules allow for more wriggle room in exceptional times. The 
intervention was welcomed by business groups as a small piece of certainty at a 
time of political crisis in the UK.

Carney addressed that spike in economic and political uncertainty head on this 
week when he warned that the economy was suffering from “economic 
post-traumatic stress disorder”. The Bank’s governor prompted a stock market 
rally after indicating that cuts to interest rates, which are already at a 
historic low of 0.5%, were on the cards.

Chancellor abandons plans to return to surplus by 2020 - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/01/shares-rise-on-brexit-rate-cut-prospect-business-live>
Achieving a budget surplus by the end of the decade and every year thereafter 
“in normal times” was one of Osborne’s most coveted economic goals.It had 
conjured images of Mr Micawber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/10/george-osborne-public-finances-victorian-values>
, a character in Charles Dickens’s David Copperfield. Governments were expected 
to at least balance the books in the 19th century and in the first three 
decades of the 20th century, when the public finances were run on the Mr 
Micawber principle that income exceeding spending equalled happiness, and 
spending exceeding income equalled misery.

Osborne’s admission that he needed to be “realistic” about achieving it 
follows a warning in March that he had only a50-50 chance of achieving his aim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/17/budget-2016-osborne-chances-of-delivering-surplus-50-50-ifs>
 of a £10bn surplus in four years’ time.


The warning came from the Institute for Fiscal Studies following the budget, 
in which Osborne was already facing a deterioration in growth forecasts. Slower 
growth makes it harder to improve the public finances because tax receipts wane.

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, said there had been “no 
credible economists that could be found to support the chancellor’s surplus 
target in the first place”.
George Osborne (@George_Osborne) 
Clear signs of economic shock in aftermath of Leave vote. Will require supreme 
national effort but we can come through this challenge
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/748773418258960384> July 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/748773418258960384> 
“It is only a shame he was not realistic sooner, as under Jeremy Corbyn, 
Labour has been unequivocal in its opposition to failed Tory austerity,” said 
McDonnell. “The truth is [that] as Labour consistently warned, George Osborne’s 
recovery built on sand was underpinned by a fiscal rule that is not robust or 
flexible enough to equip our economy for any potential shocks it may face, or 
to provide the investment that our economy so clearly needs.”

Andrew Tyrie MP, the chairman of the Treasury committee, described the 
abandoned fiscal rule as “the latest in a long line of fiscal rules, targets 
and objectives of successive governments to have bitten the dust”.

Manufacturers’ organisation the EEF welcomed the “much-needed pick-me-up” and 
called for the government to combat any economic downturn by committing to 
infrastructure expenditure.


Rain Newton-Smith, the chief economist at the CBI business lobby group, said 
the chancellor was right to adapt his budget policy to the state of the 
economy, but that it should still keep a long-term goal for a surplus.

“Once the economy has adjusted, the government should set out plans to return 
the public finances to balance over the economic cycle,” Newton-Smith said.

The Resolution Foundation thinktank called for a rethink of the £12bn cuts to 
working-age welfare scheduled to take place during this parliament.
 