
Germany has denied it rebuffed an attempt by Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to seal an early deal on 
citizens’ rights post-Brexit, and reiterated that there was “complete 
unanimity” among the EU’s 27 member states that the subject could only be 
discussed once Britain had triggered article 50.

'Europe's fate is in our hands': Angela Merkel's defiant reply to Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/europes-fate-is-in-our-hands-angela-merkels-defiant-reply-to-trump>
The Tory MP Peter Lilley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-lilley> 
told the Brexit select committee on Wednesday that Germany was one of the two 
countries the prime minister was referring to when she said in her Brexit 
speech on Tuesday she could not get full support from the 27 remaining member 
states for a deal on the rights of EU citizens in Britain and UK nationals on 
the continent.

“We want to guarantee the rights of EU citizens who are already living in 
Britain and the rights of Britons in other member states as early as we can,” 
May said inher speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/deal-citizens-rights-full-eu-theresa-may-brexit-referendum>
. “I have told other EU leaders that we could give people the certainty they 
want straight away, and reach such a deal now. Many of them favour such an 
agreement – one or two others do not – but I want everyone to know that it 
remains a priority for Britain.”

A spokeswoman for Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> rejected claims that most 
other leaders had been willing to sign an early reciprocal deal on migrants’ 
rights, stating there was “complete unanimity” that such negotiations could not 
take place until article 50 was triggered.


“The 27 heads of state have already made clear in their joint statement on 29 
June 2016 – so immediately after the referendum – that participation in the 
single market goes hand in hand with all four freedoms of the single market, 
and on this question all member states are unanimous,” said the German 
chancellor’s spokeswoman, Ulrike Demmer. “There is also complete unanimity that 
there can be no pre-negotiations with Great Britain before notification.”

Speaking at a joint press conference with the Italian prime minister, Paolo 
Gentiloni, Merkel said May’s speech had clarified how the UK would conduct its 
negotiations but European states would show a united front. “We agreed we will 
coordinate our positions,” said Merkel. “In relation to our economies, I’m not 
afraid. I think we’ll stick together.Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> must not be divided and we will 
make sure this doesn’t happen by keeping very close contacts with each other.”

The prevailing view among officials in Berlin is that even though Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and Britain have roughly equivalent 
numbers of emigrants living in each other’s countries – and therefore a joint 
interest in securing their rights – agreeing on an early deal would be more 
easily said than done.

There is also concern among the EU 27 that early negotiations would risk 
sowing divisions before article 50 is triggered since some countries, such as 
Poland, have large numbers of their citizens living in the UK while others, 
such as Spain, play host to large numbers of British citizens.

Speaking after the Brexit select committee, Lilley said his understanding was 
that Germany had not rejected a specific offer, but that it was opposed to 
opening single-issue talks before article 50 had been triggered. “It may have 
been that they said everything should be discussed together – in other words, 
they could not negotiate as a single country – that everything had to be as 
part of the group of 27,” he said.
 