
Major German companies including BMW have stopped advertising on Breitbart, 
the rightwing US news and opinion site that campaigned forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and plans to launch in Europe 
before key elections next year.

The boycott, prompted by a social media campaign titled KeinGeldFürRechts or 
No Money for the Right, follows a similar decision by Kellogg’s in the US, to 
whichBreitbart responded by urging readers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/breitbart-news-kelloggs-advertising-boycott-alt-right>
 to stop buying the cereal firm’s products.

Breitbart’s editor-in-chief, Alex Marlow, has confirmed it is interviewing 
journalists to staff new services in France andGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> which it aims to have operational 
in time for pivotal 2017 elections in which mainstream centre-right and 
centre-left parties face strong challenges from populist, hard-right rivals.

Sources close to Stephen Bannon, the former Breitbart CEO who is now Trump’s 
chief strategy adviser,told Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-trump-strategy-idUSKBN1342TP> 
its objective was straightforward: “to help elect rightwing politicians”.

“There’s an underserved readership” in Europe, Marlow told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/14/business/media/breitbart-reveling-in-trumps-election-gains-a-voice-in-his-white-house.html?_r=0>
 – which was why the site opened a UK operation, headed by the former Nigel 
Farage aide Raheem Kassam, in 2014. “It’s the same readers who had been ignored 
in Britain, and had been ignored in the United States.”

Media analysts said Breitbart, which was founded in 2007 and whose US audience 
more than doubled from 7.4 million users in September 2014 to 15.8 million this 
September, would face a crowded market if it went ahead with its plans to 
launch inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but would be 
likely to find a ready audience.


“The border between media as an information service and media as a tool in the 
service of an ideology is becoming more and more blurred,” said Nathalie 
Pignard-Cheynel, a professor of digital journalism at the University of 
Neuchâtel.

“Breitbart can capitalise – it positions itself as a classic news site, but it 
is completely upfront about its aims, it takes full responsibility for its 
message. And it’s very good at social media. It worked in the US; it could work 
here,” she said.

Breitbart’s London bureau already produces English-language articles about 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and Germany, focusing on 
migration, refugees, Islamic fundamentalism and social problems it says are 
caused by Muslim migrants, and highlighting the successes of far-right 
politicians from Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) and France’s Front 
National.


Breitbart: how 'Trump Pravda' muddied the waters and surfed wave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/14/breitbart-how-trump-pravda-muddied-the-waters-and-surfed-wave>
Breitbart emerged as a rallying point for Trump’s angry “alt-right” supporters 
during the US presidential election and sees a clear opportunity in the rise 
across Europe of political parties promoting similar populist, nationalist, 
anti-immigrant, Eurosceptic and anti-establishment views.

France and Germany both hold national elections next year, with the Front 
National leader,Marine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>
, expected to advance to the presidential runoff round in France, and Germany’s 
AfD hoping to become parliament’s third-largest party.

Other German companies joining the boycott include Deutsche Telekom, which 
said it “absolutely does not tolerate discriminatory actions or statements” and 
its ads had not been placed intentionally on Breitbart.

The restaurant chain Vapiano also told AP Breitbart was not compatible with 
its values of “openness and tolerance” and it would take steps to ensure its 
ads no longer appeared on the site.

Companies are not always aware they are advertising on sites such as Breitbart 
because their ads are often placed across a large range of websites by media 
buyers’ automated computer systems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff00d15d96c3438b052ff557348e4e479895a724%2F0_0_5500_3300%2F5500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20firms%20including%20BMW%20pull%20advertising%20from%20Breitbart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20firms%20including%20BMW%20pull%20advertising%20from%20Breitbart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff00d15d96c3438b052ff557348e4e479895a724%2F0_0_5500_3300%2F5500.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen, president of Front National, and her niece, Marion Maréchal-Le 
Pen. Photograph: Joel Saget/AFP/Getty Images 
But regardless of possible commercial problems caused by advertisers’ 
reluctance to be associated with the site, localised versions may not 
necessarily have an easy ride, said Arnaud Mercier, a professor of political 
communication at Panthéon-Assas University in Paris.


Mercier said a French Breitbart site would be competing not just with 
traditional publications such as the radical-right weekly Valeurs Actuelles but 
also with newer outlets such asatlantico.fr <http://www.atlantico.fr/>, an 
unashamedly rightwing site that nonetheless stays “within the bounds of the 
politically correct”.

It would also be up against the fachosphère, a flourishing network of 
far-right, ultra-nationalist, white identitarian and often overtly racist blogs 
and sites,many based abroad 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/politique/article/2016/05/20/la-fachosphere-s-expatrie_4923247_823448.html>
, such as the Islamophobic ripostelaique.com and France’s leading far-right 
news website fdesouche.com (the name derives from “native French”).

“These are very popular sites, with strong networks on social media,” Mercier 
said. “It’s a crowded field. I’m not sure how far Breitbart has done its market 
research. There is clearly an ideological opportunity, but I’m not convinced 
there’s a media opportunity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42df575f2a688f2f4be908f6d0da426c7b66ecc5%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20firms%20including%20BMW%20pull%20advertising%20from%20Breitbart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20firms%20including%20BMW%20pull%20advertising%20from%20Breitbart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbreitbart-looks-to-france-and-germany-another-alt-right-victory-steve-bannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42df575f2a688f2f4be908f6d0da426c7b66ecc5%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People protesting against the appointment of Stephen Bannon as chief 
strategist of the White House by the US president-elect, Donald Trump. 
Photograph: David Mcnew/AFP/Getty Images 
In Germany, Breitbart will also have to carve out a niche in an increasingly 
packed market of both established rightwing media outlets – newspapers and 
magazines such as Junge Freiheit and Compact – but also digital startups such 
as the “counter-jihad” blog Politically Incorrect or Tichys Einblick.

But according to far-right expert Johannes Baldauf, of the Amadeu Antonio 
Foundation, there is room for Breitbart. He said: “None of these players have 
the same financial firepower as Breitbart. And AfD supporters will relish being 
able to link to a more ‘respectable’ forum than Compact on their Facebook 
feeds.”

Reading Breitbart for 48 hours will convince you the world is terrible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/19/reading-breitbart-news-steve-bannon-donald-trump>
Alexander Görlach, a journalist, entrepreneur and founder of The European 
magazine, said that with Germans going to the polls next year there was “a real 
danger Breitbart will help foster more filter bubbles, more echo chambers”.


Unlike the US, Görlach noted, Germany has an ethics board, the Presserat, 
which publicly reprimands outlets that fall short of agreed journalistic 
standards. But the board focuses only on publications that consider themselves 
journalistic outlets rather than “interest-led platforms”, and who sign up to 
the German press code.

Both the Front National and AfD have welcomed Breitbart’s promised arrival. 
Bannon toldFrench website radio-londres.fr 
<http://radio-londres.fr/2016/07/breitbart-debarque-a-paris-presidentielle-france/>
 this summer he saw Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, Marine Le Pen’s 26-year-old niece, 
as a rising star, and predicted France’s 2017 elections would be “historic”.

Maréchal-Le Pen has since responded in kind, saying 
<http://lelab.europe1.fr/marion-marechal-le-pen-repond-yes-a-une-invitation-imaginaire-du-bras-droit-de-donald-trump-2899271>
 she would be delighted to work with Breitbart if it opened a Paris bureau. 
“All alternative media are generally positive,” she told Agence France-Presse. 
“Donald Trump is the demonstration of that ... They’re among the useful tools.”

In Germany, AfD’s Heidelberg branch was similarly delighted at Breitbart’s 
announcement, tweeting: “Breitbart is coming to Germany. Fantastic! That’ll 
cause an earthquake in our stale media landscape.”

 