
Ghana’s row over World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> bonuses which led to 
the government to fly $3m (£1.75m) in cash to Brazil is in the early stages of 
production, it has been confirmed.

The Black Stars squad threatened to go on strike over the non-payment of 
bonuses agreed for the tournament before the personal intervention of president 
John Dramani Mahama, with former coach Kwesi Appiah revealing that some of his 
playerskept their $100,000 share (£61,000) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/25/ghana-coach-kwesi-appiah-hid-bonuses-dressing-room>
 in their backpacks in the dressing room while they were playing their Group G 
game against Portugal in Brasília.

As reported by the Guardian in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/30/hollywood-ghana-world-cup-drama-cash-3m>
, the story attracted the attention of the US writer Darryl Wharton-Rigby and 
the former staff writer for US TV series Homicide: Life on the Street confirmed 
this week that he has been hired by Bugeater Films to write a preliminary 
script.

“Football and the players needing the money is kind of the backdrop to the 
story,”Wharton-Rigby told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/29541852>. “But it’s really about the 
journey of the guy who actually is entrusted to deliver the money and what 
happens if he doesn’t get it there in time.

“I actually want the guy who’s the hero of the story to be from Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana>. I think there should be a hero 
who is African telling the story.

“I saw footage of the police cars taking the money on the highway and you can 
just see that scene playing out in your mind with someone like Dwayne ‘the 
Rock’ Johnson as the guy having to save the day. You can see all kinds of 
mayhem happening on the highway.”

He added: “It’s 50-50 as to whether it will get made, we’re still at the early 
stages so we’re going to take it one step at a time. Hopefully we can write a 
great script and get someone who is attached to it.

“It’s a fascinating story and I think audiences internationally would really 
take to it. I can see the poster now; lots of soccer balls, a stadium and a guy 
on the run.”

Appiah’s revelations came at the presidential inquiry into Ghana’s disastrous 
World Cup campaign last month. The coach was relieved of his post in the 
aftermath of the tournament, which saw his side eliminated in the group stages.

The Ghana Football Association issued a shortlist of five names last week 
which it said are in the frame to succeed Appiah, with the former Chelsea 
manager Avram Grant joined by Patrick Kluivert, Michel Pont, Marco Tardelli and 
Juan Ignacio Martínez.

However, Kluivert – the former Holland striker who was an assistant to Louis 
van Gaal at the World Cup – has now withdrawn from the race, according to his 
agent Rob Jansen.

“Patrick has no interest in this position now. He wants at this stage to focus 
on a club and not a country job,”Jansen told Ghanaian website allsports.com 
<http://allsports.com.gh/football/withered-dreams-kluivert-not-interested-in-ghana-job-jansen-id3187634.html>
.

“He would rather wait until a proper offer from a club in Europe comes along.”
 