
An innovative project in Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> aims 
to make moveable museums available nationwide by taking a small kiosk-sized 
gallery on the road to showcase artworks and cultural artefacts.

The “kiosk museum” is the brainchild of Nana Oforiatta Ayim, a writer and 
film-maker, and founder of ANO, a non-profit art space in Accra. She decided to 
make use of an ubiquitous feature of west African architecture: the semi-legal 
containers present on every street corner, usually used by mechanics, 
hairdressers or stores selling food and supplies.

Ayim collaborated with DK Osseo-Asare, an architect who has spent more than a 
decade researching kiosk culture and designing units in Ghana and Nigeria. He 
said official government policy was to “excise the informal from the city”, 
referring to the state’s disdain for the semi-legal structures, which have been 
flattened and torn down in some areas.

Latifah Idriss, an Accra-based architect who has worked with Ayim to further 
develop the structures, said kiosks were “not considered as proper” by the 
government because “in a country that lacks welfare, they manifest as the 
architecture of poverty”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fe95d76cfff92ab47628dba5eb64ab9ff2fefa8%2F0_5_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ghana's%20first%20travelling%20museum%20ready%20to%20hit%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ghana%27s%20first%20travelling%20museum%20ready%20to%20hit%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fe95d76cfff92ab47628dba5eb64ab9ff2fefa8%2F0_5_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 The kiosk museum. Photograph: Ofoe Amegavie/ANO 
Ayim’s project celebrates the informal structures. In December, the curator 
will begin a mammoth journey with the kiosk, starting in the capital, Accra, 
and travelling across Ghana’s 10 regions.

The majority of Ghanaians get their bread and milk from kiosks, so nobody gets 
intimidated about entering them
Nana Nyarko Boateng 
Ayim said she started to reflect on the museum model in Africa 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/africa> while working at the British 
Museum. Struck by how differently African objects were encountered in display 
cabinets in the UK with how they were actively used in festivals back home, she 
began to think about how material culture could be preserved and presented in a 
way that was more in keeping with local traditions.

The “white cube” gallery, an idea developed in the west, doesn’t make sense in 
Ghana, she said, where art plays a different role in society. “I think it’s 
important to ask at every stage, how suitable is this model for the context we 
inhabit? Especially [as we are] coming out of the post-colonial moment – a 
moment in which we were defining ourselves largely based on a western model.”

Nana Nyarko Boateng, who visited the kiosk museum at Chale Wote street art 
festival this year, said she thought using something so familiar “as a tool for 
learning and engendering discussions about ourselves is just brilliant and 
absolutely pertinent”.

“The majority of Ghanaians get their bread and milk and sugar from kiosks, so 
nobody gets intimidated about entering them,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4f012812eea23da6f05536e63924bd3627d999%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ghana's%20first%20travelling%20museum%20ready%20to%20hit%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ghana%27s%20first%20travelling%20museum%20ready%20to%20hit%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fghanas-first-travelling-museum-ready-to-hit-the-road-kiosk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a4f012812eea23da6f05536e63924bd3627d999%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘Nobody is intimidated to enter’. Photograph: ANO 
Ayim said with each new location the exhibition inside the kiosk changes. 
“Film and photographs, documents, old letters – we ask people to bring things 
in and then we display them in the kiosk museum to document, and for [other] 
people to interact with,” she explained.

​Celebrating ​James Barnor – the first photographer to shoot Ghana in colour ​
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/sep/22/street-style-ghana-fashion-photographer-james-barnor>
During the Chale Wote festival in Jamestown, the kiosk museum presented 
photographs by Ofoe Amegavie alongside other artefacts. Visitors were 
encouraged to interact with the objects and share their stories. With its doors 
open to the street, the small booth – only two metres by three metres (8ft by 
10ft) – welcomed thousands of visitors.

It’s early days for the kiosk museum, as Ayim and her team figure out how to 
make the infrastructure sustainable. “Can we create an alternative based on a 
different value system, a different way of growing. I think we can, and that’s 
exciting,” Ayim said.
 