
The winner: Ghostbusters

After months of negativity from a minority of fans disturbed by the gender 
switch of its central characters,Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/ghostbusters-review-very-funny-action-comedy-spectacular>
 has finally materialised. A UK opening of £2.69m plus £1.7m in 
Monday-to-Thursday previews doesn’t scream blockbuster numbers, especially 
given a production budget reported to be north of $140m.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fwatch-the-new-ghostbusters-trailer-with-an-all-female-cast-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F3%2F1457015618320%2FKP_1820239_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20new%20Ghostbusters%20trailer%20with%20an%20all-female%20cast%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fwatch-the-new-ghostbusters-trailer-with-an-all-female-cast-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20new%20Ghostbusters%20trailer%20with%20an%20all-female%20cast%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fwatch-the-new-ghostbusters-trailer-with-an-all-female-cast-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F3%2F1457015618320%2FKP_1820239_crop_640x360.jpg>
Watch the Ghostbusters trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/03/watch-the-new-ghostbusters-trailer-with-an-all-female-cast-video>
For comparison, The Legend of Tarzan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/legend-tarzan-review-alexander-skarsgard-christoph-waltz>
 opened the previous weekend with £2.76m plus previews of £809,000. Both films 
had the benefit of audience familiarity. With a reported budget of $180m, The 
Legend of Tarzan’s extensive CGI animals and lengthy production period cost 
even more.

Ghostbusters had to contend with widespread sunshine after a disappointingly 
cloudy and rainy period. Those are tough conditions for any new film. Many 
state schools break up for summer this week, and Sony will be hoping for a 
decent run for Ghostbusters, which is rated 12A.

The runner-up: Ice Age: Collision Course
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fice-age-collision-course-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ice%20Age%3A%20Collision%20Course%20cast%3A%20'This%20might%20confuse%20Texas'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fice-age-collision-course-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ice%20Age%3A%20Collision%20Course%20cast%3A%20%27This%20might%20confuse%20Texas%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fice-age-collision-course-video-interview&media=>
Ice Age: Collision Course cast: ‘This might confuse Texas’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/13/ice-age-collision-course-video-interview>
At second place in the chart, Ice Age: Collision Course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/ice-age-collision-course-review>
’s debut figure is £3.78m. However, a hefty £2.54m of that comes from two 
weekends of previews, including a chunk from Ireland and Scotland, where the 
film had already opened. Strip out the previews and Ice Age’s real weekend 
takings fall to £1.24m – just enough for fourth place.

This represents a calamitous fall from the previous Ice Age movie, Continental 
Drift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/12/ice-age-4-continental-review>, 
which began its run four years ago. That film followed a similar distribution 
model, with four days of national previews, and an early release in Ireland and 
Scotland. At the end of its first full weekend, it stood at £13.05m, on its way 
to a final £30.4m.

It’s hard to escape the conclusion that presenting a fifth Ice Age film to 
audiences was rather testing their indulgence. The lowest-grossing entry in the 
franchise to date is the original Ice Age, which notched up £15.1m in 2002. 
Collision Course has its work cut out to match that number. The film sees Scrat 
drifting off into space – perhaps it would be a fitting end to leave him there.

The real runner-up: The Secret Life of Pets

With fourth-weekend takings of £2.05m, Illumination’s The Secret Life of Pets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/secret-life-pets-film-review-family-animation-new-york>
 is the film that really deserves second place in the chart. UK gross to date 
is £25.75m, overtakingZootropolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/zootropolis-review-elegance-wit-and-first-rate-animation>
 (£23.85m) to become the biggest animated film of the year so far. Only one 
other 2016 release –The Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review> – has 
grossed more than £2m on four weekends. It’s a feat that has eluded many 
box-office big hitters includingDeadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/deadpool-review-marvel-ryan-reynolds-film-superhero>
,Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>
 andBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeWI_Jsw9qUs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeWI_Jsw9qUs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeWI_Jsw9qUs&media=>
Overall, there is some notable depth in the marketplace currently, with 
eighth-placedCentral Intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/central-intelligence-review-dwayne-johnson-kevin-hart>
 managing a nifty £767,000. This is the highest gross for a film in eighth 
place since January 2015, when Birdman found itself in that position with 
takings of £826,000.

The special event: Dirty Dancing

Posting the biggest ever weekend for a Secret Cinema event, Dirty Dancing has 
debuted with an energetic £946,000 from a single venue. Last summer, Secret 
Cinema’s major event,The Empire Strikes Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
, began with £304,000, on its way to £6.32m. Dirty Dancing is playing only six 
times – against Empire’s 100 – but venue capacity is huge.

Dirty Dancing grossed £1.62m during its initial cinema run in 1987, and 
£224,000 on its 20th-anniversary rerelease. This six-day Secret Cinema 
presentation looks set to match the combined gross, although this comparison 
does not take account of inflation. Admission is £65 for a standard ticket, and 
it’s fair to assume that the company holds on to a big proportion of that 
number, to cover the costs of delivering the immersive experience, recreating 
Max Kellerman’s Catskills holiday resort.

The flop #1: Keanu
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpeOKngpMdKA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpeOKngpMdKA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpeOKngpMdKA&media=>
When Keanu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/keanu-review-spoof-action-thriller>
, starring TV comedy duo Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele, debuted in the US 
in April, it rolled out into 2,658 cinemas, grossing $9.45m, on its way to 
$20.6m. The pair are less well known in the UK, presenting distributor Warners 
with the challenge of finding the right size of release and the appropriate 
marketing spend. In the end, Keanu was released into 52 cinemas, taking a 
disappointing £13,700.

The flop #2: Precious Cargo
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg5Gc2qoLvvM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg5Gc2qoLvvM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg5Gc2qoLvvM&media=>
Another week, another film featuring a major star achieving a tiny gross at UK 
cinemas. This time it’s the turn ofPrecious Cargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/precious-cargo-review-bruce-willis-phones-it-in-for-crass-caper>
, a crime thriller starring Bruce Willis, Mark-Paul Gosselaar and Claire 
Forlani and directed by Max Adams, co-writer of action thriller Heist. It 
debuted in the UK with £86 from five cinemas. The film played one showtime per 
day at venues in the Reel chain: at Widnes, Hull, Fareham, Burnley and York. A 
couple of weeks ago,The Colony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/the-colony-review-pinochet-horrors-chile>
, starring Emma Watson, opened with £47 from three cinemas.

 Precious Cargo is simultaneously available as a premium video-on-demand title.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-directs-roald-dahls-fantasy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BFG%20trailer%3A%20Steven%20Spielberg%20directs%20Roald%20Dahl's%20fantasy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-directs-roald-dahls-fantasy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BFG%20trailer%3A%20Steven%20Spielberg%20directs%20Roald%20Dahl%27s%20fantasy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-directs-roald-dahls-fantasy-video&media=>
The BFG trailer: Steven Spielberg directs Roald Dahl’s fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/18/the-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-directs-roald-dahls-fantasy-video>
Despite the weather, and the not-so-exciting numbers for Ghostbusters and Ice 
Age, overall takings are down just 1% on the previous frame, and a handy 17% up 
on the equivalent weekend from 2015, whenAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
 debuted in the top spot. Now cinema managers have hopes pinned on two major 
releases this weekend:The BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-steven-spieberg-roald-dahl>
 andStar Trek Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/star-trek-beyond-review-zachary-quinto-spock-anton-yelchin>
. The BFG has performed rather disappointingly in the US, but UK distributor 
eOne can point to the huge popularity of author Roald Dahl and the film’s 
British cast and setting. Also in the mix: Greek indie comedy Chevalier, winner 
of best film at the London film festival last October.

Top 10 films, 15-17 July

1. Ghostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters>, £4,388,944 
from 581 sites (new)

2. Ice Age: Collision Course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/ice-age-collision-course-review>, 
£3,780,694 from 570 sites (new)

3. The Secret Life of Pets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/secret-life-pets-film-review-family-animation-new-york>
, £2,053,623 from 601 sites. Total: £25,744,363

4. The Legend of Tarzan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/legend-of-tarzan>, 
£1,477,249 from 521 sites. Total: £6,658,957

5. Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie>, £1,199,125 
from 602 sites. Total: £13,179,300

6. Secret Cinema: Dirty Dancing, £946,086 from 1 site (new)

7. Now You See Me 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/now-you-see-me-2>, 
£876,052 from 479 sites. Total: £4,843,905

8. Central Intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/16/central-intelligence-review-dwayne-johnson-kevin-hart>
, £766,990 from 419 sites. Total: £7,251,786

9. Independence Day: Resurgence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/independence-day-resurgence>, £347,438 from 
351 sites. Total: £11,701,124

10. The Conjuring 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-conjuring-2>: The 
Enfield Case, £210,703 from 260 sites. Total: £10,717,314

Other openers
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442402885721%2FKP_475819_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Hard%20Stop%20%E2%80%93%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20documentary%20about%20the%20Mark%20Duggan%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Hard%20Stop%20%E2%80%93%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20documentary%20about%20the%20Mark%20Duggan%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442402885721%2FKP_475819_crop_640x480.jpg>
The Hard Stop – watch the trailer for the documentary about the Mark Duggan 
shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/sep/16/the-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video>
The Hard Stop <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hard-stop>, £23,276 
(including £11,992 previews) from 21 sites

Summertime <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/summertime-review>, 
£14,033 (including £1,312 previews) from 20 sites

Keanu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/keanu-review-spoof-action-thriller>
, £13,736 from 52 sites

Men and Chicken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/men-chicken-review-deadpan-danish-domestic-horror>
, £10,908 from 16 sites

Dhilluku Dhuddu 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?annotation_id=annotation_3724136765&feature=iv&src_vid=Rq6z4EYK35I&v=Gpprj3YIs_I>
, £3,763 from four sites

Baskin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/baskin-review-turkish-horror-film-gut-churning>
, £3,080 from three sites

Mom and Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/mom-and-me-review-devastating-study-of-motherly-love-in-uss-manliest-state>
, £2,893 from five sites (Ireland)

Closet Monster <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3638396/>, £147 from one site

Precious Cargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/precious-cargo-review-bruce-willis-phones-it-in-for-crass-caper>
, £86 from five sites

• Thanks to comScore <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK>. All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.
 