
Giles Waterfield, who has died aged 67 of a heart attack, was director of the 
Dulwich Picture Gallery, in south London, from 1979 to 1996, and turned it from 
a sad, neglected institution into the well displayed, intellectually active and 
socially pioneering museum it is today.

Not a conventionally ambitious man, he chose to leave the gallery before its 
much praised remodelling was complete – it reopened after an 18-month 
refurbishment in 2000 – to become a traveller, independent curator, lecturer 
and writer. He won the 2001 McKitterick prize for his first novel, The Long 
Afternoon, but the quality his students and many friends single out above all 
others was his capacity to inspire as a teacher.

A pleasing example of this arose out of the theft from Dulwich Picture Gallery 
– for the third time – of a small portrait by Rembrandt. A detective was 
billeted on Giles in case a call for ransom came in, and the picture was 
eventually recovered. Some years passed and Giles bumped into the policeman, 
who said he had found listening to him so interesting that he had gone on to 
study art history.

Giles was born in Bramley, Surrey, the son of Honor (nee Northern) and Anthony 
Waterfield, and spent his childhood in France and Geneva - his father worked 
for the Ministry of Aircraft Production and subsequently as a scientific 
adviser to the British embassy in Paris. Giles was educated at Eton and at 
Magdalen College, Oxford, where he studied English, then the Courtauld 
Institute of Art in London, where he specialised in 17th- and 18th-century 
architecture. After a stint at the Brighton Museum andArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> Gallery and the Royal 
Pavilion, in 1979 he took on Dulwich.

Despite its building by Sir John Soane – the first purpose-built public art 
gallery in England, and much admired by postmodernist architects – and a 
collection of paintings that also included works byPoussin, Watteau and 
Canaletto, the gallery had been allowed by the 300-year-old foundation that 
owned it to decline. As Giles recalled, when he arrived there was “a staff of 
five … Nothing happened, no exhibitions, no conservation programme.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgiles-waterfield-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4148de269c447dde57d76b62e8b57d754a0c59aa%2F0_86_5406_3244%2F5406.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giles%20Waterfield%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgiles-waterfield-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giles%20Waterfield%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgiles-waterfield-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4148de269c447dde57d76b62e8b57d754a0c59aa%2F0_86_5406_3244%2F5406.jpg>
 The Dulwich Picture Gallery in 2011. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
The rebirth of the gallery was a classic example of the great and good in 
action. Giles turned to Lord Rothschild, then chairman of the Heritage Lottery 
Fund, who was a powerful help in negotiating the disentanglement of the gallery 
and its establishment as an independent charitable trust in 1994. Rothschild’s 
friend Lord (John) Sainsbury of Preston Candover became chairman of the board 
and he in turn persuaded his wealthy friends to become trustees. They raised 
funds and a lottery-supported campaign led to the endowment, restoration and 
tactful extension of the museum by the architectRick Mather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/29/rick-mather>.

Meanwhile, the gallery was developing a social arm that has since been 
imitated by much bigger museums. Giles was apparently apolitical, but his 
instincts were those of an old-fashioned liberal. “We must do something for the 
unemployed,” he said one day in 1984 to Gillian Wolfe, his pioneering head of 
education, and that was the beginning of an outreach programme that managed to 
get through even to alienated teenage offenders.

An important part of Giles’s life after leaving Dulwich was the Attingham 
Summer School, with which he had been involved since 1980. This is an 
intellectually rigorous, three-week course in historic architecture and the 
decorative and fine arts in the context of country houses. Its thousands of 
alumni, nearly all museum curators, have been forged into a fiercely loyal and 
quietly influential network by this “artistic boot camp”, as one called it. 
Giles became its co-director (1995-2003) and went on, with Sir Hugh Roberts, 
Surveyor of the Queen’s Works ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, to found the Royal Collection 
studies course, which examines the Royal Collection in particular.

He was an associate lecturer at the Courtauld from 2002, and was an adviser 
to, or trustee of, a large number of leading art organisations, including the 
Royal Academy, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, the National Trust, 
and Heritage Lottery Fund. With the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation he set up a fund 
for exhibitions in regional museums; he was on the executive committee of the 
London Library and the advisory committee of the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies 
in British Art, and many more. This work was largely unpaid and he was a 
shining example of the civil society in action.

Among the exhibitions he organised was Art Treasures of England: The Regional 
Collections, at the Royal Academy (1998-99), which brought masterpieces to the 
capital to remind Londoners that the “provinces” are not a cultural desert. His 
showBelow Stairs at the National Portrait Gallery 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/exhibitions/2003/below-stairs.php> (2003-04), 
with Anne French, was the first ever to be dedicated to servants, with 
portraits of servants from the 17th century onwards.

Last year, Giles’s history, The People’s Galleries: Art Museums and 
Exhibitions in Britain, 1800-1914, was published by Yale University Press. He 
also wrote four novels, one of them,The Hound in the Left-Hand Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jul/21/fiction.features> (2002), a 
spot-on satire of museum culture in Tony Blair’s Cool Britannia.

He had a subtle understanding of character, shown most movingly in The Long 
Afternoon (2000), which fictionalises the tragedy of his grandparents. They 
belonged to the British community in Menton on the Cote d’Azur at the beginning 
of the 20th century, where they created a beautiful garden, the Clos du 
Peyronnet, which still belongs to Giles’s brother, William. The rich 
grandmother was “delicate”, and gradually stopped her talented husband working 
or doing anything at all. Years passed in a more and more pointless and 
cocooned existence, until the outbreak of the second world war. They moved west 
to Pau, but had lost any capacity to face the challenges of the outside world, 
and after dinner one evening they killed themselves.

Nothing could be further from Giles’s own life, which was positive, driven, 
full of intellectual curiosity and generosity towards his many friends. A great 
lover of travel, he had recently been to China.

He is survived by his partner, Joseph Whoriskey, and William.

• Giles Adrian Waterfield, writer and curator, born 24 July 1949; died 5 
November 2016

 * This article was amended on 7 December 2016. The Dulwich Picture Gallery 
reopened in 2000 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/764190.stm> after a closure of 
18 months for refurbishment, rather than five years.  