
The potentially harmful effects of media on the lives of adolescent girls are 
widely recognised, but in the recently published paperMaking Waves: Media’s 
Potential for Girls in the Global South 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/policy/briefings/policy-girls-media>
, I argue that media can also play a positive role.


Media can influence healthy behaviours in girls, open the door to greater 
participation in society and ensure that girls’ issues move higher up on the 
public agenda. As it takes hold in the global south, social media may play an 
increasingly key role in enabling girls to network with each other and in 
taking action to change their worlds for the better.

At present, however, media is not sufficiently integrated into development 
strategies seeking to enhance girls’ wellbeing across the global south. How can 
donors structure media projects so as to best fulfill their developmental 
potential for girls?

Don’t lose sight of your primary audience


It sounds obvious, but when designing programming for girls, make sure that it 
speaks first and foremost to them. There’s a risk that projects focused on a 
broader audience may subsume girls’ needs beneath those of young men or older 
women.

Generate more evidence


While there’s plenty of evidence to suggest that mass media programmes shape 
social norms that affect girls’ lives, few research efforts have directly 
involved girls themselves. We need to focus our research efforts on where we 
know evidence gaps exist: the impact of different levels of exposure to media 
programming; the effectiveness of standalone communication programmes versus 
those integrated into broader development programmes, and the relative 
effectiveness of different media approaches.

Broaden the focus


The majority of media interventions for girls tend to focus on sexual and 
reproductive health, teenage pregnancy and, increasingly, child marriage. These 
are all worthwhile investments, but girls have other critical needs that can be 
addressed through media programming: economic empowerment, financial literacy 
and social and civic participation.

In Nepal, national television programme Sajha Sawal 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/where-we-work/asia/nepal/sajha-sawal> (Common 
Questions) gives adolescent girls the opportunity to ask tough questions of 
public officials alongside men and older women in their community. This creates 
visible role models who are engaged in political discussion and encourages 
civic responsibility.

In Cambodia, the Loy9 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/research/summaries/asia/cambodia/loy9-youth-civic-participation>
 project aims to boost civic participation through television, radio, online, 
mobile and live events and has reached 62% of 15- to 19-year-old girls, with 
96% of those saying that it has shown them how to express their ideas and 
opinions.

Expand across different media

Think of your media strategy around girls as just one part of a broader 
mosaic. Several case studies suggest that tying media programmes for girls to 
other community interventions can increase impact. The Nicaraguan NGOPuntos de 
Encuentro <http://www.puntos.org.ni/index.php/en/>, for example, combines 
television dramas, public service announcements and radio programmes with 
activities such as cast tours, educational sessions in schools and local 
discussion groups. Other NGOs train adolescent girls to facilitate online 
hangouts with other girls, thereby encouraging peer-to-peer conversations.

Anchor girls’ programming in broader initiatives


Sustainability can be enhanced by integrating girls’ media programming into 
broader development and empowerment programmes. Projects such as theRevela2 
<http://www.uninorte.edu.co/web/jvega/opinion/-/blogs/comienza-la-emision-de-revela2:-desde-todas-las-posiciones-por-telecaribe>
 “edutainment” platform for girls in Colombia was jointly funded by the 
ministry of health and the president’s office, while the ministry of education 
supported a complementary package for schools. The programme is now embedded 
within a broader intersectorial commission on sexual and reproductive health 
for teenagers that helps to increase the organisational and financial 
sustainability of girls’ media initiatives.

Dismantle obstacles

With some notable exceptions, current interventions tend to concentrate on the 
production of media content without addressing the systemic barriers that can 
limit media’s ability to improve girls’ lives. Challenges around girls’ access 
to media as well as gender balance within media organisations need to be 
addressed head on in order to ensure that media can play a positive role in 
enhancing girls’ potential.

Caroline Sugg is the head of advisory and policy at BBC Media Action 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction>. Follow @carolinesugg 
<https://twitter.com/carolinesugg> on Twitter. 

Read more stories like this:


• Millions of retweets, celebrity backing but no happy ending: 
#BringBackOurGirls’ six-month timeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2014/oct/13/millions-of-retweets-celebrity-backing-but-no-happy-ending-bringbackourgirls-six-month-timeline>
• I’m a man running a girls’ rights campaign. So what? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/18/im-a-man-running-a-girls-rights-campaign-so-what>
• Altered images: photography as a tool for gender equality
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/02/altered-images-photography-as-a-tool-for-gender-equality>
• Advertising feature: When is violence against girls going to stop? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/dec/11/when-is-violence-against-girls-going-to-stop>

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox. 

 