
Ten years ago in Malawi’s capital, Lilongwe, Zikani Kaunga, a prominent 
education advocate, invited me to the Sunbird Hotel. Pushing his juice aside, 
he tipped forward to make a proposition.

For years, Zikani had implemented a scholarship programme, funded by a foreign 
government, to put hundreds of rural girls through primary school. But Zikani 
told me that within six months of graduating from eighth grade, a third of the 
girls became pregnant. No one funded secondary education, and the tuition was 
more than the average parent earned in a year.

Zikani knew I’d written about poverty in Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>. If I could raise tuition money from 
my readers for some of his primary graduates, he would make it his personal 
business to ensure they succeed. He told me about a girl, Idah, who he enrolled 
in first grade eight years before. She was an orphan with seven siblings, and 
gifted. He was hellbent on seeing her through.

Toyin Saraki on girls' education and ending child marriage in Nigeria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/08/boko-haram-nigeria-girls>
Almost 25 years ago, World Bank chief economist Lawrence Summers endorsed 
girls’ education 
<http://www.hks.harvard.edu/m-rcbg/CSRI/publications/report_40_investing_in_girls.pdf>
 as one of the best ways to transform societies. Since then, volumes of 
research attest to the related outcomes in health, empowerment and economic 
growth. In 2014, public interest in the field soared in solidarity with Malala 
Yousafzai and the girls kidnapped by Boko Haram.


Despite all this, if you scratch the surface, you’ll find that help is slow to 
arrive where it’s needed most.

Policymakers are hardwired to look for low-hanging fruit. In girls’ education, 
this meant boosting enrollment for younger children. Malawi was one of the 
first countries to make primary education free in 1994, followed by the 
majority of African countries and many Asian countries. Donor governments were 
quick to fund these efforts, in line with the global goal of universal primary 
enrollment. Ironically, cutting tuition fees sometimes hurt learning outcomes, 
as kids crammed into unprepared school systems overnight. But in Malawi the 
policy skyrocketed girls’ primary enrolmentfrom under 50% to 100% 
<http://ageafrica.org/app/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Scharff-Primary-School-is-not-enough-Article.pdf>
 today.

Ziauddin Yousafzai: learn from Malala, use your own voice to demand rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/09/ziauddin-yousafzai-malala-girls-education>
Improvements in primary enrollment – in Malawi and elsewhere in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> – were a crucial first step, but it 
wasn’t a game-changer for girls. The statistics were so impressive that they 
created a false narrative that damaged the bigger effort; at anti-poverty 
meetings, policymakers are known to say that girls’ education is already solved.

The reality is that many girls are just as far behind boys as they were 10 
years ago when you look at secondary education. Secondary education is more 
expensive than primary and is complicated by puberty and related societal 
pressures, but many of the benefits of education kick in at this level. 
Startlingly, girls in sub-Saharan Africa are stilleight percentage points 
<http://data.uis.unesco.org/index.aspx?queryid=126> behind boys in lower 
secondary school completion, just as they were in 2004.

Thanks to the advocacy of people like Zikani Kaunga, the good news is that 
globally, after decades of focusing on primary education, more funding 
institutions are zeroing in on the gender gap at secondary school level. How 
much more could have been achieved if education funders had also focused on the 
harder problem of girls’ secondary education two decades ago? There’s a lesson 
in this; on equity issues, addressing low hanging fruit isn’t as effective as 
going to the heart of the problem.


Girls brave violence for their education in northern Nigeria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/northern-nigeria-school-girls>
Today, the biggest challenge in girls’ education rests in a group of countries 
ravaged by war. In these “donor orphan” countries, many funding institutions 
can’t function. As a colleague from a large bilateral aid agency told me: “We 
designed our education programmes knowing there was a different set of 
countries where girls were furthest behind. We just didn’t have government 
relations there.” For smaller foundations, the risks of funding programmes in 
northern Nigeria, Chad, or Syria are daunting.


In a set of countries ravaged by war - Central African Republic, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Niger, Chad, Somalia and others – there’s seven 
girls per 10 boys in the classroom or less, but aid rarely arrives. Girls are 
not only missing an education, they are at increased risk of early marriage and 
gender-based violence.


I recently surveyed 44 funder institutions in education for a report 
<http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2015/03/innovation-action-funding-girls-education-ackerman>
 published by The Brookings Institution. The result was surprising. Although 
three-quarters prioritise girls’ education, most can’t work in conflict 
settings.

For girls’ education to make real progress in the next decade, this balance 
has to change. The Global Partnership for Education – a multilateral 
partnership that grants billions for education, including to countries affected 
by war – must take the lead in pivoting toward this challenge.

In Malawi last year, Idah and I traded text messages as I drove up the dirt 
road to her university. Years ago Zikani and I saw her through high school. Now 
she studies media and development and has a weekend internship doing social 
work in nearby villages. We went together to St Mary’s High School for girls in 
southern Malawi where she was the featured speaker. In keeping with the school 
dress code, the girls all had shorn heads, but being a college girl, Idah 
favoured fine braids tied gently around her shoulders. The girls swarmed around 
her like bees to a flower, saying: “Tell us about college!”


It might be harder to do, but a few more girls like Idah in the hardest places 
would do a world of good.

Xanthe Ackerman is the founder is of Advancing Girls’ Education in Africa 
<http://ageafrica.org/>. Follow @XAckerman <https://twitter.com/XAckerman> on 
Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 