
The Pensions Regulator should be given the power to veto takeovers that put 
too much strain on their pension schemes, according to the chair of the
Institute of Directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-of-directors>.

In a paper, Barbara Judge set out ideas to avoid a repeat of the situation at 
retailer BHS which collapsed in April and sparked recriminations about its£571m 
pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
.

“The sad demise of BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> reflects 
well on nobody. The time has come to move on from the media firestorm, and to 
look at constructive and useful ways in which we can apply the lessons learned 
in the aftermath,” said Lady Judge, who used be chair of the Pension Protection 
Fund.

Companies involved in takeovers are able to approach the Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator about their plans on a 
voluntary basis. Judge said that in future the regulator should investigate 
sales of companies with turnovers of at least £200m and where the pension fund 
covers more than 2,000 employees.

As MPs on the work and pensions committee prepare to hear evidence on the 
regulator’s powers, she said: “The business community has a responsibility to 
show that it cares about how companies treat their staff, and this has prompted 
me to make these proposals.

“Giving the regulator a veto over sales is a bold proposal, but I feel much 
more scrutiny is needed of large pension schemes at the point of purchase, if 
we are to avoid similar cases [such as BHS] happening again.”

Lesley Titcomb, chief executive of the Pensions Regulator, has previously 
written to Frank Field 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/work-and-pensions/Correspondence/From-the-Pensions-Regulator-24-06-2016.pdf>
, the MP who chairs the work and pensions committee, acknowledging there is a 
case to examine its powers during takeovers.
 