
Glenda Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/glenda-jackson> is small and 
slight, her face crumpled like an old £5 note. She looks out of place amid the 
glitz of London’s Langham hotel – she smokes and swears like a trooper and, at 
80, she is as single-minded as ever.

Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/glenda-jackson> has always been her 
own woman. Who else would walk out on Hollywood in her prime to become a 
backbench member of parliament? And who else would stick at it for 23 years, 
grafting away to little notable effect (apart from making a stonking enemy of 
Tony Blair)? And who else would choose to celebrate her ninth decade by
returning to the stage as raging King Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/05/king-lear-review-glenda-jackson-old-vic>
, Shakespeare’s most gruelling part?

“I couldn’t make up my mind whether it was arrogance or just insanity,” she 
says. She looks around the salubrious tea rooms, marvelling at the decor in a 
manner that suggests she is not wholly enamoured. You imagine she would be 
happier in a greasy spoon.

Jackson even does publicity her own way. A few months ago, soon after it was 
announced that she would return to the stage for the first time in 25 years to 
play Lear, I saw her outside Blackheath station in south London trying to 
convince people to stay in the EU. I told her I would love to interview her for 
Lear. Fine, she said, before deciding it was best to wait till the show was 
done and dusted. So only now, two months after critics unanimously acclaimed 
her Lear, and a couple of weeks after the run finished, is she ready to promote 
it. “The curious thing is that it was like I’d never been away. People said to 
me: ‘Oh, you’ll be fine, it’s like riding a bike,’ and I said: ‘Don’t be
ri-dic-ulous, it’s rather more complicated than riding a bike.’” Her 
“ridiculous” is delivered with such force it could cause whiplash.

“But, you know, I’d seen my friend Nuria Espert 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N%C3%BAria_Espert> do it in Spain and she said: 
‘Why don’t you do it?’ and I said: ‘Don’t beri-dic-ulous.’” More whiplash. 
“What, a woman playing Lear, been away for 25 years? Don’t beab-surd. Then 
other people said to me: ‘If you’re going to come back, come back with 
something,’ you know … So I said I’ll either crash and burn or whatever.”

King Lear review – Glenda Jackson makes a triumphant return to the stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/05/king-lear-review-glenda-jackson-old-vic>
It’s no surprise that she whatevered. Jackson was always a magnificent actor, 
whether on stage or screen. She was a regular at the Oscars before the Academy 
had even heard of Judi Dench (winning forWomen in Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYCQok8xVbo> and A Touch of Class 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5nmnHYUQXic> in 1971 and 1974 respectively). 
Her notable portrayal ofQueen Elizabeth I 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hyeUxYW4-YA> on TV in 1971 also beat Dench’s 
effort by several decades. She was beautiful (all bobbed hair, high cheekbones 
and flushed lips), with astonishing diction and an unfeasible capacity for 
depicting cruelty. Nobody did scorn quite like Jackson. She could emasculate a 
leading man from 100 paces. And yet there was so much more to her than the 
icy temptress.

One of my favourite performances is in a small 70s film called Stevie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gUvDEZkvQlc> about the poet Stevie Smith 
<http://www.poetryarchive.org/poet/stevie-smith>. The complexity of Smith’s 
character allows Jackson to display a formidable range (social butterfly, 
depressive introvert, arrogant egotist, suffocating spinster, adoring niece, 
disdainful lover), often all in the one scene. Smith’s ambiguities mirror some 
of the ambiguities in Jackson herself. Often the actor appeared bohemian 
(starring in so many of those louche Ken Russell films that she became known as 
“the first lady of the flesh”), but in fact there has always been something of 
the puritan about her.

When I mention Stevie, her face lights up. “Oh well, she was marvellous, 
wasn’t she? I met her, you know. It was when I was with the RSC and they had 
this programme doing a mixture of poetry and jazz on Sunday evenings. I’d been 
roped into doing one, and I was standing in the wings waiting to go on and do 
my stuff, and this little woman comes up to me. I’d never seen her in my life – 
short, with a fringe, hair below her ears, wearing a white blouse, a dark 
jumper, lisle stockings, a dirndl skirt …”

Blimey, I say, how can you remember all this?

“Because she was so amazing. Let me finish my story … which looked as though 
she’d woven it at home, ankle socks, sandals and a very good piece of Victorian 
jewellery at the neck of her blouse. And the thing that was amazing to me was 
that there wasn’t a single protective curve anywhere in her body. She said: 
‘I’m Stevie Smith.’ I said: ‘Oh, hello,’ never having heard her name in my life 
before, and she goes on to the stage anddoes Not Waving But Drowning 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FKHWEWOrL9s>, and I think: ‘Who the fuck are 
you?’ And I dashed out to the bookshops the next day and there wasn’t a single 
one of her books in print. Years later, she became quite famous and she 
absolutely loved it and milked it for all it was worth, for which I take my hat 
off to her.”

Jackson is transformed as she talks. She has a wonderful facility with 
language – this could have been a monologue scripted by Alan Bennett. Jackson 
had a very different attitude towards fame – it was the price of success. As 
for her own protective curves: “I have lots. I turn my feet in when I’m sitting 
down. I tend to put my arms across me when I’m sat thinking, I bend forwards. 
Loads of protective curves.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc61d350d80c545990b3ffae0444fa043dbe243%2F0_24_2416_1449%2F2416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc61d350d80c545990b3ffae0444fa043dbe243%2F0_24_2416_1449%2F2416.jpg>
 As Gudrud Brangwen in Women in Love (1969). Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Is Stevie one of her favourite pieces of work? “I don’t really have 
favourites,” she says, brusquely. Come off it, I say – you must be able to 
think of films you’ve loved and hated? “Oh, I could certainly do that,” she 
says.

Go on then.

“No, I’m not going to. I’m sitting here as a woman who, over 80 years, has had 
to learn how to be diplomatic.” You can’t go around saying just what you want 
to whom you want in politics, she says – least of all to your constituents.

Blimey, I say, disappointed. I never thought diplomacy was your bag. “I don’t 
think it is. I mean, I’m perfectly prepared to say the horrible things I did 
which easily spring to mind.Bequest to the Nation 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070437/>, where I played Emma Hamilton, I’m just 
ghastly in. And I dida film about Sarah Bernhardt 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0074678/>, I’m lousy in that.” Why were you so 
bad?” Because I didn’t believe in it, or because I couldn’t convince myself of 
its reality in some way.”

Interviewers have often said Jackson is scary – over the years they have 
called her cold, aloof, charmless, humourless. Does it upset her? “I’ve never 
understood the fear thing.” Perhaps it’s the front you project, I say. She asks 
what I mean. Well, I say, you can be pretty abrupt – at Blackheath station, she 
shouted out after me that I was a “patronising git” …

She laughs. “Oh, I see, yeah! It’s the north versus the south. It’s what we do 
in the north!” When you’re working in a team producing something creative, you 
have to be prepared to be honest to get the best results, she says. “I expect 
people to say to me: ‘What the fuck d’you think you’re doing?’ Not that I would 
ever say that to anybody, but that’s what you’re looking for; there is that 
shared sense of responsibility.”

Jackson was born in Birkenhead to working-class parents – her father was a 
bricklayer, her mother a cleaner. She left school at 15 and worked at Boots. 
Jackson was ambitious, determined to get a transfer from the medical counter to 
cosmetics. She didn’t wangle that one, but she did end up at the Royal Academy 
of Dramatic Art.

You sense her politics – traditional Labour, solidarity, feminism – was shaped 
by family and relationships. Jackson has said in the past that she has never 
been involved in a nonviolent relationship. She has one son, the political 
columnistDan Hodges <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dan_Hodges>, from her 
marriage to Roy Hodges, whom she divorced in 1976. She has been happily single 
for decades, and lives in the basement of Dan’s home with his family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8394889df6846a70426d07b2586f6c170f8bb745%2F0_133_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8394889df6846a70426d07b2586f6c170f8bb745%2F0_133_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 On the campaign trail with Gordon Brown in 2010. Photograph: Andrew Winning/PA 
Archive/PA Images 
When she went into politics, she was expected to bring glamour to the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party. Jackson did anything but. 
She did not wear makeup or play the celebrity, and settled down to the 
nitty-gritty of life as a constituency MP.

What took her into politics? “Anything I could have done that was legal to get 
Margaret Thatcher’s government out I was prepared to do. I could not believe 
what she was doing to this country.”

Was it anger or idealism that drove her? “No, I didn’t think of myself as an 
idealist. I consider myself as a believer in what I regard as the Labour 
party’s basic principles, which have to do with equality and ‘do unto others as 
you would have them do unto you’. You know, the golden rules.”

The word Jackson returns to again and again is transformative – whether about 
the arts or politics. “My life was transformed by the Labour government of 
1945. It was transformative for millions of people like me, you know – 
education, the health service. It was proof that politics can make life better 
for people; that a social dream can become a social reality by the power 
of government.”

Does she understand why people are so cynical about politicians now? “Yes. For 
so long that voice of people on the doorstep was ignored in this country, not 
just by one political party, but by all of them.” There is little to be 
positive about in the immediate future, she says, with Trump in the US and 
Brexit here. “I still believe that we can come together, that there are values 
we do all share, but the journey to that is going to be bumpy. It’s not just 
like opening the door and saying: ‘Oh don’t deliver the milk tomorrow.’ It’s 
going to be bloody difficult.”

How does she think Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is doing? “You tell me,” she 
shoots back. “How low are we in the polls?” Would she define herself as a 
Corbyn supporter in any way? “Yes, as a person. We had contingent 
constituencies. I found him marvellous to work with, always cheerful, used to 
talk to everybody, wrote me a very sweet letter when I didn’t stand at the last 
election. I wrote back to him saying my only regret was that, as I was no 
longer a member of parliament, I could not nominate him for the leadership, 
which I would have done, because I was a firm believer that we always had to 
have a left-of-centre candidate. Never in a million years would I have voted 
for him, though.”

Even though Jackson never achieved high rank, she was a fearless politician. 
She will be remembered forskewering Iain Duncan-Smith 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Jckm3X5MXo> on welfare reform, damning 
Thatcher’s legacy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDtClJYJBj8> in the Commons 
just after she died and, most of all, her sustained attack on her own leader 
and prime minister, Tony Blair, after the Iraq war. She said he “suffered from 
the insolence of office” (a quote from Hamlet), called for his resignation and 
even considered standing against him as a stalking horse. That didn’t do much 
for your prospects, did it? “Well, I couldn’t have done anything else, because 
of my consistent opposition to the Iraq war.”

How did he treat you after that? “No different to the way he treated me 
before, because we’d hardly ever met.” What? But you’re Glenda Jackson? “That 
didn’t make any difference in parliament.” He wasn’t interested in you? “Well, 
what was there to be interested in? What they were interested in was how often 
were you prepared to open your mouth and say this is the wrong thing to do, and 
I was prepared to open my mouth at the drop a hat to say this was the wrong 
thing to do. But as a backbench MP you don’t see them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959b995a005f799156c3a58a000911fb0321ece7%2F0_956_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959b995a005f799156c3a58a000911fb0321ece7%2F0_956_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
 ‘I was prepared to open my mouth at the drop of a hat to say what was wrong.’ 
Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Jackson was criticised for her poor attendance in parliament. Was that valid? 
“Oh yes, absolutely.” What’s her excuse? “I don’t have one. I don’t think I 
ever missed a three-line whip, but to hang about for a one- or two-line whip on 
something of utter irrelevance, I couldn’t understand the point of it. If 
I could have been doing something in the constituency, that was obviously the 
priority.”

Following boundary changes that broke up her old Hampstead and Highgate seat, 
Jackson won Hampstead and Kilburn with the country’s second-smallest majority 
(42 votes) in 2010 and stood down in 2015. In the end, did politics live up to 
her expectations? “Oh, no. No.” In what way? “Well, I think we all love The 
West Wing because that’s the way we wish politics was, but it isn’t. But 
equally I wouldn’t have missed it for the world. I don’t know that politics 
itself disappointed me. But the structures of politics did, certainly. The 
minute you’re elected, you’re responsible for your constituency; I had no 
office, I had no staff, I had no equipment. It was six months before I had an 
office, which I shared with somebody. And one of the big changes has been in 
the hours the House sat. I mean, it was absolutely de rigueur that you would go 
to work at 9am and still be there at three the following morning, for no good 
reason. I mean,ut-ter-ly ridiculous. They only starting sitting at two in the 
afternoon, even though you started work at nine, so those changes have come in, 
which I think are very valid. But I think there’s still far too much antiquated 
discipline.”

Did you miss acting? “No, but I certainly missed the people. I missed them 
very much; it’s a very different kind of person. I missed the humour, I missed 
the generosity, I missed the kind of acceptance that just takes people for what 
they are.” She also missed the camaraderie.

I ask if anything in acting can beat taking on Blair in the Commons or helping 
a constituent in dire need. No, she says, she’s not playing that game. “They 
are not analogous. They are entirely different.” But a second later she isn’t 
so sure. “They’re not entirely different …”

I interrupt. “No, let me dig my way into trying to answer your question.” And 
she really does go into battle with herself. “The exclusive responsibility for 
arguing against the Iraq war or stating my opinion of Margaret Thatcher’s 
regime was mine … If there was a fallout, it was mine. The responsibility in 
acting is not exclusively mine. There’s a shared responsibility.”

I’m not talking about shared responsibility, I say.

“Well, I am!” she snaps in her best scouse.

What I’m talking about is what gave you the most satisfaction; the biggest 
high. “No, no, that’s not how it works! There isn’t a high. And if there is a 
high, it’s – what’s that thing they say about enjoying something in …”

Retrospect?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eeda39d24c398b23d8f58a99626b3d05e76e39b%2F0_317_3651_4561%2F3651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenda%20Jackson%20on%20her%20scary%20reputation%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20understood%20the%20fear%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fglenda-jackson-scary-reputation-never-understood-fear-thing-lear-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eeda39d24c398b23d8f58a99626b3d05e76e39b%2F0_317_3651_4561%2F3651.jpg>
 As Lear with Rhys Ifans as the fool in King Lear in November. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
“Thank you. Yes, they are retrospective. But the moment is passed. And it’s 
being in the now that counts.”

She talks about how she’s fitter than she has been in years, thanks to Lear. 
She went swimming, walking, even cut down on the fags in preparation. “Since 
doing Lear I’m down to under 10 a day, except for my indulgence day – which was 
Sunday, when I allowed myself a couple more.”

Is this the start of the second half of her acting career? “The other stuff 
that has been sent to me doesn’t interest me, so we’ll wait and see.” She is in 
discussions about transferring Lear to New York. Are there enough roles around 
for her? “Oh God, no. That is one of the really shocking things that hasn’t 
changed in my 25 years of being out of it. Creative writers still don’t find 
women interesting. They are hardly ever the dramatic engine, they are mostly 
an adjunct, and I find that very bizarre.”

I tell her she never answered me about which career gave her most 
satisfaction. She can’t, she says. OK, then, I say; if your parents were still 
around, what do you think they would have been proudest of? “Probably neither,” 
she says instantly. “I think my father was probably proudest of the honorary 
doctorates I got, and for my mother it would be that I went home with no holes 
in my shoes. They would be the things, yes.”

Glenda Jackson and the Making of King Lear is on BBC Radio 4 on Christmas Day.
 