
A computer program developed by Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> took an unassailable 3-0 lead 
in a best-of-five match with a Go grandmaster on Saturday.

The Chinese board game is considered to be much more complex than chess – 
there are a far greater number of outcomes – and the victory by the program, 
AlphaGo, is being a hailed as a stark demonstration of the rapidly growing 
power of modern artificial intelligence. AlphaGo took only four hours to 
achieve itsthird consecutive win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/mar/09/alphago-computer-beats-go-champion-video>
 over Lee Se-dol, one of the ancient game’s greatest modern players.

Lee, who has topped the world ranking for much of the last decade and holds 18 
international titles, had predicted an easy victory when accepting the 
challenge. Now he finds himself fighting to avoid a whitewash in the two 
remaining games, on Sunday and Tuesday.

“I don’t know what to say, but I think I have to express my apologies first,” 
a crestfallen Lee said. “I kind of felt powerless,” he said, acknowledging he 
had misjudged his opponent. “I have extensive experience in playing Go but 
there was never a case where I was under this much pressure … and I was 
incapable of overcoming it,” he said.

Go is a game for two. Players take turns putting black or white stones on a 
19-by-19 grid. The winner is the player who surrounds more territory than his 
or her opponent. Skill at Go requires an ability in dealing with abstract 
strategic concepts and for AlphaGo’s creators,Google DeepMind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/22/google-deepmind-go-alphago>
, the victory demonstrates that AI has now come of age. “To be honest, we are a 
bit stunned and speechless,” DeepMind CEO Demis Hassabis told reporters after 
the victory.

In the past, the British AI researcher has described Go as “a bit of a holy 
grail for AI research”, though he stressed on Saturday that Lee’s defeat in 
Seoul should not be seen as a loss for humanity. “Our hope is that in the long 
run we will be able to use these techniques for many other problems,” Hassabis 
said.

These applications could include making phones even smarter and “helping 
scientists solve some of the world’s biggest challenges in healthcare and other 
areas.”

The last famous scalp to be taken by AI programs came in 1997 when the 
IBM-developed supercomputer Deep Blue beat chess champion Garry Kasparov. 
However, AlphaGo’s victory goes far beyond that achievement and was achieved by 
adopting “general” or multi-purpose, rather than “narrow”, task-specific 
intelligence. This is the ultimate goal in AI – to mimic human reasoning and, 
crucially, self-learning.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falphago-wins-second-game-against-go-champion-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AlphaGo%20wins%20second%20game%20against%20Go%20champion%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falphago-wins-second-game-against-go-champion-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AlphaGo%20wins%20second%20game%20against%20Go%20champion%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falphago-wins-second-game-against-go-champion-video&media=>
AlphaGo wins second game against Go champion – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/mar/10/alphago-wins-second-game-against-go-champion-video> 