
The Greeks never used to have hero issues. But heroes have been in short 
supply in the country's hour of need, which could explain the rush to cinemas 
to spend time in the company of an 18th-century pirate turned luxury foodstuffs 
tycoon. Recent releaseO Theos agapaei to haviari 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1A4OyLCYmBg> (God Loves Caviar) is the story of 
Ioannis Varvakis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ioannis_Varvakis>, an 
Enlightenment-era rapscallion whosided with the Russians in their 1768 war with 
the Turks <>, befriended Catherine the Great and built a fortune out of 
sturgeon eggs – then gave it all away to help his motherland fight the Ottoman 
empire. It's not exactly all-action Pirates of the Aegean; withCatherine Deneuve
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/catherinedeneuve> as Catherine, John Cleese 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/john-cleese> as an English colonial officer 
andThe Lives of Others 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/115216/lives.of.others> star Sebastian 
Koch as Varvakis, this is one high-seas jolly fishing for a more upmarket kind 
of international harbour.

It's done the trick in Greece, topping the box office for three weeks in 
October and taking $2.7m (£1.7m) to date, making it the year's highest-grossing 
domestic film. The tale of an Odyssean rogue making good in stormy times has 
struck a national chord; it seems to have made no difference whatsoever that 
the film, directed by Yannis Smaragdis (who after his 2007 biopic ofEl Greco 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqB4IBj6dGg> seems to be monopolising the 
Hellenic-icon market), has come in for a rough critical ride. "Turgid, awkward 
and as insincere as they come,"wrote IonCinema's Nicholas Bell 
<http://www.ioncinema.com/news/god-loves-caviar-tiff-2012-review> after the 
film screened at Toronto earlier this year. "This historical melodrama is one 
painfully orchestrated scene after the other."

Greek criticisms were more focused. Giannis Zoumboulakis of centre-left daily 
To Vima 
<http://www.tovima.gr/culture/article/?aid=478901&wordsinarticle=%3b%CE%9F%3b%CE%98%CE%B5%CF%8C%CF%82%3b%CE%B1%CE%B3%CE%B1%CF%80%CE%AC%CE%B5%CE%B9%3b%CF%84%CE%BF%3b%CF%87%CE%B1%CE%B2%CE%B9%CE%AC%CF%81%CE%B9>
 seemed disappointed that Smaragdis hadn't made his case for Varvakis as Greek 
exemplar more clearly. "The problem is that he doesn't impose the 'Varvakeion 
ideal' through the body of the film per se. On the contrary, you feel it from 
the beginning as a given fact, similar to what Smaragdis did in his previous 
film, El Greco. It is obvious that the director can't (and perhaps doesn't want 
to) hide the huge admiration he has for Varvakis, the same way he did not hide 
it for El Greco."

Meanwhile, K Terzis of the more radical-left I Avgi 
<http://www.avgi.gr/ArticleActionshow.action?articleID=719886> was downright 
sceptical about any political or social pretensions God Loves Caviar might 
have. "Smaragdis reproduces the well-known national narrative on screen, a 
narrative he doesn't seek to redefine (to meet current needs) to address the 
crucial questions concerning our identity, questions that penetrate the body of 
our society today; he simply seeks to 'apply a balm' to the soul of today's 
Greek with another biography of a great Greek, because, as the director 
casually reveals: 'If each of us followed his example then today Greece would 
definitely be different.' Is it that simple? To get today's unemployed or 
debt-ridden shopkeeper to adopt the model of a pirate – a tycoon of the 18th 
century?"

Smaragdis is starting to take on the air of a bit of a chancer himself: 
budgeted at €6.5m (£5.2m), God Loves Caviar is the most expensive Greek film 
ever, brushing past his own El Greco's €6.2m. There's no doubt that the 
country's film industry needs a pennant production to flag up the commercial 
side of things and complement the acclaimYorgos Lanthimos 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yorgos_Lanthimos> and Athina Rachel Tsangari 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athina_Rachel_Tsangari>, the "Greek freak" 
directors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/aug/27/attenberg-dogtooth-greece-cinema>, 
are bringing in at the arthouse end. But the film has launched in vastly 
different conditions to when El Greco gathered $8.2m in 2007. Greek box office 
dropped by about a third to around $100m last year, and looks like it's going 
to take a further 20% hit this year. God Loves Caviar has done well considering 
to drum up 300,000 punters so far, but it's not enough to put the film into 
profit.

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/nov/09/alps-video-review>

Despite the flashy casting, its foreign prospects seem limited: Ioannis 
Varvakis has far less international recognition than El Greco, and the hostile 
reviews seem likely to sink God Loves Caviar's prospects. But perhaps Smaragdis 
is content just to have crafted a heroic figure for his country – whether or 
not you think God Loves Caviar's philosophy of picaresque opportunism is a 
responsible one given the scale of Greece's problems.

But who said heroes were about realism or clearheadedness? Attempts to 
consciously manufacture them often fall flat, as Hollywood frequently discovers.
Skyfall <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144416/skyfall/review>, which 
knocked God Loves Caviar off its perch in Greece, was one of the more intrepid 
recent experiments in remoulding a hero for the times. It felt a little too 
complacent, though, to coherently reposition Bond: highlighting Britain's 
fallen world-status through him, then redundantly spending its last hour on a 
reassuring trip down pop-cultural memory lane.

But then Britain isn't truly desperate. Heroes are most effective when the 
need for them is greatest, as God Loves Caviar shows. It doesn't even matter if 
a bankrupt country ends up saluting a luxury-goods pioneer. Or if the film 
isn't much cop.

• Thanks to Michael Moloney at Hellenic Bookservice 
<http://www.hellenicbookservice.com/)> for the translations.

• What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? 
Let us know in the comments below.
 