
Goldman Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> featured 
prominently in the headlines this year, even before the leak this week of 
Theresa May’s pre-EU referendum speech to staff at the investment bank.

The New York-based bank has been dragged into the BHS scandal, the bitter 
run-up to the US presidential election and the furore over the appointment of 
the former European commission president José Manuel Barrosoas chairman of 
Goldman Sachs International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/eu-ethics-watchdog-intervenes-on-jose-manuel-barroso-goldman-job>
.


The high court in London also heard allegations in June that Goldman bankers 
paid for prostitutes, private jets and five-star hotels, and held meetings on 
yachts to win business from a Libyan investment fund set up under the Gaddafi 
regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/goldman-sachs-hired-prostitutes-to-win-libyan-business-court-told>
.

These allegations were part of a $1.2bn claim against Goldman by the Libyan 
Investment Authority, which said the bank duped it into signing deals it did 
not understand. The high court ruled in Goldman’s favour this month.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-private-brexit-warning-speech-to-goldman-sachs-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May's%20private%20Brexit%20warning%20speech%20to%20Goldman%20Sachs%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-private-brexit-warning-speech-to-goldman-sachs-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%27s%20private%20Brexit%20warning%20speech%20to%20Goldman%20Sachs%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-private-brexit-warning-speech-to-goldman-sachs-audio&media=>
Theresa May’s private Brexit warning speech to Goldman Sachs – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/25/theresa-may-private-brexit-warning-speech-to-goldman-sachs-audio>
The prime minister spoke in May at the investment bank’s “Talks at GS” series. 
The list of past speakers at these Goldman Sachs events has highlighted the 
company’s allure and influence in London and other financial centres around the 
world. According to Goldman’s website, the “Talks at GS” involve the bank 
inviting “leading thinkers from a broad range of backgrounds to share their 
views and expertise”.

As well as May, who spoke at Goldman on 26 May, other speakers have included 
Anna Wintour, the editor-in-chief of Vogue, Eddie Jones, the England rugby 
union coach, and Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury.

The investment bank is not the biggest in the world (that title belongs to JP 
Morgan Chase based on their respective stock market values) but Goldman 
consistently tops the global league table for the number of mergers and 
acquisitions it has worked on, and its alumni have ended up in some of the most 
powerful jobs in the world. It was infamously described by Rolling Stone 
magazine in 2010 as a “great vampire squid 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-great-american-bubble-machine-20100405>
 wrapped around the face of humanity, relentlessly jamming its blood funnel 
into anything that smells like money”.


Former Goldman employees who have moved on to high-profile positions in public 
life include Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England,Mario Draghi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mario-draghi>, president of the European 
Central Bank, Hank Paulson, the former US treasury secretary, and Malcolm 
Turnbull, the Australian prime minister.

In the UK, Jim O’Neill, the former chief economist of Goldman Sachs, had been 
a Treasury minister in the Conservative government until his resignation last 
month, while Paul Deighton, the former chief operating officer in Europe, was 
commercial secretary to the Treasury underGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and has just been named 
chairman of Heathrow airport.

Howard Wheeldon, a veteran analyst in the City, claimed Goldman was perceived 
as a “cut above the rest”. He added: “It is informed and always one step ahead 
of its peers, quiet and yet super efficient, influential because it creates 
knowledge required, always up with events and yet, by the same token, invisible 
to its peers. There simply is no one better – the Rolls-Royce of global 
investment banking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbf71f2a9af057b384845679e717e9d7d99e47d%2F0_164_4922_2953%2F4922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goldman%20Sachs%3A%20in%20the%20headlines%20despite%20its%20renowned%20discretion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goldman%20Sachs%3A%20in%20the%20headlines%20despite%20its%20renowned%20discretion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fbf71f2a9af057b384845679e717e9d7d99e47d%2F0_164_4922_2953%2F4922.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton was paid $675,000 for speeches to Goldman employees and 
clients. Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP 
Another City source said there was a business adage that “no one ever got 
fired for hiring Goldman Sachs”.

Goldman is renowned for its discretion and secrecy, appreciated by wealthy 
clients looking for someone to manage their money or a company working on a big 
acquisition. So the bank will have been disappointed to find its name in the 
news in relation to the British prime minister, particularly because the story 
was leaked from within the bank and involved a secret event held behind closed 
doors.

A spokesman for Goldman declined to comment when asked if the company was 
investigating the source of the leak.

The bank was involved in a similar controversy with Hillary Clinton this year 
after it emerged the US Democratic presidential candidate was paid $675,000 for 
speeches to Goldman employees and clients. Clinton did not reveal the details 
of her speeches, but WikiLeaks released transcripts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
in October that showed she had avoided directly criticising Wall Street.

Two of Goldman’s most senior employees in Europe – Michael Sherwood and 
Anthony Gutman – were alsosummoned before MPs in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/bhs-committee-goldman-sachs-michael-sherwood-apologises-not-disclosing-talks>
 as part of a parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer BHS. 
Goldman had offered informal advice to Sir Philip Green before he sold BHS to 
Dominic Chappell. It warned that Chappell, a billionaire tycoon, had been 
declared bankrupt in the past and that the deal could be risky – a warning that 
came true whenBHS folded this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc7b5e278b49ef45f1c44c64c76874c22b6ff1a%2F0_33_1339_803%2F1339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goldman%20Sachs%3A%20in%20the%20headlines%20despite%20its%20renowned%20discretion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goldman%20Sachs%3A%20in%20the%20headlines%20despite%20its%20renowned%20discretion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgoldman-sachs-theresa-may-leaked-speech-brexit-warning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc7b5e278b49ef45f1c44c64c76874c22b6ff1a%2F0_33_1339_803%2F1339.jpg>
 Michael Sherwood, vice-chair at Goldman Sachs, appeared before MPs in June as 
part of a parliamentary investigation into the BHS collapse. Photograph: PA 
Sherwood and Gutman found the public hearing and inquiries into Goldman’s 
business practices awkward. At one stage, Michelle Thomson, the SNP MP, even 
said: “Mr Sherwood, I have been keeping quiet to this point, but I have been 
sitting watching everyone’s faces and, if you don’t mind my saying, you look 
somewhat uncomfortable.”

But the parliamentary appearance of two senior Goldman figures also provided a 
unique insight into how the investment bank does business, including its 
determination to stay close to leading clients.

“Goldman Sachs is slightly different from other firms,” Sherwood told MPs. 
“Our starting account size is larger and we are really in the high net worth 
business and that is all. We are in the business where we cover large 
corporations, high net worth individuals, governments. They may not do things 
for a very long period of time, but, at particular times in their lifecycle, 
they might do significant transactions and we want to be in the goalmouth when 
those things happen.”
 