
President-elect Donald Trump has formally tapped Goldman Sachs president Gary 
Cohn fora top White House economic post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/gary-cohn-trump-national-economic-council>
.

Cohn will serve as director of the National Economic Council, heading a 
department with a key role in policymaking. The post does not require Senate 
confirmation.

In a statement, Trump says Cohn will “put his talents as a highly successful 
businessman to work for the American people”.

Trump was critical of Goldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> during the presidential 
campaign and lambasted Democratic rival Hillary Clinton for giving paid 
speeches to the Wall Street giant. But he’s now chosen three people with ties 
to the bank for his administration, including Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury 
secretary nominee, and Steve Bannon, Trump’s chief strategist and senior 
counselor.

Cohn, 56, is president and chief operating officer at the Wall Street firm and 
had until recently been widely considered the heir apparent to chief executive 
Lloyd Blankfein. But according to the Wall Street Journal, Cohn, who met with 
Trump on Tuesday, has been considering a move in recent months.

Cohn is a former Goldman commodities trader from Ohio who joined the firm in 
1990. He served in a variety of leadership roles in bond trading, becoming 
co-head of Goldman’s broader securities and, eventually, co-president in 2006. 
He makes frequent appearances at industry conferences and on television, 
speaking on the state of the financial markets.

Cohn is a registered Democrat who has donated money to both Barack Obama and 
Clinton.

If he takes the post, he will be following in the footsteps of Robert Rubin 
and Stephen Friedman, two other onetime Goldman Sachs executives who served in 
that role.
 