
Toy manufacturers GoldieBlox have backed down in its legal battle with the 
Beastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/25/beastie-boys-accuse-toy-maker-copyright-girls>
. GoldieBlox upset the band after soundtracking one of its adverts with a 
parody version of their song Girls, reworking the original's sexist lyrics into 
a call-to-arms for more creative girls' toys.

After receiving legal notification from the band's lawyers, however, the toy 
company has decided to remove the song from its advert. In a letter to the 
band, signed from "Debbie and team GoldieBlox", it states: "We don't want to 
fight with you. We love you and we are actually huge fans. When we made our 
parody version of your song, Girls, we did it with the best of intentions. We 
wanted to take a song we weren't too proud of, and transform it into a powerful 
anthem for girls."

They continued: "Our hearts sank last week when your lawyers called us with 
threats that we took very seriously. As a small company, we had no choice but 
to stand up for ourselves. We did so sincerely hoping we could come to a 
peaceful settlement with you."

GoldieBlox's decision seems to have been determined by its discovery that late 
Beastie Boys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> member Adam Yauch 
requested in his will that the hip-hop group's music never be used in 
advertising: "Although we believe our parody video falls under fair use, we 
would like to respect his wishes and yours."

It concludes: "Since actions speak louder than words, we have already removed 
the song from our video. In addition, we are ready to stop the lawsuit as long 
as this means we will no longer be under threat from your legal team. We don't 
want to spend our time fighting legal battles. We want to inspire the next 
generation. We want to be good role models. And we want to be your friends."

The new advert <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIGyVa5Xftw> makes use of an 
instrumental track instead.
 