
Precious metal miners are attracting attention and not jus because of a 
continuing rise in the gold and silver prices as investors seek havens for 
their cash.

The sector has also been lifted by positive results from Egyptian gold miner 
Centamin. The company lifted its production guidance for the year from 470,000 
ounces to between 520,000 and 540,000 ounces thanks to increased output from 
its Sukari mine. It also reported a jump in second quarter profits from $37.3m 
to $101.6m. Analysts at Canaccord Genuity said:

Centamin reported seocond quarter and first half earnings that exceeded our 
forecasts – this was a strong set of results. The company had already recently 
reported second quarter gold production of 140,300 ounces from the Sukari mine, 
up 12% on the first quarter, making 265,600 ounces for the first half, up 23% 
from 216,000 ounces in the first half of 2015.Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold> sales for the first half were 
265,500 ounces. The key stand out, however, was a very strong performance in 
cost control, with the benefit from operational cost efficiencies and lower 
fuel costs exceeding our forecasts.

This is an extremely strong result, and management is clearly managing to 
successfully optimise the operations at Sukari. We had expected production and 
costs to beat guidance for the year, but not to the extent that the company is 
now guiding to. This is likely to result in positive revisions to both our 
forecasts and those in the market.

Centamin has climbed 3.4p or nearly 2% to 175p, helping push Randgold Resources
160p higher to £86.55 and Mexican minerFresnillo up 22p to £19.79.

On Randgold, analysts at Panmure repeated their hold recommendation but raised 
their price target from 6892p to 6750p, although they warned:

Following the more than 100% return in 2016, outperforming the mining index 
and the wider All-ShareiIndex by more than 40% and 95% respectively, we believe 
the current market premium has become stretched and is no longer justified. The 
latest quarterly results confirmed our thesis that Randgold continues to be 
priced for perfection and the risks to achieving production guidance set at the 
start of the year cannot be ignored. We appreciate the need for gold exposure 
but following the exceptional re-rating that has taken place this year, we now 
struggle to see significant upside ahead from the current market valuation.
 