
Hedge funds <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hedge-funds> and other 
western investors have been piling into gold this year, pushing investment to a 
record high and driving the price of bullion to its biggest first-half gain 
since 1980.

The latest report from the World Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold> Council, which represents gold 
miners, indicates that global gold demand reached 2,335 tonnes in the first six 
months of the year.

Buying by institutional and retail investors, mainly in the west, hit a new 
high of 1,064 tonnes, 16% above the previous record set in the first half of 
2009, at the height of the global financial crisis. Investment accounted for 
the biggest chunk of gold buying for two consecutive quarters – the first time 
this has ever happened.

Exchange-traded funds, which track the spot price of gold, had a stellar first 
half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/gold-demand-soars-strongest-first-quarter-on-record>
, recording inflows of nearly 580 tonnes.

Hedge funds, Japanese pension funds and bond investors, put off by low yields, 
have been buying gold amid heightened global uncertainty, according to John 
Mulligan, the industry body’s head of member and market relations.

He explained that gold, regarded as the ultimate safe haven, had become more 
attractive due to low or negative interest rates and uncertainty around the 
UK’s decision to leave the EU and the US presidential election.

Investors have been snapping up gold bars and coins in several markets, 
notably the US where demand soared 101% between April and June, as gold eagle 
coins proved popular.

The Royal Mint posted a sharp rise in profits, which it attributed partly to 
last year’s launch of Signature Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/royal-mint-makes-mint>, an 
online site allowing investors to buy or sell part of the 400oz gold bars held 
in its vaults. The Mint said there had been a huge spike in demand after the 
Brexit vote.

The gold price surged 25% rise to an average of $1,259.6 (£968.14) an ounce in 
the second quarter. The sharp rise put consumers off buying jewellery and other 
gold.
Gold price in dollar terms 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/aug/2016-08-10T16:06:10/embed.html>
 Gold price in dollar terms 
China and India, the world’s biggest gold consumers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/20/china-india-biggest-gold-market>
, saw jewellery purchases fall by 15% and 20% in the second quarter, to 144 
tonnes and 98 tonnes respectively.

In India, farmers – who account for two-thirds of the country’s gold demand – 
are under pressure following a patchy monsoon and are buying less as a result. 
Government tax rises prompted widespread strikes of jewellers, which came to an 
end in April.

The World Gold Council is predicting that the decline in global jewellery 
buying will be reversed in the second half of the year – similar to last year’s 
pattern – when the Hindu festival Diwali and a return to confidence in China 
are expected to prompt more gold purchases.

Buying by central banks fell by 40% in the second quarter but the price rise 
dramatically increased the value of gold they held, led by the US Federal 
Reserve, to $1.4tn globally.
 