
The temptation is to see the latest BBC charter melodramatics as merely St 
George (or maybe St Beeb) and the Dragon. Monstrous Whitto, a garrulous beast 
from the Whitehall jungle, threatens gallant worshippers of the great gods 
Truth and Independence. But lo! Here come thousands ofinnocent licence-fee 
payers, outraged luvvies and defiant journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-john-whittingdale-white-paper-star-pay-board>
 (including yours truly). Do King Dave and his chancellor, masters of dragons, 
want another steaming row on their doorsteps? They do not. So, at the last 
moment, Whitto gets a good hosing down and his fire-breathing plans turn to 
cold porridge. We may all rejoice. The BBC, in particular, issues a stream of 
joyful statements. Crisis over. The good guys won.

Except that Broadcasting House life, like Downing Street life, is never that 
simple. Forget St George for a moment. Think, rather, of defunctBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> drama series Hustle, in which lovable 
conmen waged eternal war against the forces of lumpen malignity. Spin, with an 
added twist. By such lights, was Mr culture secretary Whittingdale ever going 
to top slice the corporation and tie it in a thousand regulatory knots, 
throttling the life out ofStrictly Come Dancing? Perhaps not. In which case, 
was Thursday’s supposed triumph for St Beeb quite what it seemed? Same answer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36b0dd275c610d26d8663382ac50475b49c51a1%2F0_31_2105_1263%2F2105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20ship%20BBC%20sails%20on%2C%20but%20with%20many%20more%20hands%20on%20its%20tiller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20ship%20BBC%20sails%20on%2C%20but%20with%20many%20more%20hands%20on%20its%20tiller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36b0dd275c610d26d8663382ac50475b49c51a1%2F0_31_2105_1263%2F2105.jpg>
 The charter drama is more like conmen series Hustle than a battle between St 
George and the Dragon Photograph: BBC/Kudos 
There are things to make Portland Place cheer: an 11-year charter, the 
five-year revival of an indexed and rising licence fee, some funding certainty. 
The show, in short, trundles on. Come back in 2027 and see whether any 
subscription replacement for the fee has begun to find favour. Keep repeating 
the ancient injunctions of Reith – educate, inform, entertain – as though David 
Attenborough, aged 101, was the man for all seasons.

But real life isn’t so simple. Take the rancorous issue that has dogged 
negotiations between BBC and the Department for Culture, Media and Sport: who 
will sit on the new unitary board that supplants the trust regime, and how they 
will be appointed.

It’s a dodgy time to raise the problem of “independent” Whitehall appointments 
because the current commissioner for great and good job-filling,Sir David 
Normington, is heading for retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/17/bbc-board-jobs-conservatives-whittingdale>
– and manifestly unhappy about the Cameron government’s wily ways. He thinks 
covert patronage is seeping back. Once upon a recent time, when politicians 
needed a job filling, you advertised it, held interviews and selected a 
favourite and second favourite to send upstairs. Either candidate is qualified, 
minister: you choose.

Such ways and means weren’t exactly pristine. They still depended on job 
descriptions, remuneration, taps on shoulders and words in ears. Difficult, but 
not impossible. Now it’s not difficult at all. Ministers will be able to choose 
between a preferred candidate and a whole basket of “qualified” ones. The 
person No 10 wants is bound to be there somewhere. Which is why the 
Whittingdale board solution is so lethal – and so divisive.

Currently, HMG appoints the doomed trust, just as it appointed the doomed 
governors before it. But at least the trust had a primary regulatory role to 
give it common purpose. The new single board is responsible for many things: 
finance, governance, complaints, promotions and “strategy”. It won’t make 
programmes – or kill them. It’s not editorial in that sense. But it’s bound to 
have an editorial influence as it charts the dynamic ways of a BBC future. It 
needs to be expert, balanced and dynamic as well as wise and reflective. It 
needs to be led.

Can a non-executive chairman imposed by Cameron and Whittingdale do that? Can 
a deputy chair, chosen by the same system? Or four more non-execs from the 
nations and regions beyond Watford Gap? Will they find common cause with the 
four or so non-execs allegedly chosen by the BBC board itself, though – more 
killer detail – with the government’s designated chairman as master of 
selection revels?

How do Tony Hall and one or two actual executives drive the corporation 
through this non-executive mud? The new board is supposed to bring new purpose 
and new horizons. But, withRona Fairhead, the current trust chairman and chief 
regulator, dropped into place already, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-trust-rona-fairhead-new-governing-body>
 the signals are all about regulation, not innovation. Fairhead is a lively, 
sympathetic operator. She offers reassuring continuity. But this is a unitary 
board, not a trust. This is long-term change, not short-term continuity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4de01323564150ebe408249d33e95352c3fe8d%2F1502_439_4081_2448%2F4081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20ship%20BBC%20sails%20on%2C%20but%20with%20many%20more%20hands%20on%20its%20tiller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20ship%20BBC%20sails%20on%2C%20but%20with%20many%20more%20hands%20on%20its%20tiller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fbbc-white-paper-more-regulators-whittingdale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f4de01323564150ebe408249d33e95352c3fe8d%2F1502_439_4081_2448%2F4081.jpg>
 Rona Fairhead: a lively, sympathetic operator. Photograph: David Hartley/REx 
Meanwhile, belt and braces, Ofcom becomes the supreme regulator of last 
resort. In the snug little world of media regulation that means a community of 
experts shifting from chair to chair. It also means an Ofcom board, appointed 
by Whittingdale, will regulate every aspect of BBC life through a secondary 
board with its own appointed chairman and members. That’s double the 
appointment opportunities: on the BBC board, on the Ofcom board, on the BBCOfcom
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> outfit board, replacing a single 
appointed trust. With the full National Audit Office works thrown in for bad 
luck.

So instead of the opportunity for fresh thinking and fast reaction that Hall 
wanted to make continuing reality out of all the adulatory adjectives about BBC 
performance that clog the white paper, we’re being sold governance by regulator 
with the DCMS pulling strings – and adding enough new hurdles to turn Brussels 
bureaucrats green with envy. Not fewer sticky fingers feeling collars, but 
more. Not more investment in new technologies, but much less. Not more true 
independence, but less. Plus a distinctive Whitehall impartiality that keeps 
the men from the ministry in charge.

The clamour at charter-renewal time is always about politicians of every 
persuasion trying to get the spirit of BBC independence under control. It is 
about the surface independence of he says/she says that never makes a secretary 
of state screech in fury. It is public service that often tries to leave the 
public out. And it utterly forgets the creative and imaginative urge that 
doesn’t just make good drama or good news, but responds to technological and 
social change.

Yet remember that in 11 years’ time, on present trends, TV audiences will be 
down by some 30%. Television has contracted the newspaper disease and, on 
Reuters Institute estimates, in a still more crippling form. You can’t 
freeze-frame the next 11 years. Nor, within the now bubbling pot of interests, 
can you leave Ofcom to mastermind revolution.

There are reasons to welcome Whittingdale’s alleged conversion. Ten months of 
thrashing threats and anxious obeisances are over. But yet more regulation is 
only part of a BBC future, and by no means the most important part. Can 
governments, fiddling at second hand, run a broadcasting company? Can an 
artificially balanced board, some beholden to politicians, some more truly 
independent, do it? Hustle, bustle, toil and trouble.
 