
Given the extent to which soundbites have shaped popular perception of Gordon 
Strachan, there is something poetic about such utterances now appearing at the 
root of his undoing.Scotland’s woeful performance in drawing with Lithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/scotland-lithuania-world-cup-qualifier-group-f-match-report>
 on Saturday evening was alarming enough for beleaguered Tartan Army foot 
soldiers before Strachan provided the latest glimpses of his signing up for the 
flat earth society. No sooner had James McArthur snatched a last-minute 
equaliser than Strachan spoke of bad luck, outstanding displays and similar.

Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> have been in this 
movie far too often for anyone to take their manager’s bullishness at face 
value.

Strachan was effusive, to the point of being condescending to anyone with eyes 
in their head, after thedismal defeat in Georgia in September last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/04/georgia-scotland-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
 that spiked an already stuttering run towards Euro 2016.

Strachan could not be allowed to contemplate Tuesday evening’s now crunch tie 
in Slovakia without further assessment of what arrived immediately before. For 
a manager who prides himself on preparation and the drilling home of tactical 
instructions to players, it should have been astonishing to Strachan that 
Scotland played with such a lack of cohesion whenLithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lithuania> visited Glasgow.

James McArthur levels late to save Scotland’s blushes against Lithuania
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/scotland-lithuania-world-cup-qualifier-group-f-match-report>
To the untrained eye, and without knowing Strachan’s conscientiousness, this 
looked like a group of players sent out with no plan. Ticket prices 
notwithstanding, the sight of more than 10,000 empty seats at Hampden Park told 
a story of its own. Strachan needs action to back up words, and soon.

“You are being silly if you are suggesting there were no tactics,” claimed 
Strachan on Sunday. “The tactics were to get the ball to our wide men, get the 
full-backs in, one of the midfield players tucks in on one side and allows Andy 
Robertson to go round there [from left-back].

“You see Robertson tackling, Matt Ritchie comes in, Oliver Burke stays a wee 
bit further, Burke tries to spin in and go behind them. If he doesn’t get that 
he stays and plays as a striker, if he comes out of there Robert Snodgrass goes 
into there, the two midfield players stay together to pick off their one 
midfield player who goes there, then when the ball moves up to there one of the 
midfield players goes up to that position, when it is wide we try to get four 
people into the box. That was the tactics.

“If we cannot get through them we chip diagonal balls to Chris Martin into his 
chest. If you see in the first half we got two good moves out of three 
from that.”

All of this failed to acknowledge the basic means by which to beat modest 
opposition: namely moving the ball quickly and accurately. Martin, who has not 
scored in 20 club outings, is about as mobile as his 59-year-old international 
manager.

“The trend that I saw in the European Championship is that there is a bigger 
striker playing up front for most countries,” said Strachan. “They don’t have 
to be the quickest, they just have to bring other people into play.” It was 
damning to hear Scotland’s manager admit his approach was “not that much” 
different to theaway fixture in Malta last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/malta-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier>
.

Graeme Souness: Russia 2018 more crucial to Scotland than beating England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/graeme-souness-scotland-reaching-russia-2018-england-world-cup-qualifying>
Steven Naismith and Steven Fletcher are among those likely to come into 
Strachan’s thoughts forTuesday. Slovakia have troubles of their own after 
Saturday’s loss in Slovenia ensured zero points from two Group F games.

“We hoped to take something anyway,” said Strachan. “But yes, of course we 
need something now. The less you’ve won, the more you need to pick up points 
further on. That’s common sense.

“I think it’s going to be a crazy group. It’s a crazy group already. From pot 
two, Slovakia haven’t got any points yet. Slovenia, who beat Slovakia, got a 
draw at Lithuania but Lithuania could have been three up before they were 
pegged back.

“If it’s not a crazy group, then the team from pot two goes through. And we’re 
pot four. If it wasn’t crazy, then it’s quite simple. We go home because we’re 
the pot four team.

“I’ve always said that the difference could be getting a big result away from 
home. This is an opportunity. There are four opportunities and we need to get 
one of those big results away from home if we’re going to try to get second. I 
don’t know if a win takes Slovakia out of the running but it makes it very hard 
for them, that’s for sure.”

This point, at least, was indisputable.
 