
Gordon Strachan refused to discuss his future as the Scotland manager after a 
3-0 defeat by Slovakia that intensified the pressure on the 59-year-old. This 
result, coupled with a1-1 draw at home against Lithuania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/scotland-lithuania-world-cup-qualifier-group-f-match-report>
 in Glasgow on Saturday, means Scotland have taken only four points from three 
World Cup qualifying games.

“At this moment the people I feel sorry for are the players, they put so much 
work in the last couple of games,” Strachan said. “They are the ones I feel 
sorry for, they are the ones I am wondering how do I protect them. How do we 
send them back to clubs feeling good about themselves? They can’t go back 
thinking they could do any more. I am proud of them as a group.

Slovakia sink Scotland to pile pressure on Gordon Strachan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/slovakia-scotland-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
“The second group I feel for is the supporters who have come here tonight. You 
feel for them. That is what we are thinking about right now. I am not sitting 
here thinking about myself.

“It’s these lads and how we look after them and how in the future we can give 
the supporters something to sing and dance about away from home. That is what 
we are concerned about. That is where our concentration lies.”

When pressed on his own position, Strachan was again circumspect. “Every time 
I get together with the players they rejuvenate me,” he said. “I repeat, at the 
moment we have given it our best shot, tried to pick the right side.

“Right now it’s how we look after them [the players]. How do we speak to them 
on the bus going back? I can’t get any more in terms of effort, I am happy with 
the response every time we get together.”

Scotland’s next game is at Wembley on 11 November against England. “We are 
looking at it as another opportunity to get three points,” he said. “Look at 
the table, we’d like to be better off. We are one point off a play-off place. 
It is a crazy group.

Reflecting on the Slovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> 
match, Strachan rightly pointed to the referee’s failure to award a free-kick 
to Scotland in the lead-up to the opening goal. “I was sitting there thinking 
‘I like this,’” he said. “Then a decision goes against us. I thought ‘That’s 
not fair on these guys. They are playing well and playing against a more 
physical side.’ Just when we needed a break, it goes against them.

“Then the second goal made a big difference They [Slovakia] went from being 
laborious to being strong. It was uphill after that.”
 