
Don Cossack’s trainer, Gordon Elliott, is clinging to the hope that his 
nine-year-old, a brilliant winner of the Gold Cup at Cheltenham last month, can 
recover from an injury discovered on Sunday morning after a workout on the 
gallops near his stables at Longwood, Co Meath.

“He gave himself a knock on the gallops and obviously his season is over,” 
Elliott said. “I’ve had him since he was a five-year-old and he’s been such a 
professional. What’s happened is not ideal but I’m very hopeful he can race 
again later next season.”

The knock is to his off-fore tendon and could spell the end of Don Cossack’s 
days on the track. Eddie O’Leary, the racing manager for the horse’s owner, 
Gigginstown House Stud, said: “It’s only a small leg [injury] but with tendon 
injuries it may as well be a big one.

“He’s won us a Gold Cup and it could have happened before that, so we’ve at 
least that to be thankful for. The same thing happened to War Of Attrition 
[Gigginstown’s 2006 Gold Cup winner] – we never seem to get them back for a 
second Gold Cup. It’s a terrible blow for Gordon, who is a tremendous trainer 
and has done an unbelievable job with him – he’s had a fantastic season.

“Don Cossack will be treated with the aim to bring him back. If all goes well, 
that will be the plan. But if he isn’t 100%, we won’t be doing it.”

The horse was being prepared for Wednesday’s Bibby Financial Services 
Punchestown Gold Cup, which was being rightly promoted as the race of the week 
at the Co Kildare course’s big festival. Don Cossack had been due to renew 
rivalry with Cue Card, who crashed out when very much in contention at 
Cheltenham – but who later made partial amends by winning the BetfredBowl at 
Aintree. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/annie-power-aintree-hurdle-grand-national-meeting>

Don Cossack wins Cheltenham Gold Cup under Bryan Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
With the Willie Mullins-trained Vautour having been switched to the shorter 
Champion Chase at Punchestown on Tuesday, Cue Card, trained in Dorset byColin 
Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>, is the 4-7 favourite 
for Wednesday. Djakadam and Don Poli – second and third behind Don Cossack at 
Cheltenham – are next in the betting, both at 6-1.

On the Flat at Musselburgh on Sunday an astonishing comeback was completed by 
Connor Beasley, who rode his first winner since suffering life-threatening 
injuries. Beasley had fractured his skull and spine, as well as sustaining 
damage to his neck, when his mount Cumbrianna took what proved to be a fatal 
fall at Wolverhampton in July last year.

But at the Scottish track Beasley delivered a stirring finish aboard the 3-1 
chance Alpha Delphini for Cumbrianna’s trainer, Bryan Smart, in the fifth race. 
“It’s taken a while to come but it’s come at last. It’s a monkey off my back 
and I can’t thank everyone enough,” the jockey said.

“I’ve had plenty of support from the trainers who supported me last year when 
it went so well and some new ones to be fair. I can’t thank them all enough.”

Kieren Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/23/kieren-fallon-six-time-champions-jockey-dubai-world-cup-interview>
 made a re-introduction of his own at Musselburgh, where he had four mounts for 
his first action at a British track this year. But the veteran rider finished a 
narrowly beaten runner-up in the first race on Amazement and he was out of luck 
on his other rides, too.

Betting for Saturday’s 2,000 Guineas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2000-guineas> is in danger of becoming 
moribund, dominated as it is by Aidan O’Brien’s 4-6 shot Air Force Blue. The 
Classic faces not only having a long odds-on shot as favourite but also a 
smaller field than usual.

Peter Chapple-Hyam, who trains Marcel, believes his 16-1 colt can stand up to 
Air Force Blue, however. “He fully deserves to be in the lineup. He’s got a 
great attitude and a great stride – and he is certain to stay the mile well.”

Marcel was a surprise winner of the Racing Post Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/24/frankie-dettori-marcel-racing-post-trophy-doncaster-peter-chapple-hyam>
 at Doncaster in October. With the possibility that Air Force Blue could 
eventually prove to be best at shorter distances, Chapple-Hyam added this 
warning: “If any of the Guineas field have stamina shortcomings, my one will 
find them out.”
 