
British racing has moved significantly closer to a stable, long-term funding 
regime after Tracey Crouch MP, the sports minister, confirmed on Friday that 
all betting operators, including online firms based offshore, will be required 
to return 10% of their gross profits from racing bets back to the sport from 
April this year.

As a result, racing can expect to receive about £90m per year in direct income 
from betting for at least the next seven years, and see an end to the almost 
annual disputes with bookmakers over a “fair” return from betting which have 
been a feature of the previous Levy system since its introduction in 1961.

Related: BHA remains confident of hitting £100m funding target after Levy 
reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/bha-plays-down-claim-funding-from-betting-post-levy-system>

The headline figure of 10% of Gross Gambling Yield (GGY), defined as total 
stakes less winning paid out, was suggested as being the likely rate for the 
new funding regime in October last year. However, Friday’s announcement is 
confirmation that the minister has resisted last-minute lobbying by the 
gambling industry, in an attempt to reduce the rate to nine or even eight per 
cent. It will apply to all gambling businesses which accept bets on British 
racing, including on- and off-course bookmakers, pool betting, betting 
exchanges and spread betting companies.

The announcement also confirmed that the Levy Board will be wound up, with the 
Gambling Commission, which regulates the gambling industry in Britain, taking 
responsibility for collecting payments from betting operators. The money will 
then pass to a new Racing Authority which will decide how it should be spent. 
The Board has been granted a stay of execution, however, and will handle 
initial administration of payments before it disappears early next year.

Reform of the statutory Levy system to bring long-term stability to racing’s 
income and planning has been a key aim of the sport’s administrators for at 
least two decades. The search for a new system has become increasingly urgent 
in recent years, however, as an increasing amount of betting turnover has moved 
online.

The websites of most major bookmakers and gambling firms are now based 
offshore, beyond the reach of a Levy system which was conceived a quarter of a 
century before the internet.The Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-levy> yielded £99.3m for racing in 
2005-6, a figure which had dropped to just £54.5m by 2015-16.

“This move will help secure the future of horse racing in Britain by making 
sure that gambling firms pay a fair return to support the sport,” Crouch said. 
“Horse racing has a strong heritage in this country, employing thousands of 
people and is enjoyed by many almost every day of the year. This new approach 
to the Horserace Betting Levy will help sustain and develop the sport.”

Nick Rust, the chief executive of the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, welcomed 
Crouch’s statement and said that it would “restore to racing a return from all 
betting on our sport at a fair and proportionate rate”.

Rust added: “This is critical to the future health of British racing. Once the 
new system is implemented in April 2017 we will see a significant uplift in the 
sport’s central funding that will benefit our participants and the many local 
communities which racing supports across all corners of the country.

“Everyone in British racing would like to extend their thanks to the Minister 
for Sport, Tourism and Heritage, Tracey Crouch MP, and her dedicated team at 
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport.

“British racing is committed to working closely with our partners in the 
British betting industry to make a success of this new environment, and grow 
what is the most natural, exciting betting product to the future advantage of 
both our industries and the wider economy.”

Just two hurdles now remain before the old Levy system is finally consigned to 
history. The new regime will need to be approved by the European Commission, 
which will consider whether it complies with EU rules on state aid.

If approval is received, one or more gambling operators could then lodge an 
appeal against their decision with the European Court of Justice, but that 
would not prevent the new system coming into operation. Should the ECJ 
eventually uphold the appeal, however, racing could be required to repay some 
or all of the money raised to that point.

“The fundamental issue here is whether what they are proposing will get state 
aid clearance,” Clive Hawkswood, the chief executive of the Remote Gambling 
Association, said on Friday. “If they get the clearance, then they will proceed 
as proposed and through secondary legislation, they can get this done fairly 
quickly.

“You have to give an amount [to be raised], not a percentage, when you notify 
[the Commission] because they have to know what the amount is and what it’s 
needed for. Any appeal would be against the decision, and not what the 
government has done. But what normally happens in these situations is that 
governments go ahead with their plans, and then obviously if the court takes a 
different view, they roll it back somehow.”
 