
Many Clouds

Jockey: L Aspell Trainer: O Sherwood Age: Nine Weight: 11st 10lb

Last year’s winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/grand-national-aintree> tries to 
be the first to win two Nationals since Red Rum in the 1970s. Maybe he’s up to 
it; he already seems an exceptional talent, having carried more weight (11st 
9lb) to victory than any winner since “Rummie” and having also been the first 
horse to win both the Hennessy Gold Cup and the National. Unusually for a 
National winner he has continued to show a high level of form immediately 
afterwards,winning easily over Unioniste last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/many-clouds-cut-betting-grand-national-impressive-kelso-win>
 and running second to classy rivals in December and January. Another fine run 
seems on the cards, though he rather plodded for the last half-mile a year ago 
and may be vulnerable if something else is close to him over the last.

Chance: medium

Grand National 2016 – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/09/grand-national-2016-live> 
Silviniaco Conti

Jockey: N Fehily Trainer: P Nicholls Age: 10 Weight: 11st 8lb

Tough sort holds a 50% record over fences (11/22) and has bagged seven Grade 
Ones, including two King Georges. Has never faced the National fences but is 
three times a winner at theGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> meeting, suggesting three 
things: he can be relied on to show his ability at this late stage of the 
season; he loves a flat track; and he copes well with the kind of surface on 
offer here. Likes to race prominently, which will keep him out of trouble here 
but will also make this a severe test of his stamina.

Chance: medium

First Lieutenant

Jockey: BJ Cooper Trainer: MF Morris Age: 11 Weight: 11st 3lb

Seemed to take an instant dislike to this place last year, when jumping the 
first two fences very awkwardly. Got round in his own time to be beaten 95 
lengths. It is not impossible that he may fare better this time (the 2009 
National winner, Mon Mome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/apr/04/mon-mome-grand-national>, had 
been stuffed in the previous year’s race), especially since he ran his best 
race for ages whensecond in a Grade One at Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/28/don-poli-willie-mullins-lexus-chase>
. But his losing run extends to three years, he has never won a handicap and he 
has never won a steeplechase against more than seven rivals.

Chance: low

Wonderful Charm

Jockey: S Twiston-Davies Trainer: P Nicholls Age: Eight Weight: 11st 3lb

Has long been well regarded at the stable of the champion trainer but has yet 
to really justify that. Wins over fences have come against a maximum of four 
rivals and he’s been well beaten every time he’s tackled a major contest. 
Trailed Silviniaco Conti by 32 lengths inthe King George last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/26/silviniaco-conti-paul-nicholls-king-george>
 but carries just 5lb less than him here. Pulled up in last year’s Bet365 Gold 
Cup. Has made significant jumping errors in some races and his stamina for this 
test seems doubtful.

Chance: low

Ballynagour

Jockey: T Scudamore Trainer: D Pipe Age: 10 Weight: 11st 2lb

Impressive winner at the Cheltenham Festival in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/13/david-pipe-cheltenham-festival-ryanair-chase-dynaste>
 but has been high in the weights ever since and his only subsequent win was a 
hurdles race in France. Has never won a race at three miles or further, so his 
stamina is in question, even though he ran well in a three-mile Grade One here 
a year ago. Form has been dire for most of this winter but better when seventh 
at the Festival and seems to peak in the spring.

Chance: low
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgrand-national-2016-a-drones-aerial-guide-to-aintree-racecourse-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grand%20National%202016%3A%20a%20drone's%20aerial%20guide%20to%20Aintree%20racecourse%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgrand-national-2016-a-drones-aerial-guide-to-aintree-racecourse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grand%20National%202016%3A%20a%20drone%27s%20aerial%20guide%20to%20Aintree%20racecourse%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgrand-national-2016-a-drones-aerial-guide-to-aintree-racecourse-video&media=>
A drone aerial guide to Aintree racecourse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/08/grand-national-2016-a-drones-aerial-guide-to-aintree-racecourse-video>
. 
Gilgamboa

Jockey: R Power Trainer: E Bolger Age: Eight Weight: 11st 1lb

Still sailing along below many a radar despite a career record of six wins 
from 14 starts. Been restricted to three handicap starts so far, winning two 
over hurdles, including a very tough one in 2014, and running fourth under top 
weight over fences at Leopardstown’s Christmas meeting. Can’t quite cut it at 
the highest level but talented and robust enough to win a race like this under 
a fair weight, like the one he has been given here. Stamina is the issue, as 
three miles looks his outer limit on the available evidence but there is more 
to come from this eight-year-old.

Chance: medium

On His Own

Jockey: PW Mullins Trainer: WP Mullins Age: 12 Weight: 11st 1lb

Was a faller in consecutive Grand Nationals, going well in 2012 when coming 
down at second Becher’s and looking beaten before departing three fences later 
the next year. Has also been a disappointing but staying-on sixth in the 
shorter Becher Chase over these fences. Career peaked in March 2014 whenhe was 
pipped in the Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/14/lord-windermere-cheltenham-gold-cup-stewards-inquiry>
 but has struggled to get close to that level in recent starts. His only 
success in the past two years was in a small-field Grade Three at Cork and he 
was left way behind in the latest Gold Cup. But he remains higher in the 
weights than for any of his previous attempts around here, making him hard to 
fancy.

Chance: low

The Druids Nephew

Jockey: D O’Regan Trainer: N Mulholland Age: Nine Weight: 11st 0lb

Appeared on his way to winning last year’s National when slipping and falling 
five-out, though that was too far from home to be sure his stamina would have 
lasted. This has been the only target since then, so modest form through the 
winter is not worrying. He is a classy animal,a Cheltenham Festival winner from 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/10/cheltenham-festival-thedruids-nephew-grand-national>
, with a fine trainer, and it would be no surprise to see him go very well 
again. But he’s 9lb higher in the weights than last year and this may be a 
hotter contest.

Chance: high

Triolo D’Alene

Jockey: J McGrath Trainer: N Henderson Age: Nine Weight: 11st 0lb

Won a shorter race over these fences three years ago and continued to run well 
that year,winning the Hennessy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/hennessy-newbury-triolo-dalene-henderson-geraghty>
. Mostly off the boil in a handful of runs since then, including when pulled up 
in the 2014 National after a bad mistake at the 21st. Only 2lb lower now, 
partly because he won at Kempton in January but he beat a single rival, aged 
13, that day. Trailed Silviniaco Conti by 54 lengths at Ascot when last seen.

Chance: low

Rocky Creek

Jockey: A Thornton Trainer: P Nicholls Age: 10 Weight: 10st 13lb

Completed the course in the past two Nationals but well beaten both times, 
seeming not to stay the full distance on either occasion. Was a fair fifth in 
2014, a disappointing 17th last year and appeared not to relish these fences in 
a shorter race here in December. Has a couple of excellent bits of form to his 
name but has been underperforming for a full year now and neither tongue tie 
nor blinkers made a difference last time.

Chance: low

Sir Des Champs

Jockey: N Carberry (changed from injured R Walsh) Trainer: WP Mullins Age: 10 
Weight: 10st 13lb

Second in the Gold Cup of 2013 and won the Punchestown Gold Cup the following 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/24/sir-des-champs-punchestown-gold-cup>
, both runs that put him in the highest class. Had won at the previous two 
Cheltenham Festivals. Tendon injury early in 2014 seems to have blighted his 
career, though he managed a comeback win in a small race at Thurles in 
November. Well beaten in two Grade Ones since then, though both were run on 
heavy going and it remains possible that he can do better on this drier 
surface. Nicely weighted if the ability is still there.

Chance: high

Nina Carberry replaces Ruby Walsh in Grand National on Sir Des Champs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/nina-carberry-replaces-ruby-walsh-grand-national-sir-des-champs>
Holywell

Jockey: R McLernon Trainer: J O’Neill Age: Nine Weight: 10st 12lb

Seems a spring horse, having run with great credit at the last four Cheltenham 
Festivals and also three times at the Grand National meeting. Has never tackled 
these fences and rather smaller than your typical National type but seems 
pleasingly tough. Position in the weights is perfectly fair if he copes with 
the course and one for any shortlist.

Chance: high

Shutthefrontdoor

Jockey: B Geraghty Trainer: J O’Neill Age: Nine Weight: 10st 11lb

Irish National winner of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/21/irish-national-shutthefrontdoor-barry-geraghty>
, his stamina seemed to give way when fifth in this race last year. Possibly 
his preparation was partly to blame, as he raced freely on his first start for 
five months. He won’t be as fresh this time and that may help him sustain his 
effort, from a 1lb lower mark. Abscess in his foot was responsible for poor 
showing last month. Infrequent appearances in recent years make him harder to 
like.

Chance: medium

Soll

Jockey: C O’Farrell Trainer: D Pipe Age: 11 Weight: 10st 11lb

Twice beaten around 40 lengths in this race, when seventh in 2013 and ninth 
last year. Stamina appeared to be the issue both times, as he travelled well 
for a long way. He also has a history of bursting blood vessels and connections 
must hope it doesn’t happen again. Has hit new heights since joining new stable 
about 15 months ago, winning three of last seven and showing admirable 
toughness on occasion. Is 13lb higher in the weights than last year and hard to 
believe he can overcome that to win, though likely to run well again to a point.

Chance: low

Buywise

Cocktails At Dawn can win Topham Chase at Grand National meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/cocktails-at-dawn-topham-chase-grand-national>
Jockey: P Moloney Trainer: E Williams Age: Nine Weight: 10st 10lb

One of the most frustrating horses in the game, bursting with talent but 
somehow unable to win anything apart from novice hurdles in the last two years. 
Hold-up tactics and jumping errors get in his way, with the result that he has 
finished strongly but too late in several major handicaps at Cheltenham. Nicely 
placed in the weights but hard to see him getting away with his usual sloppy 
fencing around here and his stamina is also in doubt. Seemed to have had enough 
at the end of a three-mile race in January, whereas this is four and a quarter.

Chance: low

Boston Bob

Jockey: P Townend Trainer: WP Mullins Age: 11 Weight: 10st 10lb

The winner of three Grade Ones over fences, although none of those looks 
especially strong in retrospect. Soundly beaten in the very best races but his 
rating remained artificially high until he was also stuffed in a couple of 
handicaps this season. Now seems on a fairer mark and won a decent trial race 
at Fairyhouse last time. Stamina could be a weak point, despite two successes 
at around three miles.

Chance: low

Aachen

Jockey: H Brooke Trainer: V Williams Age: 12 Weight: 10st 10lb

Veteran has been better than ever this season, making all to win at Wincanton 
and Cheltenham in December. That run came to an end when collared by Soll at 
Sandown in January and he has fared much less well in two runs since, on drier 
ground, being beaten more than 40 lengths each time. Hard to believe he can win 
this from a career-high mark at the end of a tough season.

Chance: low

Morning Assembly

Jockey: D Russell Trainer: PA Fahy Age: Nine Weight: 10st 9lb

Not far off top class in 2014, when third to O’Faolains Boy in the RSA at 
Cheltenham, but missed almost two years through injury. Three creditable runs 
since his comeback in January, including finishing fourth in a Festival 
handicap last month, when a mistake three-out may have come at just the wrong 
time. Seems a strong stayer, fairly treated on his best form and a contender.

Chance: medium
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fa-jockeys-view-of-winning-the-grand-national-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20jockey's%20view%20of%20winning%20the%20Grand%20National%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fa-jockeys-view-of-winning-the-grand-national-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20jockey%27s%20view%20of%20winning%20the%20Grand%20National%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fa-jockeys-view-of-winning-the-grand-national-video&media=>
A jockey’s view of winning the Grand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/06/a-jockeys-view-of-winning-the-grand-national-video>
. 
Double Ross

Jockey: R Hatch Trainer: N Twiston-Davies Age: 10 Weight: 10st 9lb

Like a few from his stable over the years, had an excellent novice season over 
fences but struggled thereafter. Won two Cheltenham handicaps in 2012/13 and 
was a close third in a Grade One at the 2013 Festival but fell short of top 
class in subsequent runs while being too high in the weights to win a handicap. 
Has never won beyond about two and a half miles, so the extra two miles here is 
a real concern. Several bits of form, including his last two outings, seem to 
make it clear that he doesn’t quite last three miles, never mind four, so he 
doesn’t appeal, even from a Grand National-winning stable in great form just 
now.

Chance: low

Goonyella

Jockey: JJ Burke Trainer: JTR Dreaper Age: Nine Weight: 10st 8lb

Stayed on dourly to be second in the Scottish National last year, so must be a 
contender here from just a 3lb higher rating. Had won the Midlands National on 
his previous start, so stamina is clearly his long suit. Has had a couple of 
abortive attempts on these fences in the Becher Chase but that race is held in 
December, whereas this one seems to be at his best in the spring. Fine effort 
to be second to a stablemate under a big weight at Naas last month and likely 
to get involved if he can get the hang of these fences at last.

Grand National meeting winner Cue Card sets up Don Cossack clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/annie-power-aintree-hurdle-grand-national-meeting>
Chance: high

Ucello Conti

Jockey: D Jacob Trainer: G Elliott Age: Eight Weight: 10st 8lb

Half-brother to Silviniaco Conti is a fascinating, unexposed contender who has 
done most of his racing in France. Joined a top Irish trainer for this season 
and, in his last two runs, has been placed in two of Ireland’s best handicap 
chases. Those efforts were the more impressive in light of the extravagantly 
wide course charted both times by Jacques Ricou, the jockey who knew him best 
in France but is likely to be replaced for this race. He looks a classy stayer 
with more to give.

Chance: high

Unioniste

Jockey: N Scholfield Trainer: P Nicholls Age: Eight Weight: 10st 8lb

Twice a winner around Aintree’s conventional course but hasn’t yet taken to 
the National circuit, falling at the fifth last year and trailing home in the 
Becher Chase after a bad mistake. Nicely weighted on the best of his form, 8lb 
below the rating he had last year, and last three runs suggest he’s still good 
enough to run well here with a bit of luck. Seems to have been around forever 
but still only eight, so quite an achievement to have won seven times over 
fences. Well held by Many Clouds at Kelso last time but meets that rival on 
12lb better terms, which ought to make all the difference.

Chance: medium

Le Reve

Jockey: H Skelton Trainer: L Wadham Age: Eight Weight: 10st 8lb

Likeable sort who can win a good prize in the right conditions but this 
doesn’t look like his bag, mainly because the bends atAintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> turn left. For whatever reason, Le 
Reve likes to turn right, which is why all six of his wins have been at 
right-handed circuits like Sandown and Kempton. His form going left (Haydock, 
Newbury, Doncaster) isn’t on the same level. Plus his stamina gave way 
alarmingly at the end of a three-mile race last time at Kempton.

Chance: low

Gallant Oscar

Jockey: M Walsh Trainer: AJ Martin Age: 10 Weight: 10st 8lb

Hasn’t won a major prize yet but clearly has talent and suspicion is that 
there’s more to come, even though he’s 10 now. Was a staying-on third in a hot 
handicap at the 2015 Festival, won by The Druids Nephew, and bolted up at 
Punchestown soon after. Has had a quiet season so far but it has probably been 
building to this peak, so no surprise to see him run a big race. Usually held 
up, so will need some luck in weaving through the pack.

Chance: medium

Onenightinvienna

Jockey: T O’Brien Trainer: P Hobbs Age: Seven Weight: 10st 8lb

Terribly inexperienced as a novice chaser with just four runs over fences 
behind him. Only success over fences came at the expense of four other 
finishers who are now a collective 0/17 in chases. A good jumper so far and 
looks a stayer, though he got tired at the end of a quality three-mile race 
last time. Needs to take an enormous step forward. Younger than any National 
winner since 1940.

Chance: low

The Last Samuri

Jockey: D Bass Trainer: K Bailey Age: Eight Weight: 10st 8lb

Young, improving and with an impressive strike rate of five from eight over 
fences, this chestnut demands to be taken seriously. From a stable that has 
already won a National (albeit back in 1990), he won a competitive race at 
Kempton’s Christmas meeting and hacked up in his prep race at Doncaster last 
month. His 10-length defeat of The Druids Nephew that day should probably not 
be taken literally but it could not have been more encouraging. Still, this is 
a much greater test than anything he has ever faced.

Chance: high

Kruzhlinin

Jockey: R Johnson Trainer: P Hobbs Age: Nine Weight: 10st 7lb

Never got into the race when a distant 10th two years ago but was only a 
seven-year-old and can probably also be forgiven his modest effort at the 
Cheltenham Festival last month, since he seems not to cope well with that 
track. Change of stable helped him recover his best form when scoring at 
Kempton in January, beating Le Reve despite jumping left throughout. Should 
have more to offer with this season’s champion jockey aboard, though new stable 
may be slightly going off the boil. He is vulnerable to the occasional mistake.

Chance: medium

Rule The World

Jockey: D Mullins Trainer: MF Morris Age: Nine Weight: 10st 7lb

Yet to win over fences after 13 attempts but no doubt that he has the ability 
to land a good race. He was second in last year’s Irish National and third in 
the Kerry National, giving plenty of weight to the front two. Between those 
efforts, he somehow slipped up on the run to the last in the Galway Plate when 
seeming to have every chance. Last two efforts have not been as good but 
midwinter ground might not be his thing. Worth a second look.

Grand National 2016: five things to look out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/grand-national-2016-five-things> 
Chance: medium

Just A Par

Jockey: S Bowen Trainer: P Nicholls Age: Nine Weight: 10st 6lb

Produced an extraordinary finish to win the Bet365 Gold Cup last year, beating 
Vics Canvas and Le Reve, seeming to relish the marathon distance. Fairly 
handicapped on 7lb higher now and easy to imagine a similar effort carrying him 
into the argument, although horses that need extreme hold-up tactics can get 
into trouble in Grand Nationals. First two (weak) runs this season came at a 
time when the stable was faring poorly. Back to form last month with a second 
place at Exeter, giving a stone to the winner and without usual blinkers.

Chance: medium

Katenko

Jockey: W Kennedy Trainer: V Williams Age: 10 Weight: 10st 6lb

Looked really classy in his first season since arriving from France but hasn’t 
been the same since falling in the 2013 Hennessy and no real sign of 
encouragement for at least two years now. This course has sometimes sparked a 
revival in some horses and he has at least dropped back to his last winning 
rating but a substantial reason for hope is lacking.

Chance: low

Vics Canvas

Jockey: R Dunne Trainer: DA McLoughlin Age: 13 Weight: 10st 6lb

Sole win over fences so far was in the Cork Grand National of 2014 but there 
have been other impressive efforts. He was third in a quality Christmas 
handicap at Leopardstown that season and second to Just A Par at Sandown last 
April. Efforts this season have been mixed but his fifth in the Becher Chase 
here in December was another fine run from a slightly higher rating than he has 
here. Aged 13, which would make him the oldest National winner since 1923, but 
lightly raced for his age and could get involved.

Chance: low
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fa-brief-history-of-the-grand-national-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Grand%20National%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fa-brief-history-of-the-grand-national-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20history%20of%20the%20Grand%20National%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fa-brief-history-of-the-grand-national-video&media=>
A brief history of the Grand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/apr/05/a-brief-history-of-the-grand-national-video>
. 
Black Thunder

Jockey: S Waley-Cohen Trainer: P Nicholls Age: Nine Weight: 10st 6lb

Four wins over fences have come against a maximum of five rivals, suggesting 
he may not relish the experience of racing against 39 others. Has generally 
struggled since leaving novice company and even a drop in the weights didn’t 
help him at Sandown last time.Bought at auction by a syndicate including Robert 
Waley-Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/sam-waley-cohen-late-grand-national-ride-black-thunder>
, the father of the jockey, on Thursday.

Chance: low

Ballycasey

Jockey: K Walsh Trainer: WP Mullins Age: Nine Weight: 10st 6lb

Chance in last year’s race was not obvious, even though he was ridden by Ruby 
Walsh. In the end his credentials went untested, as he was brought down at the 
first Canal Turn. It looks as though a return here has been the only plan since 
then, in which case it may be unwise to fret over a couple of his poorer 
efforts this winter. He has still not won at three miles or further, so his 
stamina is a major concern.

Chance: low

Hadrian’s Approach

Jockey: N de Boinville Trainer: N Henderson Age: Nine Weight: 10st 6lb

Proved he’s the right type for this by landing the Bet365 Gold Cup in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/26/hadrians-approach-nicky-henderson-sandown>
. Just three runs since but there was promise in his midfield effort at Kempton 
last time, his first outing for more than a year. Is only 1lb higher than for 
his Sandown success and jockey bookings suggest he is the better hope of his 
trainer, Nicky Henderson, who also runs Triolo D’Alene. Leap of faith required 
but not out of this.

Chance: medium

Vieux Lion Rouge

Jockey: J Reveley Trainer: D Pipe Age: Seven Weight: 10st 5lb

Only seven and a novice chaser who jumped fences for the first time in May, 
making him inexperienced for a test like this. Won a handicap at Haydock in 
November and fairly weighted on the strength of that. Cheltenham Festival 
effort last time was more of a concern; either his stamina failed him or he 
lacked the resolution for a battle. Younger than any National winner since 1940.

Chance: low

Pendra

Jockey: A Coleman Trainer: C Longsdon Age: Eight Weight: 10st 8lb

Talented and has almost always started his seasons well, without being able to 
sustain his form this far into the year. Career peak with Ascot win on his 
reappearance but faded into fifth when trying to follow up there in December. 
Other efforts have also suggested he lacks the necessary stamina for this. 
Nicely weighted and surely has other handicaps in him but this does not seem an 
ideal opportunity.

Chance: medium

Saint Are

Jockey: P Brennan Trainer: T George Age: 10 Weight: 10st 5lb

Second in last year’s race, beaten less than two lengths, and often finds his 
best form on a drying surface at this time of year. Only 3lb higher this time 
and, as was also the case last year, comes here off the back of a handicap 
success. Likely to go well again from a handy spot at the bottom of the weights.

Chance: high

Home Farm

The Joy of Six: great Grand National moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/apr/03/joy-of-six-grand-national> 
Jockey: AE Lynch Trainer: H De Bromhead Age: Nine Weight: 10st 4lb

Winless since first run for this trainer in November 2014 in what now looks a 
weak Listed chase. Spent most of last season being shown up in Grade One races, 
while this season consists so far of a couple of well-beaten efforts over 
hurdles. Rating has at least dropped but even his best form does not entitle 
him to be in the shake-up here.

Chance: low

Grand National 2016: sweepstake kit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/08/grand-national-2016-sweepstake-kit>
The Romford Pele

Jockey: T Whelan Trainer: R Curtis Age: Nine Weight: 10st 4lb

Dangerous to underestimate this one, who seems on the way back after a period 
in the wilderness, much like his stable. Was a comfortable winner of the Summer 
Cup at Uttoxeter in 2014, making him a National type, and only 6lb higher now 
than he was that day. This season has been a write-off over fences but last two 
efforts over hurdles have been encouraging. If he can do something similar over 
these fences, he’ll have a say in this, although his jumping can let him down.

Chance: high

[Update: O’Faolains Boy now a non-runner]






 