
A young designer in Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> plans to 
sue the state in an unprecedented case after an archivist sent him evidence 
appearing to name the agents of Joseph Stalin’s secret police who executed his 
great-grandfather.

Denis Karagodin, 34, received the document in the post after repeated requests 
to the Federal Security Service (FSB) for information about the circumstances 
of his great-grandfather’s execution.

The typewritten paper appears to be a report in which three secret security 
officers confirm to a court that they have carried out the court’s death 
sentence in the city of Tomsk. The stamped document featured the names and 
scrawled signatures of the three secret police agents who took responsibility 
for shooting Stepan Karagodin.

The dead man’s great-grandson believes it is the first time that names of 
actual perpetrators of Stalin’s crimes have been directly associated with the 
deaths of their victims, and described it as a “stunning discovery”.

Karagodin does not know why the document was not stamped secret. He claims he 
can now establish a direct chain of responsibility from Stalin, to the secret 
police head, Nikolai Yezhov, to the local security officials in Tomsk, to the 
members of the tribunal who rubber-stamped the verdict, to the three 
executioners who pulled the trigger and, presumably, dumped Stepan Karagodin’s 
body into a mass grave on the edge of the city.

“The historians and specialists I have spoken with cannot believe that I 
managed this,” he said. “Some of them were simply in shock that such documents 
even exist and that you can access them.”

Karagodin, who lives in the same city where the execution took place, had been 
searching for years to find out what happened to his great-grandfather and to 
learn the names of the people who murdered him, but said in June that the 
“state security services are doing everything they can to make this impossible”.
 One page of the document on the execution of Stepan Karagodin, showing his 
name at No 13. Photograph: Denis Karagodin 
He began work in 2012, creating a website on which he collected every document 
he could find about the case. The result is a detailed account of the fate of 
Stepan, a Cossack farmer and father of nine who was executed in 1938 after 
being accused of working as a Japanese spy.

 Karagodin believes his work is producing a much-needed discussion in a 
society that has long downplayed the communist state’s crimes against its own 
people and has done little to hold perpetrators to account.

Days after he published the names of the secret police agents, Karagodin 
received a letter from a woman he publicly identifies only as Yulya, the 
grand-daughter of one of the agents who signed the document.

Although confronting the truth about her own family was heartrending, Yulya 
thanked Karagodin for bringing out “the entire truth” of the country’s past.

Karagodin wrote back to her, saying he was “sincerely grateful” for her 
“brave” letter.

In addition, Karagodin has received dozens of letters from people thanking him 
for his work or seeking advice on how they can find out more about the deaths 
of their own relatives.

“I give them advice, but it is really hard for me,” Karagodin said. “It is 
really hard. Each story is a particular hell and you have to delve into it and 
talk about these events without, at the same time, escaping from the particular 
hell of the Russian bureaucracy.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-grandson-of-man-killed-in-stalins-purges-to-sue-russian-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d8c815d49f2d95678ee108f5e7db1bd7f3f4253%2F0_132_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great-grandson%20of%20man%20killed%20in%20Stalin's%20purges%20to%20sue%20Russian%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-grandson-of-man-killed-in-stalins-purges-to-sue-russian-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great-grandson%20of%20man%20killed%20in%20Stalin%27s%20purges%20to%20sue%20Russian%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgreat-grandson-of-man-killed-in-stalins-purges-to-sue-russian-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d8c815d49f2d95678ee108f5e7db1bd7f3f4253%2F0_132_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 Denis Karagodin holding the KGB letter he was sent in the post. Photograph: 
Denis Karagodin 
Slowly, a public conversation about historical crimes is emerging. In October, 
blogger Vladimir Yakovlev wrote a heartfelt post about his grandfather, whom he 
described as “a murderer, a bloody executioner” among whose many victims were 
even some of his own relatives.

“My happiest childhood memories are connected with a spacious old apartment on 
Novokuznetskaya Street [in Moscow] that our family was very proud of,” he 
wrote. “That apartment, as I learned later, was not purchased or built, but 
confiscated. It was taken by force from a merchant family.”

 “The couch on which I listened to fairytales and the armchairs and the buffet 
and all the other furniture in the apartment – none of it was purchased by my 
grandfather and grandmother,” he wrote. “They just picked what they wanted from 
a special warehouse where the property taken from the apartments of executed 
Muscovites was stored.”

 Yakovlev also writes about the psychological wounds of Stalinism. “When 
considering the scope of the tragedies of the Russian past, we usually count 
the dead,” he wrote. “But in order to assess the scope of the influence of 
these tragedies on the psyches of future generations, we need to count not the 
dead but the survivors. The dead died. But the survivors became our parents and 
the parents of our parents.

“It took me years to understand the history of my family,” he concludes. “But 
now I have a better idea of the origins of my deep-seated, unmotivated fear. Or 
my exaggerated secretiveness. Or my absolute inability to trust and to form 
close relations. Or the constant feeling of guilt that has haunted me since 
childhood.”

Coincidentally, the human rights group Memorial this month released an online 
database of 40,000 former Stalinist secret police agents. Russian media 
reported in November that the descendants of some of those named in the 
database have asked President Vladimir Putin to shut down the project out of 
fear they could become “targets of revenge”.

Karagodin now intends to seek to prosecute “the entire criminal conspiracy” 
that led to the death of his great-grandfather and the other six people named 
in the document.

When people tell him that the authorities would never allow such a case to go 
forward, Karagodin has a simple answer. “We’ll try even if it is unsuccessful. 
At least it will go down in history as an attempt,” he said.

“A precedent can be a powerful thing.”

A version of this article first appeared on RFE/RL 
<http://www.rferl.org/a/stalin-great-terror-search-for-great-grandfather-executioners-reconciliation-russia/28131158.html>
 