
The biggest revelation was that Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> can talk for six hours 
without swearing. Few would have suspected that. He could not, however, do so 
while being polite.

The Topshop billionaire was determined to throw jabs at as many members of the 
committees as possible. MPs were variously told not to stare, to put on their 
glasses, to stop bullying him (as if) and to rephrase questions. Iain Wright, 
chairman of the business select committee, was right: Green is remarkably 
thin-skinned.

He also has a fat wallet. He is now promising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 – or half-promising – to get it out for the benefit of BHS pensioners. Details 
were non-existent, however. Green did not say how much he is offering, or 
whether the Pension Protection Fund – funded by a levy on solvent 
defined-benefit schemes – would be asked to cover part of the deficit, which 
runs to £571m on one calculation.

Green’s reputation (and perhaps his knighthood) depends on the terms being 
seen to be fair. In practice, that may mean covering the entire shortfall. The 
final bill may run to less than £571m because the deficit does not have to be 
cleared overnight, and because scheme members who are decades away from 
retirement could be offered lump sums in exchange. But Green could be looking 
at a reasonable demand for £300m. Only then can his pledge to “sort this in the 
correct way” be judged. At the moment, he is waving only good intentions and a 
vow to give it his “best shot.”

As for where responsibility lies for the appalling decision to sell BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> for £1 to Dominic Chappell, a former 
bankrupt with no retail experience, Green did an effective job of spreading 
blame among his advisers. He can’t shuffle off his own ultimate responsibility, 
but he is right that deals of this size do not proceed without professional 
advisers lending their reputations.

Green’s friendship with Goldman Sachs is now shredded, one assumes. The bank 
was the “gatekeeper” to the transaction, agreed Green. It vetted Chappell and 
“one million per cent” Green would have not have proceeded if Goldman had said 
no. The testimony of Michael Sherwood, Goldman’s top man in London and Green’s 
old chum, is now keenly awaited. Goldman wasn’t paid for its services but it’s 
impossible to ignore the depth of its involvement when there is an email trail 
running to 79 exchanges.

But law firm Olswang or accountants Grant Thornton – both working for Chappell 
– deserve much harder questioning. Green made the very serious allegation that 
one or both firms worked for Chappell “on contingency” despite not knowing him 
“from a hole in the wall.”

If the former phrase implies the firms would collect multi-million fees only 
if BHS was sold, it would raise big ethical questions. Chappell was an unfit 
and underfunded buyer and 11,000 jobs and a neglected pension fund were at 
stake at a company making heavy losses. The presence of success-dependent fees 
would raise clear concerns about conflicts of interest. Olswang and Grant 
Thornton should be forced to reveal their terms of engagement immediately.

The wonder, though, is that Green ever allowed himself to get into this mess. 
He can blame “stupid, idiotic” mistakes in the management of the BHS scheme; 
and he’s probably correct that the trustees were asleep at the wheel and that 
thePensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator moves too 
slowly. In the end, though, he – or, rather, Lady Green – owned the sponsoring 
company and the ballooning deficit was stated in the accounts every year

Yes, the collapse in gilt yields made life harder for all employers with 
defined-benefit schemes, but the BHS pension deficit was always his problem. If 
he really didn’t focus on the problem until 2012, he is as guilty of stupidity 
and idiocy as everybody else. He is, as he put it, a “big boy”. It’s time to 
stop teasing and write a big cheque.

Top marks for optimism over Poundland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fgreen-has-a-thin-skin-but-a-fat-wallet-will-he-open-it-for-bhs-pensioners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72ff34ec55d5b89ff85133347735124de2faa25c%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20has%20a%20thin%20skin%20but%20a%20fat%20wallet%20%E2%80%93%20will%20he%20open%20it%20for%20BHS%20pensioners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fgreen-has-a-thin-skin-but-a-fat-wallet-will-he-open-it-for-bhs-pensioners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20has%20a%20thin%20skin%20but%20a%20fat%20wallet%20%E2%80%93%20will%20he%20open%20it%20for%20BHS%20pensioners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fgreen-has-a-thin-skin-but-a-fat-wallet-will-he-open-it-for-bhs-pensioners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72ff34ec55d5b89ff85133347735124de2faa25c%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Poundland’s share price has fallen sharply since the takeover of 99p Stores. 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
Give thanks for Steinhoff, shareholders in misfiring European retailers will 
be saying. The giant South African company seems to be on a mission to buy any 
mid-sized chain of shops it can find.

It missed out on the Argos owner, Home Retail, which went to Sainsbury’s; 
French electricals chain Darty also slipped away. But now Christo Wiese, 
Steinhoff’s majority shareholder, is taken by the splendours of Poundland. He’s 
bought a 15% stake from private equity outfit Warburg Pincus and is
contemplating a full bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/steinhoff-considers-bid-for-poundland>
.

Wiese gets top marks for opportunism. Poundland’s share price has fallen 
sharply since the takeover of 99p Stores, which was a simple deal on paper but 
less so in practice. Investors worry whether that the UK is now awash with 
general-merchandise discount shops. And, in Warburg Pincus, Steinhoff 
identified a large and loose piece on the shareholder register. An offer around 
Wednesday’s closing share price of 200p – up almost a third on the level at the 
start of the week – would probably succeed.

But what’s Steinhoff grand strategy? Its UK portfolio includes Benson for 
Beds; home furnishing chain Harveys; and stakes in gym firm Virgin Active and 
clothing retailer New Look. It’s a disjointed collection, and will be odder 
still ifPoundland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/poundland-discount-retail> arrives. One 
can understand the desire to expand out of South Africa and earn profits in a 
currency that is more solid than the rand. But a general splurge on unconnected 
European retailers looks a very unsophisticated strategy. It’s baffling.
 