
Amid growing economic chaos, and the highest inflation rate in the world, some 
Venezuelans are swapping bolivars forbitcoins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> in order to buy basic 
necessities or pay their employees

The digital currency is free from central bank or government controls, and 
users inVenezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> see it as a 
safe alternative in an economy where the government has enforced strict foreign 
exchange controls, and inflation is running at an estimated 500%.

This week, Venezuelans rushed to unload 100-bolivar bills – the largest 
denomination – afterthe government announced that it would be withdrawn from 
circulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/venezuelans-on-the-removal-of-the-100-bolivar-note-thoughtless-dangerous>
 on Wednesday in what it described as a move against profiteering.


Venezuelans rush to ditch 100-bolivar bills after president's sudden ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/venezuela-100-bolivar-bills-sudden-ban-colombia-nicolas-maduro>
Although Bitcoin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> users still 
represent a tiny minority, some believe that the currency will become more 
popular in Venezuela as economic uncertainty escalates.

Unlike other online payments, the peer-to-peer currency does not require any 
third party to buy, sell or send. Venezuelans only need a phone, computer or on 
an online wallet service to store bitcoins which they can exchange at the 
black-market dollar exchange rate – almost five times the official exchange 
rate.


There are no official statistics on the number of bitcoin users in the 
country, but according to the brokerage website Surbitcoin.com – a platform 
allowing Venezuelans to buy and sell bitcoins in exchange for bolivars – the 
number of users has increased from 450 in August 2014 to more than 85,000 in 
November 2016.

“Bitcoin is mainstream neither in Venezuela nor in the world but there is a 
growing interest in the technology. More and more people from different 
industries are getting on board,” said Jorge Farias, the CEO of another 
exchange platform,cryptobuyer.io <https://cryptobuyer.io/>.


Farias said that some use the currency to by food or medicine, while 
Venezuelans abroad use it to send funds to their families.

Some use bitcoins to buy Amazon gift cards, then order goods and food on the 
online store in the US and other countries, which can then be delivered by 
courier to Venezuela – where supermarket shelves are frequently empty.

Others use the currency as safe haven for their savings. “I save in bitcoin 
and when I need money, I convert it into bolivars, I just changed 0.14 bitcoin 
and that was enough to live for quite some time,” said Lili Beth Grela, who 
runs Cryptobuyer’s finance department.

Although bitcoin itself has been prone to volatility in the past four years, 
it remains relatively stable compared to the bolivar, which depreciated 60% 
against the US dollar on the black market in November, according to the 
US-based websiteDolar Today <https://dolartoday.com/>, which provides a 
benchmark exchange rate.

In mid-2014, one bitcoin was worth about 40,000 bolivars, which then amounted 
to $630. One bitcoin is now worth less than 2m bolivars at the time of writing, 
according toSurbitcoin <https://surbitcoin.com/#market>.

Farias says that many Venezuelan tech workers who freelance for companies 
elsewhere prefer to be paid in bitcoin. “With Cryptobuyer, we convert bitcoins 
into bolivars and help Venezuelans pay for daily life necessities, such as 
mobile phones recharges, television, water and electricity bills as well as 
banks transfers in bolivars,” he said.

On the other hand, “buying bolivars with bitcoins is the easy part because a 
lot of people have lost trust in the bolivar and will take bitcoins instead,” 
says Surbitcoin.com CEO Rodrigo Souza.

To buy bolivars with bitcoins, people either use peer-to-peer service, like 
LocalBitcoins, to trade in person. They can also use an exchange brokerage, 
such as where they can convert their bitcoins into bolivars and vice versa.

Venezuela’s political and economic turmoil has in turn triggered a health 
crisiswith the collapse of its healthcare system, and acute shortages of drugs 
and medical supplies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/venezuela-crisis-hospitals-shortages-barcelona-caracas>
.

One user, Eli, a 33-year shoe store owner, said he uses the digital currency 
to buy medicine for his mother’s bone cancer. He sells bitcoins to a friend in 
Colombia who buys cancer treatment and medical supplies when he comes to visit.

Venezuelans on the removal of the 100-bolivar note: 'thoughtless, dangerous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/venezuelans-on-the-removal-of-the-100-bolivar-note-thoughtless-dangerous>
“Treating my mother’s cancer would have been very difficult without using 
bitcoins because my business is going bankrupt and I have a lot of debts, so 
bitcoins enabled me to stay afloat while our currency is collapsing,” said Eli.


Another bitcoin user, Arley from the Táchira state on the border with 
Colombia, said he buys drugs in Colombia with bitcoins, then resells them after 
legally importing them to Venezuela.

The currency occupies a legal grey area in Venezuela: while in the US it is 
deemed a commodity, “there are no laws against or in favor of bitcoin in 
Venezuela. With this loophole, bitcoin could be considered a digital good, 
which would make it legal to buy and sell,” he said.

But, fearful of potential retribution from the government, most Bitcoin users 
in Venezuela keep a low profile, restricting their discussions of currency to 
encrypted communications apps such as Telegram.

“We’re afraid because there has been a foreign exchange control in Venezuela 
for years so we don’t want to openly talk about changing bolivars into another 
currency, especially not at the black-market exchange rate,” said Carlos, a 
bitcoin user from Anzoátegui state.
 