
On one small point, one can sympathise with Sir Philip Green. Frank Field, 
chair of one of the committees exploring the downfall of BHS, didn’t have to 
say MPs “would laugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/mps-penalties-philip-green-attend-inquiry>
” if the billionaire retailer turns up on Wednesday with a proposal that puts 
less than £600m into the company’s pension fund. It would have been wiser to 
wait to see what Green says, rather than pronounce on what would provoke mirth.

But so what? The point the grumbling Green has overlooked is that he’s not 
dealing with a legal process, or even a regulatory investigation. He’s facing 
two crews of MPs who are free to comment as they wish during the course of 
their inquiries. There is no obligation on the parliamentarians to be polite, 
or to offer opinions only after hearing all the evidence.

Field’s remark, one suspects, was prompted by the rumour that Green was 
preparing to offer £150m directly toBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pensioners. The chair of the work 
and pensions committee may have been indicating that such a proposal would be 
technically problematic. He’d be right. The size of the shortfall in the scheme 
– £571m, on one measure – means the Pension Protection Fund, which is funded by 
a levy on solvent defined benefit schemes, would still be on the hook for a 
very large sum. In other words, £150m might not be generous in context. Field’s 
phrasing may have been inelegant but, to use a Green phrase, that’s showbiz.

Indeed, the Topshop <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/topshop> tycoon 
hasn’t helped himself by saying next to nothing since the collapse of BHS. He 
could have issued a statement giving his version of events at any time. He 
could have disputed any of the allegations made by witnesses. Instead, he’s 
stayed silent even as his original claim to have sold BHS in a good condition 
to a credible buyer has been steadily undermined.

Green chose former bankrupt Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> as a purchaser and, 
given the rapid collapse of BHS and the shortfall faced by pensioners, he 
should not be surprised that answers are being demanded. If Wednesday has 
assumed the status of a “showdown”, Green is primarily to blame.

He will – let’s hope – drop his silly threats not to appear. A no-show would 
provoke attempts to strip him of his knighthood, which really would be an 
arbitrary process, and would not stop parliament trying to assert its 
authority. The bald facts for Green should be very simple: you’re a British 
citizen and MPs wish to ask you legitimate questions, saying no is not an 
option.

Changing Clarkes won’t be enough for Asda

Once upon a time, Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> used 
to boast about its pride in owning Asda, citing the many trading ideas it had 
re-imported back to the US. The UK was regarded as the best of its foreign 
adventures.

These days, it’s almost as if Asda is viewed as an errant child whose 
existence has to be acknowledged in round-robin dispatches, but not dwelled 
upon.Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> wasn’t even mentioned by 
name in the latest quarterly update to shareholders. Instead, there was a 
general grumble about how “a highly competitive environment and food deflation 
in the UK continued to challenge the market”.

That environment is now so entrenched that even head office in Arkansas thinks 
something needs to be done. Asda chief executiveAndy Clarke is out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
, to be replaced by Sean Clarke, who has earned his spurs running Walmart China.

Changing Clarkes does not, in itself, signal a change of strategy. For that to 
happen, Walmart will have to acknowledge that the current softly-softly attempt 
to lower Asda’s prices, while protecting its profit margins, is a flop. 
Like-for-like sales have fallen for seven quarters in a row. Aldi andLidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> have been the beneficiaries.

The cure is permanently lower profit margins, to provide financial firepower 
to combat the discounters. Tesco andMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> have been dragged into that 
battle, and the scars show in their battered share prices. The grocery game is 
just less profitable than it was.

If Asda is now preparing to lead a price war, the stakes will be raised again. 
But don’t assume that outcome is inevitable. Walmart could have given Asda a 
licence to be more aggressive several years ago. Changing the local boss may 
herald a change of heart. But it could turn out to be another cop-out – an easy 
way to avoid making a hard decision on prices.

LinkedIn accepts Microsoft’s generous invitation

LinkedIn is a networking website where ambitious office-workers go to make 
over-extended boasts about their professional achievements and ambitions. The 
company’s management lives by the same philosophy.Selling LinkedIn to Microsoft 
for $26.2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/linkedins-rapid-14-year-growth-led-to-262bn-microsoft-deal>
 is, apparently, a “refounding moment” that “gives us a chance to change the 
way the world works”.

Cut to the chase, chaps: you’ve played a blinder. You’ve extracted a monstrous 
price – a 50% premium to the old share price – by finding a buyer with an 
excess of cash and a shortage of ideas about how to protect its dominance in 
professional computing. Congratulations, it’s a terrific deal from the seller’s 
point of view. But howLinkedIn <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/linkedin>
 can be worth $60 per member, including the inactive ones, is a mystery.
 