
Guardian Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> is 
to cut costs in the US in response to challenging market conditions in an 
attempt to break even in the country by the next financial year.

Almost a third of jobs across all departments in the US are expected to be 
cut, reducing the number of staff employed in the country from 140 to about 100.

The group said market conditions made it “difficult but necessary” to make the 
changes if the Guardian was to break even in the US by 2017-18.

According to some estimates, technology groups such as Facebook and Google 
attract 85% of digital advertising spend in the US. Faced with such 
competition, Guardian revenues have failed to meet expectations despite having 
risen in the current financial year.

In an email to staff, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, and the 
chief executive, David Pemsel, said the cuts were necessary even though strong 
audience growth in the US had led to the newspaper group being “among the top 
five digital newspaper platforms in America”.

The pair said all departments would feel the impact of the cuts but that the 
priority was “to protect Guardian journalism”.

Since a voluntary redundancy programme announced in March, the company has cut 
more than 260 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/guardian-losses-members> in the 
UK to save an estimated £17m a year.

In July <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/guardian-losses-members>
, the Guardian reported losses of £69m for the last financial year but revealed 
strong growth in itsmembership scheme 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=fsarticlecopyhp>, with more than 
50,000 people paying to sign up.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> US union 
committee said it was “deeply disappointed” with the decision, “considering the 
optimistic financial projections made to us within the last year”.

It acknowledged, however, that the management had said it would work with the 
union to decide how the cuts would be made.

“We are committed to fighting for fair and equitable treatment for the entire 
Guardian US editorial staff for as long as it takes,” the committee said.
 