
The publisher of the Guardian has invested in Founders Factory 
<https://foundersfactory.co/>, a company that funds technology startups across 
a range of industries launched by lastminute.com co-founder Brent Hoberman

Under the exclusive deal, Guardian Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup>, the parent company of 
the Guardian and Observer, becomes the exclusive partner for Founders Factory 
investments in businesses in the media sector.


“This strategic investment gives GMG the opportunity to bring emerging 
technology trends into our own business and culture, giving us access to a 
global network of start-ups and the chance to get in early with possible 
commercial opportunities,” said chief executive, David Pemsel.


Hoberman, who recently stepped down from the GMG board after nine years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jan/24/guardianmediagroup.citynews>, 
says the aim of Founders Factory is to develop as many as 200 early stage 
technology companies over the next five years.

“We’re really excited to be announcing this partnership with the Guardian – 
one of the world’s most instinctively digital, innovative and ambitious news 
organisations,” he said. “We will benefit from their strength, reach and 
institutional knowledge right across the media sector while they will be able 
to tap into our ability to develop truly innovative products and introduce them 
to the most exciting thought leaders in technology.”

In June, Founders Factory struck a similar deal 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/business-news/tech-businesses-get-backing-from-macmillan-owner-holtzbrinck-10326294.html>
 with Holtzbrinck, the Stuttgart-based owner of publishing house Macmillan, 
with a focus on education technology ventures.

Holtzbrinck also put several education technology ventures into the company 
including Maths Doctor, an online tutoring service set up by former investment 
banker Simon Walsh.

Hoberman and Jonnie Goodwin, founder of tech-focused merchant bank Lepe 
Partners, set up Founders Forum, a community for entrepreneurs, in 2006.

Founders Factory, which is affiliated to Founders Forum, says it provides “the 
funding to operate, the freedom to innovate and the execution support to 
overcome critical hurdles, all surrounded by a huge network of potential 
partners, investors and clients.”

 