
Guardian Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> 
and private equity group Apax have enjoyed an £80m windfall following the £800m 
stock market flotation of Ascential, the owner of assets including the Cannes 
Lions advertising festival.

Ascential, which was formerly known as Top Right and runs 17 magazines 
including Drapers, Retail Week and fashion information site WGSN, has floated 
35% of the company at 200p a share achieving the mid range of its target of an 
initial public offeringvaluing the business at up to £1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/14/cannes-lions-owner-ascential-float-top-right-apax-gmg>
.

GMG and Apax acquired Ascential for £1bn in 2008 when it was known as Emap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/emap>.

Top Right to rebrand Emap as Plexus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/10/top-right-to-rebrand-emap-as-plexus>
GMG, which is the parent company of the Guardian, owns 32.9% of Ascential, 
with Apax controlling the remaining two-thirds. The pair sold down their 
shareholdings to receive about £80m.

According to the financial filing on the float GMG sold shares worth £29.3m, 
Apax divested of shares worth £48.8m and management and staff sold off shares 
worth about £1.9m.


Following the flotation, GMG owns 23.3% of Ascential, and Apax 38.9%.

“I am very pleased with the response we have received from investors towards 
our company, our products and our IPO,” said Duncan Painter, chief executive of 
Ascential. “As we move forward as a listed company, our focus will not change. 
We will continue to put our customers first, supporting them with market 
leading products specifically designed to help them secure their own growth and 
success.”

Ascential will use the £183m in funds raised to cut its debt burden, which 
stood at £410m according to the last publicly available figures, which will 
finally bring its debt-to-earnings down to a healthier ratio of 2.5 to one.

Ascential’s most recent public financial filing shows the business made 
adjusted profits of £85.3m in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/27/top-rights-27-profit-rise-reignites-talk-of-break-up>
, a 27% year-on-year rise, as revenues rose 9% to £312m.
 