
In just three years, Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardian-australia> has built a new, 
independent and distinctive media voice in Australia.

When Joe Hockey delivered the Abbott government’s first budget in 2014, many 
newspapers judged it to be exactly the “fiscal medicine” Australia needed – a 
dose of shared “pain” for the national gain of budget repair.

Guardian Australia saw it differently. We immediately called out the fact that 
the “pain” of the spending cuts was not really being shared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-sales-pitch-of-shared-pain-doesnt-really-live-up-to-reality>
 because it fell disproportionately and unfairly on the sick, the unemployed 
and low-income families. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-2014-joe-hockey-delivers-deep-pain-for-little-gain>

We are guided by progressive values and dedicated to the old-fashioned 
journalistic grind of discovering the truth about what is happening around us, 
revealing new information and explaining cause and context. We are not afraid 
to swim against the tide.

I joined the fledgling Guardian Australia three years ago as political editor 
because I was convinced Australia needed a new, courageous, clear-eyed source 
of news and commentary.

It was a startup, with all the crazy work hours and improvisations that 
entailed, but it offered the irresistible prospect of telling stories that were 
not always being told.

No endeavour can always run perfectly, but we have grown and expanded across 
the country and I believe we are succeeding in our most important aims. We’ve 
reportedscoops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/19/asylum-seekers-identities-revealed-in-immigration-department-data-lapse>
 that havedominated the national debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
, including the revelation that Australia spied on the former Indonesian 
president and his wife. We’ve provided fearless and factual coverage of 
politics, have revealed anddocumented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/20/the-worst-ive-seen-trauma-expert-lifts-lid-on-atrocity-of-australias-detention-regime>
 thereality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/04/a-life-in-limbo-the-refugees-who-fled-torture-only-to-end-up-trapped-indefinitely-on-manus>
 of offshore detention on Manus Island and Nauru, and haveled the 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
 nationaldiscussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/14/aboriginal-bones-being-returned-australia>
 onIndigenous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/05/family-re-live-pain-as-ms-dhu-inquest-searches-for-answers-over-death-in-custody>
 issues andthe environment, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
 including the impact of climate change on the Great Barrier Reef.

How technology disrupted the truth | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
We’ve shone a light on the quiet suffering of millions of women with 
endometriosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/28/endometriosis-hidden-suffering-millions-women>
,held live events on issues such as marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/01/love-wins-guardian-marriage-equality-forum-feels-the-passion>
, covered sportin new ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/jul/12/david-squires-on-portugal-winning-euro-2016>
, doneterrific  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jul/23/find-out-when-politicians-amend-their-donations-and-lists-of-gifts-and-business-interests>
data journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/mar/22/do-you-pay-more-tax-than-australias-biggest-private-companies>
, run a wide scope ofcommentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jun/14/new-research-abbott-and-turnbull-the-worst-economic-managers-since-menzies>
 andopinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/im-still-reeling-from-qa-but-not-because-i-was-called-hysterical>
, and established popular podcasts. Andwe’ve retained our sense of humour  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/i-love-the-smell-of-recriminations-in-the-morning->
along the way, with a little help from First Dog on the Moon. We’ve won Walkley 
awards every year we’ve been publishing, in2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/29/guardian-australia-wins-walkley-award>
,2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/05/walkley-awards-winners-the-guardian-and-abc-take-scoop-of-the-year-as-peter-greste-is-honoured>
 and2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/stan-grant-wins-walkley-award-for-guardian-columns-on-indigenous-affairs>
.

And as the world confronts new political and economic uncertainties, we have 
the incredible depth of international coverage and commentary from the Guardian 
UK and US and from Guardian correspondents around the globe. Guardian Australia 
is run as a separate company and operates its own Australia-focused newsroom, 
but it is also part of the Guardian’s 24-hour global news operation, helping to 
cover breakinginternational stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/13/shootings-reported-in-eastern-paris-live>
 in all parts of the world.

Most importantly, we’ve tried to listen to our readers, to talk to you in 
comments threads and on social media, at our events and via email. We’re being 
read more than ever. More than three million people visited Guardian Australia 
in June. On election day Guardian Australia articles were viewed almost 2.8m 
times. On election nightour authoritative politics live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/02/australian-federal-election-2016-results-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live>
 was viewed more than a million times.

But as is the experience of all media organisations, the great digital 
disruption is presenting both opportunities and enormous challenges. The reach 
of social media such as Facebook, the different ways readers are accessing news 
and the advent of adblockers have upended every newspaper’s business model. 
Many have set up paywalls.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>, including 
Guardian Australia, is responding in different ways. We want our journalism to 
remain accessible to everyone, but we are asking readers who value what we do 
to consider some financial support.

As the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, wrote recently in a 
thought-provoking essay on the future of journalism in this age of 
technological disruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
, “the truth is a struggle. It takes hard graft. But the struggle is worth it: 
traditional news values are important and they matter and they are worth 
defending.”

I’ve just taken over as editor of Guardian Australia. I have one overriding 
aim – to steer us through this next wave of change and embed Guardian Australia 
as a leading progressive voice, and a place where Australian journalists can 
continue to do brave and important work.

If you agree that traditional news values are worth defending, if you are 
among the community of readers who share our values and like what we do, if you 
want to help independent journalism continue and prosper, I’m asking you to 
consider supporting us with amonthly  
<https://membership.theguardian.com/au/supporter?INTCMP=mem_au_editorial_lenore_article>
 orone-off contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/au?INTCMP=co_au_editorial_lenore_article>. 
It’s a small amount that can make a big difference to Australian journalism.

Lenore Taylor

Editor, Guardian Australia

 * Support us with a monthly 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/au/supporter?INTCMP=mem_au_editorial_lenore_footer>
 orone-off contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/au?INTCMP=co_au_editorial_lenore_footer>
 