
1It’s a sharp dressed guitar – but is its fluffiness signifying the kind of 
owner who might drive a souped-up Cortina with fluffy dice and a bit of jazz 
funk on the stereo?Boon Gould of Level 42 <>Eddie Hazel of Funkadelic <>Billy 
Gibbons of ZZ Top <>Johnny Marr of the Smiths <>2Quite the eruption of colour 
from this one, sported by which Californian? Eddie van Halen of Van Halen <>
Carlos Santana of Santana <>Mick Mars of Mötley Crüe <>Greg Ginn of Black Flag 
<>3In later years he’d substitute the classic Rickenbacker for a selection of 
Gibsons. Which art school boy is this?Ray Davies of the Kinks <>John Lennon of 
the Beatles <>Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd <>Pete Townshend of the Who <>4He’s 
British and he’s proud of it! But which Britpop king flew the flag?Graham Coxon 
of Blur <>Mark Webber of Pulp <>Noel Gallagher of Oasis <>Chris Gentry of 
Menswear <>5The battered Telecaster is, naturally, the guitar of the common 
man. Which common man, though?Frank Turner <>Billy Bragg <>Bruce Springsteen <>
Tom Clarke of the Enemy <>6You can’t mistake this guitar, even in a little 
silhouette. Who’s playing it?Brian May of Queen <>Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin <>
Steve Howe of Yes <>Jeff Lynne of ELO <>7Five necks good, one neck bad. Is it 
five times more expensive for its owner?Paul Stanley of Kiss <>Rick Neilsen of 
Cheap Trick <>Donald Roeser of Blue Öyster Cult <>Tom Scholz of Boston <>8It’s 
the Flying V’s owner we’re looking for, but the presence of a “twin guitar 
attack” should give you a clue who’s sporting it …Scott Gorham of Thin Lizzy <>
Michael Schenker of UFO <>Kirk Hammett of Metallica <>KK Downing of Judas Priest
 <>9The guitar’s square. The man most certainly wasn’t. Who’s pictured?Bo 
Diddley <>BB King <>Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top <>Howlin’ Wolf <>10Name the man who 
wrote a song so profound it needed not six, not 12, but 18 strings to play.Pete 
Townshend of the Who <>Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones <>Jimmy Page of Led 
Zeppelin <>Alex Lifeson of Rush <>11You don’t get to be as heavy as this man by 
playing guitars with soft, rounded edges. Who is more metallic than thou?Dave 
Murray of Iron Maiden <>James Hetfield of Metallica <>Kerry King of Slayer <>
Dave Mustaine of Megadeth <>12And finally, if you don’t get this one, consider 
yourself told off. Just consider the fact that the SG-playing guitarist is 
wearing school uniform …Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine <>Brian “Head” 
Welch of Korn <>Wes Borland of Limp Bizkit <>Angus Young of AC/DC <>
 