
The Coen brothers pull off an elegant bait and switch in Hail, Caesar! 
(Universal, 12). Lured by the respective bright lights of a vintage Tinseltown 
milieu, a game star ensemble andGeorge Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>’s glistening teeth, we arrive 
expecting a weightless bauble. What we get is a pretzel-knotted spiritual 
rumination to be filed nobly alongsideA Serious Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-serious-man>. It’s no surprise that the 
Coens can handle dense theological inquiry and noir-style puzzle plotting with 
equal aplomb, nor that they’re movie-literate enough to directScarlett Johansson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> in a sublime pastiche of 
an Esther Williams mermaid musical. It’s less expected to see them exhibiting 
all these skills in one film, but asJosh Brolin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/josh-brolin>’s flailing Hollywood studio boss 
wades into ever murkier backlot shenanigans, the dream-like tonal and logical 
lurches ofHail, Caesar! feel like part of its woozy, seductive design. The 
Coens are besotted with the absurdity and artifice of cinema, but see real life 
as an equally strange construction.

Reality gets a simultaneously bleak and oblique twist, meanwhile, in Anomalisa 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 15), cockeyed geniusCharlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman>’s lovely, long-faced first 
foray into animation. Co-directed with stop-motion artist Duke Johnson, this 
story of a grey customer service expert, Michael, gazing into the existential 
void shows humanity as an eerie, uniform mass – our voices alike, our faces 
identically built from multiple, not-quite-joining parts. With love comes 
distinction: when Michael (drily voiced byDavid Thewlis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-thewlis>) falls for Jennifer Jason 
Leigh’s whimsical, admiring, anomalous Lisa (geddit?) in a drab Ohio hotel, his 
world, for a time, opens and expands. Kaufman explores these broken-souled 
puppets as tenderly and inquisitively as he has done his live-action 
characters; animation just feels an obvious aesthetic progression for a 
film-maker who was never quite of this world to begin with.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWQkHA3fHk_0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWQkHA3fHk_0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWQkHA3fHk_0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Anomalisa. 
Deniz Gamze Ergüven’s sensuous, sun-bleached debut Mustang (Curzon Artificial 
Eye, 15) is, in a sense, caught between worlds. The film delineates, with great 
sensitivity, the plight of an oppressed band of sisters in a remote Turkish 
village, while couching their story in chic arthouse terms that make the 
Ankara-born director’s Parisian upbringing quite clear. (A 
Turkish-German-French co-production, the film wasclaimed by France 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2015/09/mustang-selected-as-frances-oscar-submission-for-best-foreign-language-film-213298/>
 at this year’s Oscars.) Whatever its cultural makeup, it’s vibrant, affecting 
stuff: the young women’s liberation may follow a crowd-pleasing formula, but 
the film’s western influences perhaps aptly reflect the characters’ own 
desires. Ergüven connects with them at a gut level, and with breezy formal 
flair to boot.

Her airy touch would be welcome in Mon Roi (Studiocanal, 15), a shrill 
unparcelling of a destructive marriage that, despite its occasionally 
impressive grandiosity of feeling, comes as a disappointment fromPolisse 
director MaÏwenn. Emmanuelle Bercottook home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2015/may/24/cannes-2015-palme-dor-red-carpet-and-closing-ceremony-in-pictures>
 a best actress prize at Cannes for this, but there’s something self-admiring 
and put-on about her and on-screen sparring partnerVincent Cassel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/vincent-cassel>’s fever-pitch work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DABNB3zw5BAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DABNB3zw5BAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DABNB3zw5BAo&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Mustang. 
Elisabeth Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/elisabeth-moss>, however, 
delivers steaming, real-deal intensity in Alex Ross Perry’sQueen of Earth 
(Eureka, 15), a clammy, claustrophobic and wholly arresting study of female 
friendship gone haywire that makes a swift transfer from cinemas to DVD. The 
wan, plastic-wrapped “girl power” ofAllegiant (eOne, 12), meanwhile, could use 
one iota of Moss’s potency. Now three films in, this drab, sub-Hunger Games 
dystopian fantasy franchise makes less sense than ever, and seems even to have 
defeated Shailene Woodley’s perky spirit. A fourth film looms next year with 
all the promise of a dental check-up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlzPgN8eEI-c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlzPgN8eEI-c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlzPgN8eEI-c&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Queen of Earth. 
Finally, a pair of nifty domestic thrillers wring dread and tension from that 
most middle class of social setups: the dinner party. InThe Ones Below (Icon, 
15), first-time director David Farr (writer of TV’sThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-night-manager-episode-by-episode>
) effectively plays on the maintenance and reversal of polite British distance 
as two adjacent couples, both expecting children and occupying the same smart 
Islington terrace, gradually eat away at one another. It overboils badly in the 
last act, however, which can’t be said for US director Karyn Kusama’s 
super-sleek, super-smartThe Invitation, which recently popped up on Netflix. 
Shamefully denied a UK cinema release, this sharp, shivery tale of ex-spouses 
circling each other at an ostensibly friendly social reunion riven with hidden 
histories and agendas keeps its mysteries on a teasingly tight leash 
throughout. It’s a must-see – and for Kusama, left languishing too long in the 
Hollywood doldrums following 2000’s tough-shelled indieGirlfight, a 
career-reigniting revelation.
 