
Half of the fizzy drinks sold in supermarkets have more sugar in one can than 
an adult should consume in a day, with ginger beer as the worst offender, 
research has found.

New research reveals that 55% of all the carbonated drinks on sale in shops 
from Aldi to Waitrose contain more than30 grams, or seven teaspoons, of sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/jun/12/how-much-sugar-is-in-your-fizzy-drink>
 – the limit that everyone over the age of 11 isencouraged to stick to 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/notes/2014/consultation-sugar-guideline/en/>
.

The high sugar content of such drinks is even worse when it comes to 
children’s health. A typical 330ml can of almost three out of four (73%) of the 
169 products studied contained more than the24g (six teaspoons) of sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/04/children-aged-four-to-10-have-equivalent-of-5500-sugar-cubes-a-year>
 which official advice says is the most children aged seven to 10 should have 
over 24 hours.

How much sugar is in your fizzy drink?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/jun/12/how-much-sugar-is-in-your-fizzy-drink>
Ginger beer contains the most sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/12/traditional-fizzy-drinks-sugar-diabetes>
, according to the findings, which are published in the journal BMJ Open. The 
average sugar content across the 21 different types of branded and non-branded 
ginger beers studied was 38.5 grams, or 9.6 teaspoons, and 81% of them 
contained more than the 30g adult daily limit.

“It is disgraceful that so many children can access these products, which 
contain such staggering amounts of sugar, far in excess of their maximum 
allowance for the entire day. It is therefore not possible to state that these 
drinks can be consumed as part of a ‘healthy balanced diet’, even though drinks 
companies claim [they] can be”, said Kawther Hashem, a co-author of the study 
and researcher for the campaign groupAction on Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/18/aseem-malhotra-sugar-campaigner-prevent-obesity-public-pressure-on-government>
 based at Queen Mary University of London.

Flavoured colas were the second most heavily sugared. All four of the types 
tested had more than 30g of sugar and the average was 37.5g, or 9.4 teaspoons. 
They were followed by colas, fizzy orange drinks and cream soda, all of which 
contained on average more than 30g of sugar per 330ml.

The lowest amounts of sugar were found in elderflower, dandelion and burdock, 
lemonade and ginger ale. Hashem acknowledged that some manufacturers had 
already started reducing the sugar content of their fizzy drinks in advance of 
the government’s bringing in itsplanned sugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/17/coca-cola-hits-back-at-sugar-tax-plan>
 on such products.

Last week Tesco announced that it was cutting the amount of sugar in its own 
brand drinks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/07/tesco-cuts-sugar-in-own-brand-drinks-to-avoid-sugar-tax>
 to less than five grams per 100ml, the level at which the new levy is due to 
kick in. Ministers hailed the move as proof that the introduction of the tax is 
prompting beneficial change.

Suntory have also pledged that they will do the same, which will affect brands 
such as Lucozade and Ribena.

“It will be no surprise to most people that soft drinks contain a lot of 
sugar, but it’s the sheer amount of sugar that will come as a shock to many,” 
said a spokeswoman for theObesity Health Alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/obesity-soar-boys-girls-poorer-homes-deprived-backgrounds-overweight-2020>
, a coalition of charities and medical organisations. “Drinking just one can of 
ginger beer or cola, for example, would immediately take you over the daily 
recommended limit for sugar, and significantly over if you’re a child.”

Free sugars are simply “empty calories” which are “seriously endangering 
people’s health” and contributing to type 2 diabetes, tooth decay and obesity, 
she said. The alliance is encouraged to see manufacturers such as Tesco 
reducing the amount of sugar in their products and others pledging to do the 
same, she added.

Sarah Toule, head of health information at World Cancer Research Fund, said: 
“Over-consuming these high-calorie soft drinks with little nutritional value 
can lead to being overweight and obese, which can increase the risk of 
developing 11 common cancers in later life, including breast and prostate 
cancer.”
 