
The best joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-those-autumn-statement-jokes-in-full>
 in Philip Hammond’s autumn statement was the line about how he is injecting 
£400m of venture capital funding into the British Business Bank “to tackle the 
longstanding problem of our fastest-growing technology firms being snapped up 
by bigger companies, rather than growing to scale”. A day later, one such UK 
pioneer, Edinburgh-based Skyscanner,is being bought by large Chinese travel 
group Ctrip for £1.4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/skyscanner-sold-to-chinas-ctrip-in-14bn-deal>
, a sum that makes Hammond’s £400m fire-fighting fund look like a water pistol.

The Treasury might argue that it has smaller, earlier-stage companies in mind 
for its £400m and thatSkyscanner <https://www.skyscanner.net/>, boasting 60 
million users a month for a service that scans the internet for cheap flights, 
had already achieved scale.

That objection would be fair only in part. Skyscanner had indeed achieved 
profitable success, but one can assume the Chinese are willing to pay 80 times 
top-line earnings only because they think much more lies ahead. They may be 
right. Skyscanner has expanded into the hotel and car-rental markets and others 
could follow. In time, the business could emerge as a serious competitor to the 
likes of Expedia.

In the end, of course, the government can hardly stop entrepreneurs selling 
their businesses if they wish. Gareth Williams, Skyscanner’s co-founder and 
chief executive, may also have been tempted by more than a high sale price. The 
deal brings the opportunity for his firm to tap Ctrip’s deep pool of Chinese 
tourists in search of international travel.

How will the autumn statement change Britain? Our panel’s views | Matthew 
d’Ancona, Martin Kettle, Gaby Hinsliff, Aditya Chakrabortty and Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-panel-make-a-difference-philip-hammond>
From outside, however, this takeover feels like another lost opportunity for a 
British-owned company to pursue global leadership under its own steam. Each 
case is different, but Hammond may discover that the biggest obstacle is 
cultural. Horizons in the UK are increasingly set to the short-term, and the 
City’s influence is strong. There are honourable exceptions: note how Baillie 
Gifford, a Skyscanner investor since last year, said it would have been happy 
to support further growth of the firm as an independent company. Unfortunately, 
such an appetite for long-term adventure is rare.

The remedy to the problem Hammond correctly identifies is not obvious. But his 
£400m, though welcome, is unlikely to be it.

Real estate is used to feast or famine, but not like this

Forget the government’s plan to ban letting agents from charging fees to 
tenants. Estate agents’ real troubles are more basic: housing transactions are 
plunging – or “running significantly below 2015”,in the more restrained 
language of Countrywide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/countrywide-profits-estate-agency-brexit-vote>
, the UK’s largest operator.

Feast or famine is a normal state of affairs in estate agency, but, even in 
that context, change has come swiftly. The share price tells the story. 
Countrywide floated at 350p in 2013, raced to 650p within a year and was still 
as high as 600p as recently as May last year, when George Osborne’s help-to-buy 
schemes were in full swing. Now the shares stand at 170p, down another 12% on 
Thursday.

London, where Countrywide reports exchanges down 29% in the latest quarter, is 
the group’s biggest headache, but its nationwide volumes for 2016 are still 
expected to be 6% lower, with a further fall on the cards for 2017. The 
catch-all “Brexit uncertainties” take some of the blame, but in London the 
bigger factor seems to be former chancellor George Osborne’s hikes to stamp 
duty on higher-priced homes in December 2014, and again April this year. Fewer 
people can afford to buy £1m-plus homes, or they are deterred by the tax bill.

In the absence of a U-turn on stamp duty rates by Hammond (no sign so far, 
despite the hit to the Treasury’s coffers), Countrywide and its peers will just 
have to wait for wealthy Londoners to accept that their houses may be worth 
less than they thought. It will happen – but slowly.

No one knows what Brexit means, not even the OBR

Give Robert Chote a break. Or, if you prefer, attack the chairman of the 
Office for Budget Responsibility for the right reasons. In recent years, the 
fiscal watchdog has generally been too optimistic in its forecasts of how the 
UK economy would perform. So it is bizarre for hard-line Brexiters now to 
declare loudly that the OBR is somehow infected by “doom and gloom” inthinking 
growth will slow to 1.4% next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-will-hold-uk-gdp-growth-back-says-obr>
.

These predictions are always best estimates, compiled in the face of 
uncertainties. This time the uncertainties are greater than ever. Nobody can 
say with much confidence how the economy will perform in the run-up to an event 
as significant as exit from the EU. An estimate of growth of 1.4% seems as good 
as any. The irate Brexiters should calm down: the real outcome will be revealed 
soon enough.
 