
All roads lead to Rome, and experience would suggest, all autumn statements 
lead to roads.

Under Alistair Darling there was an M1 upgrade in what was then called a 
pre-budget report. His Conservative successor George “we are the builders” 
Osborne pledged the biggest road investment programme since the 1970s and a 
permanent pothole fund. Then last week, Osborne’s successor Philip Hammond 
stuck with tradition and promised to push ahead with road schemes in the 
“northern powerhouse” and to tackle congestion on key routes under plans to 
revivethe UK’s pitiful productivity growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/why-is-uks-productivity-still-behind-that-of-other-major-economies>
.

Such nods to drivers and hauliers are easily explained in a nation where cars 
are by far the most popular mode of transport and wherealmost three times more 
goods are moved by roads than by water and rail combined 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/road-use-statistics-2016>. Promises 
to bust traffic jams and plug potholes are easy wins for politicians – as is
endlessly freezing fuel duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/hottest-year-ever-but-no-mention-of-climate-change-by-hammond>
.

Similarly, when it comes to appearing to be doing something about the 
productivity puzzle it is far easier to talk about roads than the thorny issue 
of Britain’s addiction to low-paid, low-skilled work.

But Hammond will not be able to escape this reality if he is serious about 
raising productivity – a measure of what is produced for every hour worked. 
Likewise, if he and Theresa May want to address the economic discontent that 
was partly responsible for the Brexit vote he will have to ensure any 
productivity gains he does eke out are shared by low-paid workers.

As the chancellor said himself, Britain’s productivity gap with its neighbours 
has real repercussions on living standards.

“In the real world, it takes a German worker four days to produce what we make 
in five; which means, in turn, that too many British workers work longer hours 
for lower pay than their counterparts,”Hammond said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
.

It was a welcome appraisal of a problem that is too often discussed in 
abstract, jargon-laden terms. But Hammond still fell into the usual trap of 
turning to infrastructure and innovation for the solutions.


Roads and inventions like next-generation electric vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/electric-vehicles-greg-clark-jaguar-land-rover>
 are all well and good, but in an economy dominated by the services sector, it 
too needs attention if the country is ever going to make meaningful inroads on 
productivity.
Of course, many of the technological advances that are made under the badge of 
innovation can help in the services sector. Internet banking and automatic 
checkouts are obvious examples.

But there is also evidence that services employers can make productivity gains 
by changing the way they treat their employees.


The Joseph Rowntree Foundation has been exploring this link between the 
prevalence of low-paid work and low productivity.In an analysis with the 
thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research 
<http://www.ippr.org/files/publications/pdf/low-wage-sectors_May2016.pdf?noredirect=1>
 [pdf], the charity found low-pay sectors constitute about 23% of our economy, 
but account for about a third of the UK’s productivity gap with leading western 
European economies.

JRF is rightly telling ministers to broaden the industrial strategy to include 
low-paying parts of the economy such as retail, care and catering, and that by 
doing so they could make greater economic gains and lift hundreds of thousands 
of people out of working poverty.

Finding ways to lift productivity in those sectors is not easy. But if solving 
our low productivity problem was simple, countless experts would not have 
dubbed it a “puzzle”.

There are three key areas that employers and policymakers can explore, beyond 
the usual technology fixes.

The first is the relationship between pay and productivity. In a classic 
chicken and egg situation, economists argue over what comes first: low pay or 
low productivity.

There is an argument that employers can only afford to raise wages, when 
productivity goes up. Butwork by the Living Wage Foundation 
<http://www.livingwage.org.uk/business-case-living-wage-5> and others has found 
raising pay can in turn raise productivity. Better paid workers are more 
motivated and more likely to stick around and accumulate skills. Seen another 
way, when employers are forced to pay more, they are more likely to seek ways 
to make work more productive. Ideally, this will happen with the government’s
mandatory national living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
.

The second area is flexible working. Consider the case of a woman working for 
a retailer. She acquires years of experience, then has a child, takes maternity 
leave and returns to work part-time. Her employer wants to capitalise on the 
woman’s experience and offers her a senior role. Fearful of how that new role 
will fit in with her childcare arrangements, the woman turns down the promotion.

When JRF commissioned research into productivity and pay in the retail sector 
<https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/improving-pay-progression-and-productivity-retail-sector>
 by the economist and former MP Kitty Ussher, she found about half of retail 
workers who already worked part-time said they would only accept a promotion if 
they could remain part-time. Little surprise then, that the study also revealed 
half of retail workers felt overqualified for the work they did.

Clearly, employers are missing a trick when they fail to help workers find 
ways to balance family commitments with career progression.


Alongside these workers for whom the overriding priority was to have 
controlled hours, Ussher identified a second group who wanted to work more 
hours and gain promotion to increase their earnings. Among that second group 
there was evidence of frustration at the lack of opportunities to get on.

This leads to the third area: engagement. If staff do not feel involved in 
deciding their hours or career path, it is unlikely they will feel ready to 
share suggestions on how their workplace could run more efficiently. 
Productivity suffers as a result.

Words like engagement sound fluffy, but manufacturing – which consistently 
outperforms on productivity – has been doing this for decades. In a well-run 
factory, staff are actively encouraged to make suggestions on small changes 
that could raise their productivity, such as the positioning of a tool. It’s 
called “continuous improvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/06/budget-2015-george-osborne-britain-productivity-puzzle>
”.

Ussher’s research found this kind of engagement was lacking in retail, where 
72% of workers felt they could see possible improvements in how their business 
ran, but just 44% said those ideas were taken seriously.

With management clearly failing these workers, it was welcome that Hammond’s 
autumn statementcontained £13m for a scheme to boost UK management skills 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
.

But workers need more than just better managers to be more productive. They 
need better career paths, including quality apprenticeships, and they need more 
economic security, not zero-hours contracts.

Employers are crucial in this and so too is government backing. If the 
chancellor really wants to “build an economy that works for everyone” he and 
his fellow ministers must resist the temptation to pick winners at the expense 
of those working in the vast, low-paying, low productivity parts of the economy.
 