
“Adapt or die” – Hanna

If you’re a main character in Hanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141512/hanna>, then “adapt or die” is a 
pretty nifty little rule to live your life by. If circumstances were to change 
even slightly for these people, and they weren’t completely on top of 
everything, they’d almost immediately find themselves dead at the hands of any 
of the beastly shadow-dwelling villains that populate their world.

But it’s a little harder if you’re a film director, as Joe Wright knows only 
too well. With his early films like Pride and Prejudice and Atonement, he built 
a box for himself – a straight-backed box, full of stiff upper lips, faraway 
glances and all manner of delicate period flourishes – that ended up stifling 
him creatively. So he tried to adapt, by producing more contemporary work. Some 
of that work included Hanna, and it proved to be such a weird fit that Wright 
quickly retreated back to the safe comforts ofAnna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anna-karenina>. He tried to adapt, but right 
now it looks like he’d rather end up being buried in that box of his. All of 
which makes Hanna a strange little oddity, a smudge on an otherwise ornate 
filmography. And that, obviously, makes it the perfect subject for a rewatch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhanna-clip-joe-wright-exclusive&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20Joe%20Wright's%20Hanna&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhanna-clip-joe-wright-exclusive>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20Joe%20Wright%27s%20Hanna&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fhanna-clip-joe-wright-exclusive&media=>
 Watch an exclusive clip from Joe Wright’s Hanna 
“Sometimes children are bad people, too” – Marissa

Perhaps the biggest problem with Hanna is one of expectation. Until that point,
Joe Wright <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-wright> had painstakingly 
built a career aimed squarely at the awards season solar plexus. Pride and 
Prejudice and Atonement – even The Soloist in its own nightmarishly warped way 
– were designed to be prestigious, middlebrow, released-in-January fare, 
precision-engineered to tickle the various fancies of Oscar voters. But Hanna? 
It’s practically Taken. Watching Hanna is like watching Michael Haneke have a 
go at Bangkok Dangerous.

The upshot of this, at least, is that it can be a painfully beautiful film. 
The climax, set inside an abandoned fairground complete with a heavy-handedly 
symbolic set of giant monster jaws, is perfectly staged. The sound design is 
complex and thoughtful. Freeze-frame any shot containing Saoirse Ronan and you 
could easily mistake her for an illustration from an antique book of 
Scandinavian fairytales. A little more time has been spent over the themes of 
the film than you’d otherwise expect, too – so much so that at times you want 
to pause the film, grab Wright by the shoulders and yell “I get it! She just 
wants a family! Now be quiet and blow more stuff up!” – which may or may not be 
to its detriment, depending on how drunk you are.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fmay%2F09%2Fhanna-saoirse-ronan-joe-wright-interview-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20approached%20it%20like%20a%20dance%20piece'%3A%20Saoirse%20Ronan%20and%20Joe%20Wright%20on%20Hanna%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fmay%2F09%2Fhanna-saoirse-ronan-joe-wright-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20approached%20it%20like%20a%20dance%20piece%27%3A%20Saoirse%20Ronan%20and%20Joe%20Wright%20on%20Hanna%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fmay%2F09%2Fhanna-saoirse-ronan-joe-wright-interview-video&media=>
 ‘I approached it like a dance piece’: Saoirse Ronan and Joe Wright on Hanna - 
video 
“Run little piggy!” – Isaacs

But Hanna’s biggest coup is its cast. As well as Ronan, it stars Eric Bana and 
Cate Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> and Tom 
Hollander and Olivia Williams and Martin Wuttke. Shepherd that cast into the 
right material and you’d have a textbook piece of award-bait. Here, though, 
despite their best efforts to wrestle something meatier out of their roles – 
Hollander’s Izzardishly German accent is a case in point – they’re reduced to 
little more than utilitarian stock characters.

Which brings us back to the Joe Wright problem. Hanna is, basically, fluff; 
one of those instantly forgettable action flicks that you watch because you’ve 
seen everything else and you’re a bit drunk. But the cast is so impressive, and 
the director so prestigious, that it desperately tries to contort itself into 
fine art at every turn. As a result, it’s at least 20 minutes longer than it 
really needs to be. Ironically, in the hands of a less skilled director, Hanna 
would have been a much more enjoyable film.
 Finnish line: Eric Bana and Saoirse Ronan in Hanna. Photograph: 
c.Focus/Everett/Rex 
Notes

• Another area I’m still on the fence about is the soundtrack. At the cinema, 
with the benefit of gigantic surround-sound speakers, the Chemical Brothers’ 
clubby offerings suited the film perfectly. On a smaller screen, however, they 
appear to make the film feel about 15 years older than it actually is.

• One thing that made Hanna the character a little harder to like than normal: 
she is a one-H Hanna. She’s an H-denier. Always be suspicious of H-deniers, 
that’s my motto.

• Cate Blanchett in Hanna is still a million miles better than Cate Blanchett 
in Indiana Jones, though.

• And let’s end with the obligatory mention that Eric Bana still isn’t making 
the sort of films that he should be: Eric Bana still isn’t making the sort of 
films that he should be.
 