
For all the cerebral piety and inward contemplation of Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>, the new movie by Martin Scorsese, 
there are more than trace elements of an adventure yarn: 17th-century 
Portuguese Jesuits sneak into Japan, where their religion is banned, searching 
for their missing leader. Our idealistic travellers (Andrew Garfield and Adam 
Driver) encounter dangerous weather, double-crosses, imprisonment and physical 
torture. For a film about a spiritual journey, it has its share of action.

There are plenty of films with friendly fathers, or clerics killed off as a 
device to kickstart a supernatural horror schlocker. What distinguishesSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> is that these devoted men are 
heroes. Men of the cloth are rarely leading men in adventure cinema, but there 
are a few titles that could be added to the priests-in-peril genre …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Black Robe (1991) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qdD9YUeBDlI>

As Portuguese Jesuits were struggling in Japan, French Jesuits were having an 
equally rough ride in eastern Canada. Bruce Beresford’s remarkable adaptation 
of Brian Moore’s novel Black Robe depicts an uneasy alliance between early 
colonists and the Algonquian people. A young priest (Lothaire Bluteau) is 
guided from the few wooden shacks of the Quebec settlement to an even more 
remote and slush-besieged outpost amid the Huron tribes.

Cultural misunderstandings are eventually thawed by a burgeoning romance 
between Bluteau’s non-priestly companion and a young Algonquin woman – and by 
everyone’s desire to escape the Iroquois, who take an extremely dim view of 
trespassing.

Beresford’s film is, in the grand scheme of things, relatively progressive in 
its acceptance of other belief systems, but it does not shy away from majestic, 
snowy imagery of our lone, beleaguered beacon of light in a savage wilderness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79dd2f54d295a7d5fe37913d8d81d72621597250%2F0_42_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20men%20of%20God%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20most%20badass%20priests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20men%20of%20God%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20most%20badass%20priests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79dd2f54d295a7d5fe37913d8d81d72621597250%2F0_42_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 Robert De Niro in The Mission. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS 
The Mission (1986) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y-l2-Q7vODc>

Roland Joffé’s Jesuit tale is set 100 years after Silence, but may well be the 
most visually breathtaking of the lot. (Scorsese does take a shot at Joffé: the 
earlier film features an image of a crucifix in engulfed by water but this one 
has three.)

Jeremy Irons is a Spanish Jesuit hoping to spread the word to the Guaraní 
tribe of Latin America. At first, he is rejected, but, in time, his very 
pinko-hippie strain of Catholicism catches on. He is joined by a penitent 
ex-slaver (Robert De Niro) just in time for the 1750 Treaty of Madrid, which 
solidified borders between European empires.

Irons’ mission, a paragon of faith and industry, then suddenly finds itself 
under Portuguese rule, meaning his Guaraní are at risk of being carted off by 
slave traders. (The Jesuit elders have made a lesser-of-two evils choice: if 
they had not abandoned a few missions, the entire order would have been 
jeopardised.) What’s a holy man like Irons to do in times like this? Well, make 
a bloody last stand, of course. Luckily, he’s got Raging Bull on his team.

Despite The Mission’s inclusion on the Holy See’s 45 great films list, its 
conclusion isn’t that dissimilar to that of Predator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2001eeb03c4286133aed912cbe3d892e500da1e5%2F0_25_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20men%20of%20God%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20most%20badass%20priests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20men%20of%20God%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20cinema%E2%80%99s%20most%20badass%20priests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcinemas-most-badass-priests-martin-scorsese-silence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2001eeb03c4286133aed912cbe3d892e500da1e5%2F0_25_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Jason Miller and Max von Sydow in The Exorcist. Photograph: Allstar/WARNER 
BROS. 
The Exorcist (1973) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a8g3h2JaVE4>

Forget what I said earlier about horror films, as The Exorcist defies 
categorisation. And, for a priest in peril, you can do no better than the eerie 
opening sequence of William Friedkin’s masterpiece, in which Max von Sydow’s 
Father Merrin wanders the bazaars and dig sites in Iraq looking for … 
something. You can tell he’s prepared to sacrifice himself for a noble good 
(just look at him sweat), and, as he stares down a spooky statue under the 
blazing sun, you know this is going to get nasty. Of course, not even he can 
withstand the pure evil of a pea-soup-barfing little girl using profanity with 
Mercedes McCambridge’s dubbed voice.

The Agony and the Ecstasy (1965) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-LnVqkwSRbc>

Sometimes, it isn’t a priest from the rank-and-file who is the hero, it’s the 
holy father himself. There are many cinematic pontiffs, but Rex Harrison was 
first to be a movie pope badass.

Carol Reed’s Cinemascope story about the painting of the Sistine chapel has is 
a sequence every bit as noteworthy as Charlton Heston’s chest. The 
behind-schedule Michelangelo (Heston) is summoned to explain himself to his 
patron, Pope Julius II (Harrison). However the pope doesn’t summon him to a 
cathedral, but to a battlefield – barking military orders one minute and 
pontificating on art the next.

Clearly, this is meant as a metaphor for the battle of wills between these two 
headstrong men, but it’s a fascinating visual reminder about seats of power 
that have been sanitised by modernity.

Silence review: the last temptation of Liam Neeson in Scorsese's shattering 
epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
Of Gods and Men (2010) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrIyn3yuip4>

Xavier Beaumont’s movie is not set centuries ago, nor is it a supernatural 
fantasy. It is set very much here and now (well, mid-1990s Algeria) and pieces 
together the true story of French Trappist monks murdered by military forces. 
The monks are presented as mainstays of stability, offering medical services 
and a friendly face to the Muslim locals. The leader (Lambert Wilson) reads 
from the Qur’an as much Pascal’s Pensées. The local goons want them out, but 
they can’t abandon their villagers. Doubt, worry, faith and sacrifice boil up 
with extraordinary cinematic tension.

While it is hard to describe this film as anything other than tragic, a 
sequence in which the gentle and mostly elderly monks (a big night might 
include broth and classical music) battle a helicopter with choral chants is 
one of the more heroic moments – religious or secular – you are likely to see 
in any movie.
 