
You have to hand it to the stars of the Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> franchise for making it to 
adulthood in one piece. Judging by the experiences of generations of 
too-much-too-soon ex-child stars, they should really all be drooling junkies, 
annoying party monsters or just flat-out dead by now.

Swiss Army Man review: dead Daniel Radcliffe farts Paul Dano to safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/swiss-army-man-review-dead-daniel-radcliffe-farts-paul-dano-to-safety>
But no. Having banked something like $10m each for surrendering a decade of 
their childhoods apiece, and having borne the weight of their generation’s 
pre-adolescent hopes and dreams, their post-Harry lives seem pretty normal and 
sane.Rupert Grint <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rupert-grint> and Emma 
Watson appear well-adjusted and happy to take a lower profile.

Daniel Radcliffe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/daniel-radcliffe> is 
perhaps more ambitious about a post-Potter career. He telegraphed that early on 
by starring in a revival of Peter Shaffer’s play Equus – a demanding role with 
a lot of tabloid-friendly nudity – before he was even finished with Harry, and 
then doubled down with his work as young Allen Ginsberg in the proto-beatnik 
drama Kill Your Darlings.

All that Potter money has given Radcliffe the unique opportunity to bide his 
time, choose his parts, and get things right. In common with a lot of 
fresh-faced child stars waiting for the glow of infancy to burn off and the 
lines and wrinkles to build up – which can take for ever: seeLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, Kirsten Dunst et al – 
Radcliffe seems keen, understandably, to set fire to his cherubic younger self, 
establishing a firm demarcation line between all that and whatever comes next.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdaniel-radcliffe-imperium-swiss-army-man-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Radcliffe%3A%20'I'm%20pretty%20handy.%20I%20put%20a%20desk%20together'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdaniel-radcliffe-imperium-swiss-army-man-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Radcliffe%3A%20%27I%27m%20pretty%20handy.%20I%20put%20a%20desk%20together%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdaniel-radcliffe-imperium-swiss-army-man-video-interview&media=>
Daniel Radcliffe: ‘I’m pretty handy. I put a desk together’ – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/26/daniel-radcliffe-imperium-swiss-army-man-video-interview>
And what comes next is, this week, going undercover in a white-supremacist 
gang for Imperium. And, next week, playing a farting corpse.

Swiss Army Man's farting folly could be the cure for Hollywood's 'sequelitis'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/23/swiss-army-man-daniel-radcliffe-paul-dano>
Swiss Army Man is a vibrant desert-island allegory in which suicidal Paul Dano 
is saved when a dead Radcliffe washes up on his beach. I think we can safely 
assume that any movie in which Radcliffe plays a flatulent corpse whose 
erections function like a compass, and whose farts make him useful as a jet-ski 
and a weapon (like the knife, he’s multi-functional) is not aimed at JK 
Rowling’s global fanbase.

It’s certainly diverting. But it’s also an ambiguous, upbeat, finally rather 
moving story of self-delusion, madness and lost love. With Dano handling the 
wide-eyed, manic side of the story, Radcliffe makes a different kind of hay 
with his far from inert role. He deftly turns what could be a tedious acting 
exercise into a complex performance, full of life, despite being technically 
dead.

It feels like the final, decisive act of auto-infanticide for Radcliffe and 
Harry Potter: the Kid is dead; long live the King.

Swiss Army Man is in cinemas from Friday
 