Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfDF_ZdL7G9o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfDF_ZdL7G9o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfDF_ZdL7G9o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fDF_ZdL7G9o>

An 11-year record at the Mexican box office fell the weekend before last, when 
class-clash comedyNosotros los Nobles 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ghr3wKI4idg> (We Are the Nobles) dislodged the 
2002 Gael García Bernal dramaThe Crime of Father Amaro 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95907/crime.of.padre.amaro> as the 
highest-grossing local film of all time. The sickly sweet whiff of Catholic 
corruption enticed audiences a decade back; this time it's the equally worn 
groove of the gulf between rich and poor in the country. Nosotros los Nobles 
riffs on the cunning scheme of a Mexico City millionaire who strips his kids of 
all their luxuries by staging a fake police raid, forcing them to drive buses, 
wait cantina tables and other humiliations conducive to heartwarming life 
lessons.

Director Gary Alazraki <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1890752/> knows whereof he 
speaks: he is the son ofCarlos Alazraki 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carlos_Alazraki>, an influential ad executive who 
has produced campaigns for presidential elections, as well as forCarlos Slim 
Helu <http://www.forbes.com/profile/carlos-slim-helu/>, the billionaire who is 
the world's richest man and apparently worth 8% of Mexico's GDP. "Latin America 
is a region where middle class is very small," Alazraki Jr recently told 
Associated Press. "So I thought if you want to capture the mood of the public, 
that's the first place to look, the contrast between rich and poor." He's only 
the latest to come to that conclusion: Nosotros los Nobles was directly 
inspired by Luis Buñuel's 1949 comedyEl Gran Calavera 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdTzmZ6YPIU> (The Great Madcap), which also 
features a modern-day Croesus reassessing his life.

Mexican cinema could use a reality check, too. Nosotros los Nobles is 
undoubtedly a chink of light for the industry – but it's still only the year's 
second most successful film, a long way behindThe Croods 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/mexico/yearly/>, and is sure to be pushed 
further down as blockbuster season unfolds. The Crime of Father Amaro was 
actually seen by far more people (5.2 million against Nosotros los Nobles' 3.3 
million.) And it's extraordinary that, in 2013, it's possible to be the 
reigning domestic film on a mere $15.5m (£10m) in what, in terms of admissions, 
is actually thefifth largest movie market in the world 
<http://screenville.blogspot.co.uk/2009/06/admissions-world-cinema-stats-2.html>
. $15m seems like nothing.

Put bluntly, there isn't the same passion for Mexican films as there is for 
cinema-going in Mexico. And it has a big problem on that score: no country has 
been more affected by Hollywood's behemoth presence over the border. The taste 
for US entertainment means the local industry has to kick hard just to keep its 
head above water. Even Canada – whose output has far less cultural clout abroad 
– has managed to produce close to 100 films a year recently; Mexico manages 
50-70. Latin America in general is heavily Hollywood-dominated, andMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> is no exception: homemade films had 
just a 6.1% share in 2010.

There's been a recovery since the dark days of the mid-90s, when cinemas were 
flooded by US imports after the country joined the North American Free Trade 
Area, obliterating the industry overnight. But the wider feeling seems to be 
that the renaissance sinceAmores Perros 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/84950/amores.perros> sent a jolt of 
electricity around the world in 2001 has been a fragile, faltering one. It's no 
surprise that the gravitational pull of Los Angeles has proved too strong to 
resist, not just for name auteurs likeAlejandro González Iñárritu 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0327944/> and Alfonso Cuarón 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/alfonso-cuaron>, but also for the 
below-the-line crew in their thousands who could have enriched the Mexican 
industry.
 Fragile ... Amores Perros 
But Nosotros los Nobles proves that the traffic isn't just one-way. It's 
actually a Warner "local-language" production, part of the intensifying pattern 
of intimate US studio involvement in overseas markets. There's certainly a 
philosophical debate to be had about this trend. On the debit side, isn't this 
just another means of Hollywood maintaining its stranglehold? On the credit 
side, perhaps it's the Americans who can teach the Mexican film-makers the 
commercial imperative they need – adopting forms (like Nosotros' high-concept 
comedy) and marketing that can hold their own and fire up the mainstream. 
Warner actually have previous form on this front in Mexico: their 2010 romcomNo 
Eres Tú, Soy Yo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FKLzfHsLUds> (It's Not You, 
It's Me) holds the No 5 spot in the domestic all-time list.

There's no easy answer to that conundrum (and I'll be following up on the 
issue at greater length in a few weeks' time). But it's undeniable that 
Hollywood influence was already important in Mexico prior to the local-language 
trend. Iñárritu, Cuarón andGuillermo del Toro 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/guillermodeltoro> all purloined a kind of 
American dynamism or genre literacy, as well as private financing, that broke 
from the European-influenced art-film model thatIMCINE 
<http://www.imcine.gob.mx/>, the Mexican public film-development organisation, 
had practised since the 1980s. Big neighbours can lend a helping hand, as well 
as smother; stories of rich and poor are rarely as simple they seem.

• In next week's After Hollywood, the Turkish film industry heads back to 
Gallipoli. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.
 