
Marvel Studios 'considering' a new solo Hulk movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/18/ruffalo-new-hulk-film-marvel-studios>
As a teenage comic book fan growing up in the 1980s, I loved Peter Parker. The 
idea that a high-school kid with remarkably ordinary problems could double as a 
Green Goblin-battling, Vulture-battering superhero made Spider-Man seem closer 
to reality than any of the other comic book titans of the period. And so it is 
with some degree of sadness that I wonder if studios Sony and Marvel have made 
the wrong decision by retaining Parker for the wallcrawler’s next big-screen 
adventure, just asMiles Morales has been upgraded to the main Spidey role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/22/marvel-launches-mixed-race-spider-man>
 in print.

Marvel creative legend Stan Lee said this week that heroes who were imagined 
as white, male and straight should remain so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/stan-lee-spider-man-should-stay-white-and-straight>
, placing the onus on comic book creators to imagine new black, female or gay 
characters to improve diversity. But he’s ignoring the fact that most of the 
best-known superheroes debuted at least 50 years ago, prior to the successes of 
the US civil rights movement, the 1960s and 70s wave of feminism and the 
decriminalisation of homosexuality in many western nations (let alone the dim 
and distant concept of legalised gay marriage). It’s no wonder they all hail 
from the same limited demographic pool.

Tom Holland named as next Spider-Man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/tom-holland-spider-man-marvel-sony>
If Spider-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spider-man> were created now, 
there’s a very good chance that he’d be mixed race (like Morales), or perhaps 
even gay or female. The geek community that reads comics and cheerleads 
Hollywood’s box-office-dominating superhero movies is famous for its diversity 
and liberalism, which is why the current female comic book iteration of Thor is 
already outselling its male counterpart (despite howls of fury from some 
quarters).

Picking a greener Spidey in the shape of 19-year-old Tom Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/tom-holland-spider-man-marvel-sony>
 is a smart move. This is not just a young-looking actor, like predecessors 
Tobey Maguire or Andrew Garfield: Holland still has the acne and sparrowy frame 
to prove he’s not yet out of his teens. The contrast when he meets 50-year-old 
Robert Downey Jr (Iron Man) and 34-year-old Chris Evans (in the title role) in 
Captain America: Civil War, will be genuine and palpable. As a crime-fighting 
teenager meeting established heroes who have saved the world at least twice, 
that’s just as it should be.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhas-marvel-chosen-the-wrong-spider-man-for-its-cinematic-universe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435250317488%2F3d18392e-97d0-449a-9a14-46ca2555f7cf-1573x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20Marvel%20chosen%20the%20wrong%20Spider-Man%20for%20its%20cinematic%20universe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhas-marvel-chosen-the-wrong-spider-man-for-its-cinematic-universe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20Marvel%20chosen%20the%20wrong%20Spider-Man%20for%20its%20cinematic%20universe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fhas-marvel-chosen-the-wrong-spider-man-for-its-cinematic-universe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435250317488%2F3d18392e-97d0-449a-9a14-46ca2555f7cf-1573x2040.jpeg>
 No acne ... Andrew Garfield as Spider-Man. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar
But haven’t the studios missed a trick here? The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2> was largely seen as 
a failure, despite a global box office take in excess of $700m. And there have 
been suggestions that Sony has tried to reboot its property too many times in 
too short a period to keep audiences on the hook. So what better way to shake 
up the Spidey mythos than to place an entirely new hero inside the suit, one 
who has taken the print media by storm?

It was not to be, and Marvel and Sony had better hope they’ve made the right 
decision, because it sounds as if their partnership on superhero movies goes 
further than anyone expected. As well as Marvel having obtained the rights to 
include Spider-Man in its own cinematic universe, studio boss Kevin Feigehinted 
this week that an agreement is in place for Sony to borrow Avengers heroes 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ant-man-saga-paul-rudd-804566> for 
standalone Spidey movies. If this is true, then all the more reason to finally 
get the webslinger right: Holland and Peter Parker are going to be centre stage 
for a while to come.
 