
It’s every parent’s nightmare: discovering that this year’s must-have toy is 
impossible to get in time forChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. Well, get ready for the 
Hatchimal, an interactive bird that hatches itself out of an egg. Retailers are 
warning that demand is unprecedented and stock running low worldwide.

Apart from a few branches of Argos, all the major high street toy retailers in 
the UK have sold out of this year’s dream toy and it is changing hands on eBay 
and Amazon for more than £40 over its recommended retail price of £59.99.

The hype has been building up all year, with a viral marketing campaign that 
kept the species and appearance of the toy inside the egg a secret until the 
global launch last month. Since then, the fluffy chicks have flown off the 
shelves, with some retailers in the US reportedly selling out within 24 hours.

“If you see a Hatchimal, buy it because you might not see it two days later,” 
said Frédérique Tutt, global toy industry analyst for the NPD Group.

Top toys for Christmas 2016: where to find the best deals in-store and online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/11/top-toys-christmas-2016-find-best-deals-in-store-online>
National chains Toys <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/toys> “R” Us, 
Smyths and The Entertainer are expecting new arrivals of stock before 
Christmas, but say purchases are likely to be rationed to one per customer. 
Most retailers are no longer accepting pre-orders.

Gary Grant, founder of The Entertainer, said there was almost a riot at one of 
his stores last week following a small delivery of stock. “I’ve been selling 
toys for 35 years. Even with Teletubbies and Cabbage Patch Kids, I’ve never 
known anything quite like Hatchimals. It’s unprecedented. People will drive 100 
miles for one.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fddacc781c97449bbc68ee30bf234861c6574f%2F0_221_3307_1984%2F3307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hatchimal%3A%20the%20must-have%20Christmas%20toy%20you%20simply%20can't%20get&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hatchimal%3A%20the%20must-have%20Christmas%20toy%20you%20simply%20can%27t%20get&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fddacc781c97449bbc68ee30bf234861c6574f%2F0_221_3307_1984%2F3307.jpg>
 Two boys play with a Hatchimal. Photograph: DreamToys 
Hatchimal owners cannot choose the colour of the hidden toy they are 
purchasing, and must cuddle, rub, pat and tap the egg for 20 to 25 minutes 
before the chick inside feels nurtured enough to hatch. The Hatchimal will then 
gradually peck its way out of its hard plastic egg and reveal itself.

“You get to anticipate that moment of surprise,” said James Martin, of 
manufacturer Spin Master. He says the idea of a hatching toy was sparked by the 
craze for “unboxing” – viral videos of toys being opened. “But this isn’t you 
opening a toy. This is a toy coming out to you. There’s a magic and a wonder in 
that moment. It’s the whole idea of the beginning of a life, which we’ve been 
able to deliver in a toy.”

Once hatched, the Hatchimal will learn to walk, talk and play games, as long 
as it is showered with love and affection. In this way, it is remarkably 
similar to a Tamagotchi, the digital pet that hatched from a virtual egg and 
became one of the biggest toy fads of the 1990s.

Unlike other interactive toy pets, such as the Furby, there is no accompanying 
app. “We wanted it to be a very real experience,” said Martin. “No screens.”

Top toys for Christmas 2016 - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2016/nov/09/top-toys-christmas-2016-in-pictures>
Despite receiving positive feedback from retailers before the launch and 
increasing its manufacturing capacity by more than 50%, Spin Master admits it 
has underestimated demand. It has now started dispatching Hatchimals by air 
instead of sea, to cut a month from delivery times.

Martin said parents should not panic. “There is stock heading to all the 
retailers around the world on a weekly basis until January. We are not playing 
a numbers game. We have no desire to keep the product from kids.”

However, Siobhan Freegard, founder of video parenting site Channel Mum, has 
seen it all before: “ ’Tis the season to make money – and no one is more aware 
of that than toy retailers. Stores screaming that it’s sold out and tales of 
the toys selling for double or triple the cost on eBay are simply part of the 
sales drive.”

She advised parents to relax and wait for the next batch of Hatchimals to 
arrive in the shops, rather than buying them at inflated prices online. “It 
only encourages eBay and Gumtree sellers to snap up all available stock.

“Stores may be showing Hatchimals as sold out at the moment, but as we’ve seen 
with previous festive must-haves, stocks almost always arrive just before 
Christmas to keep children happy – and the tills jingling.”

Festive essentials

Other Christmas dream toys that were near-impossible to find:

Rubik’s Cube, 1980


The fastest-selling puzzles of all time gave rise to two medical conditions: 
cubist’s thumb and Rubik’s wrist. More than 350 million have been sold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e6060a70f99813f6abc7f4c839f8f4d950134c%2F98_34_1745_2181%2F1745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hatchimal%3A%20the%20must-have%20Christmas%20toy%20you%20simply%20can't%20get&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hatchimal%3A%20the%20must-have%20Christmas%20toy%20you%20simply%20can%27t%20get&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fhatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e6060a70f99813f6abc7f4c839f8f4d950134c%2F98_34_1745_2181%2F1745.jpg>
 A Cabbage Patch Doll. Photograph: Gary Childs/Rex/Shutterstock 
Cabbage Patch Kids, 1983 (left)


Demand for these soft-sculptured, 40cm dolls led to Cabbage Patch riots, with 
shoppers fighting in the aisles.

Teletubbies, 1997


More than a million Tinky Winky, Laa-Laa, Dipsy and Po dolls from the hit BBC 
series were sold between September and December. Large stores sold out of stock 
within hours of delivery.

Thunderbirds’ Tracy Island, 2000


The BBC’s autumn relaunch of the show triggered a buying frenzy. The 
manufacturer blamed low production levels on a shortage of microchips caused by 
demand for mobile phones.

Snow Glow Elsa, 2014


This £35 doll, which sings the song Let It Go from the Disney film Frozen ad 
nauseam, was sold out by November.
 