
1) Where will the Queen be at 11.59 pm, on December 31 1999? 

2) Which former world leader admitted to having no cash? 

3) Couples who light up are more likely to break up. True or false? 

4) What is William Hague's New Year resolution? 

5) Why has Australia declared Warne on England? 

6) Which of the following was shortlisted for the title of personality of the 
Millennium?

a) Margaret Thatcher

b) Marie Curie

c) Oliver Cromwell 

d) Mother Teresa 

7) Who got into trouble over the uplifting support of a lady of lingerie? 

8) What was born yesterday? 

9) Which Major Minor is to be married? 

10) Which received more calls on Christmas Day - the Samaritans or the Dixons 
computer helpline?

11) What is the latest hot new food to be microwaveable? 

12) Whose bust was removed from a university building after students reported 
feeling uneasy under its gaze?

a) Arthur Koestler

b) Geri Halliwell

c) Buster Keaton

d) Adolf Hitler 

13) What are chefs Nico and Raymond trying to blank? 

14) Arise Lord Cortina. Who? 

15) Which one of the following didn't become a parent last year?

a) Diane Blood

b) Swampy 

c) Mandy Allwood

d) Posh Spice Answers: 

1) Millennium Dome. After a will-she-won't-she drama, it was announced that 
the Queen will attend the champagne party which will open the Dome and herald 
in 2000.

2) Mikhail Gorbachev. The last Soviet leader lost his Â£50,000 savings when the 
Rouble collapsed.

3) True. US researchers found that adult smokers are over 50 per cent more 
likely to divorce than non-smokers.

4) To learn more Welsh from his wife Ffion. Hague's intention was published by 
the Government-backed charity Campaign for Learning.

5) Bowling phenomenon Shane Warne has been recalled by the Aussies after 
injury following England's dramatic Fourth Test victory.

6) c) Cromwell made it on to BBC Radio 4's shortlist of six. The others were 
Churchill, Darwin, Newton, Caxton and Shakespeare.

7) Peter Mandelson, who allegedly accepted free flights from American bra 
magnate Linda Wachner, but failed to declare them in the Commons Register of 
Interests.

8) The Euro was introduced in 11 EU countries yesterday.

9) John Major's daughter Elizabeth is to marry her trainee medic boyfriend 
Luke Salter, who proposed on Christmas Day.

10) The Samaritans - but only just. They received 15,000 calls to the 11,000 
desperate new computer owners who rang Dixons

11) Salad. Sainsbury's have launched a microwaveable pre-packed salad said to 
taste better when heated.

12) a) Arthur Koestler. The bust, at Edinburgh University, was removed from 
view after disclosures that the author and university benefactor was a rapist.

13) Genetically modified food. Nico Ladenis and Raymond Blanc are calling for 
a ban on growing and selling such products until the full extent of their 
effects is known.

14) Sir Alex Trotman, retiring Ford chairman has become a life peer. Sir Alex 
was a key figure in the development of the Cortina.

15) d) Posh Spice is to become a mother this year. Blood had a child conceived 
using her dead husband's sperm, Allwood, who lost octuplets, finally had a 
baby, and Swampy fathered a son, Kaya.

 How you Rate? 0-4 Handkerchief 5-9 Socks 10-14 Hand-knitted jumper 15 Furby 
 