
Helen Czerski has the coolest job in science – she’s a bubble scientist. Or, 
to give her her full title, she’s a physicist and oceanographer at University 
College London 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/mecheng/mecheng-news-publications/meet-helen-czerski>. 
When she’s not doing that, you’ve probably seen her on telly as a science 
presenter for the BBC. She has just finished her first book,Storm in a Teacup: 
The Physics of Everyday Life, and if that’s not enough she also plays badminton 
competitively. Sitting at her kitchen table, just returned from a morning 
coaching session and still wearing her racket club’s black and red polo shirt, 
she laughs as theObserver opens with the obvious question…

Bubbles?
Yeah, nobody quite knows what to make of it when I tell them, but they’re 
always interested. Bubbles are like the dolphins of the physics world, right? 
They make people happy. But scientifically they’re also fascinating. They’re in
champagne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/sep/28/champagne-science-study-france-bubbles>
, they’re used in medicine, they’re in the ocean – they’re the unsung heroes of 
the physical world. This business of having two phases together – a liquid and 
a gas interacting – is such a useful thing. It gives you something that neither 
a gas or a liquid can do on its own.

As the sea ice retreats the Arctic Ocean is more exposed… I’d like to go and 
study the bubbles underneath breaking waves

Like what?
Take the foam on top of a cappuccino. It’s just milk and air. Put a spoon on 
top of a column of just coffee or just air and it’ll fall through, but whip 
them both up into a cappuccino and the spoon will rest on top. Understanding 
what’s going on when bubbles form has all sorts of applications, like 
understanding how oceans breathe or how light and sound travel through oceans.

Why do people need to know about the physics of everyday life? Isn’t it just 
good enough to know that things work, like a smartphone?
It’s about knowing the rules of the world so you don’t get exploited. Whether 
it’s a politician or a salesman, you need to know the rules they’re playing by. 
It doesn’t mean you have to be an expert on weather systems or on double 
glazing or cars or mattresses or phones, but if you know the basics it gives 
you the confidence to ask the right questions. Say someone is trying to sell 
you a swanky smartphone case to make your reception better, or a magnetic 
bracelet they say will cure your wrist pain, you can ask “well, how does it 
work?” and if you know the basics you can tell whether they know what they are 
talking about or whether they’re just making things up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhelen-czerski-physics-everyday-lives-quantum-weirdness-storm-in-a-teacup-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc97401bf93cd3d4cadee8e8aad0a0be1b6d20df2%2F156_0_1570_1080%2F1570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helen%20Czerski%3A%20%E2%80%98Physics%20isn%E2%80%99t%20all%20quantum%20weirdness.%20It%E2%80%99s%20about%20daily%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhelen-czerski-physics-everyday-lives-quantum-weirdness-storm-in-a-teacup-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helen%20Czerski%3A%20%E2%80%98Physics%20isn%E2%80%99t%20all%20quantum%20weirdness.%20It%E2%80%99s%20about%20daily%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhelen-czerski-physics-everyday-lives-quantum-weirdness-storm-in-a-teacup-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc97401bf93cd3d4cadee8e8aad0a0be1b6d20df2%2F156_0_1570_1080%2F1570.jpg>
 A satellite image of the Arctic shows comparative ice melt: an opportunity for 
bubble research, says Czerski. Photograph: The National Snow and Ice Data 
Center (NSIDC) 
But a lot of people shun physics because it seems so complicated and 
irrelevant.
I know. I don’t think we’ve done a good job in talking about physics. People 
get the impression that it’s all about quantum weirdness or stars and time and 
the universe, but it’s also about quite basic things.Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/physics> is about patterns that are folded 
into our everyday lives. It’s much more accessible than people think and we 
should be telling them that. But nobody else is, so I am.

Do you have an example from your book?
OK. How about the way that tea sloshes around when you walk helping to explain 
why mobile phone signals don’t interfere with each other? Tea sloshes at 
different rates in different size mugs, faster in little mugs and slower in 
bigger ones. The reason you spill tea when you walk is that it just so happens 
that the walking speed of a normal human is almost exactly the same as the 
slopping speed in your average mug. The walking speed exactly reinforces the 
slopping speed, so you spill the tea if you walk normally – walk slowly or with 
a tiny mug or a gigantic mug and you won’t spill a drop. Mobile phone signals 
work on the same principle. They’ve each got a really precisely tuned resonance 
– or electron slopping rate – so that you can have two people sitting next to 
each other on two phones having two different conversations and they won’t 
interfere with each other.

I see choosing to have an adventure as a rational decision, even though it 
might look irrational

Is there a tension between being a scientist and being a television presenter?
The biggest tension is time. It’s definitely more than one job, however you 
want to add it up. There are benefits: I learn a lot. I’ve definitely met 
people and learned things that I otherwise wouldn’t have if I stayed in my lab 
like a lot of scientists do. There are similarities between the two, too. The 
most important thing, whether it’s doing scientific research or presenting or 
writing, is understanding the situation clearly enough to be able to pick out 
exactly the right question. To organise all the ideas into a hierarchy and say: 
“This [jabs at an imaginary point with her finger], this is the important thing 
that it all hangs on.”

It must be tough to make time for yourself?
Not really. I manage to do some kind of sport – badminton or running or 
canoeing – almost every day. One of the things that I find mystifying is that 
people tend to think of scientists as somehow “other”, somehow alien. I’ve 
sometimes not been invited to normal, mundane things that I’d enjoy because 
people assume I’m off doing something higher. It’s true that I read a lot of 
books and play with ideas but the washing machine breaks for me, too!

So what’s your biggest non-science, non-sport guilty pleasure?
I guess I’m not allowed to say reading, am I?

No.
Erm… chocolate. Dark chocolate with hazelnuts.

Of what are you most proud in your career?
Overcoming being extremely shy. I was too shy to speak as a child and it’s 
something I only really began to overcome around the time of my PhD [in 
experimental explosives physics at the University of Cambridge]. Academically, 
I’m probably most proud of building instruments that go out into the open ocean 
and measure things that we have never been able to measure before. There’s 
something quite satisfying about drawing a ridiculous machine on a piece of 
paper and then a few years later having this monstrous thing sitting in front 
of you, pushing a button and it working.

If money or logistics were not an issue, what would your dream experiment be?
I’d like to go to the Arctic and study the bubbles underneath breaking waves 
there. As thesea ice retreats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/22/historical-documents-reveal-arctic-sea-ice-is-disappearing-at-record-speed>
 the Arctic Ocean is becoming more and more exposed, so we need to understand 
better how gases and particles are exchanged across it. Bubbles are the 
vehicles that allow this exchange. Finding out what keeps us and our planet 
alive – and what might not keep us alive – is becoming increasingly important.

Carlo Rovelli: ‘Science is where revolutions happen’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/16/carlo-rovelli-interview-quantum-gravity-physics-science-is-where-revolutions-happen>
Science is all about evidence and acting rationally. What is the most 
evidence-free or irrational area of your life?
I suppose I’d say I was a compulsive opportunity taker. I see choosing to have 
an adventure as a rational decision, even though it might look irrational to 
others.

So if someone asked you to go on a one-way trip to Mars to study bubbles you 
would go?
I feel like I’ve got a bit more living to do on Earth first. Anyway, nobody’s 
solved the radiation problem yet. If they figured out a way to send people 
there without giving them incurable cancer then I’d think about it. I reckon 
I’ve got at least another two or three decades before it becomes a possibility.

Hang on, are you saying that the Mars One expedition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/feb/09/mars-one-mission-a-one-way-trip-to-the-red-planet-in-2024>
 is not going to set up a colony on Mars by 2027 like they say they will?
You see! Knowing some basic physics can help you make important real-life 
decisions. [laughs]

Storm in a Teacup: The Physics of Everyday Life by Helen Czerski is published 
by Bantam, £18.99.Click here to order a copy for £15.57 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/storm-in-a-teacup.html>
 