
The 1970s are issuing their siren song to the many American critics who loved 
David Mackenzie’s zippy crime thrillerHell or High Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hell-or-high-water>, moving them to elegy and 
nostalgic regret: “They don’t make them like this any more – but they still 
can, and here’s the proof” (Boston Globe); “The sort of sweeping grandeur that 
today’s filmmakers rarely aspire to, let alone fulfill” (Wall St Journal); 
“Takes you places that you thought the big screen had forgotten” (St Louis 
Post-Dispatch), and perhaps more clear-headedly: “You’ve seen it all before, 
but hell, it’s worth seeing again.” (Time Out).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&media=>
Watch a trailer for Hell or High Water 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQoqsKoJVDw> 
And it’s true, Hell or High Water does partake of virtues we associate more 
closely with movies of the 1970s: a mid-range budget and a crisp 140-minute 
runtime, a clever story that offers thrills and introspection in equal measure, 
and even a political dimension (the big enemy is a bank), plus solid character 
work from all the players. You could name a dozen 70s thrillers set in this 
west Texas/southeast-sun belt milieu alone –Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/02/bring-me-head-alfred-garcia>, 
Charley Varrick, Mister Majestyk, Rolling Thunder, Who’ll Stop the Rain.

Hell or High Water’s David Mackenzie: ‘I look forward to the day people get 
sick of superheroes’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/hell-or-high-waters-david-mackenzie-i-look-forward-to-the-day-people-get-sick-of-superheroes>
But Hell or High Water also resembles other, more recent movies in its 
veneration of a school of film-making that was as good as dead by the time 
Reagan was elected.Out of Sight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A_GOrRyhABg> 
was an early backward-looking pioneer, as was The Lookout, by the same 
screenwriter, Scott Frank.A Most Violent Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jan/23/a-most-violent-year-video-review>
 channelled the big-city melodramas of Sidney Lumet (Serpico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/08/serpico-new-york-police-corruption-sidney-lumet-biopic>
, Prince of the City) whileKilling Them Softly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/mar/20/the-film-that-makes-me-cry-killing-them-softly-james-gandolfini>
 bore echoes of thrillers likePeter Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/10/peter-yates-obituary>’s The 
Friends of Eddie Coyle (also based on a novel by George M Higgins) andUlu 
Grosbard <https://www.theguardian.com/global/2012/mar/23/ulu-grosbard-obituary>
’s Straight Time. Shane Black’sThe Nice Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
 is an open mash-poem to the movies of that era, from itsFreebie and the Bean 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SyWOZknKkFA> opening to its cheerfully amoral 
fadeout.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cda805a0ec01d45241971c66a3e1dc4a06f00c5%2F0_9_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cda805a0ec01d45241971c66a3e1dc4a06f00c5%2F0_9_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Ryan Gosling and Russell Crowe in The Nice Guys. Photograph: Allstar/Silver 
Pictures 
The difference is that the movies that inspired these younger directors, with 
their grit and texture and soul, were mostly backed by the major studios of 40 
years ago, given mainstream nationwide releases, and by and large acquitted 
themselves well in the brute marketplace. Films by the new generation of 
film-makers either get arthouse releases and make arthouse money, or get wide 
releases and still make arthouse money.

What has changed in the intervening years? What happened to studios that 
backed these movies, and the film-makers who made them? What about the people 
who starred in them? And where is the audience that watched them?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-y0Ief9Up0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-y0Ief9Up0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-y0Ief9Up0&media=>
Watch a trailer for Charley Varrick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-y0Ief9Up0> 
A look at the actors’ faces then and now tells us a lot. Oscar Isaac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/oscar-isaac-steven-spielberg-film-kidnapping-edgardo-mortara>
,Brad Pitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/12/allied-brad-pitt-and-marion-cotillard-in-teaser-for-second-world-war-thriller-video>
,Chris Pine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/chris-pine-set-to-play-wonder-womans-boyfriend-steve-trevor>
, George Clooney – all gorgeous, some annoyingly, even underminingly so. Now 
check the mugs of yesteryear:Gene Hackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gene-hackman> (Night Moves, Cisco Pike, Prime 
Cut),Robert Duvall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/24/robert-duvall-oscars-wild-horses-western-interview>
 (The Outfit),Charles Bronson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/02/guardianobituaries.film> (Mister 
Majestyk), Joe Don Baker (Charley Varrick),George C Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/sep/24/guardianobituaries> (Hardcore), 
and even, for God’s sake,Walter Matthau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/jul/03/guardianobituaries.filmnews> 
(Charley Varrick, The Taking of Pelham 123). Add the late-career periods of
Robert Mitchum <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/26/1> (The Friends of 
Eddie Coyle) andLee Marvin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/25/lee-marvin-john-patterson> (Point 
Blank, Prime Cut) and you have either the Mount Rushmore or the Murderers’ Row 
of crag-faced movie stars. And perhaps the emblematic face of the entire 
sub-genre I am delineating here wasWarren Oates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/17/1>, snaggle-toothed, ill-shaven, 
sweaty, goofy-looking, and just magical on screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e41b0b62a0e0b2c5974b3e38ae11d94cc52cdd%2F0_0_3000_1935%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e41b0b62a0e0b2c5974b3e38ae11d94cc52cdd%2F0_0_3000_1935%2F3000.jpg>
 Warren Oates in Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia, 1974. Photograph: Michael 
Ochs Archives/Getty Images 
The titles I’m listing should make it clear I’m hewing away from the Official 
Version of the Hollywood Renaissance, the film-makers who were so cruelly swept 
away by the new post-Jaws/Star Wars economic dispensation. Yes, that all 
happened, but other film-makers were the bathwater thrown out with the baby 
when this kind of mid-budget film-making began to lose out to the tentpole 
mentality. A good number of the great movies of the 70s were autumnal, mature 
works by older directors at the end of long careers. These would includeDon 
Siegel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/27/invasion-of-the-bodysnatchers-1956>
, who had started out doing montage work for Warners in the 1940s, and had 
worked steadily and memorably for two decades already. LikewiseRobert Aldrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jun/10/1>, one of the most prominent and 
successful directors of the period, and Siegel-protegeSam Peckinpah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/30/bloody-sam-peckinpah-wasted-insane-wild-bunch>
, who went from Hollywood pariah to household name and back in the last decade 
of his career.Richard Fleischer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/28/guardianobituaries.usa> 
(Majestyk) andSidney Lumet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/10/sidney-lumet-obituary> (The 
Anderson Tapes, Serpico) made occasional forays into the intelligent thriller 
genre between very different kinds of other movies, while younger journeymen 
likeJohn Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/04/rolling-thunder-john-flynn-dvd> 
(The Outfit, Rolling Thunder),Michael Ritchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/apr/19/guardianobituaries.filmnews> 
(Prime Cut) and Joseph Sargent (The Taking of Pelham One Two Three) staked 
honourable places at the top table.

By and large these actors and these directors (and inevitably in this era, we 
are talking about men) had done their fair share of living: some had seen the 
worst of the Depression and thesecond world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>, or Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/shortcuts/2013/jul/24/korean-war-british-memories-forgotten-conflict>
; many came up the hard way from poor backgrounds and raw experiences; and that 
knowledge was deeply etched in the actors’ faces and performances and in the 
directors’ ways of shaping their stories.

To put it no higher: Chris Pine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-pine>, 
a very good actor, lacks that depth and sense of hinterland. And most 
film-makers today learned about whatever they know about life from films and 
film school, and from the three generations of film-makers who have passed 
through film schools since the movie brats in the 1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2cfc24e5826a2271d561a13ff2daa5aa3f1726%2F0_0_4002_2676%2F4002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2cfc24e5826a2271d561a13ff2daa5aa3f1726%2F0_0_4002_2676%2F4002.jpg>
 Backdrop of conflict … National Guard troops in gas masks confront students at 
Kent State University, Ohio, protesting US policy in south-east Asia in 1970. 
Photograph: Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images 
In the 70s, America went through the greatest sustained period of intense 
self-scrutiny in its history

And of course, it was the times, the 1970s. As the historian Rick Perlstein 
has noted, these were the years when the introspection and self-critical 
attitudes cultivated on the fringes in the 60s went mainstream and suburban. 
America, and Hollywood as well, went through the greatest sustained period of 
intense, 360-degree national self-scrutiny in their history. Just as every 
institution in the polity was examined for flaws and weak spots, so were genres 
in Hollywood, because they too were American institutions badly in need of a 
dose of revisionism. Throughout many of these movies one can detect – or feel – 
the looming recent disasters ofVietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/30/vietnam-war-first-person-stories>
 andWatergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/07/nixon-richard-president-watergate-archive>
, the racial upheavals of the 1960s, the burgeoning oil crisis and the end of 
the postwar economic boom. Sometimes it just takes the times to give a movie an 
extra dimension.

Star Wars offered a whole new American creation myth … the hell with little 
pictures

But America finally got tired of questioning itself after the two decades of 
violent, fast-forward historical tumult between 1960 and 1980. It didn’t want 
to hearJimmy Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/11/president-jimmy-carter-interview>
 examining his navel and speaking of “malaise”, and it didn’t want to feel 
bummed out at the movies, either. In this sense,Ronald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jun/07/guardianobituaries.past> and Star 
Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> came to Americans’ rescue 
hand-in-hand: Reagan offering a rose-tinted vision of picket fences, 10-cent 
gas and hard-working white folks; while Star Wars, one year after the 
bicentennial (itself a foretaste of Reagan), offered a whole new American 
creation myth for people who were bored with the old one.

The studios got the message – after the movie brats had all had one massive 
flop apiece, culminating inHeaven’s Gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/03/michael-cimino-deer-hunter-heavens-gate-american-film>
 – and followed the money. They have never looked back.

Marooned on the outgoing tide was the kind of mid-budget action and crime film 
that I’ve been talking about. For Hollywood, the onset of the home-video era in 
1980 was like a second coming of the malevolent TV set in the early 1950s, and 
the remedy this time around wasn’t CinemaScope or 3D or Smell-O-Vision, it was 
just money, big budgets, nationwide simultaneous releases, marketing blitzes – 
and the hell with little pictures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233fcc5820e6bf4c9cb4e5d2895be8259981995%2F0_0_3600_2385%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20or%20High%20Water%3A%20why%20Hollywood%20should%20make%20them%20like%20they%20used%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fhell-or-high-water-hollywood-film-making-70s%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233fcc5820e6bf4c9cb4e5d2895be8259981995%2F0_0_3600_2385%2F3600.jpg>
 Aaron Paul and Bryan Cranston in Breaking Bad. Photograph: 
AMC/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
But TV won in the end, which wasn’t all bad, because all the instincts and 
habits and ideas that these film-makers prized can now be detected in complex, 
intelligent, richly rewarding dramas likeBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/dec/18/breaking-bad-best-tv-2013>
 (with its southwestern locale) and its spinoffBetter Call Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/21/better-call-saul-amc-spin-off-breaking-bad>
, inThe Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/20/television.irvinewelsh>, The 
Sopranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/12/sopranos-best-tv-drama>, 
The Night Of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/the-night-of-us-justice-system-drama-hbo-riz-ahmed>
 and particularly the second (70s-set) season ofFargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/20/fargo-review-black-humour-white-landscapes-its-brilliant-and-beautiful>
.

Although flickers of the tendency are evident in Hell or High Water and other 
retro-70s works, the reality is that this audience now prefers to savour its 
thrills at home, not at the movies.
 