
Remember how mainstream media’s lies and distortions were going to be 
corrected by people using social media?

Now we have mainstream media trying to cope with fake news distributed through 
social media.

To add to the drama, we have fake claims by digital moguls that they can do 
something positive to stop the dissemination of fake news.

Facebook’s founder Mark Zuckerberg, having initially denied that fake news was 
problematic 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/11/10/13594558/mark-zuckerberg-election-fake-news-trump>
, now wants us to believe that“we’ve been working on this problem for a long 
time.” <https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103269806149061> Really? So it is 
a problem after all?

As for Google, its chiefs seem to think fake news will be strangled to death by
removing advertising tools that enable sites to make money by spreading lies 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/11/14/13630722/google-fake-news-advertising-ban-2016-us-election>
.


But the fake news phenomenon is not only driven by shysters seeking profit. 
Some of it is propagandistic (as was clear during the US presidential election) 
and some of it is simply mischievous.

Politicians have no right to complain. Down the years so many of them have 
played fast and loose with the truth. Their spin doctors turned lying into an 
art form.

This year’s elections on either side of the Atlantic confirmed that we may, 
sadly, be living in a post-truth society.

Americans have elected a lying president in Donald Trump. Britons have voted 
to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> in a campaign 
noted for abundant lies.

Mainstream media has been blindsided by the lying phenomenon. Cynics will 
surely say that its chiefs are upset by the rise of competing liars who appear 
to do the job so much better than them.

So be it. But let’s also consider how difficult it is nowadays for journalists 
who think they are being fair and balanced (not in a Fox News way) in their 
reporting.

Their impartiality tools just don’t work any longer. For example, during the 
Brexit debate, the views of the overwhelming majority of scientistswere 
“balanced” in a BBC discussion by the opinion of a spokesman for a fringe body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/30/scientist-complains-to-bbc-about-being-misled-over-radio-4-interview>
. There was no equivalence.

Barack Obama made a similar observation in a New Yorker interview 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/11/28/obama-reckons-with-a-trump-presidency>
 in saying: “An explanation of climate change from a Nobel prize-winning 
physicist looks exactly the same on your Facebook page as the denial of climate 
change by somebody on the Koch brothers’ payroll.”

His complaint about is that, in the new media environment, “everything is true 
and nothing is true.” In fact, as the BBC instance shows, it happens across all 
media.

The real problem with new media is the speed with which falsehoods are spread 
and the difficulty of providing countervailing corrective information.

I have just faced the consequences of this phenomenon. Last week, the 
students’ union at City, University of Londonpassed a stupid motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/18/city-university-students-vote-for-campus-ban-sun-daily-mail-express>
 banning the Sun, Daily Mail and Daily Express from the campus.


None of the 500 or so students currently studying journalism at City voted for 
the motion. Indeed, only one of them appears to have attended the meeting (and 
voted against the ban).

Yet, on Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, a number 
of people - including current and former journalists - misread the stories 
about the vote and began to criticise City’s journalism students for doing 
something they had not done.

Despite my unequivocal statement about journalism students having had no 
responsibility for the motion, and similar forthright denials by my colleagues, 
the lie proved difficult to quash.

People picked up on the story days later and, unaware of the truth, repeated 
it. So denials had to be ceaselessly reiterated. A myth had been created and it 
wouldn’t surprise me if there are still people who believe it.


It’s not the fault of social media (you can’t blame the platform), but it is a 
consequence of it, because lies can be passed on so swiftly and 
indiscriminately.

And, of course, it is also about human fallibility. Lies that play to our 
prejudices are more easily believed and we pass them on thoughtlessly, 
exacerbating the problem.

Quoting Obama again, he said of new media: “The capacity to disseminate 
misinformation, wild conspiracy theories, to paint the opposition in wildly 
negative light without any rebuttal – that has accelerated in ways that much 
more sharply polarise the electorate and make it very difficult to have a 
common conversation.”

Yes, and here’s a further irony. There is a well-known adage that “a lie gets 
halfway around the world before the truth has a chance to get its trousers on.”

It is usually attributed to Winston Churchill. But the website Quote 
Investigator, which substitutes shoes for trousers incidentally,suggests it was 
coined many, many years before Churchill got to it 
<http://quoteinvestigator.com/2014/07/13/truth/>.

So even a quote about how lies gain currency could be false. And we can’t 
blame social media for that, can we?
 