
We’ve all done it, us serial dieters. Browsing the aisles, bored of our 
regimens of deprivation, we crave something sweet. And so we grab the low-fat 
yoghurt, or the 80-calorie chocolate mousse, or the can of diet cola, 
convincing ourselves that we can have a little bit of what we fancy and that it 
doesn’t matter, because sugar and fat, not artificial sweeteners, are the real 
enemies in our constant war against obesity.

But now, scientists think that artificial sweeteners might be fattening us up 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/its-a-bitter-blow-low-calorie-sweeteners-may-fatten-us-up-5950vwhwv>
. Dr Chee Chia, a clinician scientist at the National Institute on Aging at the 
US Department of Health and Human Services, has conducted research that found 
that people who broadly ate the same diet – and the same number of calories – 
became fatter if they consumed low-calorie sweeteners. One possible explanation 
is that these sweeteners affect our metabolism, triggering it to lay down more 
abdominal fat. Research from the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel 
suggests that sweeteners disrupt the body’s ability to regulate sugar. Anda 
recent report by researchers at Imperial College London and two Brazilian 
universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/03/no-evidence-sugar-free-diet-soft-drinks-aid-weight-loss-study>
 argued that diet drinks might be no better for weight loss than their 
full-sugar counterparts.

Related: You mean you doubt Diet Coke’s health claims? | David Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/dare-doubt-health-claims-for-diet-coke-sugar>

If true, it doesn’t surprise me. Anecdotally, I have friends who have cut out 
their daily diet drink and have lost half a stone seemingly overnight. The 
science of nutrition is complex and conflicting – we are constantly being told 
to cut out whatever dietary scapegoat is currently held responsible for our 
thickening waistlines – fat, sugar, carbs, gluten, meat. But most of us know in 
our disobedient guts that eating as naturally as possible in combination with 
exercise is the healthiest way to stay slim. It’s just that we can’t resist 
sweetening the bitter pill with a quick artificial fix.

We have a terrible food culture in Britain, an addiction to sweet things and 
processed foodstuffs; harassed workers lunch “al desko”, slaves tooffice cake 
culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/let-them-eat-nuts-dentists-want-office-cake-culture-to-end-in-2017>
, and mainlining biscuits to overcome the 4pm slump; after-work boozehounds 
guzzle kebabs and chips as they stagger home from the pub; middle-class 
gout-magnets down red wine with their slices of pâté; and overworked parents 
feed their kids from Iceland’s freezer cabinet (not knowing they already 
stopped at the chicken takeaway on their way home).

To browse the supermarket with its aisles and aisles of processed rubbish is 
to conclude that it’s no wonder so many British people are fat (eight in 10 
middle-aged Britons areoverweight or exercise too little 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/middle-aged-britons-overweight-exercise-too-little-exceed-alcohol-guidelines-public-health-england>
, according to Public Health England). It’s embarrassing, when you think about 
it. (I say this as someone who, having decided to get healthy this year, found 
herself at the weekend devouring an entire chocolate Santa.)

A decade of flat-sharing has taught me that, as humans, our eating habits are 
incredibly varied and personal. I have observed various flatmates’ diets at 
close range – the single lads who eat only tortellini, the strictly vegan girl 
with lists of ingredients as long as her arm, the American with a special pan 
for his grilled cheese, the friend whose freezer bags of cheap, bloody cuts of 
meat gave me the chills, theOttolenghi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/yotam-ottolenghi-recipes> 
addict, the Italian who cooked everything from scratch, and the guy whose 
kippers stank out the whole house. Not to mention my boyfriend, who was once 
caught in the act of consuming five, yesfive, jacket potatoes. It’s sad, but 
many of my friends and flatmates have spent most of their 20s trying to 
re-educate themselves about healthy eating, having been taught bad habits at 
home as they were growing up.

While it’s important to note that junk food is full of crap that keeps us 
addicted to it, I’m afraid I’m also going to blame the parents. We are all 
products of our circumstances. I can cook, for example, because as a young 
carer, I had to, and I eat vegetables because I was raised vegetarian. Parents 
shape our attitudes to food in ways that we are not even conscious of. Some are 
overzealous, banning all additives or ruthlessly assessing their children’s 
weight. Others bring their offspring up on chicken nuggets.

Related: Diet drinks and other ways not to lose weight | Amy Fleming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/diet-drinks-non-sugar-ways-not-to-lose-weight-pound-shedding-myths>

Many fail to teach their children to cook, so that when they are released into 
the world they head straight to the ready meal aisle. None of these parents are 
bad people; but they are inadvertently passing on bad habits. It would be 
useful if health, cookery and nutrition was a fuller part of the school 
curriculum, but so much of the way we approach our diets begins at home. Yet 
parents are in denial. Last month the Health Survey for England found that 91% 
of mothers and 80% of fathers of obese children areblind to the fact their 
offspring have a weight problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/parents-children-overweight-survey-obesity>
.

The trick to maintaining a healthy weight, as Simon Stevens, the NHS chief, 
said last month, is simply to “eat less rubbish”. Education is key. The NHS has 
just announced plans to put 50,000 people at risk of diabetes on a diet. 
Lifestyle coaching and cookery classes are part of the initiative. But adults 
also have a duty to educate themselves, and to take a long, hard look at how 
their bad food habits are affecting their children’s health.
 