
Will Smith’s Collateral Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/collateral-beauty> bombed badly at the box 
office this weekend, but not for a lack of star power. Besides Smith, Edward 
Norton, Kate Winslet, Helen Mirren, Keira Knightley, Michael Pena, and Naomie 
Harris all have significant roles in this overwrought drama. Big names might 
get the average moviegoer to consider your release, but there’s one other 
element that’s necessary to ensure a financial or critical success: your movie 
has to be good.

Collateral Beauty is not good. It’s needlessly complicated, treats its 
audience like it’s dumber than a box full of unused Fox network reality show 
pitches, and totally wastesWill Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith> in a dull tearjerker that elicits 
absolutely zero tears, except the ones you will shed when you realized you 
wasted your hard-earned money on Collateral Beauty.

Let’s start with the obvious. If the plot of a Will Smith movie sounds kind of 
like Seven Pounds, you know trouble is a-brewin’. Seven Pounds is, of course, 
the movie where a grief-stricken Will Smith commits suicide by sharing a 
bathtub with a jellyfish. In that film, sad Will Smith spends the entire 
runtime atoning for killing someone while driving and texting. It’s po-faced, 
grim and dull. Just like Collateral Beauty it has a needlessly convoluted plot.

Collateral Beauty review: a Chernobyl of toxic sentimentality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/collateral-beauty-review-will-smith-helen-mirren-keira-knightley>
In this case, Will Smith plays an ad executive so consumed with sadness after 
his daughter dies that he refuses to work, which, as you might imagine, is not 
ideal for an ad agency. In order to keep a major contract, the company needs 
Smith’s character to get back to work, so they hire actors to pretend to be 
physical manifestations of the concepts of love (played by Keira Knightley), 
time (Jacob Latimore) and death (Helen Mirren). The solution to Smith’s 
writer’s block issue is to make him think he’s clinically insane. That always 
works.

How did a film with a classic Will Smith vehicle implode so colossally?

It’s not even a real fantasy film! It’s someone making Will Smith think he’s 
in a fantasy film. That extra layer of artifice is not necessary, and actually 
harmful to your ability to enjoy Collateral Beauty. As every negative review 
has pointed out about this movie, this might be the cruelest trick ever played 
on a grieving fictional character in the history of drama. But it gets worse! 
Big Willie Styles starts going to a grief support group and falls for the head 
of the group, played by Naomie Harris. This is going to completely ruin this 
movie if you have some sick notion of seeing it, so fair warning.

You see, Harris and Smith share the grief of a lost child. Their stories have 
much in common, which naturally draws them together. In fact, their stories are 
the same because they are actually exactly the same. Will Smith has had amnesia 
the entire movie and doesn’t remember that Naomie Harris is his wife. So, not 
only is this movie cruel, it’s also very, very strange and kinda tone-deaf.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcollateral-damage-will-smith-review-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa64e626a697af86626aa11d3304de76fee361b3%2F0_40_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Here's%20every%20single%20thing%20that%20is%20wrong%20with%20Collateral%20Beauty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcollateral-damage-will-smith-review-what-went-wrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Here%27s%20every%20single%20thing%20that%20is%20wrong%20with%20Collateral%20Beauty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fcollateral-damage-will-smith-review-what-went-wrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa64e626a697af86626aa11d3304de76fee361b3%2F0_40_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 You know it’s bad when Kevin James is giving you career advice. Photograph: 
Allstar/Columbia Pictures 
No one goes into a Will Smith movie wanting it to be bad (unless you’re say, 
Bill Bellamy, who constantly lost parts to Will Smith in the mid-90s). Will 
Smith is one of the world’s most beloved movie stars and is so likable that he 
made me sort of almost kind of enjoy I Am Legend. This guy is as close to 
foolproof as one can get from a casting perspective. He can carry a movie just 
with his smile.

And there is the major flaw with Will Smith movies like Collateral Beauty, 
Seven Pounds, Concussion, After Earth, Winter’s Tale, and pretty much any movie 
where Will Smith is supposed to be serious, sad, tortured, or in any way 
stymied by life itself. The Will Smith the planet fell in love with is fun. 
Think back to the great performances of Will Smith: Men in Black, Independence 
Day, Hitch (yes, Hitch), Ali, Bad Boys. There’s a palpable joy to his work.

Collateral Beauty is emotionally manipulative without understanding how human 
emotions actually work

That’s not to say that Will Smith is incapable of working in a drama. Pursuit 
of Happyness and Ali are definitely serious films, but in those movies, Smith 
plays a fighter. In one of those movies, he’s a literal fighter. His struggle 
is our struggle. Smith getting a job in Pursuit of Happyness makes me cry every 
time, because he has worked so hard to get to that point. He’s a good dad 
(besides the sleeping in the Bart station thing) that retains a sense of 
optimism in the face of rebuke after rebuke in his efforts to provide for his 
son. Collateral Beauty is as close to the exact opposite of that as possible. 
It’s dire. It’s emotionally manipulative without understanding how human 
emotions actually work. And it robs us of the Will Smith we love.

Focus is not much of a movie. It’s a trifle that is best consumed on an 
airplane or in the midst of a crippling fever. That said, it gives us Will 
Smith. The real Will Smith. The Will Smith who smiles. Navel-gazing Will Smith 
is not what we want. It’s not the actor we embraced, nor is it the best 
possible version of the actor we love. It’s as if Tom Hanks suddenly decided 
that he should play a serial killer in a movie. Bad Boys III cannot get here 
soon enough.
 