
Space-race drama Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
 – about a group of black female mathematicians who were instrumental in 
getting the Apollo missions off the ground – has retained its position at the 
top of the US box office 
<http://variety.com/2017/film/news/hidden-figures-monster-trucks-live-by-night-ben-affleck-1201960810/>
 as a slew of more obviously commercially targeted films failed to score with 
audiences.

Related: Hidden Figures review – black women Nasa boffin pic defies its formula
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/hidden-figures-review-john-glenn-taraji-henson-black-nasa-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>

The film, which stars Taraji P Henson, Octavia Spencer and Janelle Monáe, and 
is directed by Theodore Melfi, saw off competition from new arrivals such as 
big-budget action comedy Monster Trucks, which could only manage seventh with 
an estimated $10.5m on its opening weekend, and the Jamie Foxx kidnap thriller 
Sleepless, which fared even more poorly, with $8.46m for eighth place. Outdoing 
both was little-heralded horror film The Bye Bye Man, which managed to land in 
fifth place with $13.38m.

Hidden Figures’ estimated $20.45m in its fourth week on release was enough to 
comfortably see off La La Land, which took $14.5m for second place in its sixth 
week. Hidden Figures’ box office sturdiness – perhaps fuelled by the Martin 
Luther King holiday weekend – was further underlined by the underwhelming 
performance of a number of high-profile expanding films, which added large 
numbers of screens but little in the way of receipts. After three weeks of 
limited play, Boston marathon thrillerPatriots Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/18/patriots-day-review-boston-marathon-bombing-movie-is-tense-yet-respectful>
 went nationwide, yet only managed $12m to land at No 6; Martin Scorsese’s 
religious dramaSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/02/martin-scorsese-silence-religious-epic>
 took $1.9m to stall at No 16; while Ben Affleck mob thrillerLive By Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/15/live-by-night-review-ben-affleck-sienna-miller-dennis-lehane>
 added more than 2,800 screens from its previous week, but failed to crack the 
Top 10, settling for $5.42m at No 11.

Monster Trucks’ failure to dent the box office was widely anticipated, after 
reports emerged 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/monster-trucks-viacom-loss-115-million-1201867055/>
 that studio Paramount were expecting to lose $115m on the project.
 