
Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins>, who has been at 
odds with referees throughout his turbulent career, escalated the conflict to a 
new level by punching one in the stomach during an exhibition with Jimmy White 
at Spennymoor Leisure Centre. His target was Terry Riley, a referee of 25 
years' experience, who had adjudged that Higgins had fouled the blue with his 
shirt.

"At this point the referee got hold of Higgins by the neck and pushed him 
backwards along the table, then a few people jumped out of the crowd to 
intervene," said a witness.

The match carried on without the referee but ended five minutes later. The 
promoter, Gary Astley told the crowd: "Tonight was a unique event. I spent the 
last three months promoting this and this was not in the script. I don't care 
what anybody says, Alex is one of the nicest people I have ever met in my life."

Astley said later that Higgins had told him the referee "overreacted" but 
Riley maintained: "It was a punch and officials are not there to be punched. 
Early on in the game, he was getting abusive. I said to Gary Astley, 'I am not 
able to take this'."

Higgins was unrepentant yesterday at a book signing in Newcastle. He said the 
incident had been "blown out of all proportion". Reporters at the signing were 
then evicted from the bookshop. Earlier, Higgins had refused to answer 
questions from waiting journalists.

The 58-year-old Higgins, who has suffered from cancer of the throat, has not 
competed on the circuit for 10 years but, as a former world champion, remains 
an honorary member of the World Professional Billiards andSnooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> Association.

But it appears unlikely that his long list of disciplinary convictions will be 
extended. A charge in 1994, of refusing to take a drugs test after losing to 
Ken Doherty in the world championship at The Crucible, was dismissed at a WPBSA 
hearing. However, two new charges were instituted that day of which Higgins was 
found guilty on the spot without having due time to assemble a defence - he was 
accused of throwing down a sample bottle at the abortive drugs test and of 
displaying a packet of Marlboro cigarettes at a press conference at the 
Embassy-sponsored tournament.

His solicitor, Robin Falvey, pursued this as an abuse of process along with 
another from an earlier case. From the Eye of the Hurricane: My Story, the 
two-time world champion's autobiography, published this month, reveals for the 
first time that the WPBSA offered him a remarkable settlement which included 
Â£30,000 "in respect of the stress caused by the false charges and the 
hearings." Higgins rejected the offer but the legal aid board refused to grant 
him further assistance and in the end he received nothing.

His 17 complaints against the WPBSA board members and functionaries remain on 
file, as do several complaints against him by referees, a stalemate that seems 
unlikely ever to be resolved.
 