
Never go back, the saying goes, advice that Alex Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> should have taken to heart. 
Instead the former Hurricane returned to competition yesterday for the first 
time in more than five years and, far from recapturing his lost youth, was 
humiliated by one.

 Higgins, now 54 but still dapper in crimson shirt and plum bow tie, was 
beaten 5-1 by 16-year-old Darren Dornan in front of 49 people in Derry.

 Until recently the former double world champion had been hustling for beer 
money in Shepherd's Bush, west London, so a slot in the unofficial Irish Open 
at the Millennium Forum at least represented a step up. But Higgins proved a 
shadow of his former self.

 Higgins, who has twice survived cancer scares, produced the odd shot to 
suggest that a remnant of his talent lingers but seemed more intent on living 
up to his reputation for being temperamental, complaining about the lack of a 
scorer. He also expressed his displeasure with the referee for not wearing the 
customary white gloves.

 He managed to take the third frame, with his top break of 23, but after 
losing the contest he rushed away without comment. Dornan said he was 
"delighted". He will now play Joe Swail, the favourite for the first prize of 
Â£5,000.

 Higgins's last tournament was in Plymouth in 1997. He was escorted from the 
venue by police and discovered at 4am sprawled outside a nightclub, victim of 
an assault with an iron bar. He discharged himself from hospital and went back 
to living in a caravan in his then girlfriend's garden.

 The promoter of yesterday's event, Colin Maguire, who manages the Irishman, 
asserted on the eve of the match that Higgins could still "beat anyone on his 
day" but it would have to be a very different day from yesterday.
 