
It is peculiarly timely that both High-Rise (Studiocanal, 15) and London Has 
Fallen (Lionsgate, 15) hit shelves tomorrow: for better and (mostly) worse, 
these are films for the addled, overcast mood of mid-Brexit Britain. Not that 
the former,Ben Wheatley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/06/ben-wheatley-interview-high-rise-jg-ballard-mark-kermode>
’s lacquered yet brutalist adaptation ofJG Ballard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jgballard>’s 1975 novel, is overtly a film 
of its moment. Elaborately decked out in concrete and shag carpeting, this 
clattering study of a glistening tower block collapsing under the weight of its 
social iniquities and inequalities plays as both an end-of-days fantasy and a 
water-damaged period piece.

It evokes the 1970s and its mildewed economic turmoil right down to a 
concluding (and overly on-the-nose) quote from a brink-of-power Margaret 
Thatcher at the close. Watching it last autumn, I foundHigh-Rise both formally 
imposing and politically safe: a calculated vision of chaos, scored and 
designed to the nth degree of hot-mess splendour, yet seemingly at pains to 
distance itself from a more contemporary application of Ballard’s thesis. As 
the pound plummets and population divisions fester, however, I wonder if the 
film has stumbled its way into relevance. Let the bad times roll.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fhigh-rise-london-has-fallen-witch-truth-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3149018549219045a0f49a446a602ea63ba579ca%2F0_115_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High-Rise%3B%20London%20Has%20Fallen%3B%20The%20Witch%3B%20Truth%3B%20Bang%20Gang%20(A%20Modern%20Love%20Story)%3B%20Fox%20and%20His%20Friends%3B%20Chinese%20Roulette%3B%20Brahman%20Naman%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fhigh-rise-london-has-fallen-witch-truth-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High-Rise%3B%20London%20Has%20Fallen%3B%20The%20Witch%3B%20Truth%3B%20Bang%20Gang%20%28A%20Modern%20Love%20Story%29%3B%20Fox%20and%20His%20Friends%3B%20Chinese%20Roulette%3B%20Brahman%20Naman%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fhigh-rise-london-has-fallen-witch-truth-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3149018549219045a0f49a446a602ea63ba579ca%2F0_115_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Gerard Butler in the ‘ugly’ London Has Fallen. Photograph: Allstar/Millennium 
Films 
London Has Fallen, meanwhile, cloddishly stumbles into… well, not relevance, 
exactly, but a kind of beef-brained reflection of the far right’s least nuanced 
political insecurities. “Get back to Fuckheadistan or wherever it is you’re 
from,” grunts US presidential bodyguardGerard Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gerard-butler> to one of the many 
indistinguishable Muslim terrorists he guns down in the course of this ugly, 
gungy first-world-under-fire thriller; the action hero we need in these times, 
apparently, is Nigel Farage with stubble and a gym contract.

In the film’s predecessor, Olympus Has Fallen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/olympus-has-fallen>, Butler saved the White 
House from North Korean invaders with cheap, cheerful aplomb. This time, it’s 
London, blitzed by Pakistani arms dealers with the chintziest digital effects 
in recent blockbusterdom, requiring gung-ho American rescue after our prime 
minister suspiciously keels over. Search for allegorical parallels to 
Westminster’s disorder if it amuses you; just don’t credit this flatly racist 
hokum with any intelligence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQXmlf3Sefg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQXmlf3Sefg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQXmlf3Sefg&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Witch. 
Better yet, ignore it and unsettle yourself, instead, with The Witch 
(Universal, 15). In debut director Robert Eggers’s formidably shivery 
17th-century horror story, a rural New England family unravel in a fit of 
Christian hysteria after their infant son vanishes into thin air otherwise 
thick with stern, stormy mood. Beautifully shot in shades of driftwood, with 
sparse dialogue written in the formal, heightened idiom of the period, the film 
commits fully to the austerity of its milieu, while maintaining an intriguingly 
ambiguous fidelity to its characters’ God-fearing faith, as Satanism (or 
perhaps just damaging imaginings thereof) encroaches on the family’s already 
fragile peace. Eggers, for his part, maintains a slow, sinuous creep; not 
overly concerned with big scares, his film gets under your skin before you can 
jump out of it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqOz8-Sto1g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqOz8-Sto1g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMqOz8-Sto1g&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Truth. 
Yet another magnetising characterisation by Cate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> is the best reason James 
Vanderbilt’s otherwise respectably camel-coloured political dramaTruth (Warner, 
15) has for being. As once disgraced journalist and60 Minutes producer Mary 
Mapes, she’s all shoulder-padded swagger masking burnt, jangling nerves; she 
commands emotional involvement even when theplot-fuelling scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/09/uselections2004.usa>, about 
questionably unearthed documents throwing George W Bush’s military record into 
question, is a decade past its boiling point.

Things get a bit more heated in Bang Gang (A Modern Love Story) (Metrodome, 
18). If French director Eva Husson’s pleasingly permissive study of teenage 
promiscuity isn’t quite as boundary-pushing as it imagines, it at least 
observes sexuality with elegant candour. Doing the same while maintaining a 
genuine sense of risk – after 40 years, no less – is Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s
Fox and His Friends(Arrow, 15), a blazing, biting, still pointed survey of 
homosexual activity and exchange across the class divide. Now reissued on 
Blu-ray, paired up with Fassbender’s fascinating, more clinically designed 
bourgeois takedownChinese Roulette, it’s the best film on the shelf this week.

Finally, sexual and class frustrations jostle to more chipper effect in 
Brahman Naman <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80097355>, Netflix’s latest 
premiere to be poached from the most recent Sundance festival lineup. An Indian 
spin on the John Hughes playbook, this jovial, 1980s-set tale of book-smart 
male college nerds in Bangalore dumbly bumbling their way out of virginity goes 
light on the raunch by western standards, but establishes its own ground by 
deftly weaving local, caste-related tensions into its adolescent nostalgia.
 