
Tax advisers, accountants and lawyers who aid the super-rich with offshore tax 
evasion will face tough new penalties from New Year’s Day, withHMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> now able to publicly name and shame 
“enablers”.

The Treasury said the government’s new powers would see individuals or 
corporations who take deliberate action to help others evade paying tax facing 
fines of up to 100% of the tax they helped evade or £3,000, whichever is 
highest.

The secret life of a tax adviser: it’s not about devising fancy avoidance 
schemes | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/secret-life-tax-adviser-sifting-nonsense-keep-family-secrets>
The new crackdown, first announced by the then chancellor George Osborne in 
the 2015 budget, will mean HMRC can, for the first time, penalise the 
facilitators of tax evasion who help to physically move funds abroad or advise 
on offshore tax saving.

Announcing the new penalties, the financial secretary to the Treasury Jane 
Ellison said: “Tax evasion is a crime and as a government we have led reform of 
the international tax system to root it out. Closer to home we are creating a 
tax system where taxes are fair, competitive and paid. The raft of measures we 
have introduced to tackle avoidance and evasion will create a level playing 
field for the vast majority of people and businesses who play fair and pay what 
is due.”

A new corporate criminal offence of failing to prevent the facilitation of tax 
evasion will also be introduced this year, with companies held liable if an 
individual acting on their behalf as an employee or contractor facilitates tax 
evasion. Previous rules meant a corporate criminal prosecution was only 
possible if there was proof that the board of directors were aware and involved 
in facilitating the evasion.

The Treasury said HMRC had secured more than £2.5bn specifically from offshore 
tax evaders since 2010. However, the department was criticised last November 
after its new specialist tax evasion unit only successfully pursuedone criminal 
prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/hmrc-investigating-19bn-in-potential-tax-avoidance-by-super-rich>
, despite having identified potential evasion and avoidance worth nearly £2bn 
after examining the tax affairs of 6,500 super-rich individuals.

Also coming into force on 1 January is a new requirement to correct past tax 
evasion, which will see anyone who has failed to correct past evaded taxes by 
30 September 2018 hit with tough new penalties.

The Treasury said more action was planned in the coming months, including a 
consultation on a new requirement for businesses and individuals who create 
complex offshore financial arrangements that bear the hallmarks of enabling tax 
evasion to notify them to HMRC.

May pledged during her leadership campaign that she would pursue companies and 
individuals who took part in deliberate tax avoidance. “It doesn’t matter to me 
whether you’re Amazon, Google or Starbucks: you have a duty to put something 
back, you have a debt to fellow citizens and you have a responsibility to pay 
your taxes,”she said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/11/andrea-leadsom-apologises-to-theresa-may-politics-live>
.
 