
It’s pretty easy to conjure an idea of a Canadian. As one young paramour 
looking to marry an American told a dating website: “She must be willing to 
become a hockey fan and eat maple syrup and Beaver Tails in my igloo.”

There’s more to the stereotype, of course. Canada’s universal health care and 
gun-control legislation are frequently namechecked by American politicians 
(often disapprovingly), while the country’s adventurers have a long-standing 
tradition of stitching tiny Canadian flags into their backpacks.

But while some of these cliches are true – Tim Hortons really does sell 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/canada-coffee-tim-hortons-1.3745971> more of 
its hot brown drink (they call it “coffee”) than any other restaurant chain – a 
deep dive into the actual statistics suggest that much of the country’s image 
is just that.

Some of the most common misconceptions about Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> include:

Canada’s most popular sport by far is ice hockey

What football is to Brazil, hockey is Canada, right? Between them, the men’s 
<http://www.hockeycanada.ca/en-ca/Team-Canada/Men/Olympics.aspx> and women’s 
national Canadian ice hockey 
<https://www.hockeycanada.ca/en-ca/Team-Canada/Women/Olympics.aspx> teams won 
seven of a possible eight gold medals at the last four Winter Olympics.

But while Canada’s superiority on the ice remains unchecked, the sport itself 
is becoming a little more niche at home. A 2014 study 
<http://www.srgnet.com/2014/06/10/massive-competition-in-pursuit-of-the-5-7-billion-canadian-youth-sports-market/>
 pegged ice hockey fourth among 3-to-17-year-old Canadians in participation 
numbers,behind swimming, soccer and dance 
<http://www.srgnet.com/wp-content/uploads/cysr_graphs_Top-Sports.png>. It’s 
probably no coincidence that hockey was also ranked the second most expensive 
sport to play, and that multiculturalism means a generation of kids less 
uniformly passionate about pucks.

Meanwhile, the rest of the world is catching up to Canada when it comes to 
playing the sport professionally:2015 marked the first time in 98 years when 
Canadians did not make up the majority 
<http://www.tsn.ca/canadians-do-not-make-up-the-majority-of-nhl-players-this-season-1.380861>
 of National Hockey League players.

Canadians live in the wilderness

Pierre Berton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/dec/07/guardianobituaries.pressandpublishing>
 once declared: “A Canadian is somebody who knows how to make love in a canoe.”

But there are a few problems with this all-Canadian adage, beyond the obvious 
issue of tipping. For one, Bertonnever actually said it 
<http://www.cbc.ca/newsblogs/yourcommunity/2013/06/ascanadianas-making-love-in-a-canoe.html>
. For another, the image of Canadians as a wilderness-dwelling people is not 
borne out by research: as of 2011, a full81% of Canadians resided in a 
“population centre”, census speak for urban area. 
<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/demo62a-eng.htm> 

In fact, about 35.2%, or one in three Canadians 
<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/140226/dq140226b-eng.htm>, lives in 
either Toronto, Montreal or Vancouver alone.

And if you think the vast majority Canada’s city-dwellers love nothing more 
than to race to the countryside, you’d also be wrong: a 2010poll found that 
only 23% of Canadians see their ideal vacation as a visit to a cottage or a lake
 <http://www.ipsos-na.com/news-polls/pressrelease.aspx?id=4884>. 

Canadians are taxed to death

The status of Canada as something of a socialist darling leads many to assume 
that Canadians pay income tax rates at similar levels to those in, for example, 
France or Germany.

Not so, according to the OECD’s annual Taxing Wages report 
<http://www.oecd.org/tax/taxing-wages-20725124.htm>. The report ranks Canada 
25th out of 34 countries 
<http://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-policy/taxing-wages-tax-burden-trends-latest-year.htm>
 in terms of its“tax wedge” 
<http://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-policy/taxing-wages-tax-burden-trends-latest-year.htm>
 for single-income earners (a measure of the difference between labour costs to 
the employer and the corresponding net take-home pay of the employee). By this 
metric,, Canada is actually slightly below the US.

In the same report, Canada ranked 14th out of 34 in terms of income tax, based 
on the average national wage. When it comes to corporate taxes, too, Canada is 
relatively generous– the headlinecorporate tax rate has dropped 
<http://www.tradingeconomics.com/canada/corporate-tax-rate> from 34% in 2007 to 
26.5% in 2015, ranking Canada 61st in the world. By comparison, the US ranks 
fourth.

Canadians are obsessed with beer


There are few images more Canadian than beloved SCTV hosers Bob and Doug 
McKenzie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jO75Wrf-Phg> sitting on a couch and 
cracking open a few bottles of Molson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04u58ifxmRA>Canadian while complaining about 
US-style twist-off caps. TheBeer Hunter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xQtXpBtk_dk>, an all-Canadian take on Russian 
Roulette, has long been the nation’s greatest drinking game.

But while it is true that Canadians love beer – they spent C$15.7bn on the 
stuff in 2011 
<http://www.agr.gc.ca/resources/prod/Internet-Internet/MISB-DGSIM/ATS-SEA/PDF/6476-eng.pdf>
– an increasing number are embracing wine as their drink of choice.As a 2015 
report notes <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/150504/dq150504a-eng.htm>
, “Beer sales as a share of the total sale of alcoholic beverages have been 
declining for several years.”

In 2004/2005, the report continued, beer had a market share of 49% in terms of 
dollar value, while wine had a market share of 25%. By 2013/2014, the market 
share for beer had declined to 42%, while wine was up to 31%.

Canada is a haven for pot smokers 

Since snowboarder Ross Rebagliati went on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 
1998 to celebrate the return of his Olympic gold medal after it had been 
stripped from him because of THC in his blood, Canada has garnered a reputation 
as weed-smoking haven. The 2001 ruling of anOntario court that prohibiting the 
medical use of marijuana was unconstitutional 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/ontario-court-strikes-down-canadas-pot-laws/article584318/>
 did little to shake that impression.

But although Justin Trudeau’s Liberal government promised to table legislation 
to legalise marijuana in 2017,Canada’s medical community  
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/who-wants-legal-marijuana-not-so-many-canadians-as-once-thought-survey-finds>
andpopular opinion 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/canadian-doctors-divided-over-details-of-legal-marijuana/article31537060/>
 are divided on the question, and there arediplomatic hurdles still to clear 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/trudeau-legalizing-pot-global-treaties-1.3390745>
. Even if weed is eventually made legal, it will likely be sold in set 
quantities, possibly from government stores, and subject to significant taxes 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/marijuana-legislation-knowns-unknowns-1.3660258>
. In fact, the North American nation that has made the biggest strides in 
legalising pot has been the supposedly drug-averse US.

Canadian hospital wait times are so bad they flee to the US for care

During the 9 October presidential debate, Donald Trump raised some ire north 
of the border when he referred to Canadian healthcare as “catastrophic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/10/canada-healthcare-donald-trump-debate>
. Said the now-president-elect: “You’ve noticed the Canadians. When they need a 
big operation, they come into the US in many cases, because their system is so 
slow.”

As ever, Trump is manipulating the truth. Canadians do endure long wait times 
for specialised treatment 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/health/canadian-health-care-wait-times-still-unacceptably-high-two-reports-say?__lsa=7c5d-d866>
, and as of 2014 Canada ranked last among 11 OECD countriesin terms of how 
quickly patients can get an appointment with their family doctor 
<http://www.ctvnews.ca/health/canada-ranked-last-among-oecd-countries-in-health-care-wait-times-1.1647061>
.

However, Canadians aren’t flocking en masse to the US in response. A Fraser 
Institute report revealed that in 2015 just1% of Canadians who needed 
specialised medical treatment sought that treatment in the US 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/canadian-health-tourists-drop-1.3800729>. 

Canada is a major exporter of comedy stars

Dan Aykroyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/31/dan-aykroyd-new-ghostbusters>, 
Martin Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/oct/20/martin-short-my-family-values>
,Eugene Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/eugene-levy-american-pie-got-graphic>
,Catherine O’Hara <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001573/>, Lorne Michaels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/17/lorne-michaels-kingmaker-comedy-saturday-night-live>
,Jim Carrey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jimcarrey>, Mike Myers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mike-myers>, Dave Foley 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004929/>. All are Canadians who made it big in 
America – and all are over 50. Whereas comedians were once regularly 
“discovered” on shows such asSaturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live>, SCTV and Kids 
in the Hall, the well has been drying up: the success of Seth Rogen,Jay Baruchel
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/07/us-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel>
 and Ryan Reynolds is heartening, but Canada is no longer the comedy source it 
once was.

Though tightened screening at the US border may be partly to blame 
<http://splitsider.com/2014/12/extraordinary-person-visas-and-the-plight-of-canadian-comedians/>
, the changing way in which we consume comedy – bite-sized clips shared online, 
from acts such as Picnicface and Baronness Von Sketch Show – also plays a role. 
The old model of a breakout US/Canadian TV sketch comedy may no longer exist, 
says Toronto Second City’sEtan Muskat 
<https://twitter.com/EtanMuskat?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
: “The CBC is trying to have breakout mainstream comedic success, following a 
model that doesn’t compute.”

Canada is a frigid wasteland

Canada is cold, eh? It has an average daily temperature of -5.6 
<https://www.canadiangeographic.ca/article/10-surprising-facts-about-canadian-weather>
C, making it one of the chilliest countries on earth. But the idea of an 
“average Canadian daily temperature” is meaningless. Not only does it combine 
cities likeRegina 
<http://www.regina.ca/residents/residents-regina-facts/about-regina/> and St 
John’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-cool-canada/2016/sep/09/st-johns-newfoundland-and-labrador-paradise-on-the-edge-of-the-ocean>
 – thousands of miles apart, in entirely different climates – but it doesn’t 
capture range.

Canada’s summer highs are in fact often equal to, or higher than, other major 
cities in Europe and the US 
<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/phys08b-eng.htm>. 
Winnipeg, for example, which suffers average annual winter highs of -12.7, has 
a summer average high of 25.8, higher than Paris and Los Angeles.

Canada also has a rich summer culture of cabin or cottage-going to rival the 
Scandinavians and the dacha-loving Russians. If anything, the brutal winters 
make Canadians appreciate the summer months more.

Canada’s economy is driven by natural resources

Though Canada is the biggest exporter of crude oil to the US 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/canadian-crude-exports-to-us-hit-record-level/article29613525/>
 and thehighest exporter of forestry products relative to imports 
<http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/industry/overview/13311>, the forestry, 
fishing, mining, quarrying, oil and gas industries collectivelyemploy only 
355,000 Canadians 
<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/econ40-eng.htm>, or 
2% of the workforce.

In fact, Canada’s services sector dwarfs the goods-producing sector by almost 
four to one. And the third-biggest service employer after retail and 
healthcare/social services is “professional, scientific and technical 
services,” including tech startups likeShopify <https://www.shopify.co.uk/>, 
Hootsuite <https://hootsuite.com/en-gb/> and Freshbooks 
<https://www.freshbooks.com/uk?ref=ppc-t1-fb&camp=UK+-+Search+%28FB-Branded%29&ag=Freshbooks+-+Phrase+%25232&kw=freshbooks&dv=c&mt=p&ntwk=g&ap=1t1&crid=89954723444&source=gaw&gclid=CJSr9MfGj9ACFYQy0wodg3cEYw>
. In 2015, Canada’s tech companies produced $117bn or 7.1% of Canada’s economic 
output,greater than that 
<http://brookfieldinstitute.ca/research-analysis/the-state-of-canadas-tech-sector-2016/>
 of the finance and insurance industry. AsMike McDerment 
<https://twitter.com/mikemcderment>, CEO of Freshbooks, notes: “It’s our 
observation that the economy is being restructured away from resource economy 
to services and tech.”

Canada is a Scandinavian-style social democracy

Though Canada enjoys a strong healthcare system and is consistently ranked 
among themost livable countries on earth 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/12/16/travel/undp-most-liveable-country/>, many 
assume it is a thriving social democracy in the style of Sweden or Denmark. Not 
exactly.

Canadian bachelors students pay the joint 2nd highest tuition fees of OECD 
countries 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/education/education-at-a-glance-2016/indicator-b5-how-much-do-tertiary-students-pay-and-what-public-support-do-they-receive_eag-2016-20-en#.WCGxamSLQ1J>
, alongside Japanese and Korean students. Canada also has the7th highest child 
poverty rate <http://www.unicef.ca/en/our-work/article/unicef-report-card-10>in 
the OECD, and, as of 2013, waslast in spending on early childhood education 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/why-governments-must-invest-in-early-childhood-education/article19594896/>
 and is among themost expensive countries on earth when it comes to childcare 
costs <http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/oecd-child-care-costs-1.3815954>. 

Meanwhile Canada’s rich-poor gap is slightly bigger than the OECD average 
<https://www.pressprogress.ca/oecd_study_the_gap_between_canada_rich_and_poor_is_significantly_bigger_than_previously_thought>
, and the World Economic Forum putCanada in 30th place 
<http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2015/rankings/> globally – 
two spots below the US – in gender equality measures.

Canada is diverse from coast to coast

The Economist recently pointed out 
<http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21709291-why-canada-still-ease-openness-last-liberals?fsrc=scn/tw/te/pe/ed/thelastliberals>
 that Canada is a world leader in immigration, both in acceptance and 
integration, a result of 1971 legislation enshrining multiculturalism. However, 
most of the resulting diversity is limited to Canada’s big cities.Of Canada’s 
6.8 millions immigrants 
<https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-010-x/99-010-x2011001-eng.cfm>
 in 2011, 91% lived in one of Canada’s 33 census metropolitan areas (CMAs) – 
Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver – compared with 63.3% of people who were born 
in Canada.

Across the country, skilled immigrants struggle with significant barriers to 
finding work 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/skilled-immigrants-face-hurdles-in-finding-jobs-government-report-says-1.2759702>
, such as language and requirements for Canadian experience. In Vancouver and 
Toronto, many immigrants are increasingly living in inner suburban enclaves 
<http://www.urbancentre.utoronto.ca/pdfs/researchbulletins/CUCSRB42-Murdie-Cdn-Immigration3-2008.pdf>
, with less access to public transport. At least one geographer, Zach Taylor,
argues the isolation and resentment these enclaves can cause helped fuel the 
populist rise of Toronto mayor Rob Ford 
<http://activehistory.ca/2014/03/torontos-rob-ford-phenomenon-and-diversity-within-canadas-evolving-suburbs/>
.
 