
The 16th-century artist Hans Holbein the Younger’s series of tiny woodcuts, 
The Dance of Death, should be viewed as dangerous satire and an early form of 
political cartoon, according to a Cambridge academic.

The Dance of Death by Hans Holbein review – capering skeletons and ruined 
churches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/25/dance-of-death-hans-holbein-skeletons-reformation-review>
Holbein’s series of grisly images, created between 1524 and 1526 and showing 
the folly of greed and pride, are part of a tradition dating back to the 
medieval idea of the “danse macabre”, which showed death, in the form of a 
skeleton, acting as the great leveller to kings and emperors. But in a new 
Penguin Classics edition collecting the woodcuts, Ulinka Rublack, professor of 
early modern history at the University of Cambridge, argues that Holbein’s 
version of the story is more than just another religiously-themed moral tale, 
and is actually a political statement.

Using contemporary sources including local government records from the period, 
Rublack found that the young artist known for his later portraits of the Tudors 
was then struggling to survive financially, and part of a group of subversive 
artists who were being drawn into the movement for political change in 
Reformation Europe.

She points to images from The Dance of Death such as one of a pope shown 
surrounded by little demons, which she said was a “very risky” thing to have 
done. “For me it is a clear reference to Lutheran criticism which claimed the 
pope was the antichrist. It is taking up the language used by the Lutherans, 
which was a dangerous thing to do,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fholbein-woodcuts-dangerous-political-satire-ulinka-rublack-new-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16b5ce51716017251c4e1a58f0cc5a3fbe0ff9f%2F0_0_2416_3240%2F2416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holbein%20the%20'16th-century%20Hebdo'%3A%20artist's%20woodcuts%20are%20dangerous%20political%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fholbein-woodcuts-dangerous-political-satire-ulinka-rublack-new-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holbein%20the%20%2716th-century%20Hebdo%27%3A%20artist%27s%20woodcuts%20are%20dangerous%20political%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fholbein-woodcuts-dangerous-political-satire-ulinka-rublack-new-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa16b5ce51716017251c4e1a58f0cc5a3fbe0ff9f%2F0_0_2416_3240%2F2416.jpg>
 Death and the Abbot, after Hans Holbeins Dance of Death, 1538. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
Another image shows death adorned with a cardinal’s face; in another, a nun 
flirts with her lover. Rublack said she was “surprised” by “how committed 
[Holbein] seems to have been to issues of social justice. The judges, the 
notaries, all those who should help poor people, it’s clear [from his woodcuts] 
that Holbein thought they were open to bribes and dismissive of those they 
should help.”

“The invisibility comes through of those at the margins of society. I don’t 
know any other graphic work of the period that does that, that speaks so 
strongly for the poor, for those who are invisible,” she said.

Rublack is from St John’s College, which described The Dance of Death as the 
“16th-century Charlie Hebdo”, and said that by “reworking the traditional Dance 
formula and adding tokens and signifiers that pointed to political concerns 
specific to its time, Holbein’s Dance was not just a piece for religious 
meditation but an early form of political cartoon, designed to delight, 
surprise and offend”.

“What’s striking is how many of his images were about social justice,” added 
Rublack. “Holbein was part of a movement which was very concerned with radical 
questions about welfare and reform.

“Looking at it as satire, rather like a publication such as Charlie Hebdo 
today, is probably the way to think about what he was doing at the time. 
Criticising the pope and Catholic clergy was dangerous; it could be censored 
and people could be imprisoned for it. But it’s sobering to think nobody was 
assassinated for it, which has occurred in response to comparable satire in our 
own time.”

Holbein produced the work while he was living in the Swiss city of Basle. The 
Reformation would not arrive there until 1529, but Rublack argues that there 
was already pressure for reform, and that Holbein, living among artists, would 
not have been immune to its influence.

“One can only imagine an atmosphere of creative fun and irreverence, which 
thrived on jokes against monks, priests, the local bishop and popes,” she 
writes in the new Penguin Classics edition, out this month.

What struck me was how many risks Holbein was taking in pushing these 
critiques. It was such an exciting time
Ulinka Rublack 
“I think he was engulfed in these discussions from the start,” Rublack told 
the Guardian. “What really struck me was how many risks he was taking in 
pushing these critiques. It was such an exciting time because graphic art 
became so political and the role of satire merges with an extraordinary 
movement for change.”

Holbein would go on to work in the Tudor court in England, producing works 
such as The Ambassadors and his famous portrait of Henry VIII.

“What is impressive is that he could have easily made the decision to give up 
painting, as so many contemporaries did,” Rublack said. “Instead, he made the 
very risky decision to pursue painting elsewhere. He seems to have known that 
he had great works like The Ambassadors in him.”
 