
When Mitzi Trumbo was 15, she opened her front door to find one of Hollywood’s 
most famous actors standing outside. It was Kirk Douglas. A few days later, 
Laurence Olivier turned up. “He outstretched his hand for me to shake and the 
dog got in the way and he tripped over.”

Fifty-five years later, she still remembers how starstruck she felt. But 
besides the excitement, what Mitzi most recalls from those encounters was a 
feeling of frustration that she couldn’t brag about it to her high-school 
friends. Her father, Dalton Trumbo, was one of the most famous Hollywood 
screenwriters of his generation, both for his work (he wrote the Oscar-winning
Roman Holiday, starring Audrey Hepburn and Gregory Peck, and several novels) 
and for his leftwing politics.

In 1947, when anti-communist fear took root in America, Trumbo was called to 
testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee. He refused to give 
the names of colleagues with supposedly communist sympathies and was imprisoned 
for 11 months. On his release, he was blacklisted and could not work under his 
own name. He continued to produce uncredited scripts and his three children – 
Nikola, Mitzi and Christopher – were told not to speak about anything that went 
on at home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454602053700%2FKP_1708788_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trumbo%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trumbo%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftrumbo-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454602053700%2FKP_1708788_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Trumbo - video review 
When Mitzi opened the door to Douglas and Olivier, her father was writing the 
screenplay forSpartacus, which would go on to become one of the biggest box 
office hits of all time. Trumbo was publicly credited as its writer on the 
film’s release in 1960: an act that effectively broke the blacklist.

The extraordinary story of Trumbo’s defiance in the face of politically 
motivated adversity has now been made into a film, withBreaking Bad’s Bryan 
Cranston <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston> in the title 
role and featuring Helen Mirren and John Goodman.

“It’s an important story to get out there,” says Mitzi, 70, speaking from her 
home in the Bay Area of San Francisco. “Jay Roach [the director] and Bryan 
Cranston have done a wonderful job. They really care about it.”

Seeing her father, who died in 1976, portrayed on screen was a surreal 
experience. Cranston bore a startling physical resemblance to Trumbo, 
“especially when they had him older. At times, I would be on set and I would 
say: ‘Gosh, that’s so like him.’ ”

Other aspects rang less true. “There’s a scene where he takes me and my sister 
for ice-cream,” says Mitzi. “I was laughing with her afterwards saying, ‘That 
would never have happened!’ My father worked all the time and if we had issues 
we went to our mum. But he was fiercely entertaining. We learned about language 
and politics and how to think from him. That was pretty great.”

The paranoia whipped up by the Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy throughout 
the 1950s had a devastating impact on many Americans unfairly accused of 
leftwing subversion. In Hollywood, more than 300 artists were boycotted by the 
studios. Some, such as Charlie Chaplin, Orson Welles and Paul Robeson, 
emigrated or went underground.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE&media=>
 Trailer for Trumbo 
It was a divisive period where loyalties were questioned and friendships 
shattered. Trumbo, who had joined the Communist party for five years in 1943, 
was part of the Hollywood Ten: a group of screenwriters and directors who 
refused to testify and were found guilty of contempt of Congress. Other 
witnesses called in front of the committee – including Elia Kazan, the director 
ofOn The Waterfront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/12/elia-kazan-martin-scorsese> – 
named names and were allowed to continue their work. The playwright Arthur 
Miller, who had been lifelong friends with Kazan, never spoke to him again. 
When Kazan received an honorary Oscar in 1999, many in the audience refused to 
clap.

Mitzi remembers her father being “pretty stoic” about his blacklisting. “He 
just knew he had to figure out what to do. I have to say, honestly, communism 
was not very important to him … He hated meetings. He was really an independent 
thinker and group activities were not his sort of thing. It was the principle 
of democracy he was fighting for, for justice and civil rights and all those 
things. Having all of that around you is a good way to grow up.”

After he was released from jail, the Trumbo family escaped the increasingly 
uncomfortable political climate in America by moving to Mexico City for two 
years. Mitzi was six and had to learn a new language: “It was a big 
turnaround.” She credits her mother, Cleo, with “keeping us all together. She 
was the rock of our family.”

When Mitzi was eight, the Trumbos returned to the Highland Park area of Los 
Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>.

“You knew you were different from everyone in the neighbourhood. There were 
many things you could never say or talk about. We could never talk about what 
our father was writing, even though our parents were very open with us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd6a4aa900e2f23d123b3035b847c6cb4ce94544%2F0_181_1922_1154%2F1922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hollywood%20blacklisted%20my%20father%20Dalton%20Trumbo%3A%20now%20I%E2%80%99m%20proud%20they%E2%80%99ve%20put%20him%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hollywood%20blacklisted%20my%20father%20Dalton%20Trumbo%3A%20now%20I%E2%80%99m%20proud%20they%E2%80%99ve%20put%20him%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd6a4aa900e2f23d123b3035b847c6cb4ce94544%2F0_181_1922_1154%2F1922.jpg>
 Dalton Trumbo with Mitzi on the ranch in 1948. Photograph: Courtesy of Mitzi 
Trumbo 
During this time Trumbo wrote The Brave One (1956), which received an Oscar 
for best story credited to “Robert Rich” – a name borrowed from a nephew of the 
producers. His earnings dwindled: over a two-year period, Trumbo wrote 18 
screenplays at an average fee of $1,750 each.

At school, Mitzi felt like an outsider. “At some point, they started having 
secret PTA meetings excluding my mother,” she says. “Then the kids started 
avoiding me. It was a tough few months until I finally told my parents and said 
‘I just can’t go back’. The kids tortured me for the rest of the year and then 
I went to a different school.”

The effect of the blacklist on families is often overlooked. In most cases, it 
meant that the main breadwinner was, at best, facing a substantial cut in 
salary and, at worst, unable to work at all. And then there was the added 
pressure of carrying around a notorious surname linked with communist 
sympathies in an era of heightened popular anxiety about the threat from Russia.

“When you said your name in the 50s, it was almost like a challenge,” says 
Mitzi. “Over the years it changed. Now, I get ‘Oh, are you related to Dalton 
Trumbo?’ ”

She says that as a result she has a special bond with the other children of 
blacklisted artists, particularly the family of Ring Lardner Jr, who was also 
part of the Hollywood Ten and who went on to writeM*A*S*H. “There is a 
community,” she says. “There always is a feeling, even if we don’t see them 
often or know them well, that we know what we went through.”

When McCarthy died in 1957, Mitzi remembers “a sense of joy because he 
represented the whole thing”. But it wasn’t until the 1960 release ofSpartacus, 
directed by Stanley Kubrick, andExodus, directed by Otto Preminger, that Trumbo 
was given public credit for his work on both films. The blacklist rapidly lost 
credibility.

Mitzi remembers her parents taking her and a friend to a “fancy Hollywood 
[movie] theatre” on the daySpartacus was released. “It was the first time I saw 
his name on screen,” she says. “It was amazing. It was very cool.”

Was her father emotional?

“No, but he didn’t show emotions much. He was fierce and angry about the 
blacklist and when it was finally broken for him, it wasn’t broken for his 
friends. There wasn’t a feeling of ‘Oh, now it’s over’ because it still wasn’t 
for lots of people.”

Trumbo’s career survived and flourished. He was reinstated in the Writers 
Guild of America, and was credited on all subsequent scripts. In 1975, a year 
before he died, he was officially recognised as the rightful winner of the 
Oscar forThe Brave One and was presented with a statuette.

Mitzi went on to become a professional photographer. She and her husband 
Richard have two daughters and two grandchildren.

As for the blacklist? It’s in the past. “Holding grudges so many years later? 
My parents taught us not to do that.”

Trumbo is being released in the UK on 5 February.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa53cb793f38a0d5f92d2f33fe5f2b1c6e96deba%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hollywood%20blacklisted%20my%20father%20Dalton%20Trumbo%3A%20now%20I%E2%80%99m%20proud%20they%E2%80%99ve%20put%20him%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hollywood%20blacklisted%20my%20father%20Dalton%20Trumbo%3A%20now%20I%E2%80%99m%20proud%20they%E2%80%99ve%20put%20him%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdalton-trumbo-hollywood-blacklist-mitzi-trumbo-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa53cb793f38a0d5f92d2f33fe5f2b1c6e96deba%2F0_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 The Hollywood Ten stage a demonstration at Los Angeles airport on their way to 
prison. Photograph: Everett Collection/REX 
THE MCCARTHY ERA

■ Between 1946 and 1952, the number of FBI agents rose from 3,559 to 7,029, as 
part of President Truman’s loyalty-security programme, which investigated 
government employees to identify communist sympathisers.

■ In October 1947, the House Committee on Un-American Activities (Huac) began 
to subpoena screenwriters and directors to testify about alleged communist 
links.

■ The Hollywood Ten, a group of actors, screenwriters and directors who 
refused to answer some questions posed by the committee, were blacklisted by 
studios.

■ Eventually, hundreds of artists were banned by the industry. Among them were 
Charlie Chaplin, Orson Welles and Paul Robeson.

■ Senator Joe McCarthy launched his anti-communist campaign in 1950, when he 
accused more than 200 state department staff of being communists.

■ By 1959, Huac was being denounced by former presidentTruman as the “most 
un-American thing in the country today”.
 