
Wesley Sneijder put his finger on the national pulse in Holland. “This summer 
I will go as far away as possible,” the midfielder said. “I’ll go to a place 
where I cannot watch any of the matches, none of them at all.” The European 
Championships in France was supposed to be impossible for the established 
nations to miss. Enlarged to 24 teams, the safety net had been spread far and 
wide – but Holland stillfound a way to slip through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/14/holland-failure-qualify-euro-2016>
.

For the first time since 2002, when Louis van Gaal failed to take a squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/sep/02/newsstory.sport2> that 
featured Edwin van der Sar, Marc Overmars, Patrick Kluivert and a host of 
stellar names to the World Cup in South Korea and Japan, Holland will be absent 
from the cast list at a major finals.

Holland’s dramatic fall from Total Football to total desperation | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/14/holland-failure-qualify-euro-2016>
The Dutch are the most glaring of absentees and the fall-out and 
soul-searching from their botched qualification campaign, which began badly 
under Guus Hiddink and tailed away under Danny Blind, is likely to cease only 
when the championship has ended.

In the meantime Holland have been reduced to providing the tune-up opposition 
forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> at Wembley on 
Tuesday, having fulfilled a similar function against France at the Amsterdam 
Arena on Friday, a game they lost 3-2.

It was surely not meant to be this way and it says much that, rather than 
footballers, the hot Dutch sports stars of the moment arethe Formula One driver 
Max Verstappen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/21/max-verstappen-christian-horner-red-bull-f1-singapore>
, thesprinter Dafne Schippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/30/dafne-schippers-world-championships-200m>
 and the women of the national handball team. Schippers and the handballers 
will go for gold at the Rio Olympics in August.

It feels like a trick of the mind that as recently as July 2014 Holland were 
denied a place ina second successive World Cup final  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/11/world-cup-final-holland-spain1>
aftera semi-final defeat on penalties by Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/09/argentina-holland-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
. That was the summer of Van Gaal, in his second stint in charge of the 
national team, pulling his confidence trick before the quarter-final penalty 
shootoutdefeat of Costa Rica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/05/holland-costa-rica-world-cup-match-report>
, when he brought on Tim Krul for Jasper Cillessen in goal, and of Arjen Robben 
striking fear into opposing defences.

For the record Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> finished 
fourth in their European Championship qualifying group, behind the Czech 
Republic, Iceland and Turkey, having lost five of their 10 ties. Moreover, they 
were well beaten on each occasion. The unravelling was as traumatic as it was 
unexpected.

Blind will oversee the 2018 World Cup campaign and his priority in the 
short-term is to stabilise and inject confidence, flickers of which were 
evident inNovember’s 3-2 friendly win  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/wales-holland-friendly-match-report>
over Wales in Cardiff when Robben made the difference with two goals. The squad 
leans heavily on the captain but he is currently unavailable because of a thigh 
problem.

Blind has been forced to contend with injuries; the defenders Ron Vlaar and 
Stefan de Vrij are among those out while Robin van Persie has been deemed 
lacking in sharpness by Blind. Van Persie, now 32 and at Fenerbahce, has been 
left out of the squad.

Sneijder has made the point that there is little of his peer group remaining 
for the France and England games. “I was chatting with Klaas-Jan [Huntelaar] 
and we realised that we were the only guys left,” Sneijder said. “We see only 
young guys around us.”

Sneijder and Huntelaar were a part of the squad that reached the 2010 World 
Cup final in South Africa, when they lost to Spain, together with Robben, Van 
Persie and Ibrahim Afellay, the Stoke City winger, who was a late call-up to 
the current party after a clutch of injury withdrawals.

But it is a measure of Holland’s changing face that Blind has chosen or been 
able to choose only four of the team that started the semi-final against 
Argentina at the last World Cup – Sneijder, Cillessen, Gini Wijnaldum and his 
own son, Daley.

Sneijder, 31, and Huntelaar, 32, are the oldest members of Blind’s selection 
and, at times like these, it is tempting to lament the age group that Holland 
seemed to lose. In 2007, they were the European Under-21 Championship winners 
but, from that squad, only Vlaar and, to a lesser extent, Krul have gone on to 
be successes at senior international level. Royston Drenthe, Ryan Babel, Daniël 
de Ridder, Ryan Donk and Hedwiges Maduro were tipped to become mainstays for 
their country, but, for various reasons, it has not happened.

The focus, inevitably, during a period of renewal has turned to the nation’s 
young talent and there is a particular buzz about the Ajax midfielders Davy 
Klaassen and Riechedly Bazoer. Klaassen, a naturally creative player, is the 
club captain at 23 while the 19-year-old Bazoer, who is fast and powerful, has 
been likened to Patrick Vieira by the former Ajax youth coach Fons Groendijk.

Bazoer could have gone to Manchester City at 16 only to move, controversially, 
from PSV Eindhoven to Ajax and almost all Europe’s biggest clubs are tracking 
him. He came on against France for the injured Sneijder and it will be 
interesting to see whether he is involved at Wembley. The 21-year-old AZ 
Alkmaar striker, Vincent Janssen, who is top scorer in the Dutch League this 
season with 20 goals, is a part of the squad for the first time and then there 
is Memphis Depay.

When the 22-year-old winger swapped PSV for Manchester United last summer, 
there was the hope that he would take the Premier League by storm. Insteadhe 
has struggled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/20/memphis-depay-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
 and there has been criticism in Holland that he is more preoccupied with his 
fashion choices than football. Depay reported for international duty this 
season wearing a wide-brimmed hat and a big, red Louis Vuitton scarf, a look 
that was lampooned. Clearly, Depay could wear what he wanted without complaints 
were he to routinely cut a dash on the field.

Blind named seven PSV players in his original squad, before withdrawals, and 
the club impressed during this season’s Champions League,taking Atlético Madrid 
to penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/atletico-madrid-psv-eindhoven-champions-league-match-report>
 in the last 16 before going out, but there is a general lack of top-level 
experience and it is noticeable how few of Blind’s players are at the very 
biggest clubs.

Apart from Robben at Bayern Munich there are Daley Blind and Depay at an 
uninspiring United and that is pretty much it. There was once a time when Real 
Madrid had six Dutchmen – Ruud Van Nistelrooy, Sneijder, Robben, Rafael van der 
Vaart, Huntelaar and Drenthe. Today, only Van der Vaart and Ricky van 
Wolfswinkel are at Spanish clubs – both with Real Betis – and neither is close 
to the Holland squad. Van der Vaart has fallen from favour and is not even in 
the team.

There is an affinity in Holland for the Belgium team at the European 
Championship, largely because some of their squad have played in the Eredivisie 
and Sneijder referenced them when he assessed Holland’s state of transition, 
where the youthful prospects need time and the old guard are largely gone or 
going. “Belgium are now contenders for the title at the Euros, but they had 
some rough years,” Sneijder said. “That’s what we have had now.”

Sneijder used the past tense to describe the side’s woes, in that optimistic 
manner so beloved of footballers, but he is not blind to the reality. Holland 
must take the long road back to the top.
 