
Dear Karl, I’ve landed now. As ever, my senses felt overloaded. Life and death 
is very close in Rio. Just off to the Copacabana beach for a swim. Can’t wait 
for theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014> to begin.

Dear Fredrik, I’m sorry not to have replied sooner but I was asleep when your 
email arrived. I then had to get up and make breakfast for the children because 
Linda is away. It is enormously irritating to have to deal with the kids when I 
have so much of importance to write. But to business. I am smoking my third 
cigarette of the day and I find my thoughts are not entirely dissimilar to 
those I was having when I smoked the second, namely that I am quite happy to 
watch theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> on 
TV here in Sweden while you are in Rio. It also occurs to me that we might be 
able to turn the emails into a book so that we can get paid for doing what we 
were going to do anyway. By the way, I rather want Argentina to win. I have 
always admired their nihilism.


Dear Karl, writing a book about life and football sounds like a great idea. As 
you know I am a huge admirer of yourMy Struggle series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-hari-kunzru>
. It’s interesting to hear you are supporting Argentina. I had imagined you 
might be a fan of Germany. Yesterday, I went to a transvestite bar before going 
to watchBrazil v Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/12/brazil-v-croatia-world-cup-2014-live-report>
 with my friend Alonso in a favela. The passion for the beautiful game here is 
amazing.


Dear Fredrik, I slept through the second half of the opening game so managed 
to miss most of the excitement. But had I stayed awake, I guess I might have 
been as excited as you – though even if I wasn’t, it wouldn’t stop me writing 
about it. After all, what is a writer who doesn’t write? I am now going to do 
some shopping, have a shit and then take the kids out. I now quite like the 
look of Uruguay. I also quite admire England, though I suspect I may be alone 
in that.


Dear Karl, it sounds as if you are very busy with your smoking, shitting and 
childcare arrangements. I’m not surprised you’ve managed to sleep through most 
of the tournament, but I am happy to update you. I’m now firmly behindBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alexs-adventures-in-numberland/2014/jun/06/world-cup-brazil-belgium-team-ranking-system>
. I’ve also been thinking about football and philosophy. Is it not just perfect 
that one of Brazil’s best ever players was calledSocrates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/21/seven-deadly-sins-socrates-brazil>
?


Dear Fredrik, your letter catches me at a rare moment when I am fully awake 
and not having to deal with the boredom of childcare. What you say about 
football, philosophy and national identity struck a chord with me as I am often 
referred to as the NorwegianKant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/17/immanuel-kant-philosophical-argument-shot>
. The prevailing mood of thekulturmann in Sweden borders on the fascistic. It 
still upsets me when journalists accuse me of misogyny because they conflate my 
novels with real life. Just because everything in my books happened to me and I 
use people’s real names doesn’t make them true. God, I wish Linda was around so 
I could watch more football.
 Home and Away: Writing the Beautiful Game by Karl Ove Knausgaard and Fredrik 
Ekelund (Harvill Secker, £18.99) 
Dear Karl, the mood in Brazil is very sombre after they were dismantled 7-1 by 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
. It is as though the country has entered a period of national mourning. By the 
way, I have to take issue with you when you say Argentina totally outclassed 
Belgium in the quarter-finals. How can1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/05/argentina-belgium-world-cup-2014-quarter-final-match-report>
 be a thrashing?

Dear Fredrik, you get to the heart of why I am a bestselling writer who has 
been translated into many languages and you are not. My friend, you have not 
yet learned the art of making money out of contrarianism. Goals ruin football! 
My ideal game is one where two sides are still locked at 0-0 after 24 hours 
with more than half the players on both sides having died of exhaustion. By 
such a measure, a 1-0 win is totally outclassing the other team. Took the kids 
to the beach but it was full of nudists so we had to go straight back home.

Dear Karl, I watched the final with my friend Alonso in another favela. 
Germany were the better side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 but you must be disappointed Argentina lost. Won’t keep you, as I expect you 
have cigarettes to smoke.

Dear Fredrik, I slept through the final only to wake up and find I had 
sleep-typed another book. Not too sorry about the result as I remembered the 
pope is Argentinian and I wouldn’t have liked to entertain the possibility that 
religion had influenced the outcome. See you at the book launch.

Digested read, digested: Futility 0–1 Nihilism.
 