
Just for August, a random selection of registered, non-subscribing desktop 
readers of theFT.com <http://ft.com/> who had downloaded ad blocking software 
were met with an article missing a third of its words. How frustrating, 
maddening even … until you realise that a third roughly equates to the 
proportion of total digital earnings made up by ad revenue at the Financial 
Times. What an ingenuous way of illustrating the impact of ad blocking software 
on a publisher’s revenue and, consequently, content. The threat posed to 
publishers by ad blocking software is forcing many to think in a similarly 
lateral way.

According to the Interactive Advertising Bureau [IAB] UK’s Ad Blocking Report 
<http://www.iabuk.net/about/press/archive/iab-uk-reveals-latest-ad-blocking-behaviour>
, published in March, 22% of British adults online were found to be using ad 
blocking software, a rise from 18% in October 2015. And although publishers 
will be relieved after theEU said this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/31/mobile-phone-networks-should-not-block-adverts-says-eu>
 that plans by mobile phone operators to block adverts for customers across 
their networks breached net neutrality legislation, if the use of ad blockers 
grows the consequences could be dramatic.

Google’s former general manager of marketplace development, Ben Barokas, now 
CEO of Sourcepoint, which works with publishers to tackle the ad blocking 
challenge, believes the number of users deploying ad blocking software averages 
around 15%, but says some publishers are seeing upwards of 40% of their 
audience using ad blocking tools. “For premium publishers, with large 
audiences, the revenue risk is significant – an average ad block rate of 20% 
could result in a loss of several million dollars a month.”


From digital to print: the publishers bucking the online-only trend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jun/27/digital-print-publishers-swipe-net-a-porter>
Between 20 and 22% of the FT.com’s users are blocking advertising, and while 
Jon Slade, chief commercial officer at the Financial Times says the problem is 
not yet “material”, he is acutely aware of the future impact. “Our greatest 
concern is where we go in the next six to 12 months because we still have 
enough advertising to sell – just about – but if it continues to get a great 
deal worse and the industry doesn’t address the problems in the way it needs 
to, we can anticipate some serious problems down the line.”


The Financial Times is currently trialling four approaches aimed at reducing 
the number of users blocking ads. Arguably its most innovative experiment is to 
obscure a third of an article. Slade admits that while it is a little cheeky, 
it is intended to illustrate the necessary value exchange to readers. “This 
solution came up as one that raised a bit of a smile but also helped people to 
understand the impact and consequences. It was done in a thoughtful way and in 
keeping with the Financial Times brand, which can be witty. We think it is 
quite clever and will give us some good results.”


Another thoughtful approach is being undertaken by Forbes, which in December 
2015 started rewarding those who turned off their ad blocking software with an 
ad-light experience. This sees the removal of certain types of ads, including 
interstitial, auto-play and in-line video ads, to enhance the reader 
experience. Mark Howard, chief revenue officer at Forbes says, “It acknowledges 
that users have a choice and this approach respects that choice and gives them 
the ability to choose whether they want to support our content with viewing 
ads.”


Figures from February 2016 revealed that four million desktop visitors to 
Forbes – 42.3% of those asked – had either disabled their blockers or 
whitelisted Forbes.com since the trial began. This translated into the delivery 
of 63 million ad impressions that would have otherwise not been seen. “We 
started seeing users whitelist us immediately and, as we measured their site 
visits, we saw that the people participating in our ad light experience were 
consuming 40%–plus more page views and spending over 100% more time on the 
site,” says Howard.


Other publishers are acting to reduce their reliance on online advertising. 
For Car Throttle, billed as the “Lad Bible for petrol heads” – which reaches 
100 million car enthusiasts each month – the challenge is acute.Figures from 
the IAB 
<http://www.iabuk.net/about/press/archive/new-iab-uk-research-reveals-latest-ad-blocking-levels>
 in November 2015 show that ad blocking is more prevalent among men (23%) than 
women (13%) and the propensity to block ads decreases with age – from 35% of 
18- to 24-year-olds to 13% of people age 55 and over. “Ninety percent of our 
audience are millennial males so we’ve always known that our users are likely 
to be heavy users of ad blocking software (around 50% of all desktop users have 
ad blockers turned on),” says Adnan Ebrahim, chief executive of Car Throttle. 
“Our commercial strategy was formed with this very much in mind.”


Algorithms are more like puppies than monsters, they want to please you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jun/06/algorithms-more-puppies-than-monsters-please-you-natural-language-processing>
Car Throttle’s approach has been to embrace branded content campaigns, which 
now make up 80% of the site’s ad revenue. “It’s an effective way of being able 
to offer advertisers access to users without being dependent on ‘ad-blockable’ 
advertising.” It has run recent content campaigns with Nissan and Ford, 
creating and distributing content to its millennial car enthusiasts. “In the 
case of Nissan, the video we helped to distribute reached over 15 million 
people with 5.5m views, because the advertiser message becomes part of the 
content.”


The International Business Times (IBT) <http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/> is 
trialling “polite but firm” messaging such as “By having ads on our site, this 
ensures we can offer our content to you for free. Please turn off your ad 
blocker or whitelist us. Thanks in advance, the IBT team” to ad blocking users. 
But the organisation is also looking to spread its risk by exploring other 
revenue streams. IBT editor-in-chief John Crowley says the publisher is 
“devoting increasing focus to platforms like Facebook Live, where we see new 
revenue opportunities unaffected by ad blocking”. Facebook revealed in August 
that it was trialling an option for publishers to insert a short ad break in 
their Facebook Live videos.

Yet those publishers who take arguably the crudest solution to the problem and 
simply ban some readers from accessing content are also seeing results. In 
October 2015, 20% of daily financial site City A.M.’s desktopFirefox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/firefox> users were using ad blocking 
software. The finding prompted City A.M. to implement a ban against such 
readers – the first UK newspaper to do so – greeting them with blurred content 
overlaid with a message explaining that it relies on advertising to fund its 
journalism. It has proved a successful move. “Staggeringly, 65% of desktop 
users turn off their ad blockers when confronted with our polite message,” says 
Emma Haslett, digital editor at City A.M. “Objections have been fairly minimal.”

What works in the fight against ad blocking will depend on each publisher and 
its audience, but finding fitting ways to educate readers about the necessary 
value exchange is clearly a top priority.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 