
Siobhan Dowd had breast cancer. Her sister Denise was looking after her and 
one day, when the time seemed right, they had “the conversation”.

“It came up when I was doing some of her personal care,” says Denise, a 
retired district nurse. “That’s always a good time to talk to people, because 
it’s quite intimate. Out of the blue, she asked, ‘How do you feel about losing 
a sister?’ And because it was out of the blue I said, ‘Terrible’. I actually 
got quite upset. But she was very calm. She didn’t try to make it ‘all right’.”

That conversation, and the spirit in which it is conducted, can make all the 
difference to families facing a death.

“Often, we are frightened to talk about something we don’t think we can face,” 
Denise says. “Siobhan was terrifically brave to raise the subject with me. We 
talked about what death might be like. She said she thought it would be like 
before she was born – oblivion. But she didn’t make the conversation all about 
her. It was about me. She had a big heart.”

And this was just one of many similar conversations started by the late 
children’s author. Because the book Dowd started writing as she was dying has 
now been turned into a major film,A Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
, with exactly this kind of difficult dialogue at its heart.

Starring Liam Neeson, Felicity Jones and Sigourney Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver>, it’s exciting, sometimes 
funny, and features a stunning performance by the child actor Lewis MacDougall, 
whose own mother died a year before shooting began.

“When Siobhan was first unwell, my children were 12, 15 and 18,” Denise says. 
“At that time, they were asking questions like, ‘But she will get better, won’t 
she?’ And we hoped she would, at that time, so we could be quite positive. It 
was only a few months before she died that we spoke together as a family about 
the fact that it probably wasn’t going to be good news. It’s hard, the chipping 
away. A Macmillan nurse told me that with children as young as my youngest was 
then, you should only answer the questions they ask you. And gradually let them 
know that, no, she’s not going to get better.

“Adults sometimes find it harder to cope after a death. For children, it’s the 
impending doom, knowing that something terrible is going to happen. Something 
outside the scope of their experience. Siobhan was a very special auntie, and 
we’d been very open with our children about what was happening to her. But they 
were worried about the effect it would have on them, and on everybody around 
them – on me.

“Being with Siobhan at the end was terribly important for me. Then suddenly it 
stopped, and there was this void. Grief is a very lonely emotion. You can be 
surrounded by other people who are grieving. They can feel a similar pain, but 
can’t feel your pain. Sometimes it’s more intense and sometimes it recedes, and 
nobody’s at the same stage at the same time. But I have a close family, and two 
other sisters, Oona and Enda, and a terrific extended Irish family. The Irish 
are fantastic at dealing with death. They were on email, and on the phone. They 
were really good.”

The other thing Denise discussed with Siobhan was the book Siobhan had been 
commissioned to write. After the cancer spread, she was put on to drugs 
extracted from yew trees. She did well on these, for a time. “And she said, a 
lot of people want to write about their cancer, but I want to write about a yew 
tree …”

She came up with the outline for a book, focused on a lonely boy whose mother 
was dying. “She was so pleased she’d been asked to do it, and she had lots of 
good ideas,” her sister says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3006b20db65612a5b7d3118260fcedd12da49524%2F0_182_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20tell%20a%20child%20his%20mother%20is%20dying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20tell%20a%20child%20his%20mother%20is%20dying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3006b20db65612a5b7d3118260fcedd12da49524%2F0_182_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 The prizewinning children’s author Siobhan Dowd, who created the story for A 
Monster Calls before she died. Photograph: Random House 
After Siobhan died, aged 47, the editor who had commissioned the book received 
a manuscript from Dowd’s agent. It was short – the length of this article – 
with notes about what would follow. The boy had a name, Conor, and the tree 
would come to life to tell him stories.

The publisher and the agent decided to show this to another writer, Patrick 
Ness – like Dowd,a winner of the prestigious Carnegie medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/14/carnegie-patrick-ness>.

Ness read it with an open mind. “I thought, wow, there’s real power here,” he 
tells me. “And I started to get ideas. It was thrilling.”

He took on the project and the book he wrote, based on Dowd’s ideas, became a 
huge success. Published in 2011,A Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/07/monster-calls-patrick-ness-review>
 was hailed as outstanding and exceptional, and won the most prestigious 
children’s book awards. Ness wrote the screenplay himself for the director JA 
Bayona, whose films includeThe Impossible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/27/the-impossible-review>, and The 
Orphanage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/28/the-orphanage-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-kinderhorror>
.

Ness is often asked why he writes about dark subject matter for young people. 
“My answer is: you should read what teenagers write! They write much darker 
stories than any young adult author would be allowed to publish. I have no 
problem with that. And if they are thinking about these dark things then the 
immoral choice would be tonot address that. That would leave them to think 
about these things by themselves. When you talk truthfully about what’s dark, 
you are believed when you talk truthfully about hope and possibility.

“I’m in my 40s. At my age, if you’ve been paying any kind of attention, you 
realise what’s important: to allow somebody to be who they are, and share 
what’s bothering them, and give them a safe space to do it, and some love and 
support. That’s just being a decent human. But people don’t always know how to 
do that with someone like Conor, who’s 12 or 13.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F113ce8a13c4c9a6ab3f2c3907c8bd000dea003d1%2F1803_447_2393_2992%2F2393.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20tell%20a%20child%20his%20mother%20is%20dying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20tell%20a%20child%20his%20mother%20is%20dying%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmonster-calls-film-mum-friend-siobhan-dowd-boy-talking-tree-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F113ce8a13c4c9a6ab3f2c3907c8bd000dea003d1%2F1803_447_2393_2992%2F2393.jpg>
 Patrick Ness, who wrote the book A Monster Calls from Siobhan Dowd’s outline. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
“I don’t think anybody in the story is acting badly. They’re all being as 
loving as they can. There’s nobody to blame here. Conor’s a clever kid who has 
figured out 95% of the truth, and there’s another 5% that is causing him 
trouble. And that 5% is acknowledging that you can feel contradictory things, 
and live with that. There’s a huge amount of anger inside grief, particularly 
if you are young. So Conor is angry about what he’s going through. Angry at 
himself, and angry at his mother – even though he knows that’s unfair.”

Sigourney Weaver, who plays Conor’s grandmother, and Felicity Jones (his 
mother), prepared for the film by talking to people who had been through 
something similar. They talked to oncologists andMacmillan Cancer Support 
<https://www.macmillan.org.uk/>, and visited a hospice. But MacDougall, as 
Conor, had already lived through something like his character’s experience: an 
only child, he’d lost his own mother, Fiona, aged 53, in 2013 after a long 
illness.

“I’d read the book,” says MacDougall, now 14, “so I knew what was going to 
happen to Conor. I discussed it with my dad, and I was happy enough to do it.”

Towards the end of the film, Conor admits to wishing it was all over, that the 
uncertainty and unhappiness might just end. Speaking that kind of truth is 
never easy, says MacDougall. “I think everybody knows what the truth is. But 
it’s hard to be honest, even with yourself. What Conor struggles with is that 
nobody is telling him the truth. He doesn’t have anybody he can turn to, and 
the monster becomes that person.”

Played by Liam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson>, the 
monster tells stories that reflect obliquely on Conor’s troubles. “It’s 
important to have people around you who can help. Someone you can talk to. 
Being alone in tough situations is really not good.”

Did working on the film help MacDougall to see in a fresh light what he’d 
lived through himself?

“When I did lose my own mother, I was around Conor’s age, a bit younger. There 
were times before my mother passed, when she was in a bad way, when there was a 
possibility that she might not get through. And I remember vividly having 
conversations about it. I was very upset at the time. My dad told me, you know, 
‘Your mum might not get through this.’

“So having lived through something a bit like Conor’s experience was helpful – 
to know what he was going through in any particular moment. At other times, on 
set, it did affect me because it was a bit close to home.”

Days before O’Dowd died, she set up a trust. The proceeds of all her books – 
including A Monster Calls – go towards bringing the joy of reading to 
disadvantaged young people, including many who have lost a parent or sibling. I 
ask MacDougall if he has any advice for them.

“Not to feel that you …” he begins, then stops. “Let me think.” After a pause, 
he speaks again. “With me, I didn’t get to have some kinds of experiences I’d 
have wanted, like in average relationships. Like picking up from school. So I 
would say to people, don’t dwell on what you didn’t get to do, but cherish the 
things you did.

“Obviously, when somebody close to you has passed there’s always going to be a 
time of being upset about that, and mourning, and that’s perfectly normal. It’s 
in a way quite healthy. You should just know that it will pass and you will end 
up looking back fondly on the memories that you have.”

• A Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
 is in cinemas from New Year’s Day
 