
In summer 1984, Iain Harvey was in London’s Charlotte Mews, behind the offices 
of the animation companyTVC <http://www.imdb.com/company/co0103341/>. He was 
wondering how, in four years, he had gone from being finance director at 
publisher Hamish Hamilton and being interested in doing something with a 
remaindered children’s book, to being a film producer about to see David Bowie, 
his teenage pop hero, in his movie. “When he came, he was so modest and 
unshowy,” recalls Harvey. “I remember him talking about his Brixton days, quite 
naturally, when I’d said about seeing him at Brixton in the 70s. He was an 
absolute gem.”

A man with ice-blond hair walks into an unlit, gloomy attic, snow falling 
outside, dusty memories in his mind. He kneels down by a rocking-horse and 
tells us of his childhood, of holidays by the seaside, of winters returning 
home, of being around the fire, and of making snowmen. “One year, I made a 
really big snowman,” says Bowie, pulling a blue scarf out of a drawer; it is 
dotted with snowmen, green-hatted and coal-eyed. “He got me this scarf. You 
see,” he says tenderly, “he was a real snowman.”

For millions of us, Christmas TV wouldn’t be the same without the animated 
adaptation of Raymond Briggs’sThe Snowman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/snowman-8.html>, made in 1982. For those of 
us who remember Bowie’s introduction, where he frames himself as the boy who 
made and loved and lost a special friend, this dreamlike detail of the season 
takes on new poignancy now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D54MEWWIiIk8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D54MEWWIiIk8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D54MEWWIiIk8&media=>
 Watch David Bowie’s introduction to The Snowman 
Scour the Bowie books, however, and details of how he got involved prove hard 
to find. It’s not that he shied away from kids’ projects. He was a father 
before fame really hit, and he narratedProkofiev’s Peter and the Wolf  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kpoizq-jjxs>in 1977, saying he did it for his 
son, Duncan Jones. Nine years later, he introduced a generation of kids to 
frightwigs and latex in Jim Henson’sLabyrinth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2yd4em1I6M>. But The Snowman came during an 
odd period in Bowie’s creative life, when grownup film roles were taking him 
into darker, stranger places, while his 1983 album,Let’s Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/12/david-bowie-lets-dance>, and the 
Serious Moonlight Tour, took him to his international commercial peak.

Several members of The Snowman team remember Bowie well, though. His section 
was not part of the original film, which began with Briggs introducing his 
story to viewers. Bowie’s involvement came after the public had already seen 
and fallen in love with the film.

The story of The Snowman, like Bowie’s, is surprisingly slow-burning. First 
published in 1978, it sold well initially, but a second print run stalled. “We 
had a basement of 50,000 books, basically, until the film came out,” says 
Harvey, then at Hamish Hamilton, before he became executive producer of the 
film version. Producer John Coates, of TVC, took out an option on the book for 
a year in 1980, making an animated storyboard of it only when the year was 
nearly out. In March 1982, new TV network Channel 4 offered to fund the film, 
which was broadcast on Boxing Day that year,beginning with Briggs walking 
through a snowy field <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZE9KpobX9J8> near his 
rural Sussex home, the opening that was used for the first two years.

In January 1983, The Snowman was nominated for the Oscar for best animated 
short film, but it didn’t win. The growing popularity of home video pushed its 
appeal, though, and US networks became interested. However, they didn’t 
understand the appeal of Briggs’s introduction. “We didn’t realise that in the 
US programmes were sponsored, and to be sponsored you needed a big name,” 
Harvey says. Then along came Bowie.

Bowie first met a Snowman team member during its production in 1982: its 
soundtrack composer, Howard Blake, was simultaneously musical director ofThe 
Hunger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l9IDoAPC6Ps>, Tony Scott’s erotic 
vampire thriller, in which Bowie starred. “You couldn’t imagine two different 
films,” Blake says, laughing. He was having daily lunches with Bowie at the 
White Elephant in Mayfair, preparing him for his mimed cello scenes in The 
Hunger, where they “must have talked about the Snowman project”. Bowie was 
already a fan of Briggs’s nuclear war fable from that year,When the Wind Blows 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-the-wind-blows-2.html>, which TVC also 
had in development.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fhow-the-snowman-melted-david-bowies-heart-raymond-briggs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a77146037bd491e1ecab39d51978c43a3cf9eab%2F0_250_2576_1546%2F2576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20The%20Snowman%20melted%20David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fhow-the-snowman-melted-david-bowies-heart-raymond-briggs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20The%20Snowman%20melted%20David%20Bowie%E2%80%99s%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fhow-the-snowman-melted-david-bowies-heart-raymond-briggs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a77146037bd491e1ecab39d51978c43a3cf9eab%2F0_250_2576_1546%2F2576.jpg>
 A still from the film version of The Snowman. Photograph: TVC/Rex/Shutterstock 
By early 1984, Blake’s Snowman soundtrack was starting to sell well, driven by 
the songWalking in the Air <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xb-pX7sIjFY>. The 
US label CBS was also involved in the effort to take The Snowman to America.

“People such as Laurence Olivier and Julie Andrews were being suggested [for a 
new introduction], but the Americans were going, it must be a rock star,” Blake 
says. “‘Like Mick Jagger?’ I remember saying. And they were all, ‘That would be 
great!’” Blake talked to Coates about Bowie; the singer had already got in 
touch with Coates offering his services for When the Wind Blows. Harvey also 
had a connection to Bowie through Jeremy Isaacs, producer of the 
prisoner-of-war dramaMerry Christmas Mr Lawrence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7JTroFovUXw>, in which Bowie starred in 1983. 
“Jeremy said we should push our luck, although we were fairly nervous to do 
it,” Harvey remembers. “It quickly became clear Bowie was happy to do it.”

The script for the new introduction span off from Briggs’s original, which 
talked about a snowy day full of “light and silence”. Harvey doesn’t remember 
who adapted it for the film, but he thinks part of it might have been 
improvised. Briggs was also on-set on the day, not minding that his 
introduction was being superseded; he admits now that the story about a snowy 
day inspiring the book “was total rubbish, of course”. He never saw the results 
of Bowie’s work, but he has warm memories of meeting him.

“I remember us all lining up to shake his hand like he was the Queen,” Briggs 
says. “He was wearing these amazing pink shoes, and his face was wonderful to 
look at – those different-coloured eyes. A charming bloke.” Bowie shook 
Briggs’s hand firmly and said he liked his work; two years later, he 
contributed the title track to the film version of When the Wind Blows, 
releasing it as a single in June 1986 (he had intended to do the whole 
soundtrack, but under pressure from EMI to focus on the follow-up to 1984’s 
Tonight, he had to withdraw).

Snowman storyboard artist Joanna Harrison also animated Bowie for the video to 
the single <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLZgXm4EoHI>; she had been at TVC’s 
offices in London when Bowie came in to film. She was responsible for the chunk 
of The Snowman set in the North Pole, in which Father Christmas adds the name 
James to the tag on the present the boy receives there. It was the name of 
Harrison’s then-boyfriend, who became, and still is, her husband.

In summer 1984, they were dating. “James was a huge Bowie fan, and I’d taken 
his copy of Station to Station along to be signed, with a big, black 
felt-tipped pen. We were all hanging out in reception, desperately 
overexcited.” But then Bowie’s security arrived; only the top TVC team were 
allowed in. This was especially unfair, Harrison felt, as she had contributed 
something important to the singer’s scene: the hand-stitched green hats and 
coal eyes on the machine-knitted snowmen dotting Bowie’s blue scarf. There had 
actually been two scarves, she says. “Bernard Cribbins got the other [he 
recorded the audiobook], but he left his in the back of a taxi. We heard that 
Bowie gave his to his son.”

Another dreamlike detail remains with Harrison, too. On returning to work the 
day after filming, she discovered that Bowie had, after all, signed James’s 
copy of Station to Station with her felt-tip. After Bowie’s death, the couple 
dug it out, recalling a dusty old memory.

In the great array of Bowie’s work, a short introduction to a 26-minute 
animation isn’t one of the key pieces. It’s hardly Ziggy Stardust or Low. But 
it is proof of his willingness to work on the unlikeliest of projects, and the 
sprinkling of magic he could bring to them. It would have been easy for the 
massive star to overshadow The Snowman, but that wasn’t what happened. Instead, 
Harvey remembers a man “clever enough and modest enough not to take The Snowman 
away from what it was, which was this perfect little film, this timeless 
moment”.

The Snowman is being shown on Channel 4 on Christmas Eve at 4.45pm.
 