
Sixty years separate us from the birth of rock’n’roll – and slap bang in the 
middle of that is the event that marked rock’n’roll’s passage into 
respectability. The programme on sale atLive Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live-aid> called the event a “global 
jukebox”.

At its most effective, this is exactly what it was. No one puts money in a 
jukebox with the intention of playing a record they’ve never heard before, and 
the cleverest artists who performed that day realised this was no time to shift 
new product.

Given one song early in the day to rescue his flagging fortunes, Adam Ant sang 
his next single Vive Le Rock and effectively signed his own death warrant.Bryan 
Ferry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bryanferry> was similarly 
short-sighted, choosing to perform three songs out of his allotted four from 
his new Boys & Girls album (the other was his cover of Jealous Guy) over his 
most fondly remembered Roxy Music hits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549141526%2Fa03bd76a-8835-41bb-8fdb-5e19a72d7346-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Live%20Aid%20reinvented%20pop%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Live%20Aid%20reinvented%20pop%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549141526%2Fa03bd76a-8835-41bb-8fdb-5e19a72d7346-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Judicious choice of material ensured the albums of Freddie Mercury and Queen 
were topsellers after Live Aid. Photograph: Phil Dent/Redferns 
And, of course, at the other extreme, no one played it smarter than Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/queen>, who somehow managed to crowbar six 
hits into their 20-minute slot. This was no accident. As their drummer, Roger 
Taylor, said at the time: “It’ll make a pot of money for a wonderful cause, but 
make no mistake, we’re doing it for our own glory as well!”

The following week’s chart positions ratified their new status. Queen’s 
Greatest Hits, The Works and Mercury’s solo album Mr Bad Guy soared up the 
charts; the following summer they returned to Wembley for a headlining show of 
their own.

Before Live Aid, they wouldn’t have dared presume they could fill such a 
space, but the events of 13 July ushered in a new kind of mega-rock event in 
which there appeared to be no losers: television coverage helped drive sales; a 
generation of music fans raised on canonical rock artists had the disposable 
income to spend on these happenings; and the bands, benefiting from the extra 
coverage, got more and more popular. Ensuing shows by Simple Minds, Genesis, 
The Rolling Stones, Pink Floyd and U2 meant Wembley was being used almost as 
much for music as it was for sport.

By helping create a new superleague of rock stars, an event conceived purely 
to raise money for African famine victims ended up generating just as much 
revenue for the labels to whom the artists were signed. From the industry’s 
perspective, the timing was perfect. Compact disc players were becoming 
affordable and the format gave baby boomers the perfect excuse to forego new 
music in order to re-purchase albums by many of the artists who performed that 
day.

The music industry has been desperate to relive Live Aid - a major live pop 
event that reinforces the status of artists

With this in mind, it’s no surprise that, in the intervening years, the music 
industry has been desperate to relive Live Aid – a major live pop event, 
usually charitable, that reinforces the status of established artists and 
anoints a handful of new ones. Nelson Mandela’s 70th birthday, Freddie 
Mercury’s tribute concert, Live 8, Live Earth, Concert for Diana are all cases 
in point.

At the age of 60, rock’n’roll finds itself in a strange position. What was 
once countercultural has now inevitably become the status quo. No fixture on 
the calendar represents that delicate transition quite like Glastonbury. The 
festival which, according to the editor of fRoots magazine and inaugural 
attendee, Ian Anderson, started out as “just one stage, a bunch of hippies, 
with free milk handed out from the farm”, now caters to two audiences. Up in 
the Green Fields, it’s much the same as it always was: dozens of stages play 
host to troupes of bearded self-styled self-sustaining artists playing music 
whose commercial potential is as negligible as it was 40 years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549702391%2F53076514-ea93-4295-834d-9da66da77af8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Live%20Aid%20reinvented%20pop%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Live%20Aid%20reinvented%20pop%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F10%2F1436549702391%2F53076514-ea93-4295-834d-9da66da77af8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lionel Richie performs to crowds at Glastonbury and, thanks to the BBC, into 
the living rooms of middle England. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
On the main stage, where the BBC cameras are trained, it’s a different story. 
Lionel Richie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lionel-richie> is playing his 
hits to 200,000 people whose desire to experience a moment of musical 
togetherness radiates outwards into the sitting rooms of middle England, in the 
process giving Richie a No 1 album and further ratifying Glastonbury’s place in 
the cultural fabric of Britain. Without the paradigm shift set in action by 
Live Aid, it’s hard to imagine any of that happening.


 * This article was amended on 13 July 2015. The “f” was removed from fRoots 
magazine during the editing process. This has been corrected.
 