
 Back story

With the Nepal earthquake first anniversary and the world humanitarian summit 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> falling within a month of each 
other, Christian Aid spotted a window of opportunity. We wanted to raise 
awareness of our disaster-relief work in Nepal, as well as our commitment to 
listen to and learn from crisis-hit communities. We also wanted to show the 
wider humanitarian community and the public that we were dedicated to improving 
our emergency response.

The anatomy of a campaign: 'If men had periods' by WaterAid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/25/if-men-had-periods-wateraid-menstruation-sanitation>
When I was tasked with this brief, I was reminded of an American art project, 
In search of the truth <http://www.insearchofthetruth.net/>. The team behind 
the project placed an inflatable booth in the middle of Afghanistan. Inside the 
booth was an automated camera: local people were asked to speak to the camera 
and tell them the truth. Here was something engaging, intriguing – an idea 
worth stealing.

So earlier this year, Christian Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> converted an old Nepalese 
truck into a makeshift recording studio – think video diary room on wheels 
tearing around misty Nepalese hill terraces. Traveling from community to 
community, we invited people affected by the earthquake to step inside and tell 
us what they really thought about the aid the world gave. We asked them what 
the most and least useful aid was, and what they would need to help them 
survive a disaster in the future. More than 200 people took part and the 
results surprised us.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUh6WJ87a44&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUh6WJ87a44>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUh6WJ87a44&media=>
Aims

We wanted to make a film to help people understand that aid is complex and 
that needs vary from disaster to disaster. What might be appropriate for one 
culture and geographical space may not for another.

While used to aid trucks, the people were not used to aid agencies asking them 
for their opinion and were suspicious

By using the voices and opinions of people affected by disaster – and by 
providingsurvey statistics 
<http://www2.christianaid.org.uk/emergencies/nepal-earthquake/nepal-aftershocks-statistics>
 for a wider perspective – we set out to demonstrate that it does reach people 
who need it most. We also wanted to be open that mistakes do happen, but that 
the sector can learn from them by listening to communities and adjusting their 
response the next time disaster strikes.

From a personal perspective, I wanted to show real people with real 
personalities talking about the things they care about.

Strategy 

In order to capture attention we had to make a film that wasn’t just dominated 
by serious aid-and-accountability messaging, but that included a touch of 
humour and honesty. We chose an upbeat soundtrack – arguably a controversial 
choice when the world is looking back on a disaster that killed 9,000 people. 
We used local characters to add humour, and included unexpected responses to 
surprise viewers (“some people ate the washing powder”) and provoke questions. 
We wanted to portray the people who took part not as victims but as ordinary 
people. The film also had to be fast-paced, dynamic and short (three minutes), 
with text and subtitles to be suitable for social media.

The anatomy of a campaign: giving child marriage the finger, Plan UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/17/campaign-ngo-charity-marketing-child-marriage-plan>
Execution 

We hired a Nepalese production company and worked with colleagues in-country 
to run the project over a two-week period. We promoted the truck to villages 
with the help of our partner organisations on the ground, local radio, leaflet 
promotion and street entertainment. I spoke to the team from In Search of the 
Truth to get some advice. We used the video content to create the short film 
and a bespoke webpage:Nepal Aftershocks: the people’s truth about aid 
<http://www2.christianaid.org.uk/emergencies/nepal-earthquake/aftershocks>, 
which we disseminated on the earthquake’s one year anniversary and the world 
humanitarian summit.

Challenges

 Working in very basic and difficult terrain, coupled with equipment and 
technology problems, was challenging. People in the villages were wary of the 
truck at first. They were not used to aid agencies asking them for their 
opinion and were suspicious. But after one or two people stepped inside and 
word began to spread, people started queuing up to take part. We were also 
worried that some media outlets might pick up on the more negative feedback 
from community members and use it in isolation to promote their anti-aid 
agendas. Luckily that didn’t happen. One of the biggest challenges in terms of 
promoting the film to the general public was whether or not the world 
humanitarian summit would have an impact outside the sector.


My advice to anyone running this kind of project in the future would be to 
make sure you have access to, and the support of, respected contacts in the 
communities you visit and to promote the event in advance and on the day. Make 
sure marketing materials and the questions you ask translate culturally. Do 
some testing first. Make sure people in the community understand what you are 
doing and what is required of them. Make any technology very simple and easy 
for participants to use so it doesn’t require sophisticated maintenance in 
rural environments.

People are surprised but impressed that an NGO would produce a film that is 
self-critical
Dipankar Patnaik 
Results

We’ve had great feedback from other NGOs and colleagues in the humanitarian 
sector, includingBond <https://www.bond.org.uk/> and ACT Alliance 
<http://actalliance.org/>, and ITV News, Channel 5 News and Thomson Reuters 
highlighted the project. One large and well-known charity has requested the 
methodology so that they can use it in their accountability work. The film was 
shown at a side event at the world humanitarian summit and has been viewed 
thousands of times online and through social media networks. Kathmandu-based 
colleagues aired the film at theAssociation of international NGOs – Nepal 
<http://www.ain.org.np/> on the anniversary of the quake and told us the 
reaction was positive. “People are surprised but impressed that an NGO would 
produce a film that is self-critical,” said Dipankar Patnaik, our senior 
emergency programme manager for Nepal.

The anatomy of a campaign: tax justice, ActionAid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/07/the-anatomy-of-a-campaign-tax-justice-actionaid>
It’s difficult to make an engaging film about aid effectiveness and 
accountability but I am proud that the information we collected will be used to 
help inform Christian Aid’s disaster response in the future. Our colleagues in 
Nepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal> are already combining the data 
from the truck with GPS data that shows where aid has been delivered to 
accurately target the most vulnerable communities.

Emma Wigley is multimedia communications manager at Christian Aid. Follow 
@Emma_Wigley <https://twitter.com/Emma_Wigley>on Twitter.
 <https://twitter.com/Emma_Wigley>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 