
As the centennial celebration of Copa America comes to a close on Sunday 
evening, much of the rhetoric will undoubtedly focus on what happens on the 
field. The final – Chile againstArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina>, la Roja facing Lionel Messi’s 
Albiceleste – should be a fantastic battle, a highly intense affair between two 
giants of South American fútbol. This, however, is not a tactical examination 
of the game neither is it a commentary on how they got here. If you’re looking 
for that, not to worry, my much smarter colleague, Jonathan Wilson can help out 
with his big-game preview on Sunday.

Chile beat Colombia after long weather delay to set up final with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/chile-colombia-copa-america-weather-delay-storms-chicago>
Consider this post an expression of gratitude to the Copa América fans – most 
notably, the Latinos who, aside from rooting for their teams in large numbers,
both at the game 
<http://www.goal.com/en-us/news/587/copa-america/2016/06/16/24716412/copa-america-quarterfinals-between-mexico-and-chile-colombia-and->
 orat home 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/soccer/la-sp-copa-us-argentina-tv-ratings-20160622-snap-story.html>
, have turned this event into a harmonious experience. Therefore, this is an 
expression of gratitude, and a unique opportunity to say: thank you, Latinos.

Thank you, immigrants, children of immigrants, and Hispanos from across the 
Americas, for showing the footballing world how to celebrate and how to treat 
each other: with tolerance, with respect, with dignity.

Sure, there were some isolated issues of fan misbehavior 
<http://www.goal.com/en-us/news/587/copa-america/2016/06/06/24350512/fans-fighting-cups-flying-and-fun-football-copa-america>
, andticket pricing, mixed with inconsistent attendance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/20/copa-america-expensive-tickets-television-ratings>
, was a topic of conversation throughout, but this is about the collective 
behavior from the thousands of fans who were at the games and what we witnessed 
throughout the Centenario. As another soccer tournament across the Atlantic 
deals with high levels of violence and hooliganism by supporters of various 
nationalities, we tried to show a different side.

“I took my oldest son, Alejandro, to MetLife Stadium for Peru v Colombia,” 
said Mauricio Izurieta, who lives in New York City 
<https://www.instagram.com/nuestracopa/> with his wife and two sons. “The truth 
is that the atmosphere was incredible: 8o,000 people, and everyone got along. 
I’m always wary of taking him to a big game with large crowds but the fans were 
so great, the mood was so welcoming.”

I was also at the game: Izurieta is not exaggerating. My wife and I were 
present to root for Peru, but we sat in the middle of a Colombian ocean, 
surrounded by golden yellow jerseys cheering for their belovedCafeteros. Can I 
tell you something? Not only did we all get along, throughout the evening, but 
by the end of an emotional game – after enduring a tense penalty shoot-out that 
Peru lost in heartbreaking fashion – we left our seats and searched for 
consolation when a gigantic Colombian fan wearing his flag like a ceremonial 
cape and drunk with jubilation, grabbed my hand and said: “No es el final del 
camino, hermano. Debes estar orgulloso.” (“This is not the end of the road, 
brother. You must be proud.”)

After leaving the ground, I walked and witnessed 
<https://twitter.com/lmechegaray/status/743998514007543811> thousands of 
Colombian and Peruvian fans walking in complete harmony, as if we had just 
finished a seance. As a soccer fan who has been attending games for more than 
30 years, it was one of the most memorable experiences I haver been a part of.

This may all seem terribly nostalgic, but the truth is at this very moment, 
Latinos in America are facing enormous prejudice from various corners of the 
country. At a time when we are constantly marginalizedfor being rapists, 
criminals, drug dealers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/26/donald-trump-latino-hispanic-immigrants-citizenship-voting>
 or job stealers, where only a wall can secure the safety of the “real 
America,” we demonstrated, through soccer, the meaning of unity.As the Hispanic 
population continues to grow faster than any other demographic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/18/latinos-donald-trump-voter-registration-swing-states>
 in the US, it’s imperative that we keep helping the nation – and indeed the 
world – by flipping the script on who we are as a community. It’s a damn shame 
Mr Trump is not a soccer fan. Maybe him and Ms Coulter can take a well-earned 
break and come to the final. I’ll see what I can do.

This tournament was a festival of the beautiful game, but it was also a window 
into the souls and hearts of Latinos everywhere. So with that being said, 
gracias mi gente. Thank you for laying the canvas where we can paint a new 
picture and maybe, just maybe, begin to tell a different story.

One that’s ours. 

 