
Despite deciding not to back Donald Trump financially with ads during the 
presidential election, the sprawling donor and advocacy network led by the 
multibillionaireKoch brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/koch-brothers> is emerging as a winner in 
the transition.

Longtime ally Mike Pence is leading the transition team, and several veteran 
Koch network donors, operatives and political allies are poised to join the
Trump administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> 
when the new president takes office in January.

Trump's billionaire cabinet could be the wealthiest administration ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
While Charles Koch and some network officials had tough words for Trump for 
some of his incendiary campaign rhetoric and positions this year, several 
mega-donors who back Koch-linked advocacy groups poured millions into Super 
Pacs and other fundraising efforts to boost Trump, and some of these donors 
have not been shy about flexing their muscles during the transition.

The Koch network, which says it spent about $250m this election cycle on 
politics and policy efforts, comprises several hundred donors who help 
underwrite numerous free-market, small-government advocacy groups. The network 
is spearheaded by Charles and David Koch, the libertarian-leaning brothers who 
control the $115bn-a-year energy and industrial behemoth Koch Industries.

Several Koch network donors who backed Trump, such as Robert Mercer, Joe 
Craft, Doug Deason, Harold Hamm, Diane Hendricks and Stan Hubbard, have reason 
to be pleased that his early cabinet picks align with their views on expanding 
fossil fuels, spurring charter schools, repealing and replacing Obamacare, and 
slashing government regulations and taxes.


One of Trump’s early cabinet selections, for instance, was Betsy DeVos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>
 as education secretary: DeVos is part of a multibillionaire family that have 
long been hefty donors to advocacy groups linked to the Kochs and championed 
charter schools and school choice, both popular causes in Koch world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874365faf1a0722f4ec57ac4844df0841674209b%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20network%20led%20by%20the%20billionaire%20Koch%20brothers%20is%20riding%20the%20Trump%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20network%20led%20by%20the%20billionaire%20Koch%20brothers%20is%20riding%20the%20Trump%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874365faf1a0722f4ec57ac4844df0841674209b%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 David Koch and his brother Charles control the $115bn-a-year energy and 
industrial behemoth Koch Industries. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
Further, Trump’s key energy adviser for months has been fracking 
multibillionaire Hamm, who has been mentioned as a potential energy secretary. 
While Hamm is expected to keep running his oil and natural gas company 
Continental Resources, two transition sources say he has pushed for Oklahoma 
governor Mary Fallin to be named interior secretary, and the state’s attorney 
general Scott Pruitt to run the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which he 
has sued to block climate change curbs.

Rebekah Mercer, the daughter of billionaire hedge fund executive Robert 
Mercer, who ploughed $2m into a pro-Trump Super Pac that she ran, is on the 
transition’s executive committee. Mercer has talked with chief White House 
strategist Stephen Bannon about having an outside group hire the big data firm 
Cambridge Analytica, which her father is a key investor in and Bannon sits on 
the board of, for messaging and communications drives to boost administration 
goals,according to a digital strategist familiar with the firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-cambridge-analytica-steve-bannon>
.

“I think most of the network is pretty pleased” with the cabinet selections to 
date, said Texas investor Doug Deason who, in tandem with his billionaire 
father Darwin Deason, poured almost $1m into the Republican National Committee 
to help Trump and other GOP candidates. “They’re pleased Trump has softened his 
rhetoric.”

Deason, who said he is “passionate about school choice”, also said that he 
spoke to Pence for a half hour around Thanksgiving – and then followed up with 
texts – to tout Rudy Giuliani for secretary of state and, as Hamm did, Pruitt 
to head the EPA. Giuliani is a partner of Deason’s at Giuliani Deason Capital 
Interests, a private equity firm.

The early moves by Trump and his transition team have also pleased Hubbard, a 
billionaire media owner. “I’m feeling a lot better about him than I did 
earlier,” Hubbard told the Guardian. “Trump’s picked good people for his 
cabinet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9466bab8dfd9db0649a7adc4ec18c3c8c6cd77ee%2F113_769_6904_4143%2F6904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20network%20led%20by%20the%20billionaire%20Koch%20brothers%20is%20riding%20the%20Trump%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20network%20led%20by%20the%20billionaire%20Koch%20brothers%20is%20riding%20the%20Trump%20wave&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fdonald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9466bab8dfd9db0649a7adc4ec18c3c8c6cd77ee%2F113_769_6904_4143%2F6904.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s selection for education secretary, Betsy DeVos, is part of a 
multibillionaire family that have long been hefty donors to advocacy groups 
linked to the Kochs. Photograph: Press via/REX/Shutterstock 
Hubbard and other donors are also betting that Pence, who some Koch network 
donors once hoped might lead the GOP ticket, will be a powerful force in the 
administration. “My guess is that Pence will be a lot more active than most 
vice-presidents,” said Hubbard.

It's Trump's America now. Time to get over our attachment to facts | Richard 
Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/03/donald-trump-facts-lies-trumpism>
Besides overseeing the transition, Pence has been working closely with House 
speaker Paul Ryan, whom he served with in the House before he was Indiana 
governor, to coordinate plans for Obamacare’s repeal, a hugely controversial 
and risky effort, but a top priority for the Koch network and many Republicans.

Still the Koch network, which spent $42m on ads to help GOP Senate candidates, 
is expected to have some dust-ups with the Trump administration: Trump’s 
protectionist trade stances and some of his policy goals, such as a massive 
infrastructure spending program, pose potential conflicts with Koch world’s 
free-market views.

But Koch network officials sound cautiously upbeat about the incoming Trump 
administration. “We are encouraged by the Trump administration’s stated 
commitment to reduce corporate tax and regulatory burdens and make America more 
competitive,” James Davis of Freedom Partners, the network’s financial hub, 
said in an email. Davis added that the network would “try to find areas to work 
together” with the new administration.
 