
This was the year when the news became a headache to liberals everywhere, 
revealing that we had consistently backed the wrong horse, and great fears and 
tensions were being felt thatled people to vote for politics of division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/welcome-age-anger-brexit-trump>
. In the weeks after Donald Trump’s election as president of the United States, 
we have seen a strengthening of reactionary politics, withdemagogues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/demagogues-and-cheats-un-human-rights-chief-condemns-trump-and-wilders>
 and fascists feeling empowered by the decisions that have gone their way. We 
have also seen a certain element of the leftwing seek to blame itself for 
having alienated ordinary folk. This last sentiment is visible in several films 
that came out in 2016: works with ostensibly right-on politics that 
nevertheless betrayed a queasiness towards the modern world, towards minorities 
and women; films in which a fear of a new world order is palpable.

A Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/a-bigger-splash-review-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-luca-guadagnino>

Luca Guadagnino set the tone towards the start of the year, when this 
apparently juicy psychological thriller lurched into a wrong-headed and iffy 
discussion of the refugee crisis.In the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/a-bigger-splash-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-review-mark-kermode>
, a singer and her boyfriend (Tilda Swinton and Matthias Schoenaerts) welcome 
her flamboyant ex (Ralph Fiennes) and his young daughter (Dakota Johnson); the 
sexual tension flares between these rich, beautiful people holidaying off the 
coast of – wait for it – Sicily. The film revels in the glamour of its 
characters and in their easy beauty, unironically projecting them as stars 
wherever they go (witness a karaoke scene in which a whole village flocks to 
see Fiennes showboat in a tiny bar). So, when catastrophe strikes and one of 
the main characters seeks to blame it on the refugee population, it doesn’t 
ring as Guadagnino satirising his characters’ vanity so much as shoehorning in 
a deeply serious and difficult issue to confect some gravitas. No refugees are 
named, they are only briefly alluded to, and the disastrous events of the last 
two years are used as a mere narrative crutch. It’s a move that betrays an 
uneasy sense that film should be addressing the political topics of the day, 
but in a film that has no idea with what language to do so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
A Bigger Splash: exclusive clip featuring Ralph Fiennes and Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/28/a-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-review-absolutely-fatuous-thank-god>

A similar helplessness inhabits the hapless Absolutely Fabulous film, which 
seemed to quake with an almost adorable – were it not so totally misguided – 
sense that it needed to say something about the “trans question”. The film 
didn’t, in fact, need to talk about it, and what it had to say was foolish when 
it wasn’t outright hateful. The most egregiously offensive moment came when a 
character was revealed as being coerced into transitioning, prompting a 
staggering moment when he is interrogated about whenit is going to be cut off. 
From there, the film rampages wildly through questions of gender, making Patsy 
drag up and having her tasered when a flight attendant mistakes her for a trans 
man. The film traduced not only Patsy and Eddie’s discombobulation about the 
modern world (which is what the audience was there to lap up), but an almost 
seething misunderstanding of contemporary gender politics on the part of its 
creators.

Bridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/bridget-joness-baby-review-reborn-renee-zellweger-excels-in-fun-romp-heavy-with-expectation>

If A Bigger Splash <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash> and 
Absolutely Fabulous hinged on very particular phobias, the new Bridget Jones 
movie was hilariously prone to fear and confusion about just about everything. 
Internet dating? A terrifying romance-free vortex of cynical narcissism. Sex? 
An act between a man and a woman, with the purpose of making a baby. The 
Bridget Jones movies have always had a conservative bent (essentially being 
Jane Austen adaptations set in a white version of modern London), but the new 
film goes a little further, with a bizarre scene in which Bridget flees an 
amniocentesis needle, thereby refusing to check her foetus for chromosomal 
abnormalities. To each woman her choice, but the film makes a big hoopla of 
mining discomfort and laughs out of this routine procedure, with the clear 
message being that it is unnatural. The whole film takes against science in 
general, mocking the modern world’s attraction to technology – and Bridget 
eventually finds out the identity of the father of the baby the old-fashioned 
way, by falling in love with him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-cinema-failed-diversity-in-2016-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-bridget-jones-baby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F732389bdbdcf4dfad1a7bf9f85c61c979ff3d63b%2F94_82_698_419%2F698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20cinema%20failed%20diversity%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-cinema-failed-diversity-in-2016-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-bridget-jones-baby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20cinema%20failed%20diversity%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-cinema-failed-diversity-in-2016-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-bridget-jones-baby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F732389bdbdcf4dfad1a7bf9f85c61c979ff3d63b%2F94_82_698_419%2F698.jpg>
 Colin Firth, Renée Zellweger and Patrick Dempsey in Bridget Jones’s Baby 
Paterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/paterson-review-adam-driver-jim-jarmusch>

Part of the reason Bridget felt so antiquated and fusty is that films this 
year were looking back to a romanticised past – the 1990s and the Regency – to 
justify the idea of “the one” and the true romance of marriage. A few films 
this year put on similarly rose-tinted glasses to consider the olden days, 
chief among them Paterson, which harked back to a mythical era of American 
poetry. Its ex-military hero, with his supportive housebound wife giving him 
free rein to incarnate the true writer’s authentic calling, writes Wallace 
Stevens-style poetry in the year 2016 and lives without a mobile phone. Jim 
Jarmusch’s unease at a fast, connected world is telling, and finds its 
resolution in its consideration of Paterson’s titular hero, who stands as a 
true male, a zen man of letters, a sort of John Clare of New Jersey.

Everybody Wants Some!! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/everybody-wants-some-review-richard-linklaters-sports-jock-comedy-is-a-winner>

This is the biggest political failure of the year: a film which can only have 
been made byRichard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/30/richard-linklater-film-director-murderer-lodger-simon-hattenstone>
 as a bet that he could flunk the Bechdel test. Set on a university campus in 
1980s Texas – a halcyon era mercifully free of safe spaces — Everybody Wants 
Some!! chooses to tell the story of gender politics from the point of view of a 
bunch of baseball-playing bros. Blind nostalgia is the order of the day, as 
this #notallmen mess finds a way to look with fondness upon these violent, 
sexist men – in the process denying women speech and agency. It becomes almost 
a game for the characters to work out in what way Linklater, freed at last from 
having to let Julie Delpy write a character for herself, will next prevent a 
woman from talking. There are scenes where women are asked questions and don’t 
reply, merely smiling and nodding. In one scene, a self-professed feminist gets 
her comeuppance by being seduced by the most grotesque of all the students.

Linklater’s amiable fondness for the dinosaurs at the heart of his film 
extends to sanitising their world, so that hazing is fun, homophobia is all but 
absent and one can only imagine that, once they’ve bedded the skirt they spend 
the entire film chasing, these guys are the kings of asking for consent. It is 
not possible to have followed events on American campuses in recent years and 
be blind to the terrible practises in male societies; yet Linklater persists 
with his oddly tone-deaf celebration of these jocks. In a scene that shows to 
what extent he is with these guys, he films a man whose prowess as a baseball 
hitter enables him to cut a ball in half mid-flight with an axe. Lovingly 
filmed in slow motion, this scene shows that he has no distance from his 
subject, and that what element of smiling satire his film can muster is 
completely insufficient.Everybody Wants Some!! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/everybody-wants-some--> is Trump’s America 
writ large: a sexist and macho look at a completely imagined past, in which 
things were great – for straight white men.
 