
Saturday 11 June, 11.08pm

Christopher Hansen had just watched a horror movie, The Conjuring 2, based on 
a true story from 1977 about a family in Enfield, north London. “It’s scary,” 
he said. He also went shopping for a “really cute outfit” to wear that night, 
for his first visit to one of Orlando’s most popular gay nightclubs, Pulse.

Orlando attack victims: the lives cut short in America's deadliest shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jun/13/orlando-terror-attack-victims-pulse-nightclub>
Hansen, an unemployed 32-year-old, drove to the club with a friend, aiming to 
arrive before 11pm so entry would be free, he told the Guardian. He used valet 
parking, got to the entrance and checked the time. It was 11.08pm. “I said, 
‘come on, it’s 11.08!’ But they said, ‘$10 please’.”

Inside he discovered it was Latin night, a delirious mix of bachata, 
reggaeton, merengue and salsa. Many patrons were of Puerto Rican descent.

“We were dancing with people from all walks of life,” Hansen said. “Gay and 
straight, brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers. There was a group of four 
women and they were saying things like, ‘Oh papi, look at you, you’ve got 
moves. White boy’s got moves!’ We were drinking and making friends of 
strangers.”

In the dance room, he recalled, there was Latin music. In the back room, used 
for performances and drag shows, there was a hip-hop soundtrack and 
provocatively dressed men and women. This was Pulse, co-founded in 2004 by 
Barbara Poma to honour her brother, John, who died from Aids in 1991. The name 
was “for John’s heartbeat”,its website said 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20151026132459/http://www.pulseorlandoclub.com/about-barbara-poma/>
.

Pulse had come be renowned locally as a place of freedom and self-expression, 
a compact, upscale venue with chandeliers, mirrors and waterfalls among gold 
and metallic tones. “Very chic,” said Kirk Hartlage, a restaurant manager who 
used to work there.

Three hours later, it would be awash in blood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17000060db8fcf14b69f73d57e685ac5c7d39e02%2F0_151_4422_2654%2F4422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17000060db8fcf14b69f73d57e685ac5c7d39e02%2F0_151_4422_2654%2F4422.jpg>
 Christopher Hansen, who was inside the Pulse nightclub during the massacre, in 
Orlando, Florida Monday. Photograph: Joe Burbank/AP 
Sunday 12 June, 12.30am

Hansen’s friend had gone home but he continued to party. Angel Santiago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-nightclub-attack-survivor-angel-santiago>
, 32, arrived with two friends. “We just were having a good time, dancing, 
talking, and toward the end of the night we moved toward the rear bar,” he 
later recalled, from his hospital bed.

2.02am

The club was calling last orders and preparing to close but an estimated 320 
people were still inside. Among them were Hansen, Santiago, Luis Burbano,
Patience Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/15/orlando-shooting-survivor-pulse-nightclub-hostage-interview>
, Janiel Gonzalez, Jeannette McCoy and Orlando Torres.

McCoy had her back to the entrance when Omar Mateen, a 29-year-old 
self-appointed lone warrior, walked in. He was carrying a Sig Sauer MCX rifle, 
a handgun and multiple rounds of ammunition.

“I’m seeing people getting hit, being killed in front of me,” McCoy, 37, a 
personal trainer,told the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-did-i-walk-away-alive-the-orlando-shooting-through-a-survivors-eyes/2016/06/13/786e4510-31a5-11e6-8ff7-7b6c1998b7a0_story.html>
. “I see the barrel, I see the gun, and you’re seeing the flicker of the 
bullets coming out. He didn’t say anything. He was just shooting … He came in 
with the intent of evil. It was him trying to kill every single person in that 
club.”

I didn’t even want to look back. To look at them, that would be the last 
memory I would have
Luis Burbano 
Burbano had just finished his last drink and signed his bill. “The DJ was 
playing a typical set that incorporated what we thought was gunshots as part of 
the music,” he said. “Four shots, pop, pop, pop, pop.

“By the time it got to 20 to 30 rounds we were already trying to exit the side 
exitway behind the stage. It was very narrow. There was about 20 to 30 people 
trying to push themselves through a very small door and there was a huge gaping 
hole in the fence that looked like people had punched it and kicked it down.

“We started to realise [the shots were] getting closer and louder and louder. 
There was about a 10-second break where we didn’t hear any more bullets going 
off and that’s when we made a jet for the door. I didn’t even want to look 
back. To look at them, that would be the last memory I would have. That’s 
something I didn’t want to remember.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16534c80bb9e4faec6f191bba8256b5e62a77434%2F0_78_2116_1270%2F2116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16534c80bb9e4faec6f191bba8256b5e62a77434%2F0_78_2116_1270%2F2116.jpg>
 Luis Burbano speaks during an interview with the Associated Press in Orlando, 
Florida, on Monday. Photograph: AP 
The sound of those first bursts of gunfire were captured on video by 
25-year-old Amanda Alvear, who uploaded the footage to Snapchat. She had been 
recording friends as they danced and turned the camera on herself as the first 
shots rang out. She did not appear to panic. Then the film stopped, without 
warning.

Amid the pandemonium were acts of great heroism. Imran Yousuf, 24, a bouncer 
and former marine who served in Afghanistan, saw people pouring into the back 
hallway. No one was calm enough to unlatch the exit door.

“Either we all stay there and we all die, or I could take the chance of 
getting shot and saving everyone else, and I jumped over to open that latch and 
we got everyone that we can out of there,”he told CBS News 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/war-veteran-imran-yousef-saves-dozens-during-orlando-nightclub-shooting-omar-mateen/>
, estimating that 60 or 70 people got out that way.

Edward Sotomayor Jr, known to his friends as Eddi, pushed his boyfriend to 
safety out of the door in front of him as he was himself shot in the back. 
Sotomayor, 34, died in hospital.

Blood was flying everywhere. The person next to me was shot. … I knew I would 
be like a domino in the line of fire
Christopher Hansen 
Hansen was at the bar. “The shooter came in through the front door and was 
shooting at the dancefloor and the bar,” he recalled. “Bang, bang, bang! People 
were screaming. Blood was flying everywhere. The person next to me was shot. 
When he fell, I fell: I knew I would be like a domino in the line of fire. My 
dad was in the army and had always taught us about safety.”

As bullets flew and ricocheted, split-second decisions – to drop, to hide, to 
run, to stand still – would make the difference between life and death. Hansen 
started crawling towards the club’s outdoor patio.

“I stopped for a second: should I go to the bathroom and hide? No. I just knew 
in a situation like this, if I locked myself in the bathroom, I couldn’t 
imagine trying to get out.”

Instinct served him well. Hansen reached the patio and, with others, pushed 
over a fence. He then ran in a zigzag to avoid being shot from behind. He came 
across a man called Carlos carrying another man called Junior, who was bleeding 
heavily. He put Junior’s arm over his shoulder to help.

“I took my bandana off and I put it in a knot and shoved it in his bullet hole 
in his back.”

Junior had been shot twice. He survived. Hansen, wearing a stars and stripes 
T-shirt, talked to another injured woman, to keep her conscious.

“Everyone’s calling me a hero,” he said, “but I’m just someone who happened to 
be there and was able to help.”

Santiago, Gonzales and Torres all decided to hit the ground when the shooting 
began. Santiago said: “My initial thoughts were maybe there was an altercation, 
it was personal, so stay to the ground until it’s over.”

Gonzalez told ABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/orlando-shooting-hero-saves-life-wounded-pulse-bartender/story?id=39812071>
: “I just remember ducking to the floor and telling myself, ‘This is it. This 
is how I die. This is the end of me.’ I remember praying on the floor and 
asking God, ‘Help me. Help me get through this right now.’ It was insane. 
Literally like a scene straight out of a movie.”

Gonzalez hid behind a bar until he was able to flee. 

“I found the courage within myself to just get up and be like, ‘This is not 
how you’re going to die. You’re going to live. You’re going to be able to 
survive this. We need to come up with a plan. I remember running and not even 
looking back, just running, running, running, running to the first [lit] 
building that I saw, which was a 7-Eleven.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56ec901decde5ebd53368f5acb999af1fd96ba08%2F0_240_5028_3018%2F5028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56ec901decde5ebd53368f5acb999af1fd96ba08%2F0_240_5028_3018%2F5028.jpg>
 News and police vehicles line the street next to Pulse nightclub Thursday in 
Orlando, Florida. Photograph: David Goldman/AP 
Torres, a Puerto Rican born in New York who worked as a Latin promoter of 
Pulse, had gone with a female friend to the back of the building, as she wanted 
to use the bathroom. That was when he heard a popping sound.

“That doesn’t sound right,” his friend said.

The sound became louder: pop, pop, pop, pop. Torres, trained as an auxiliary 
police officer in New York City, got his friend to squat with him on top of the 
toilet seat. “I was thinking if the shooter comes in here he will see our feet 
and will know we’re in the stall so we must keep our feet up and keep quiet.”

Adam Gruler, an off-duty Orlando city police officer who was working security 
at Pulse that night, began to exchange fire with Mateen. Realising he was 
outgunned, he called for back-up. He had only a service revolver; Mateen had an 
assault-style rifle and a Glock machine pistol.

Gruler and the next two officers to arrive on scene, Swat team members Scott 
Smith and Jeffrey Backhaus, went straight into the club and secured a large 
area where the first victims had been gunned down, so the injured could be 
evacuated to the hospital. They were unable to neutralise Mateen, however. He 
withdrew into the bathrooms, taking a number of hostages with him.

In such a situation, hostages are not really hostages, said Ron Borsch, a 
well-known protocol trainer from Ohio. Instead, they are “temporarily alive 
murder victims”. On the other hand, Mateen’s retreat to the bathrooms suggested 
someone who might not have been quite so ruthless.

“It seems like he was caring a little much about himself,” Borsch said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead7018a4c290ae4c53a803c96fc8ecfe7981ec0%2F0_143_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead7018a4c290ae4c53a803c96fc8ecfe7981ec0%2F0_143_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Orlando Torres, 53, is flanked by friends during a prayer vigil for victims of 
the mass shooting, at Joy Metropolitan Community church in Orlando on Sunday. 
Photograph: Doug Clifford/AP 
2.05am

For many who prayed the bathroom would provide refuge, it became a death trap. 
Mateen entered, barricaded himself in and carried on firing, reportedly 
laughing as he kept pulling the trigger.

According to Carter, 20, now recovering in the hospital, there was a 
bloodsoaked melee of scrambling, screaming “at the top of our lungs” and random 
death. Then silence.

“There was a moment where he stopped shooting in the bathroom and that’s when 
everyone looked around and that’s when I first realised that my leg was shot,” 
Carter said.

Orlando shooting: funerals for victims begin as city continues to grieve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/17/funerals-orlando-victims-pulse-nightclub-fbi-investigation>
“At that point this is when we knew this wasn’t a game. This was real and this 
was something that was really happening to us right now. It was a shock. We 
went from having the time of our lives to the worst night of our lives all 
within a matter of minutes.”

Santiago and his friend were cowering in a handicapped toilet cubicle with 
about 15 or 20 other clubgoers. Santiago dropped the ground and tried to hide 
under the sink, though he knew it would offer scant protection. He began to 
realise this was more than an altercation between two people. Much more.

“I just kept hearing gunfire over and over and over again,” he said. “They 
kept getting louder, closer, and I could actually start to smell – I don’t 
know, I guess it’s gunpowder, I’m not sure. It kind of smells like when 
firecrackers go off.

“We were all trying to be as quiet as possible. We didn’t want to attract 
attention. But the gunfire kept getting closer and closer and at one point 
everyone’s just like, ‘Shhh, shhh, be quiet, be quiet,’ and that’s when bullets 
start coming through the stall wall towards us.”

I could see other people just piled behind me – just blood. Some were dead and 
some were just moaning in, like, pain
Patience Carter 
Santiago was hit in his left foot and right knee. His friend was more 
seriously wounded. Young people were cut down and killed in front of their 
eyes. For the surviving hostages, the ordeal was just beginning. In the 
claustrophobia of the crowded bathroom, they did not know if the mundane sounds 
of Mateen using a wash basin and hand dryer would be the last they ever heard.

Carter said: “I could see piles of bodies laying over the toilet seat, and 
slumped over, and the bottom of the toilet was just covered in handprints in 
blood. When I looked back the other way, I could see other people just piled 
behind me – just blood. Some were dead and some were just moaning in, like, 
pain. I looked across and I could see my best friend on the floor, Akyra, just 
looking lifeless.

“At that point, I was just like I really don’t think I am going to get out of 
here. You know, I made peace with God, within myself, I said: ‘You know, God, 
if this is time, if this is my time to go, if this is how I have to go, just 
please take me. I don’t want any more shots.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fpulse-nightclub-shooting-survivor-hostage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Survivor%20describes%20being%20held%20hostage%20during%20Orlando%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fpulse-nightclub-shooting-survivor-hostage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Survivor%20describes%20being%20held%20hostage%20during%20Orlando%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fpulse-nightclub-shooting-survivor-hostage-video&media=>
Patience Carter describes being held hostage during Orlando shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/15/pulse-nightclub-shooting-survivor-hostage-video>
2.06am

Mina Justice was asleep at home when she woken by a text message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/hes-coming-im-gonna-die-sons-text-to-mother-reveals-orlando-shooting-terror>
 from her 30-year-old son, Eddie. “Mommy I love you,” it said. “In club they 
shooting.”

Mina tried calling but there was no response. Worried and drowsy, she wrote 
back: “U ok”.

At 2.07am, Eddie wrote: “Trapp in bathroom.” Mina asked what club. Eddie 
replied: “Pulse. Downtown. Call police.”

At 2.08am there was another, chilling message from Eddie. “I’m gonna die,” it 
said.

Now wide awake, Mina dialed 911. She sent a numerous texts: “I’m calling them 
now; U still in there; Answer our damn phone; call them. Call me.”

2.09am

Pulse staff posted a message on the club’s Facebook page: “Everyone get out of 
pulse and keep running.”

Soon injured survivors were pouring into Orlando regional medical center, just 
two blocks away. There were not enough ambulances so some came by pickup truck. 
Dr Chadwick Smith, the trauma surgeon on call, alerted colleagues: “This is not 
a drill, this is not a joke, you need to get here fast.”

2.22am

Manteen called the 911 emergency service and hung up, then called again and 
spoke briefly. A 911 dispatcher called back. During the calls, Manteen pledged 
allegiance to Islamic State andmade reference to the Boston Marathon bombers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/omar-mateen-fbi-boston-marathon-tsarnaev>
.

Torres recalled hearing Mateen talking to people in one of the other stalls, 
telling them not to use their phones. “He said please don’t text – that’s the 
exact words he used: ‘Please don’t text.’”

Then he heard the gunman on the phone to what Torres presumed to be the 
Orlando police department. “He said, ‘Tell America to stop bombing Isis in 
Syria.’ He repeated that. They were asking him questions but he didn’t want to 
answer. He got upset and hung up on them.”

One of the most puzzling aspects of what Torres heard as he remained as still 
as possible inside the bathroom stall came next. Mateen, he recalled, “got on 
the phone to someone he knew and said, ‘We are doing this already, it should be 
on the news already.’”

Strangely, the gunman referred in the course of the conversation to three 
others inside the club and called himself the “fourth gunman”.

“He mentioned some girl’s name,” Torres said, “saying she was inside the club 
with a bomb vest.”

Torres has no idea why Mateen would have told such a blatant lie, as there was 
no one else with him. It later became clear that killer did have a track record 
of making false statements, such as his claim to co-workers that he knew 
Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the brothers who carried out the 2013 Boston 
Marathon bombing.

He said, ‘Are any of you black in there? I have no problems with the black 
people'
Orlando Torres 
As his agonising wait for rescue continued, Torres overheard further strange 
exchanges. He recalls how the gunman confronted a group of people squashed for 
cover in one bathroom stall.

“He said, ‘Are any of you black in there? I have no problems with the black 
people.’”

Carter, herself African American, heard the same comments. She added: “So the 
motive was very clear to us who were laying in our own blood and other people’s 
blood, who were injured, who were shot. We knew what his motive was and that he 
wasn’t going to stop killing people until he was killed, until he felt like his 
message got out there.”

Looking back, Torres was struck by how calm the gunman sounded. “He just 
talked normal, in straight English,” he said. “He sounded to me like an 
American boy.”

At another point, the promoter could hear the gunman handling his firearms, 
and the sound of what he took to be ammunition falling on the floor. Throughout 
that time he kept resolutely still, by now lying on the floor, his head rammed 
against the toilet bowl.

“I was thinking I wasn’t going to make it out of here. I knew I wasn’t coming 
out of this, I just wasn’t. But the police strategy worked, thank God.”
 A photo of the interior if Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Florida, taken from 
their website. Photograph: http://www.pulseorlandoclub.com/ 
2.39am

Eddie Justice texted his mother: “Call them mommy. Now.”

He wrote that the killer was in the bathroom. “He’s coming. I’m gonna die.”

Justice asked her son if anyone was hurt and which bathroom he was in. At 
2.42am, he responded: “Lots. Yes.”

When he didn’t text back, she sent several more messages. Was he with police? 
“Text me please,” she wrote.

“No,” he wrote four minutes later. “Still here in bathroom. He has us. They 
need to come get us.”

2.45am

Manteen phoned News 13 Orlando and spoke to producer Matt Gentili, repeating 
his claim that he carried out the attack for Isis. Police had various 
commuications with Mateen. According to Orlando mayor Buddy Dyer, the gunman 
falsely claimed to have explosive vests, which he threatened to strap to four 
hostages and detonate.

2.49am

Mina Justice told her son the police were there and to let her know when he 
saw them. “Hurry,” Eddie wrote. “He’s in the bathroom with us.”

She asked, “Is the man in the bathroom wit u?”

At 2.50am: “He’s a terror.”

Then, a final text from Eddie a minute later: “Yes.”

He was killed.

3.29am

Orlando regional medical center personnel received an urgent message on their 
pagers: “Mass casualty is in effect due to active shooting more than 20 
traumas.”

3.58am

Orlando police tweeted: “Shooting at Pulse Nightclub on S Orange. Multiple 
injuries. Stay away from area.” Multiple emergency vehicles responded, 
including the Orlando fire department’s bomb squad and hazardous material team.

During the standoff with Mateen, police tried creating exit routes for the 
trapped clubbers. They tore a window air conditioning unit out, after hearing 
the thumping of fists coming from a dressing room on the other side. At least 
four people escaped that way.

4am

Dr Joshua Stephany, Orlando’s chief medical examiner, received a call of about 
a dozen casualties in the club. Shortly after, he learned that the body count 
had reached 20, then 30. Stephany and his staff headed towards Pulse.

4.15am

Orlando gunman searched for Facebook reaction during Pulse nightclub attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/orlando-attack-facebook-post-pulse-nightclub-shooting>
An initial reconstruction, based both on public statements by the Orlando 
authorities and on second-hand accounts of internal deliberations from a senior 
law enforcement official who has been briefed on them, suggests that the police 
brought the siege to an end approximately 45 minutes earlier than previously 
reported.

The county bomb squad set shape charges on the walls outside the bathrooms in 
which many surviving clubgoers were trapped. The plan was to provide those 
survivors with escape routes while also giving law enforcement an entry point.

The senior official described the decision to use explosive charges as “an 
extremely aggressive entry” and a decision “you don’t take lightly”. He said it 
was rare for most state or local law enforcement agencies to resort to such a 
tactic because they don’t generally have the expertise to perform the operation 
with confidence. In this case, the closest experts would probably have been at 
McDill air force base in Tampa, more than 80 miles away.

The charges failed to breach the walls, forcing the police to resort to plan 
B. They broke in with a battering ram: an armoured vehicle known as a Bearcat.

For those imprisoned inside, it was the moment of salvation. Torres recalled a 
loud explosion and the bathroom filling with dust. Within seconds members of 
the police Swat team had burst in. Torres was dragged up and virtually hurled 
through the hole in the wall, landing on the hard ground outside the club, 
grazing his arm and side. He was quickly taken toFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> hospital. Later on Sunday, he was 
released.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1470a636de8e04b1cfec0d55a3eef552cecb20d3%2F0_147_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1470a636de8e04b1cfec0d55a3eef552cecb20d3%2F0_147_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Angel Santiago speaks to the media from the Florida hospital on Tuesday in 
Orlando, Florida. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
Santiago, still on the ground in a pool of blood, said he heard the police 
arrive, yelling: “Drop it! Hands up!” Then he heard police chatter on a distant 
radio. Unable to walk, he dragged himself under the stall to exit it. He saw a 
body in front of the door on the opposite side. There was no one else. He 
dragged himself out of the bathroom towards the bar area and saw the face of a 
police officer.

Santiago waved the light of his cellphone so the officers could see him. They 
told him to lift his hands and drop whatever he was carrying. Santiago complied 
and dragged himself towards them. They grabbed him by the arms and took him 
outside, where he told them there were at least 15 people in the bathroom 
needing help.

[The police] asked me instructions on exactly where the bathroom was. After I 
told them, they put me in an ambulance
Angel Santiago 
“At that point they asked me instructions on exactly where the bathroom was,” 
he said. “After I told them, they put me in an ambulance.”

Police later issued photos showing a simple hole in a wall, about 4ft high and 
3ft wide.

“We were able to rescue dozens and dozens of people who came out of that hole,”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/pulse-nightclub-hole-wall-hostages>
the police chief, John Mina, said.

The police have given no indication whether any of those shot at the end of 
the ordeal were accidentally hit by their own bullets.

“The autopsy reports will tell us a great deal,” the senior law enforcement 
official said. “You can be sure this is going to be examined at the molecular 
level.”

Mateen himself came through the hole, still shooting. He hit Swat officer 
Michael Napolitano’s Kevlar helmet, directly in front of his forehead. But now 
he was outnumbered, by 14 law enforcement officers, and outgunned.

“He engaged in a gunbattle with officers where he was ultimately killed,” Mina 
reported.

The worst terrorist attack on American soil since hijackers flew planes into 
the World Trade Center was finally over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d1561f2d302c9bbfbb47d9caf0c12e9b91d6b5%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20'He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Orlando%20shooting%20unfolded%3A%20%27He%20came%20in%20with%20the%20intent%20of%20evil%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Forlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70d1561f2d302c9bbfbb47d9caf0c12e9b91d6b5%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 FBI agents investigate near the damaged rear wall of Pulse on Sunday in 
Orlando, Florida. Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
5.53am

Orlando police tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/orlandopolice/status/741931400392249344>: “Pulse Shooting: 
The shooter inside the club is dead.”

7.15am

Police said multiple people had been killed inside the nightclub, and at least 
42 injured had been taken to hospitals. “Approximately 20” were known to have 
died, police said.

8.30am

Barack Obama was briefed by his homeland security and counter-terrorism 
adviser. The White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, said the president 
directed federal officials to provide “any necessary assistance to pursue the 
investigation and support the community”.

10.15am

Authorities identified the gunman as Omar Mateen, 29, of Fort Pierce, Florida.

10.30am

The estimated death toll more than doubled. At a press conference, police said 
50 were dead and 53 more hospitalised. Officials later clarified that the death 
toll included 49 victims and the gunman.

10.37am

Vice-President Joe Biden called the shooting “an act of pure hate and 
unspeakable terror”.

“They were our brothers and our sisters,” he said. “Our friends, neighbours, 
and loved ones. In the coming days, we will learn more about these 50 souls and 
the lives they lived and the world they made better.”

11.20am

Families and friends gathered outside Orlando regional medical center waiting 
to learn whether their loved ones were among the dead. Enakai Mpire recalled 
how some were informed by a doctor and police officer in a conference room.

“The whole room transformed,” he told the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/us/confusion-and-fear-grips-orlando-s-lgbt-community-1.2683468>
. “I’ve never seen anything like that. People just started fainting, people 
started screaming, people started punching the walls. It was horrific.”

11.58am

Mateen’s father, Seddique Mir Mateen, of Port St Lucie, spoke for the first 
time since the atrocity, saying he is in shock and taken completely by 
surprrise.

“We are saying we are apologising for the whole incident,” he said. “We are in 
shock like the whole country.”

1.50pm

Speaking at the White House, nearly 12 hours after the shooting, Obama 
condemned it as“an act of terror and an act of hate” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/12/orlando-terror-attack-50-killed-nightclub-deadliest-mass-shooting>
. The US flag was flown at half-mast.

• This article was amended on 20 June 2016 to correct the type of rifle used.
 