
When Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> 
bought BHS in May 2000, he insisted it would not be rocket science to revive 
the ailing high street retailer. After paying £200m, he was convinced he had 
the skills to secure its future and make it the foundation of a sprawling 
retail empire.

But last year, after failing in his mission, Green sold BHS for £1 to a little 
known group of investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 who have steered it into collapse in just over 12 months. His dreams for the 
chain may have come to nothing, but Green’s family have still been big winners 
from BHS, taking out more than £580m in dividends, rental payments and interest 
on loans to helpfund a lavish lifestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/28/observer-profile-sir-philip-green>
.

BHS pension: why the regulator wants Sir Philip Green to contribute more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/25/bhs-pension-regulator-sir-philip-green-analysis>
As the pensions regulator considers whether to pursue Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-owner-retail-acquisitions-25m-administration>
 for between £200m and £300m – to help fill the black hole in BHS’s pension 
schemes that had developed since 2000 – he is awaiting delivery of his latest 
toy: a $150m (£100m) superyacht named Lionheart. The 90-metre vessel will join 
Green’s two other yachts, speedboat, helicopter and Gulfstream jet, which comes 
in handy for his weekly trips to and from Monaco to visit his family.

Green and his wife Tina were listed as the UK’s 29th richest family in last 
weekend’s Sunday Times rich list, which estimated their worth as £3.22bn. That 
total excludes the £280m which researchers suggested Greens might have to hand 
over to the pensions regulator.

Tina, who since 2004 has been the legal owner of BHS – and the Arcadia Group, 
which includes Topshop, Miss Selfridge and Dorothy Perkins – is based in 
Monaco. The handover of BHS to Green’s wife was completed just beforethe family 
paid themselves £1.2bn in dividends from Arcadia in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/oct/21/executivesalaries.executivepay>
, the biggest pay cheque in British corporate history, equivalent to four times 
the group’s then profits.
Philip Green graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/bhs_green-zip/giv-12515Rs8cEALe2gL8/>
Toga party

Even after the financial crisis hit the UK economy in 2008, the Greens have 
partied on. The family enjoy several weeks a year at the exclusive Barbados 
resort Sandy Lane, where they can hang out with friends such as Simon Cowell.

In 2012, the family apparently shelled out more than £3m to fly 150 guests – 
including Cowell, Kate Moss, Holly Valance, and her partner, the property 
developer Nick Candy – to Mexico’s Yucatan peninsula for Green’s 60th birthday 
party. Rihanna and Stevie Wonder were reportedly flown in to provide the 
entertainment.

But that was a relatively muted affair compared to Green’s 50th birthday bash, 
for which he chartered a private jet to fly 200 guests, including journalists 
and other business associates, to Cyprus for a three-day toga party at a cost 
of £50m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde0302af8a524a5db0ba3fde5727c923b28a5bc%2F29_57_2187_2186%2F2187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Philip%20Green's%20family%20made%20millions%20as%20value%20of%20BHS%20plummeted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Philip%20Green%27s%20family%20made%20millions%20as%20value%20of%20BHS%20plummeted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde0302af8a524a5db0ba3fde5727c923b28a5bc%2F29_57_2187_2186%2F2187.jpg>
 Philip Green with Suki Waterhouse, Kate Moss, Cara Delevingne, Sienna Miller 
and Naomi Campbell. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
Last year’s birthday was rather different. Days before Green turned 63 he sold 
BHS, after years of trying to offload the weighty burden of the group’s pension 
fund liabilities and trading losses. “I think my birthday present was a 
disposal as opposed to a purchase,” 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/business/Retail_and_leisure/article1530747.ece>
 he told the Sunday Times.

Green helped smooth through the deal by agreeing for Arcadia to pay £5m a year 
into BHS’s pension fund over three years, alongside a matching £5m payment from 
the group’s new owner, Retail Acquisitions.

Arcadia also wrote off £200m of charges for BHS assets as part of the takeover 
deal. Arcadia initially retained a further £40m of intercompany debt, but that 
was also written off in February. It also left £65m of cash in BHS as well as 
about £100m of freehold and long leaseholds. On the eve of the deal, one of 
BHS’s two head offices, next door to each other on the Marylebone Road, was 
sold for between £30m-£40m. Though the Greens had a stake in the building, they 
agreed that the proceeds go toBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>.

Pension warning

However, the pensions regulator looks likely to seek more from the Greens, as a
Guardian analysis suggests the family earned more from BHS during their 
ownership than the retailer’s £571m pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/25/bhs-pension-regulator-sir-philip-green-analysis>
, as measured on a buyout valuation.

When Green bought BHS in May 2000, the group’s fund was in surplus. In the 
year to March 2001, accounts filed at Companies House indicate a surplus of at 
least £5m. A year later that had risen to £17.4m on a pre-tax basis. But when 
pension trustees wrote to members in December last year, they warned that the 
company’s two funds had a combined deficit of £225.6m, based on the difference 
between its assets and potential liabilities.
BHS pension graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/bhs-zip/giv-12515nn8ByEFoWjbE/>
Between 2002 and 2004, shareholders extracted just over £422m in dividends – 
the vast majority of which went to Green’s family. A company controlled by 
Green also earned nearly £10m in interest from a £19.5m subordinated bond, a 
form of loan, issued to BHS in May 2000.

The Green family also collected £151.4m in rent from 12 stores owned by a 
Jersey-based entity it controlled called Carmen Properties. The storeswere 
bought for £106m in 2001 and sold for £70m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/29/sir-philip-greens-family-firm-sales-bhs-retail-acquisitions>
 as part of the deal under which the business passed to Retail Acquisitions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4186426207d51dcee32086eea2c02d02a806d95%2F0_0_1570_942%2F1570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Philip%20Green's%20family%20made%20millions%20as%20value%20of%20BHS%20plummeted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Philip%20Green%27s%20family%20made%20millions%20as%20value%20of%20BHS%20plummeted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fbhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4186426207d51dcee32086eea2c02d02a806d95%2F0_0_1570_942%2F1570.jpg>
 Green’s latest £100m yacht Lionheart, moored in Livorno. Photograph: 
livornodailyphoto.blogspot.co.uk 
The billionaire has pointed out that the deal marked a near-£40m paper loss – 
though this was more than offset by rental income, which property experts have 
said was at the top end of the market rate for such stores.


Meanwhile, another entity under the Green family’s control, Mildenhall, 
collected nearly £3m from ground rent on one of BHS’s head offices over seven 
years.

Even today, the family is understood to maintain ownership of BHS’s Marylebone 
headquarters, worth about £40m. If no buyer is found for the wounded retailer, 
the Greens could stand to benefit from the arrival of new, wealthier tenants in 
the sought-after central London location.

 