
It's not exactly Brokeback Mountain. They look like they're having more fun, 
for starters – one guy bent over a deluxe sofa getting rogered by his mate: 
"Yeah! You know I'm a bad boy!"

It's no tearjerking "I wish I knew how to quit you", but it is a tiny piece of 
history: one of Nollywood's handful of gay sex scenes. It kicks off the film
Pregnant Hawkers <http://www.ogamadamtv.com/tag/pregnant-hawkers/> in typically 
unapologetic Nollywood style; surprisingly explicit for a country where 
homosexual sex is still illegal andpunishable by death in some states 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBT_rights_in_Nigeria>.

Reactions have been, shall we say, mixed. "I'm speechless – are we supposed to 
accept this trend?" said one blogger. A forum commenter: "This is not good for 
Nollywood – salt in the wound." Another: "It's time for sympathetically and 
affirmatively drawn gay characters in Nollywood. That would only elevate 
Nollywood and its international audience."

You couldn't call Pregnant Hawkers, which came out earlier this year, 
sympathetic. Popping a gay sex scene up front in the first scene is pure 
exploitation tactics on the part of the producers, in line with a recent strain 
of more sexually frank Nollywoodsome deem to be pornography 
<http://news.naij.com/38950.html>. After mum walks in on the pair – to much 
shrieking and doomy percussion claps on the soundtrack – they only reappear to 
bookend the film, which is a series of vignettes about exploitative 
relationships. One poisons the other, when he refuses to give up on his 
girlfriend. Annie Proulx would be proud.

This animosity and moralising is the story of LGBT characters so far in 
Nollywood. It's produced a small body of "gay cinema" – examined in detail in
this excellent essay by Lindsey Green-Simms and Unoma Azuah 
<http://www.academia.edu/3590070/_The_Video_Closet_Nollywoods_Gay_Themed_Movies._>
 – in which homosexuals are almost always under the influence of witchcraft, 
mentally ill, or just plain wrong 'uns.

The first Nollywood depiction of a gay relationship was in 2003's Emotional 
Crack <http://irokotv.com/video/1584/emotional-crack> – which meanders round to 
the subject after spending its first hour pondering domestic violence. Having 
rejected a wifebeater and hooked up with his victim, Dakore Egbuson-Akande's 
free spirit is transformed into a kind of Single White Female harpy after 
eventually getting the cold-shoulder from her lover. She ends up stabbing 
herself. Things hadn't moved on by 2010'sMen in Love 
<http://irokotv.com/video/922/men-in-love>, in which the lead couple's affair 
is explained away by a "strong Satanic bond".

That kind of snide audience manipulation isn't totally dissimilar to what 
Hollywood did to the LGBT communityunder the Hays Code 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_Picture_Production_Code>. It took until 
the 1990s for things to really start changing in America. Clearly, the 
Brokeback breakthrough could be a while away in Nigeria. It's difficult to get 
Nollywood stars – many of whom are happy to air the anti-gay views that much of 
the country's devout population share – to play gay, which is sometimes left to 
Ghanaian actors further out on the fringe of the industry.

Some commentators see it as positive that homosexuality is getting depicted at 
all. After 10 years, Emotional Crack is still a well-known title – quite a feat 
considering the Nigerian industry's ferocious turnover. The continued 
production of gay-themed titles shows that they're hitting a nerve of tangible 
prejudice, fear and even curiosity. But is there a Nigerian director ready to 
go a step further and empathise?

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at Hollywood's local-language film 
productions. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in 
the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 