
The winner: Bridget Jones’s Baby

The Bridget Jones’s Baby success story at UK cinemas writes another chapter as 
the film cracks £30m in just 17 days – the fastest pace ever set for a romantic 
comedy. Of course, ticket price inflation favours this movie, but it’s worth 
remarking that 2001’s originalBridget Jones’s Diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-diary> had yet to crack £30m 
after 31 days of release – eventually reaching £42m thanks to a very long tail 
of cinema play. Three years later,Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-the-edge-of-reason> was quicker 
out of the gate, cracking £30m after 24 days of play, on its way to a final 
tally of £36m.

Bridget Jones's Baby makes Working Title first British film company to take 
$1bn in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/bridget-joness-baby-working-title-1bn-uk-box-office-eric-fellner-tim-bevan>
The romantic comedy has been rather an orphan genre in recent years, at least 
in the UK and the US. British variants – 2014’sCuban Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/13/cuban-fury-review> and 2015’s Man 
Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-up> – have seen such disappointing box 
office that producers and financiers are hardly encouraged to try again. The 
weepieMe Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/me-before-you-film-love-disability-thea-sharrock-sam-claflin>
, a £9.6m hit this year, hardly qualifies as an example of the romcom genre, 
despite some comedic elements and a strong romantic storyline. As for the US, 
there has really only beenHow to Be Single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/21/how-to-be-single-dakota-johnson-rebel-wilson-review>
 this year, which also broke a few rules in the romcom template.

The success of Bridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/bridget-joness-baby-working-title-1bn-uk-box-office-eric-fellner-tim-bevan>
 doesn’t really yield many lessons for the film industry, since it’s a sequel 
featuring a beloved character, which doesn’t help a producer shopping an 
original romcom script. It does, however, encourage development executives to 
keep scouring those bookshelves in the hope of discovering a new property with 
equivalent potential. It’s also another reminder of the commercial potency of 
the female audience, which continues to be under-served by Hollywood.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bridget%20Jones's%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bridget%20Jones%27s%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&media=>
Bridget Jones’s Baby: watch Renée Zellweger return in new trailer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/mar/23/bridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
Bridget Jones’s Baby has powered an admissions surge for the month of 
September, traditionally a relatively quiet month for UK cinemas. The monthly 
admissions data is always slow to be confirmed, but insiders are saying it 
could well be the strongest September this century, and the busiest since 1997, 
which was powered by the late-August release that year ofThe Full Monty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1997/aug/29/1>. 

Bridget Jones’s Baby (£31.35m) has now overtaken Notting Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/notting-hill> (£31.01m) to become the 
fourth-biggest romcom at the UK box office, behind the previous two Bridget 
Jones movies andLove Actually <https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-actually>. 
These numbers are not adjusted for inflation.

The runner-up: Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftim-burton-miss-peregrine-school-peculiar-children-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Burton%3A%20'When%20I%20first%20came%20to%20England%20I%20thought%2C%20Wow!%20I'm%20home!'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftim-burton-miss-peregrine-school-peculiar-children-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Burton%3A%20%27When%20I%20first%20came%20to%20England%20I%20thought%2C%20Wow%21%20I%27m%20home%21%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ftim-burton-miss-peregrine-school-peculiar-children-video-interview&media=>
Tim Burton: ‘When I first came to England I thought, Wow! I’m home!’ – video 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/27/tim-burton-miss-peregrine-school-peculiar-children-video-interview>
Although it couldn’t budge Bridget from the top spot, Miss Peregrine’s Home 
for Peculiar Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/miss-peregrines-home-for-peculiar-children-review-tim-burton>
 opened with a very creditable £3.36m, or £3.47m including previews. That’s a 
nice recovery of commercial form for directorTim Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/timburton>, after 2014’s Big Eyes (debut of 
£136,000) and 2012’sFrankenweenie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/21/frankenweenie-review-tim-burton> 
(£742,000 including previews of £156,000). The last time a Burton movie opened 
bigger was in 2010, withAlice in Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/07/alice-in-wonderland-review>.

Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children review – return to Burtonworld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/miss-peregrines-home-for-peculiar-children-review-tim-burton>
Miss Peregrine has the advantage of familiar source material (the Ransom Riggs 
<http://www.ransomriggs.com/> novel) and a family positioning – although a 12A 
certificate and a peril-packed storyline might be red flags for parents of 
younger children. The story’s setting is primarily in Wales and Blackpool, 
which is another advantage for the UK release.

The livestream event: Supersonic

Supersonic review – Oasis pop history lesson ignores battles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/supersonic-review-oasis-documentary-noel-gallagher-liam-gallagher-mat-whitecross>
Another week, another event-style release of a music documentary, with 
Sunday’s presentation of Oasis film Supersonic, together with a livestream Q&A 
with directorMat Whitecross 
<https://www.list.co.uk/article/85131-supersonic-director-mat-whitecross-making-coldplay-film/>
 and executive producer Liam Gallagher. On 8 September, Nick Cave filmOne More 
Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
 went out to 156 cinemas, with some repeat showings over the 9-11 September 
weekend, grossing £343,000. A week later, it was the turn ofThe Beatles: Eight 
Days a Week – The Touring Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/06/the-beatles-eight-days-a-week-the-touring-years-exclusive-clip-video>
, which went out on 15 September to 497 cinemas, yielding £597,000 in a single 
day, and now stands at a robust £926,000.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9waBd3yPOLE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9waBd3yPOLE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9waBd3yPOLE&media=>
Watch the Gallagher brothers in the Supersonic trailer – video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9waBd3yPOLE> 
Supersonic on Sunday grossed £542,000 from 387 venues, which is a nice chunk 
ahead of its regular release on Friday, when the film will downsize to a more 
focused 74 cinemas. And because the Sunday screenings are classified just as an 
event release, and because the regular rollout beginning this weekend swerves 
the three big circuits Odeon, Vue and Cineworld, distributor eOne is able to 
release Supersonic on DVD, Blu-ray and digitally within the 16.5-week 
theatrical window that the major multiplex chains demand. In fact, the home 
entertainment release is set for the end of this month.

The under-performer: Free State of Jones

When STX Entertainment and IM Global greenlit the $50m-budget American civil 
war dramaFree State of Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/free-state-jones-review-matthew-mcconaughey-newton-knight>
, starring Matthew McConaughey, hopes were high for a major prestige film with 
awards potential and commercial heft. But the US release in June, delivering 
just $21m at the box office, put paid to that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3EMkxEKKSQI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3EMkxEKKSQI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3EMkxEKKSQI&media=>
Watch Matthew McConaughey in the trailer for Free State of Jones – video. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3EMkxEKKSQI> 
For the UK, American civil war dramas are a tricky sell at the best of times, 
and distributor StudioCanal really needed some US buzz to give the film 
liftoff. Absent that, Free State of Jones represented a distribution challenge, 
despite someadmiring reviews including from the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/free-state-of-jones-review-matthew-mcconaughey-rages-through-civil-war>
. The UK debut of £119,000 from 226 cinemas might be labelled a disappointment, 
but expectations had already been shifted significantly downwards.

The personal best: Hell or High Water

Hell or High Water review – elegiac Texan western that packs a dizzying punch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/hell-or-high-water-review-cannes-film-jeff-bridges-chris-pine>
In 2014, when Starred Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/23/starred-up-review-prison-drama-mark-kermode>
 grossed £1.5m in UK cinemas, the film represented directorDavid Mackenzie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/hell-or-high-waters-david-mackenzie-i-look-forward-to-the-day-people-get-sick-of-superheroes>
’s biggest ever box office here and his first £1m hit. Over the seven previous 
feature films, commercial returns for the director had been distinctly patchy. 
Now Hell or High Water has reached £1.62m, overtaking Starred Up to become 
Mackenzie’s new best achiever. The film grossed £52,000 at the weekend, and 
there’s probably another £150-200,000 left in it yet, as it mops up the smaller 
indie venues.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJQoqsKoJVDw&media=>
Watch the trailer for Hell or High Water – video. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQoqsKoJVDw> 
The future

13th review: Ava DuVernay doc shows prisons are the new plantations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
Buoyed up by the strong hold of Bridget Jones’s Baby, takings at the weekend 
were overall 11% up on the previous frame, and also 15% up on the equivalent 
session from 2015, whenThe Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/the-martian-review-matt-damon-shines-stranded-astronaut>
 arrived at the top spot. Box office has now been up on the equivalent 2015 
weekends for nine of the past 10 frames. Hopes are high that this trend will 
continue with the arrival today (5 October) ofThe Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
, adapted from the Paula Hawkins bestseller. Rival distributors are running 
scared of the eOne release this weekend, although Warners offers Mel Gibson 
actionerBlood Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/blood-father-review-cannes-mel-gibson>
 and Icon presents darkly comic US indieWar on Everyone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/war-on-everyone-review-john-michael-mcdonagh-skarsgard-pena-bad-cops>
, from John Michael McDonagh (The Guard, Calvary). Alternatives include US 
horror comedyThe Greasy Strangler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/the-greasy-strangler-review-sundance-film-festival-jim-hosking>
, the regular release of Supersonic, as mentioned above, and Louis Theroux’s 
first theatrical featureMy Scientology Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/30/louis-theroux-my-scientology-movie>
.The 13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
, the documentary from Selma director Ava DuVernay about US mass incarceration 
of African Americans, appears simultaneously in cinemas and on Netflix, 
following festival showcases in New York and London.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&media=>
Watch the trailer for The 13th: better yet, watch the film - video. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V66F3WU2CKk> 
Top 10 films September 30 to 2 October 

1. Bridget Jones’s Baby, £4,807,165 from 645 sites. Total: £31,350,360

2. Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children, £3,473,781 from 558 sites (new)

3. Deepwater Horizon, £1,984,340 from 487 sites (new)

4. The Magnificent Seven, £1,004,373 from 540 sites. Total: £4,354,269

5. Supersonic, £542,263 from 387 sites (new, Sunday only)

6. Finding Dory, £365,921 from 478 sites. Total: £41,720,627

7. Kubo and the Two Strings, £320,781 from 486 sites. Total: £2,730,717

8. Don’t Breathe, £220,900 from 220 sites. Total: £3,356,184

9. Bad Moms, £178,511 from 203 sites. Total: £7,977,387

10. MS Dhoni – The Untold Story, £177,441 from 79 sites (new)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbridget-joness-baby-miss-peregrine-supersonic-free-state-of-jones-uk-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c74125a34f852c1be45b39f43ec65a5795f52a%2F0_14_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bridget%20Jones's%20Baby%20continues%20growth%20spurt%20at%20UK%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbridget-joness-baby-miss-peregrine-supersonic-free-state-of-jones-uk-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bridget%20Jones%27s%20Baby%20continues%20growth%20spurt%20at%20UK%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbridget-joness-baby-miss-peregrine-supersonic-free-state-of-jones-uk-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c74125a34f852c1be45b39f43ec65a5795f52a%2F0_14_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Mark Wahlberg, right, in Deepwater Horizon. Photograph: David Lee 
Other openers

Free State of Jones, £118,886 from 226 sites

Swiss Army Man, £80,403 from 59 sites

The First Monday in May, £31,846 from 15 sites

 LORD (Legend of Ravaging Dynasties), £28,147 from 16 sites

Nikka Zaildar, £27,623 from 12 sites

Under the Shadow, £24,392 from 25 sites

Southside with You, £6,184 from 27 sites

The Fencer, £4,202 from six sites

Courted, £2,883 from eight sites

Aandavan Kattalai, £1,908 from one site

Kickboxer, £1,132 from 10 sites

Urban Hymn, £859 from eight sites

Tharlo, £699 from three sites

Amanda Knox, £306 from one site

 * Thanks to comScore <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK>. All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.
 