
Few words are ruder in polite society than “strike”. Hated by politicians. 
Deplored by the press. As for the party supposedly overrun by trade union 
barons, whoever can name an occasion when one of their leaders has publicly 
supported a strike will win a part-share of myimmigration-control mug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/29/diane-abbott-labour-immigration-controls-mugs-shameful>
.

Divided we stand on the place of unions in Tory Britain | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/04/place-of-unions-tory-britain-divided-we-stand>
To such genteel ears, what I’m about to say will sound as sophisticated as 
breaking wind at a palace garden party. But some things demand directness – 
which is why I’d urge you to support the binmen,care workers 
<http://socialistworker.co.uk/art/40228/Barnet+care+workers+strike+back+against+Tory+service+cuts>
,librarians <http://www.barnetunison.me.uk/?q=node/1576> and other council 
staff striking in Barnet right now 
<http://www.times-series.co.uk/news/12927538.Barnet_Council_workers_take_strike_action_in_protest_at_outsourcing/?ref=rss>
.

Allow me to be blunter still, and say that this fight in an outer-London 
borough forms the frontline of one of the most important battles in Britain 
today. Because the men and women who normally serve kids’ meals, pick the 
rubbish off the streets and look after residents with mental-health needs are 
having to defend their services from a threat that may soon be coming to your 
local council: their jobs are about to be handed over to a private company.

The process is usually described as outsourcing – but that term does no 
justice to what’s happening in this leafy part of the capital. Councils of all 
stripes have been outsourcing for decades, which is why your local traffic 
warden is usually tramping the streets on behalf of a private firm. But that 
isn’t enough for Tory-run Barnet – it is on a mission to make itself disappear. 
It has begun a programme to farm out so many of its services that the local 
trade union calculates staff willshrink from 3,200 in September 2012 to just 332
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/local-services-barnet-council-town-hall>
.

Everything from registering births to mowing the local cemeteries has either 
already been outsourced or is about to about be. And most of the key tasks have 
been given to the FTSE giantCapita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/nov/20/capita-avoid-public-service-contracts>
. Not just for a few months or a couple of years, mind you: Capita will run 
these services for at least 10 years.

So an arm of Britain’s local government has in effect agreed to a friendly 
takeover by a £7bn multinational. Whoever Barnet residents vote for in local 
elections, they will always get Capita. Whenever they phone or email or visit, 
they will speak to aCapita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> 
employee. The FTSE giant will face no competition for the next decade; nor will 
it endure the same scrutiny as democratic government, as previously public 
information is veiled under “commercial sensitivity”.

Outsourced and unaccountable: this is the future of local government | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/local-services-barnet-council-town-hall>
This scale of outsourcing is new to Barnet, but has already given rise to some 
monstrous cock-ups. I’ve mentioned one here before: the loss of legal expertise 
meant that Barnet councillors were given the wrong reports to vote on last 
summer, prompting an independent inquiry that concluded: “There is no one who 
understands local government law in depth at Barnet 
<http://www.times-series.co.uk/news/11519194._Inexperienced__staff_who_have__no_understanding__of_local_government_law_at_Barnet_Council/?ref=mr>
.” And while the council claims the point of outsourcing is to save money, 
evidence of that is thin. One local blogger, who writes under the pen nameMr 
Reasonable 
<http://reasonablenewbarnet.blogspot.co.uk/2015/05/barnet-payments-to-capita-250-to.html>
, makes it his habit to go through the accounts and can’t identify any of the 
much-touted savings. He has offered to donate £250 to charity if the council 
can prove its claims, but so far there’s been no reply. I asked the local 
authority the same question this afternoon, but staff couldn’t come back to me 
in time. Meanwhile, the cost of interim and agency staff is ballooning from 
£12.5m two years ago to £15.5m.

If you want to see the world of outsourcing at its most illogical, spend a bit 
of time with detail-hunters like Mr Reasonable. He tells me about phoning his 
local library to see if a children’s book was in stock. The call was of course 
routed to a Capita call centre in Coventry, where staff spent ages unable to 
help before connecting him back to the librarians just down the road. By his 
calculations, for that wasted call Capita would charge Barnet £8.

Outsourcing is full of these invented costs, which is how the privateers make 
their billions. Mr Reasonable can tell you about how Barnet now pays £800 for a 
day’s training in how to take minutes, or£14,628 for just two months of 
occupational health assessments 
<http://reasonablenewbarnet.blogspot.co.uk/2015/05/capita-special-projects-barnet.html>
. In both cases these are services that would previously have been provided 
in-house for minimal cost. In the era of cost savings, however, they become 
very profitable indeed.

Barnet now pays Capita £800 for a day’s training in how to take minutes

These examples would be comic, if they didn’t cost blameless taxpayers so much 
money. But for the staff on strike this week, outsourcing has been much more 
painful. They’ve seen their colleagues transferred to new employers and suffer 
pay cuts. And now they’re facing the prospect of more services leaving the 
council within months – everything from children’s centres to school dinners.

What you’re seeing in Barnet is not some one-off, but a test case. Forced to 
make deep cuts, many Tory authorities are using this crisis as the perfect 
opportunity to hollow out their services. That description certainly applies to 
Margaret Thatcher’s former constituency backyard of Barnet, which dreamed up 
its disappearing act even before the banking crash.Northamptonshire has 
announced plans to outsource 95% of staff 
<http://www.northamptonchron.co.uk/news/local/budget-cuts-of-148-million-will-result-in-northamptonshire-county-council-outsourcing-95-per-cent-of-staff-1-6463894>
.Bromley’s local authority is enmeshed in strikes 
<http://www.unitetheunion.org/news/third-wave-of-strikes-at-bromley-council-as-tories-run-amok-over-mass-privatisation-plans/>
 over its plans to hand out most of its services.

The fact that these are all Tory councils is no surprise: it was Thatcher’s 
former lieutenant Nicholas Ridley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/oct/16/thatcher-outsourcing-fantasy-fails-reality>
 who came up with the idea of the night-watchman local authority, where town 
hall staff only turned up once a year to sign contracts with the private 
companies delivering local services. But this trend is not only true blue: two 
former executives at Barnet have already moved onto top jobs at Labour-run 
councils of Haringey 
<http://www.haringeyindependent.co.uk/news/9969996.New_Haringey_CEO_taking_pay_cut_with_move_from_Barnet/>
 andBarking 
<http://www.barkinganddagenhampost.co.uk/news/politics/barnet_officer_chris_naylor_appointed_as_barking_and_dagenham_council_s_new_chief_exec_1_3863880>
, presumably to work the same outsourcing magic there. In David Cameron’s first 
term, public sector outsourcingalmost doubled to £120bn 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/244f0bd8-eccb-11e4-a81a-00144feab7de.html#axzz3bpscRNhS>
. When he was re-elected, the National Outsourcing Association commented:“We 
expect to see a plethora of new outsourcing deals, both public and private, 
over the coming months.” <http://www.noa.co.uk/files/732.pdf>

Trade unions were wiped out in the private sector in the 1980s; they could be 
destroyed in the public sector this decade

This makes what’s happening this week in Barnet, and the fight it’s part of, 
so vital. If the staff lose there, and the council does hive off all the 
services, then others will be encouraged to go further and faster in their 
outsourcing. The trade unions were wiped out in the private sector during the 
strikes of the 1980s; they could be destroyed in the public sector this decade.

If you support decent public services, you have to support those strikers in 
Barnet foregoing pay. And if you want to live in a country run as a democracy, 
with all its flaws and failings – rather than by big companies answerable to 
hardly anyone – their cause is yours.
 