
Bookended by the death of David Bowie and the election of a KKK-endorsed 
braggart to leader of the free world, this was a year of terrible things. 
Terrible things, however, call for a particular kind of expression and so it 
was that the open letter returned with a vengeance. This year, women in 
particular claimed a form previously more associated with sanctimonious venting 
than with paradigm shifting and the results were sometimes extraordinary.

The most radical piece of writing I read (and reread) this year was the letter 
written by the young woman to Brock Turner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/stanford-sexual-assault-case-victim-impact-statement-in-full>
 her attacker inthe Stanford sexual assault case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stanford-sexual-assault-case>. This was 
nothing less than a reckoning – a mind and heart grappling with not just what 
had happened to her, but what humanity itself might mean when a stranger could 
rape an unconscious woman behind a dumpster. It is a testament to the strength 
of her words, to their steady and furious eloquence, that it no longer feels 
appropriate to refer to the 23-year-old author as a “victim”. Whether she 
intended to or not, she transcended victimhood. “You took away my worth, my 
privacy, my energy, my time, my safety, my intimacy, my confidence, my own 
voice, until today.”

In recent months, it has seemed more urgent than ever for women to speak up 
and refuse to have their voices taken away. When, for example, the most 
experienced Democratic presidential candidate of all time is shouted over by 
her reality-TV-star male opponent, the abstract notion of the female voice 
being heard takes on a dire cast.

Yet, as the confessional first-person-essay industry becomes saturated 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/technology/2015/09/the_first_person_industrial_complex_how_the_harrowing_personal_essay_took.html>
, female self-exposure no longer seems unassailably and inherently radical. The 
well-worn feminist axiom that the personal is political should, as with any 
soundbite, invite our scrutiny. It’s vital that we talk about sexual assault, 
for example, but a woman’s account of a terrible thing that happened to her is 
by no means automatically meaningful. When a confessional piece commodifies a 
person’s trauma purely in service of clicks and traffic, the abasement isn’t 
hers so much as our own. The term “letter” may not safeguard against this, but 
it does, with the weight of its literary past, help summon a greater civility, 
gravity and sincerity.

Those are not necessarily qualities associated with 21st-century celebrity. 
Jennifer Aniston 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/for-the-record_us_57855586e4b03fc3ee4e626f>
,Renée Zellweger 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/renee-zellweger/we-can-do-better_b_11355000.html>
,Emma Watson <https://twitter.com/EmmaWatson/status/790936408466853889>, 
Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://broadly.vice.com/en_us/article/dont-be-afraid-be-loud-jennifer-lawrence-on-what-we-do-now?utm_source=broadlyfbus>
,Mila Kunis 
<https://medium.com/mosaic2/youll-never-work-in-this-town-again-2e16c81e12c1#.6apiskzc8>
 andRose McGowan <https://twitter.com/rosemcgowan/status/788133518794715136> 
are among the famous actors to have written open letters this year, and any 
trend that reaches such a celebrity critical mass is easy to deride, 
particularly when its visible champions are wealthy white women. A black 
transgender woman living in rural poverty needs equal pay legislation far more 
urgently than a multi-millionaire movie star, but ifwords from Jennifer Lawrence
 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/work/a147/jennifer-lawrence-why-do-i-make-less-than-my-male-costars/>
 help that happen, so be it.

By definition, an open letter seeks to move outwards and many have transcended 
personal grievance into something that serves a wider awakening. Aniston’s, for 
example, ends by reminding us of our agency: “cultural standards [...] are a 
collective acceptance, a subconscious agreement. We are in charge of our 
agreement.”

And these letters are also changing the nature of celebrity. First, they allow 
a famous person to deliver her message independently, untempered by the 
subjectivity of journalists like me. Whether the result is floundering in 
confusion or brilliantly argued, the effect is the same: they humanise women we 
too readily idolise or demonise. (When it comes to female celebrity, those two 
impulses are trickily interwoven.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffeminists-open-letter-survivor-stanford-sexual-assault-case-celebrities-jennifer-lawrence-amber-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F761f713f9a38aa06a6d46109323abc6ff328bb4e%2F0_0_2693_3248%2F2693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20feminists%20embraced%20the%20radical%20open%20letter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffeminists-open-letter-survivor-stanford-sexual-assault-case-celebrities-jennifer-lawrence-amber-heard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20feminists%20embraced%20the%20radical%20open%20letter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffeminists-open-letter-survivor-stanford-sexual-assault-case-celebrities-jennifer-lawrence-amber-heard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F761f713f9a38aa06a6d46109323abc6ff328bb4e%2F0_0_2693_3248%2F2693.jpg>
 Porter magazine, available from 2 December 2016. Photograph: Ryan McGinley for 
Porter 
Second, they might cause us to reappraise what we value in these women. 
Aniston is among those featured in Porter magazine’s end-of-year special, which 
features 50 women celebrated not just for their achievements, but for “having a 
positive impact on others”. Fittingly, the issue includes four open letters 
that explicitly aspire to the universal. Serena Williams addresses hers “To all 
incredible women who strive for excellence”(right); Simone Biles begins with 
“Dear teenage girls everywhere”; Sharon Horgan writes to “All the men I’ve 
known and loved”; and Amber Heard, who has accused her ex-husband Johnny Depp 
of domestic abuse in the face of his denials, writes to, “My silent sisters 
everywhere”.

Porter’s editor Lucy Yeomans says: “Like the best correspondence, these are 
heartfelt and personal, but also speak to us all. A good letter can’t just be a 
sentiment – it has to be really artfully expressed and the ones that strike a 
chord are authentic. Maybe, then, the rise of the open letter means we’re more 
likely to celebrate people who have wisdom, people who have something to say.”

That’s no bad thing, but it is curious that we have come to expect actors, 
women whose very job it is to pretend to be other people, to be agents of 
political conviction. As Jia Tolentino wrote last month, “An essential burden 
of womanhood remains that of being required, by everyone, to signify too much.” 
With high-profile women, this makes for a “heated veneration that can’t yet be 
entirely separated from hate” and this heat and hate is visible in the coverage 
surrounding open letters. After Rose McGowan wrote to the movie industry urging 
it to stop working with known sexual predators and described the experience of 
red-carpet cameras panning up and down her body as feeling like “visual rape”, 
the Daily Mail reported on it by printing plenty of photos of her on said red 
carpet. One image was captioned: “McGowan’s activism is a far cry from years 
earlier when McGowan made headlines for wearing a sheer metal dress […]”, as if 
a certain kind of dress disqualified a woman from making any statement about 
gender equality. As if only women who covered their bodies should have any 
right to speak about them.

Sometimes, though, the cute and earnest futility of open letters can just be 
cringingly funny. Girls actor Allison Williams recently shared an open letter 
to her friend Lena Dunham’s endometriosis. “Dear Endometriosis: screw you, 
<http://www.endofound.org/screw-you-endo>” it began, as if the disease were a 
pesky cartoon character who would receive this message, emit the word “Eek!” in 
a speech bubble, then turn on tail and run. Dunham’s fruitlessly 
anthropomorphised endometriosis would find good company within the series in 
McSweeney’s literary journal, which lightly lampoons the delusions of the form. 
The intended recipients of “Open Letters to People Or Entities who Are Unlikely 
to Respond 
<https://www.mcsweeneys.net/columns/open-letters-to-people-or-entities-who-are-unlikely-to-respond>
” include “my son’s recorder 
<https://www.mcsweeneys.net/articles/an-open-letter-to-my-sons-recorder>” (“We 
have sacrificed livers full of mid-week Pinot trying to drown out the distress 
you generate”).

The frustrations of inanimate objects are, of course, in a different strata to 
the experience of the young woman who wrote to Turner. Hers was the power of 
words in its purest, most direct form – a virality based not on shock, but on 
awe. Even the vice-president was impelled to respond. Joe Biden chose to write 
heran open letter of his own 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tomnamako/joe-biden-writes-an-open-letter-to-stanford-survivor?utm_term=.jlMmB48d6#.udg7oDmvq>
: “It must have been wrenching – to relive what he did to you all over again. 
But you did it anyway, in the hope that your strength might prevent this crime 
from happening to someone else. Your bravery is breathtaking.”

When so much is at stake, we choose words wisely, reminding ourselves that 
real power isn’t about shouting the loudest, but speaking the clearest truths.

Incredible Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> of 2016 is 
published in Porter Magazine, on sale from 2 December 2016.
 