
It was three years ago this week that the government kicked off a huge 
shake-up of retirement saving to get millions more people paying into a 
pension. Since then, 5.4 million people have been automatically enrolled into a 
workplace pension scheme, with up to 5 million more due to follow them between 
now and early 2018.

Huge pension shortfall facing UK's young adults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/30/huge-pension-shortfall-facing-uks-young-adults>
Automatic enrolment has been described as the biggest revolution in UK 
pensions for 100 years – so how have people been getting on? What has the 
performance of the funds been like? And how much money are these workers likely 
to have in their pots when they come to retire? Guardian Money decided to 
investigate, and we found some workers have enjoyed pretty decent gains.

Big employers that were early into the scheme include McDonald’s, Asda and 
Sainsbury’s, with many “hourly paid” staff obtaining a pension for the first 
time. And the good news is that, since October 2012, if a worker put their 
money into one of the main default funds, it has gone up in value by around 
29%, while those who chose to go ethical have enjoyed a bumper 38% gain. The 
bad news is the level of compulsory contributions by employers and employees is 
currently so low that the sums of money going in will fall far short of 
providing a decent income in retirement.

A typical UK employee on the median wage during the period (about £26,500 a 
year) who was automatically enrolled will, after almost three years, have a 
total pot worth just £1,341. Contribution rates will escalate upwards over the 
coming years, but the reality is this regime will, for most people, provide 
just a small top-up to the state pension.

Automatic enrolment requires all employers to automatically enrol eligible 
workers into a workplace pension where both employee and company pay in. The 
regime is being phased in, so that eventually it will include people who employ 
just one person, such as a carer or nanny, provided they earn more than £192 a 
week or £833 a month, ie, £10,000-plus a year.

Being part of a good pension is important for the future of me and my family
Dave Bunting 
Around 2.4 million auto enrolled workers have been put into Nest, the National 
Employment Savings Trust, the giant workplace pension scheme set up by 
ministers as part of the changes. With this, your money is automatically 
invested in one of 47 “retirement date funds”, depending on your age.

We asked Nest for a “pounds and pence” example of what someone who was 
enrolled three years ago might have in their pot now; figures for how some of 
their funds have been performing; and some long-term projections for what 
people might end up with in a few decades’ time (see table below).

This is how we arrived at the £1,341 figure. Nest told us that someone who was 
put into its scheme in October 2012 would have a pot worth £1,341 on 31 August 
2015, made up of £618 of employer contributions, £495 paid in by the employee, 
£94 in tax relief and £134 investment growth (these figures take into account 
Nest’s charges). This example assumes the worker was put into Nest’s 2040 
retirement date fund, that 2% of their qualifying earnings – the legal minimum 
– is paid in, and that they were on the median full-time UK salary for the 
period.

Of course, paying into a pension is a long-term business, and one needs to be 
careful about drawing too many conclusions from just a couple of years’ data. 
Added to that, auto enrolment contributions are going to go up; while the total 
minimum amount paid in is currently just 2%, it is rising to 5% in October 
2017, and then 8% in October 2018. Nevertheless, some people might feel that 
£1,341 isn’t much to write home about after almost three years of paying in. 
However, bear in mind if that Nest case study example hadn’t joined the scheme, 
they would have missed out on ‘extra pay’ from their employer, plus the 
government cash in the form of tax relief.

A lot comes down to the performance of the fund you are in. As well as the 47 
retirement date funds, which are the default option for new members, Nest 
offers other options, including an ethical fund and a sharia fund.

I wonder how many other people with a learning disability have a pension
Harry Roche 
Nest members who have opted to “go green” will be cheering their decision. 
Nest’s ethical fund has performed well, notching up a 38% gain between October 
2012 and 31 August 2015, assuming a worker is in the “growth phase” part of the 
fund, where Nest concentrates on growing people’s pots quickly. This fund 
avoids companies that manufacture tobacco products, damage the environment, 
manufacture weapons of mass destruction or co-operate with countries with “a 
bad human rights record”.

The sharia fund has given a pretty decent return, too, with a gain of 34%. 
Open to anyone, not just Muslims, this invests only in the shares of 
sharia-compliant companies, and avoids businesses involved in alcohol, tobacco, 
financial services, pornography, weapons, pork, gambling and leisure/media, as 
well as companies that receive or pay large amounts of interest.

The 2040 retirement date fund, which is a growth phase fund for people aged 
around 43 now, has earned 29% over the period, while the 2055 fund, for people 
aged around 28 now, managed just under 25%. This lower return reflects the fact 
the fund is more cautious than a growth phase one because younger savers 
apparently reacted very badly to the idea of their pension savings falling in 
value.

Nest tries to steer away from focusing on the short term – it argues that its 
members will be signed up for perhaps 30, 40 or even 50 years, “so what happens 
in one or two years may not represent longer-term returns, and the positive 
effect of contributions building up over time”.

Nest isn’t the only player in this market: other providers include the 
People’s Pension, run by a company called B&CE, which looks after 1.6 million 
people’s money, and Now:Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions>, 
which has around 550,000 members.

Now: Pensions told us if someone earning £25,000 a year had been a member of 
its growth fund since the beginning of 2013, they would have a pot worth £1,068 
at the end of June 2015, made up of a total of £964 in contributions – from the 
individual, their employer, plus tax relief – and £104 investment growth (these 
figures take the scheme charges into account).

The thousands of firms participating in this pensions revolution include 
leisure company Rank Group, which signed up with Nest and has auto-enrolled 
5,630 employees since April 2013.

They include Dave Bunting, 34, a married father-of-two who works in the 
control room at the Grosvenor Victoria casino near London’s Marble Arch. He 
joined Rank in December 2014 and was enrolled early this year. “The set-up 
process was very straightforward and I didn’t really have to do anything – 
there was an ‘opt out’ form, which I didn’t sign, as being part of a good 
pension is important for the future of me and my family,” says Bunting, who 
lives in Essex. “I believe I pay 1% and Rank contributes the same. I think my 
contributions, and Rank’s, are due to go up over the next couple of years.” 
Rank says: “The scheme has been a great success and we have had positive 
feedback from our employees, many of whom had never been in a pension scheme 
before.”
 Harry Roche. 
Many other organisations such as charities have joined the scheme too. Mencap 
has enrolled a number of its staff, including Harry Roche, 27, who lives near 
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, and is an ambassador for the learning disability 
charity.

 He was auto enrolled in the Nest scheme in early 2014. “I am really happy 
with the scheme,” he says. “Currently 1% of my pay goes towards my pension, and 
this is matched by Mencap. As I get older I might want to save more, but this 
works out well for me at the moment. I wonder how many other people with a 
learning disability have a pension.”

How auto enrolment works

• Automatic enrolment was introduced under the Pensions Act 2008 and went live 
on 1 October 2012.

• It requires all employers to automatically enrol eligible workers into a 
workplace pension where both the worker and their employer pay some money in.


• The regime is being phased in. All – or certainly nearly all – employers 
with 50 or more staff are now on board, and by 2018 it will include people who 
employ just one person.


• Employers have to automatically enrol all workers who are at least 22 years 
old but below state pension age, earn more than a minimum amount (currently 
£10,000 a year, which is the same as gross earnings of least £192 a week), and 
are not in a workplace pension scheme.


• Workers not in that group can opt in if they wish to. If you are at least 16 
but under 75, earn more than £5,824 a year (£112-plus a week) and ask to be 
enrolled, your company will have to put you in the scheme and pay a minimum 
contribution, too.


• Companies will also need to enrol any workers aged 16-74 who earn less than 
that, and who ask to be put into the scheme – but the employer does not need to 
pay contributions for them.


• The focus is currently on the 1.8m small and “micro” employers that will 
need to act over the next two years – a sizeable chunk of whom employ just one 
person. This includes disabled individuals who employ a carer to help them live 
independently.


• Workers can opt out, ie, say no to being put into a pension scheme. But they 
can’t opt out until after they have been enrolled, and they have to do all the 
legwork. To opt out, you need to get an opt-out notice from your pension 
scheme, fill it in and give it to your employer – and you have only a month to 
do it. When this happens, the employee gets a full refund of any contributions 
they have made. It is against the law for an employer to try to influence a 
member of staff into opting out of a pension scheme.


• Remember that contributions are going to go up – the total minimum is 
currently 2% of qualifying earnings (typically made up of 0.8% from the worker, 
1% from their employer and 0.2% in tax relief from the government) rising to 5% 
in October 2017 (typically 2.4% from the worker, 2% from their employer and 
0.6% in tax relief), and then 8% in October 2018 (typically 4% from the worker, 
3% from their employer and 1% in tax relief). Bear in mind these percentages 
don’t apply to all of an individual worker’s salary, but only to their 
“qualifying earnings”, which is what they earn over a minimum amount, currently 
£5,824 a year, and up to a maximum amount, currently £42,385 a year.


How much will you get?

Nest provided us with estimates for three workers: a 25-year-old on £20,000 a 
year, a 35-year-old earning £26,000 and a 45-year-old on £30,000. The projected 
final amounts, showing how much they might have in their pot when they are 68 
(67 in the case of the 45-year-old) are below.

It’s no surprise that the 25-year-old ends up with the biggest sum – £91,100 
in today’s money – because he/she is paying in for longer and their money has 
more time to grow. It’s more proof, if it were needed, that it’s better to 
start saving for retirement when you are in your 20s rather than your 40s.

However, many experts say that ideally, people should be putting aside about 
half of their age as a percentage of their income – so a 20-year-old should be 
saving 10% of their salary into a pension, while for a 30-year-old it’s 15%, 
and a 40-year-old, 20%. Pension provider Royal London this week said, on 
average, a 35-year-old would need to build up a fund of at least £666,000 to 
secure a monthly income that would give them the same standard of living as 
today’s pensioners.

The Nest figures assume the worker pays contributions on their “qualifying 
earnings”. The qualifying earnings threshold usually goes up each year – it is 
currently £5,824 – and contributions are calculated on total salary minus this 
amount. The calculations are based on a total of 8% of qualifying earnings 
being paid into the pensions (4% from the worker, 3% from their employer and 1% 
in tax relief). Eight per cent will be the legal minimum from October 2018, but 
currently it’s just 2%, so some people signing up now will get a little less 
than the examples below.

Nest says these estimates are “forward looking and do not relate to historical 
performance,” and its calculations assume that people’s pots will grow as fast 
as inflation and all charges, plus 2% to 3% a year. They also assume that all 
contributions will increase in line with inflation and that the individuals are 
basic-rate taxpayers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5851fbefd59ece2b050e59cc458535a219f753f1%2F0_0_1440_232%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20is%20your%20%20auto-enrolment%20pension%20faring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20is%20your%20%20auto-enrolment%20pension%20faring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5851fbefd59ece2b050e59cc458535a219f753f1%2F0_0_1440_232%2F1440.jpg>
Now for the tough bit 

The automatic enrolment regime is now entering its most challenging phase.

The “low-hanging fruit” – huge companies such as McDonald’s and the big 
supermarkets – all signed up some time ago, and the focus has now switched to 
around 1.8million small and “micro” employers, ranging from hairdressers and 
fish-and-chip shops to window cleaners and many individuals who employ a nanny 
or carer. These are all due to be brought into the system between now and early 
2018.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756eeda0be8f572f5c583576fe29e2079bbc3164%2F0_147_4211_2527%2F4211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20is%20your%20%20auto-enrolment%20pension%20faring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20is%20your%20%20auto-enrolment%20pension%20faring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Foct%2F03%2Fhow-is-your-auto-enrolment-pension-faring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756eeda0be8f572f5c583576fe29e2079bbc3164%2F0_147_4211_2527%2F4211.jpg>
 The focus for auto enrolment pensions has switched to ‘micro’ employers. 
Photograph: Simon Belcher/Alamy 
Two-thirds of these employers have between one and four members of staff, and 
of those, nearly half employ just one person. The 1.8 million will include many 
businesses that don’t have a payroll or human resources department that 
normally deals with this sort of thing, as well as individuals and families who 
probably don’t think of themselves as an employer.

The pensions regulator recently issued research showing that almost two-thirds 
of small (with between five and 49 staff) and micro (between one and four 
staff) employers still don’t know the exact date they need to start enrolling 
their workers. Its message to these small businesses was: “Start getting your 
plans in place or you risk a financial penalty.”

However, auto enrolment has arguably been a big success so far – the 
government announced in July that workplace pension saving is now at a 10-year 
high, and that young people in particular are among the “biggest winners”. Its 
headline finding was that 70% of eligible employees – 13.9 million people – 
paid into a workplace pension in 2014.

Employers who don’t comply with the rules face a range of potential sanctions. 
They might be hit with a fixed penalty of £400, and then, if they still don’t 
toe the line, there are penalties of £50 a day for employers with one to four 
staff, rising to £500 a day for those with five to 49 staff, and an impressive 
£10,000 a day for those with more than 500 workers.
 