
After 28 years of marriage, my husband had an emotional but non-sexual affair. 
I was devastated but, after the discovery, we actually came together again in 
the most physical way. My desire and orgasms were thrilling, we experimented 
with toys and had sexy weekends away – it was awesome! I hoped that those 
sexual feelings would continue for ever but, alas, they haven’t.

Aside from natural biological urges, people become erotically charged for many 
different reasons. Some are motivated by familiar images, words or actions, 
others are triggered by feelings such as jealously, insecurity – even hatred. I 
hypothesise that it was some particular feeling you had about your husband’s 
desire for another woman that catapulted you into an erotic frenzy, and that 
this excitement evaporated once you felt secure with him again. This is not 
uncommon. It may be possible for you to recapture this feeling through creative 
role-playing if you and your husband are willing to try.

How might you, in fantasy, reproduce the same scenario of jealousy, insecurity 
or wanting to claim him for yourself? It sounds as though you are both open to 
erotic experimentation, so – with his permission – try it. Be creative and see 
what works. However, a word of warning: in using fantasy material for sex play 
that has some grounding in reality, one must be careful to keep fact and 
fiction separate. But if you two can handle this challenge, it may just do the 
trick.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 