
Ever since Les Misérables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150107/miserables> commenced its ground 
assault on the Oscars last autumn, directorTom Hooper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/tom-hooper> has taken every opportunity to 
flaunt extreme courage in the line of duty byHugh Jackman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/hugh-jackman> and co, who sung their takes live 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwgQjfg0hZw&feature=player_embedded>. Mostly, 
the critics seem won over by the brinksmanship. Present in every larynx-crack, 
heaving gulp and passion-flushed cheek, Hooper's authenticity fetishism – 
peering longingly in the direction of Les Mis's stage origins – is also a 
reminder of how chummy film and musical theatre have become in the last few 
years.

It has been one of the most prolific decades for the film musical since the 
golden-age studio extravaganzas fizzled out in the 1960s. But strictly on 
limited terms. Only the biggest, global, Broadway-and-beyond brands get to 
enjoy their moment in the cinema spotlight, and there has been a stiffly 
drilled chorus line:Chicago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2002/dec/20/artsfeatures2> ($306m worldwide 
box office),The Phantom of the Opera 
<http://film.guardian.co.uk/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,,1370099,00.html>
 ($154m),Rent <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/111319/rent> ($31m), The 
Producers <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/110036/producers>($38m) , 
Dreamgirls <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116878/dreamgirls> ($154m), 
Hairspray <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/jul/20/musical.comedy> ($202m), 
Sweeney Todd <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122346/sweeney.todd> ($152m),
Rock of Ages <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jun/14/rock-of-ages-review> 
($56m). Hooper's film, this week crossing the $300m mark, is mustering the kind 
of lung-power needed to match the mightyMamma Mia! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125168> ($609m).

The live-action musical looked finished in the 1990s, when that kind of 
quaint, stylised spectacle had been left to play quietly by itself in the 
animation sandpit under the supervision of Disney. ButMoulin Rouge 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87690/moulin.rouge> in 2001 hinted that 
there might be some life left in the genre, and perhaps the resurgence of 
interest in the "live experience" of all kinds in the internet age has helped 
fan the flames even more; film versions still benefit from the stage 
associations.

While Les Misérables and the noughties musicals seem to follow the traditional 
stage-to-screen trajectory, they are actually part of a modern, dense brand 
ecosystem, with the film studios investing in theatre as much as milking it for 
material. Hooper's film comes courtesy of Universal – which also has Universal 
Pictures Stage Productions as a sub-division. Its job is to transmute the 
studio's intellectual properties into Broadway material: among its adaptations 
are Cry Baby, Billy Elliot, and most famously, The Wizard of Oz (into the 
global hitWicked 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/sep/23/wicked-fifth-anniversary>). Many 
of the studios have similar divisions now. Warner has reworked Charlie and the 
Chocolate Factory, Elf,Casablanca 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/livechina/2005-03/28/content_428690.htm> 
(in Beijing), Interview with a Vampire, and Misery for the stage; Dreamworks is 
currently ticking off cities around the world with its musical version ofShrek 
<http://www.shrekthemusical.co.uk/?gclid=CIyKj5j4iLUCFW_KtAodMQ8A7g>.

You can see this both as sensible management, and part of the cynical, 
corporate brand blitzkrieg that is now inescapable. It's down to individual 
adaptations which side of the line they fall on. Disney'sThe Lion King 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lion_King_%28musical%29> (the company set up 
the first studio stage division in 1993) remains the gold standard for 
successful film-to-stage transfers. DirectorJulie Taymor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julie_Taymor>'s decision to use puppetry and 
African masks allowed the stage version to mark out its own creative territory, 
while also being anchored in familiar songs from the film. "Simultaneously 
mainstream and sophisticated, high and low, art and pop culture", as media 
writer Frédéric Martel described it, it hit that middlebrow sweet spot to the 
tune of more than a billion dollars worldwide – even more than the film.

Equally, when the material is mishandled, like Marvel's much-publicised 
Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/spider-man-turn-off-the-dark> tailspin 
(another Taymor gig), the grubby commercial imperative is the only thing left 
in the floodlights – and nobody finds that an enchanting sight.

The hope is that strong stage productions revitalise dormant filmed material 
with the energy of daily performance – which feeds back into the brand. That 
drives ancillary and merchandise sales of the original film; and perhaps even 
extends the range of the whole wagon-convoy. Remakes start to look more 
feasible when a story is still echoing in the zeitgeist. In cases where the 
material was heavily reinterpreted for the stage, then that strengthens the 
potential for future metamorphoses.

Universal is being especially careful with the record-breaking Wicked, having 
kept a potential screen version in cold storage for several years. It's 
reportedly going ahead now – probably once Warner Bros'Oz the Great and Powerful
 <http://disney.go.com/thewizard/> is safely out of the way.

Les Mis may not be studio-originated material, but it's playing the same 
global-franchise game. Hooper has taken extreme care to reinforce the 
iconography of the West End's longest-running musical ever – down to finding, 
in 10-year-oldIsabelle Allen 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=isabelle+allen&hl=en&safe=off&client=firefox-a&hs=CMW&tbo=d&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=IFQFUerFFrKX0QXnr4HYCA&ved=0CAoQ_AUoAA&biw=1366&bih=638>
, a dead ringer for the emblematicGustave Brion 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gustave_Brion> waif-smudge used on the posters. 
The live-singing gimmick (though it's not the first time it has been used on 
film) rounds off the symbiotic loop that has been developing between screen and 
stage – one of the newer branches of the entertainment-industrial complex.

It's almost besides the point to say there's something ruthless about the 
process – as is blindingly obvious from the narrow selection of material that 
gets to participate, as well as Hooper's hectoring, declarative, awards-hungry 
directorial mannerisms. What can you do but sing along?

• What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? 
Let us know in the comments below.
 