
Tom Kenny, voice of SpongeBob

In 1997, Steve Hillenburg showed me what he was intending to pitch to the 
children’s networkNickelodeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/30/nickelodeon-nicktoons-spongebob-squarepants-doug>
: an apple-cheeked sponge who lived under the sea. I thought it was just 
fabulous. If I don’t voice this character, I remember thinking, “I’m going to 
be really sad.”


Steve gave me a concrete description of the show, which had comedic archetypes 
that have worked for hundreds of years, further back than Shakespeare. 
SpongeBob is the naif: extremely innocent, and everything manages to be OK for 
him in the end because he’s so guileless. Then there’s Patrick the starfish, 
the not-so-smart friend, larger and stronger. Squidward is driven crazy by 
SpongeBob’s innocence and imagination, because he lacks both. And there’s the 
super-avaricious Mr Krabs.


To get his laugh right, I watched Popeye and Woody Woodpecker shows. Then I 
just tried dolphin noises

Steve’s vision was 100%. He was very sure of it. He saw that I had some 
SpongeBob characteristics. I’m kind of frantic, especially if working on 
cartoons – flailing around, screaming, very physical. We also discussed 
men-children in comedy – Stan Laurel, Jerry Lewis, Pee-wee Herman – people in 
ostensibly adult bodies, who function in the adult world, but who are 
childlike. SpongeBob is like that. He believes the next day is going to be the 
best day ever, but he lives by himself and has a job and responsibilities. That 
was an interesting part of his personality to me.


I got his voice on the first or second try. We then looked at laughs, like 
Popeye’s or Woody Woodpecker’s, and tried dolphin noises. That irritating laugh 
has now become so identified with him. It’s his “What’s up, Doc?” Steve cast 
the rest like an orchestra: this guy is woodwind, this guy is percussion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZSdrf5wGNzI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZSdrf5wGNzI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZSdrf5wGNzI&media=>
Watch a clip from SpongeBob SquarePants 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZSdrf5wGNzI> 
The pilot was about a tour bus full of hungry anchovies pulling up to the 
Krusty Krab restaurant, which runs out of food. SpongeBob is sent to the store 
to get a spatula, just to get rid of him, because they don’t think he’s useful. 
He comes back and ends up being this champion cook who just provides – 
loaves-and-fishes style – for these anchovies who are tearing up the Krusty 
Krab because they’re so ravenous. The anchovies just said “meep” so we thought 
it would be a good idea to suck on a tank of helium before we recorded the 
take. It was very controlled and completely weird.


It's a Three Stooges kind of comedy but also has a Seinfeld vibe

When I got the call saying the show had been green-lit, I was shooting on a 
farm somewhere, wearing a wizard beard painstakingly applied clump by clump. It 
was hot and everything smelled like animal poop. A career in voiceover seemed 
great.


The show was sweet and kind-hearted, but not candy-assed in a Care Bears 
<http://www.agkidzone.com/care-bears/> way. It had everything. It had this 
knockaboutThree Stooges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/30/three-stooges-film-discovered-australia-garden-shed>
 kind of comedy, but also had aSeinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> vibe: a show about nothing. 
Sometimes episodes would just be about SpongeBob trying to tie his shoes, but 
other times he’d be going on quests to find lost cities. I loved that 
juxtaposition. There was nothing like that on TV, but nobody ever thought it 
would get this big.

Twentysomethings thank me for their childhood. People say: “This is my best 
friend and we met because of SpongeBob. People call me SpongeBob and him 
Patrick.” If you’re working on CSI, or some dumb sitcom, I don’t know if that 
would happen. And my family just communicates with each other in SpongeBob 
jokes and references – if you walked into our house, you’d think we were 
speaking a foreign language. SpongeBob lives at the bottom of the sea, but he 
brings a lot of great stuff to the surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-we-made-spongebob-squarepants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182f9783a4a7c3b97e8f19255e620cec21be3086%2F0_0_5781_3128%2F5781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20SpongeBob%20SquarePants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-we-made-spongebob-squarepants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20SpongeBob%20SquarePants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhow-we-made-spongebob-squarepants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F182f9783a4a7c3b97e8f19255e620cec21be3086%2F0_0_5781_3128%2F5781.jpg>
 The 2015 SpongeBob film with, from left, Squidward, SpongeBob, Sandy and Mr 
Krabs. Photograph: Rex 
Stephen Hillenburg, creator

I was into Jacques Cousteau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/jacques-cousteau-french-ocean-explorer-odyssee-film>
 as a kid and started scuba-diving around 14, which blew my mind.It was all 
colour, another world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/04/scientists-discover-hidden-world-of-hawaiis-coral-twilight-zone>
. I studied natural resources planning and thought I could get a job at some 
marine park. But I was great at art and so-so at marine biology. It’s funny how 
the two eventually came together.


I got a job on a Nickelodeon cartoon called Rocko’s Modern Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/30/nickelodeon-nicktoons-spongebob-squarepants-doug>
. I had written an educational comic book about tide pools called The 
Intertidal Zone, which had a talking sponge. One of the guys saw it and said: 
“This should be your own show.”

In The Intertidal Zone the character was a natural sponge, but I thought an 
artificial square sponge was funnier. SpongeBob is just made of cellulose, but 
he has parents who are natural sponges – he got the square gene. The original 
name was Spongeboy, but I couldn’t use that because it was copyrighted by a mop 
company. I eventually thought of SpongeBob, but he needed a last name. 
SquarePants came to mind.

I put flowers in the sky because I had just been to Tahiti

I then came up with the other characters. I wanted Patrick the starfish to be 
really stupid, the perfect friend, because SpongeBob is an innocent, and he 
doesn’t think Patrick is dumb. So when these two guys get together, it’s like 
fire and gas. Squidward, meanwhile, lives between SpongeBob and Patrick. He’s 
the one in the middle getting driven crazy.

I wanted SpongeBob to love his job. I always imagined a kid going into 
McDonald’s and seeing a guy cooking and thinking it was the best job in the 
world: “You can eat hamburgers all the time!” I had just been to Tahiti and 
that influenced the flowers in the sky, while the tiki elements, like the 
pineapple SpongeBob lives in, are influenced byHawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/hawaii>. 

When I pitched the show, I made this special seashell. You could pick it up 
and hear me singing: “Spongeboy, Spongeboy!” I also made an aquarium with 
Patrick planted on the side, SpongeBob sitting on a barrel, and Squidward 
inside. I wore a Hawaiian shirt. I don’t know what they thought of it. 
Eventually we pitched with a storyboard. The executive, Albie Hecht, walked out 
– then walked straight back in and said: “Let’s make this.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcXQYyE3DQGY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcXQYyE3DQGY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcXQYyE3DQGY&media=>
Watch a clip from SpongeBob SquarePants 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXQYyE3DQGYhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXQYyE3DQGY>
The first season was difficult. Everyone was new and we didn’t use scripts. 
The storyboard artists figured out the plot as they went along and we added 
dialogue to that. But some of the second season’s episodes were actually good, 
like Sailor Mouth. I pitched the idea that SpongeBob and Patrick learn a 
swearword. Everyone said no. I couldn’t even use a bleep. So I used a dolphin 
sound instead.

I thought we’d get four seasons, but it’s still going. I see SpongeBob on 
ice-cream trucks a lot and I’ve got bootleg SpongeBob merchandise from Mexico. 
In Egypt, they even wearhijabs with SpongeBob on 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/miriamberger/spongebob-sqaurepants-takes-over-egypt?utm_term=.md8KRyBNn#.gvPQZeOja>
 them.

• It’s a SpongeBob Christmas! is on NickToons 
<http://www.nicktoons.co.uk/shows/spongebob-squarepants/games/spongebob-squarepants-are-you-more-spongebob-or-patrick/ne34yh>
 on 11 December and Boxing Day. The SpongeBob SquarePants Christmas Special is 
on 3 December and Christmas Day.
 