
The year of 1967 was one of love and hate in the US. In San Francisco, 100,000 
hippies gathered during the Summer of Love, while 165 race riots blazed through 
the nation’s cities, leaving 83 dead. It was also the year whenSidney Poitier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/oct/08/features.burhanwazir> released 
three films that would make him a megastar. Poitier, who was born in Miami to 
parents from the Bahamas, had made his screen debut in 1950 inNo Way Out; in 
1964 he had become the first black person to win an Academy Award for best 
actor – for his performance inLilies in the Field – and by 1967 his screen 
persona was well established. He was smart-suited and clean-shaven, dignified 
and graceful, neither dangerously defiant nor offensively deferential; 
masculine but strangely sexless. This persona echoed the manner of his friend
Martin Luther King <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> 
and, like Dr King, Poitier was elevated into an icon. He became, in the words of
Revisiting Poitier, an excellent collection of essays on his life and legacy, 
“the bourgeois wish-fulfilling symbol of a race”. Poitier’s three 1967 films 
would come to define his entire career:To Sir, With Love, In the Heat of the 
Night and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner.

Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, directed by Stanley Kramer and written by 
William Rose, is an exploration of the limits of racial tolerance disguised as 
a romantic comedy. It is boy meets girl, boy meets girl’s racist parents, boy 
gets girl. Poitier plays John Prentice, a black doctor, who has recently fallen 
in love with Joanna, a young white woman played by Katharine Houghton. The 
couple have only known each other for 10 days when they arrive at her parents’ 
home to announce their engagement and to ask for approval for the marriage. The 
parents, played byKatharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katharinehepburn> (Houghton’s aunt in real 
life) and Spencer Tracy, are forced to examine their attitudes, supposedly 
liberal, when confronted with the prospect of a black son-in-law. The film 
proceeds through conversation-heavy set-pieces as Joanna’s father – her mother 
is quickly won over by the charming Prentice – challenges his daughter’s fiance 
to explain how they will react to the inevitable obstacles their marriage will 
face.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229969705%2Faa5ecbb5-9683-43b9-ae59-60a318bdf83d-2060x1598.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sidney%20Poitier%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Barack%20Obama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sidney%20Poitier%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Barack%20Obama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229969705%2Faa5ecbb5-9683-43b9-ae59-60a318bdf83d-2060x1598.jpeg>
 Sidney Poitier and Rod Steiger in In the Heat of the Night. Photograph: 
Moviestore collection LTD 
Watching the film today, it’s fascinating to see how much it strains to 
reassure its audience even as it articulates their anxieties. As Kim Warren 
notes inPoitier Revisited, “the couple first meets in Hawaii, a state 
geographically disconnected from the continental United States, and they are on 
their way to the symbolically and politically neutral country of Switzerland”. 
The implication is that they will soon be some other nation’s problem. It is 
also made clear that the anxiety is shared by both sets of parents – the 
fathers, actually – and the most severe criticism of Prentice comes from 
Tillie, the black maid. “You ain’t foolin’ me for a minute,” she tells him. “I 
see what you are. You’re one of those smooth-talkin’ smart-ass niggers just out 
for all you can get with your black power and all that other trouble-making 
nonsense.”

“Have you thought what people would say about you?” Joanna’s father asks 
Prentice. “In 16 or 17 states you’d be breakin’ the law. You’d be criminals.” 
“And say they changed the law?” replies Prentice. That exchange demonstrates 
how the film reflects the changing realities of interracial relationships at 
the time. In the same year thatGuess Who’s Coming to Dinner was released, the 
US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> had ruled 
that states could no longer enforce laws that banned marriage on racial 
grounds. That decision was made after Mildred and Richard Loving, a black woman 
and her white husband, had been arrested and given a suspended jail sentence 
for violating a state law that prohibited marriage between white and black 
people. The court ruled on 12 June 1967. In September that year, Time magazine 
featured on its cover a young married couple, Peggy Rusk and Guy Smith; Peggy 
was white and Guy was black. “Mr and Mrs Guy Smith: an interracial wedding,” 
read the words below the image. The expressions on the faces of the newly 
married couple were ambiguous. She is smiling but he looks apprehensive, 
mindful perhaps of the words of the judge who had sentenced the Lovings: 
“Almighty God created the races white, black, yellow, malay and red, and he 
placed them on separate continents … the fact that he separated the races shows 
that he did not intend the races to mix.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229788810%2Fa6ef3275-0fa8-4adc-8fa2-bb20998c0595-2060x1564.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sidney%20Poitier%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Barack%20Obama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sidney%20Poitier%20paved%20the%20way%20for%20Barack%20Obama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fsidney-poitier-paved-barack-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432229788810%2Fa6ef3275-0fa8-4adc-8fa2-bb20998c0595-2060x1564.jpeg>
 Sidney Poitier, Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn in Guess Who’s Coming to 
Dinner (1967). Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Poitier perfected playing parts that, in the words of Poitier Revisited, 
depicted “the accomplished, well-spoken, aspiring, mild-mannered black man that 
America ought not to fear, that the black middle class ought to be proud of, 
that racist white America would have trouble hating”. The film-makers created 
for him a character who was almost superhumanly gifted. Prentice had studied at 
Yale, worked for theWorld Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> and is on his way 
to Geneva. The film further reassures by ridding him of any troublesome 
sexuality. At the start of the film his first wife and child have tragically 
died. The only kiss Prentice and Joanna share is visible in the rear-view 
mirror, and he makes it clear that he has yet to sleep with her. Poitier was 
condemned to asexuality in many of his films; one African-American critic 
referred to him as a “clean cut eunuch in the white world”.

Poitier’s defence was that his films were “interesting, marvellous fables” and 
he was able positively to harness the fame and success they generated. Along 
withHarry Belafonte <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/harry-belafonte> and 
Jackie Robinson, he funded the African American Students Association, which 
provided university scholarships to Kenyan students. Among the students who 
benefited from the programme was a Kenyan calledBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, who would later marry an 
American woman, and have a son with the same name. It is impossible to ignore 
the parallels between Poitier and Obama. When, inGuess Who’s Coming to Dinner, 
Joanna’s father asks Prentice if he has thought about the consequences of 
having children, Prentice tells him that “she feels that every single one of 
our children will be President of the United States, and they’ll all have 
colourful administrations”. “What people saw in candidate and President Obama,”
Poitier Revisited argues, “they had seen decades before in the Poitier persona: 
cool, eloquence, genuine warmth, exceptionality, and ambiguity of identity. It 
was clear … Poitier had primed the white American imagination … for the 
historic election of the first black President of the United States.”

Obama, elected with such hope and euphoria, has been accused of insufficient 
concern for the plight of African Americans. Poitier, too, was accused of being 
a white person’s fantasy of blackness. In a 1967 New York Times article 
entitled “Why Does White America Love Sidney Poitier So?”, he was dismissed as 
“the antiseptic, one-dimensional hero, a good guy in a totally white world, 
with no wife, no sweetheart, no woman to love or kiss, helping the white man 
solve the white man’s problems.” The assassination of King and the rise of 
blaxploitation left Poitier out of time. Yet despite the cartoonish perfection 
of Prentice,Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner is still relevant. I first saw it just 
before I introduced my then girlfriend to my family. We were a mixed-race 
couple and we rented the film as a humorous acknowledgement of a fraught 
situation. Anyone who thinks it is dated has never tried taking a white 
Christian girlfriend home to their Muslim parents.

• Poitier Revisited, edited by Ian Gregory Stachan and Mia Mask, is published 
by Bloomsbury.
 