
“It’s easy enough these days to wake troubled even before you remember the 
cause. Then you do. Everything is changed utterly.” So wrote novelist Ian 
McEwan on 9 July, 15 days after the UK voted to leave the European union.

Between 04.41 on 24 June – when the BBC called the referendum result – and 
McEwan’s dismayed response, David Cameron had resigned as prime minister, 
would-be US president Donald Trump had hailed it “a great victory”, the Labour 
party had exploded into a frenzy of recrimination, and the Guardian had 
published more than 700 pieces of news, analysis and comment responding to one 
of the biggest political upsets in living memory.

The Guardian in all its iterations – print, website, audio, video – is a 
wide-open plain, capable of encompassing 700 pieces on a single subject over a 
fortnight. The book I was guest editing, a small corral in which I needed to 
herd 12 months of world news into fewer than 70 articles (and 16 hard-working 
pictures). So how to choose which pieces to include?

The Bedside Guardian, an anthology of the best of the year’s journalism, has 
been published since 1951 with a different guest editor each year. One of the 
biggest challenges it presents is to find a structure capable of encompassing 
and reflecting the year as it develops.

When I agreed to edit the book back in January, the EU referendum was yet to 
be announced. I knew the biggest set-piece of 2016 – the US election – would 
fall outside its remit, as the Bedside year runs from September to September. 
But by the start of that period the ructions over Jeremy Corbyn’s election as 
Labour leader were in full flail. So the first two pieces I chosewere a Steve 
Bell cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2015/sep/16/steve-bell-on-a-new-era-of-politics-cartoon>
 from 16 September, 2015, titled “On a new era of politics”, anda Guardian 
leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/18/the-guardian-view-on-jeremy-corbyn-seven-days-that-shook-the-labour-party>
 reflecting on Corbyn’s first week, with the equally ominous headline, “Seven 
days that shook the Labour party”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3831aa145bcb5250e6b7bc541c2438395b0951bf%2F0_0_650_445%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3831aa145bcb5250e6b7bc541c2438395b0951bf%2F0_0_650_445%2F650.jpg>
 Steve Bell’s take on ‘a new era in politics’. Illustration: Steve Bell 
The first six months of content for the Bedside Guardian had already gone to 
press by June, but we had anticipated that the European referendum would 
generate significant coverage. I picked McEwan’s article because it captured 
the stunned sense of disbelief that was becoming a signature of the year; his 
phrase – “everything has changed, utterly” – could as easily have applied to 
terrorist-stricken France and Belgium, to besieged Syria or to 
earthquake-ravaged Italy.

Variety of opinion also seemed important, so in went Dreda Say Mitchell’s 
brave and provocativepre-referendum piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/aint-easy-black-brexiteer-farage-civility-other-side>
, “It ain’t easy being a black Brexiteer”. Polly Toynbee, on the murder of Jo 
Cox, conveyed the horror of the lead-up to the referendum; Marina Hyde skewered 
comeback-king Nigel Farage, hectoring his fellow Euro MPs behind “a Union Jack, 
with its little sucker pad leeching obnoxiously on to the unlovely beech of the 
European parliament chamber”.

But it took a newer form of journalism – the live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-result-live-counting-leave-remain-brain-in-europe>
 – to convey the white-knuckle ride of 12 hours that changed Europe. It was 
written by two dozen reporters from many specialisms, in the UK and abroad. 
Edited down to 43 entries between 8.13pm, when Cardiff’s bullish Remain 
campaigners were setting out their stall next to a statue of Aneurin Bevan, and 
8.25am, when an exhausted Cameron announced his resignation, it gives me 
goosebumps every time I read it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226795a50fdc82e46c00a5e99acc8e24ad16b5fd%2F0_244_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226795a50fdc82e46c00a5e99acc8e24ad16b5fd%2F0_244_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 David Cameron resigned as prime minister after the European referendum ended 
in a leave vote. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
The referendum triggered a Labour leadership re-election which – after begging 
the production team to extend the Bedside Guardian deadline by two weeks – 
enabled me to begin and end the year with a Corbyn election.

Was this just luck? I’d argue that the momentum of change, and its 
significance, was clear from those first seven days post-referendum. Nor was it 
a purely a parochial decision. Labour’s struggles reflected a rebellion that 
went far beyond Westminster infighting: all around the world, ordinary people – 
to left and right – were rising up against a status quo they regarded as 
corrupt, elitist, ideologically bankrupt.

In May, one manifestation of this status quo had spilled across the globe, 
with the publication ofthe Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, an investigation of 
offshore tax holdings which involved an international collaboration between 110 
media outlets. As Juliette Garside wrote in her summary of the operation “in 70 
countries around the world, the reverberations are still being felt”.

The Panama Papers exposé was among a series of investigations that held a 
magnifying glass up to the daunting moral and ethical challenges of our age: 
the Guardian also interrogated the state of theNational Health Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/this-is-the-nhs> and the ethics of 
the internet. “Thirty-eight face-to-face consultations, 11 telephone calls, one 
home visit, 30 medication queries, 76 prescriptions to sign, two referrals to 
dictate, 55 lab results and 24 clinic letters to read and file – that’s roughly 
an average day,” wrote an unnamed doctor of the pressures on a general 
practitioner. “Technology has disrupted the truth”, wrote editor-in-chief 
Katharine Viner,in a benchmark essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
 on journalism in the internet age.

Sometimes a single line of dialogue speaks loudest. “Nine billion pounds on 
the Olympics and they’re telling us and our babies we have to go live in 
Hastings,” lamented 19-year-old Adora Chilaisha, one of 29 young single mothers 
facing eviction from temporary housing in east London. She was speaking to Dan 
Hancox, as part of a report onan uprising against gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/12/gentrification-argument-protest-backlash-urban-generation-displacement>
 that was making waves from the UK to Germany, the US and Spain, where the 
Plataforma de Afectados por la Hipoteca movement had been so successful that 
its spokeswoman had become mayor of Barcelona and its tactics were being copied 
around the world.

Kate Lyons looked at how the plight of millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
 around the world was reflected in the names they had been given. “In many 
cases, the names reveal something of the specific problems they face, whether 
that is debt, lack of housing, unemployment, or something less tangible such as 
indecision,” she wrote. In Spain the in Generation Ni-Ni (neither work nor 
study); in China they are “the generation that eats the old”; in Greece they 
are the Generation of 500 Euros, named after a government scheme to employ them 
for €500 a month.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5e06a934fd5a98164da8a55f6de58fe4a6f61f%2F0_338_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5e06a934fd5a98164da8a55f6de58fe4a6f61f%2F0_338_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A photograph of a small boy pulled from rubble in Aleppo became a lightning 
conductor for the attention of the world media. Photograph: Mahmoud 
Rslan/AFP/Getty Images 
History on the hoof creates its own ironies. As part of a series in which 
writers looked back on the Arab Spring, five years on, Syrian Robin 
Yassin-Kassab admitted he had got the plight of his country“terribly wrong” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/23/arab-spring-five-years-on-writers-look-back>
. By late summer, Aleppo had emerged as one of the biggest tragedies of a 
catastrophic year. A photograph of a small boy pulled from the rubble became a 
lightning conductor for the attention of the world media, but the more telling 
picture – as a volunteer physician from one of the city’s embattled hospitals 
wrote – was a pencil drawing by one of the many desperately injured children he 
had treated. “What is really shocking for me,” said Zaher Sahloul, “is that the 
dead children are smiling while the living ones are crying.”

(As a footnote, when I emailed Sahloul to thank him for allowing me to use the 
picture, he sent two more. The hospital in which he had treated those children 
was now a pile of masonry.)

Perhaps the biggest challenge with this year’s Bedside Guardian, given the 
constraints of a September to September year – was the US elections. I opted to 
make a centrepiece of Gary Younge’s magisterialreflection on Obama’s legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/19/yes-tried-barack-obama-legacy-gary-younge>
. No apologies for that, but the eagle-eyed will notice that the picture 
section of the book opens with a photo of a jubilant Hillary Clinton 
celebrating her presidential nomination in a balloon-filled stadium, above 
another of an agonised-looking Donald Trump holding two crying babies: I don’t 
see it as an embarrassment but as a humbling memento of the denial that has 
been such a feature of the year.

Then there are the choices that turned out to be unexpectedly right, such as a 
blog from July on Andy Murray’sostensibly workaday Wimbledon win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-extraordinary-wimbledon-feats-everyday>
, in which Owen Gibson presciently concluded, “His consistency threatens to 
inure us to the scale of his achievement,”; he of course ended the year as 
world No1. Or, in one of the year’s more melancholic veins, Leonard Cohen’s
letter to his dying muse Marianne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/leonard-cohen-letter-to-marianne-ihlen-was-poetic-and-candid>
, which took Suzanne Moore to her local park where a memorial bench had been 
inscribed with the words of one of his greatest songs.

So many heroes died this year, including Cohen himself, that it’s comforting 
to remember the wisdom that Marianne inspired: “It’s time that we began to 
laugh and cry and cry and laugh about it all again.”

If this all sounds unutterably bleak, rest assured. In football, it was a year 
of triumph for the little guys:as Julian Barnes wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/julian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love>
 when his beloved Leicester City won the Premier League: “[One] of the season’s 
pleasures has been to see the professional sportswriters – and yes, let’s not 
forget to call them ‘pundits’ – get it all so wrong.” (That theme again!).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fd55236daa2848a3cea8c2cd8caab0b725ba88%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20capture%20an%20extraordinary%20year%20in%20just%2070%20articles%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-bedside-guardian-condensing-a-years-news-into-70-articles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3fd55236daa2848a3cea8c2cd8caab0b725ba88%2F0_183_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Leicester City provided some cheer in 2016 as they were crowned Premier League 
champions. Photograph: Matthew Ashton - AMA/Getty Images 
Star Wars, Pokémon Go and Harry Potter get a look-in too, alongside 
deliberations on narcissism, sugar-free diets and sheds. There’s a joyful 
evocation from the designer who created the burkini on the liberating effect of 
her invention for millions of women. “It was my first time swimming in public 
and it was absolutely beautiful. I remember the feeling so clearly. I felt 
freedom, I felt empowerment, I felt like I owned the pool,”wrote Aheda Zanetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/i-created-the-burkini-to-give-women-freedom-not-to-take-it-away>
, of an article of clothing that was banned in parts of France following the 
year’s terrorist attacks.

But in a week when the right to trigger Brexit is being interrogated in the 
supreme court, perhaps the most pertinently comic yarn is the kerfuffle over 
the name of a boat. In April, the great British public capsized a poll to name 
a new polar research vessel by voting en masse for Boaty McBoatface, and the 
resulting havoc is a delight to recall.

In ‘real life’, democracy was overruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/boaty-mcboatface-tyrants-have-crushed-the-peoples-will>
, and the boat was dubbed the David Attenborough. In the pages of the Bedside 
Guardian, it will always – almost – be Boaty McBoatface.

 * You can buy the Bedside Guardian, edited by Claire Armitstead with a 
foreword by David Hare,from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bedside-guardian-2016.html>  