
After the incredulity, the despair, and then the cautious return to optimism, 
the presidential campaign has entered a phase of almost intolerable anxiety. 
National polls that don’t signify much are instantly interpreted as omens of 
the apocalypse; tiny anecdotes about early voting figures induce heart-stopping 
panic, or get clung to like life-rafts, depending on the direction in which 
they point. Until Tuesday, no new information is likely to bring any sense of 
closure, only more stress, but that doesn’t stop us from seeking it 
compulsively.

Forget fear and loathing. The US election inspires projectile vomiting | 
Barbara Ehrenreich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/us-election-projectile-vomiting-barbara-ehrenreich>
Never mind that a victory for Donald Trump, at this point, would still require 
him to have executed a turnaroundunknown in living memory 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/clinton-trump-probably-wont-be-the-next-dewey-defeats-truman/>
, or that the nervous comparisons with Brexit have been so overblown. (Plenty 
of polls predicted a victory for Brexit – and there aremany reasons 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/no-presidential-election-will-not-be-next-brexit-pollsters-n672136>
 to assume the tapestry of state and national US polls is less error-prone than 
for a simple majority referendum.) In the closing days of an election that has 
kept Americans and non-Americans alike in a state of clenched-stomach tension 
for months, allowing yourself any confidence in a victory for Hillary Clinton 
feels like mocking the gods.

Even assuming Trump loses, the relief will be superficial: Trumpism will 
remain, and the world will have to contend with the fact that about 40% of the 
US electorate saw little wrong with his racism and misogyny, allegedsexual 
assaults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations-cathy-heller>
,business scandals 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/03/art-of-the-steal-this-is-how-trump-lost-916m-and-avoided-tax.html>
, lies, misrepresentations of his wealth andcharitable giving 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-donald-trump-retooled-his-charity-to-spend-other-peoples-money/2016/09/10/da8cce64-75df-11e6-8149-b8d05321db62_story.html>
, probable failure to pay taxes, lack of impulse control, profound ignorance 
and tiny attention span.

But the relief will still be real.

In a way that feels unprecedented in modern politics, Trump has burrowed deep 
into our psyches, stimulating anxiety that isn’t confined to the borders of the 
US, or to those who are the direct targets of his bigotry.

A survey 
<http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2016/10/presidential-election-stress.aspx>
 for the American Psychological Association published in October found that the 
election was a source of stress for 52% of American adults; during the summer, 
70% of registered voters – that is, including Trump supporters – said the 
prospect of a Trump presidency made them anxious, according to a Washington Post
poll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/page/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016/08/07/National-Politics/Polling/release_435.xml?tid=a_inl>
. (The figure for Clinton was 50%.) There have been multiple reports of 
election-related fears arisingon therapists’ couches 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/20/well/mind/talking-to-your-therapist-about-election-anxiety.html>
 as never before, along with anecdotes of relationships damaged by political 
disagreement.

“I think what’s been so uniquely distressing isn’t just that there’s one 
person out there who thinks like that, but that there are clearly so many 
people who agree,” saysJoan Cook 
<http://psychiatry.yale.edu/people/joan_cook.profile>, an associate professor 
of psychiatry at Yale University and an expert in traumatic stress. (She thinks 
Trump’s hardcore supporters, meanwhile, are in the grip of“traumatic bonding” 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8193053>, as with Stockholm syndrome – an 
emotional dependence forged through abuse.)

This is a kind of psychological entanglement with national and international 
news that most of us, most of the time, are spared; but the Trump candidacy has 
removed the possibility of such distance. The Rape, Abuse and Incest National 
Network reported a33% increase in calls 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2016/10/donald_trump_is_a_human_trigger.html>
 to its support hotline during the weekend following the release of Trump’s 
notorious Access Hollywood tape.

Armchair diagnosis: dos and don’ts

Alongside its psychological impact on the rest of us, the campaign has also 
felt distinctive – and distinctively disturbing – in the ways that Trump’s own 
psychology has come to dominate it.

While Hillary Clinton’s inner life remains largely mysterious, information 
about Trump’s insecurities leaks from his every public statement – even before 
the New York Timesobtained tapes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/26/us/politics/donald-trump-interviews.html> of 
interviews with a biographer in which Trump’s morbid fear of public humiliation 
was made plain. His former ghostwriter,Tony Schwartz 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/25/donald-trumps-ghostwriter-tells-all>
, has pointed out how Trump’s attacks on others aren’t random, but constitute a 
precise inventory of his own faults: “unstable”, “reckless”, “bigoted”, 
“trigger-happy”, exhausted and prone to lying.

As Sheena Monnin, the former Miss Pennsylvania sued by Trump after she 
criticized his Miss USA pageant, put it inan interview 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2016/10/25/former-miss-pennsylvania-sheena-monnin-intv-sued-by-trump-sot-cooper.cnn>
 with CNN: “I have a degree in psychology, and I understand that underneath the 
bullying tactics, there’s usually a lot of emptiness, and a strong need to feed 
the ego.”

Trump told his biographer Michael D’Antonio: “I don’t like to analyse myself, 
because I might not like what I see.” But the rest of us haven’t had much 
choice. Like a traffic pile-up, the candidate’s involuntary self-exposure has 
been impossible not to gawp at. (On that note, the October APA survey found 
that the election was having a significant negative impact on productivity.)

Yet throughout this intensely psychological election, psychology professionals 
have been restrained by a widespread, though fragmenting, consensus that 
Trump’s mental health ought not to be discussed at all.

This stance is most clearly expressed in the American Psychiatric 
Association’s so-calledGoldwater rule 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/psychiatrists-cant-tell-us-what-they-think-about-trump/>
 – the prohibition on diagnosis-at-a-distance introduced following the incident 
in 1964 when 1,100 psychiatrists told a news magazine they believed that Barry 
Goldwater, the Republican candidate for president, was unfit for office.

In a finger-wagging statement 
<https://www.psychiatry.org/news-room/apa-blogs/apa-blog/2016/08/the-goldwater-rule>
 released in August (“The Goldwater rule: why breaking it is unethical and 
irresponsible”), the APA’s president, Maria Oquendo, reaffirmed the ban. But 
while there are certainly strong arguments in favour of it – it risks 
undermining public confidence in psychiatrists, and stigmatising people with 
mental illness – it’s been far from obvious, in 2016, that these outweigh the 
ethical arguments for flouting it.

Writing in Vox 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/8/12/12447742/diagnosing-trump-sham-psychology>, the 
psychologist Cedar Riener compared psychiatrists disregarding the rule to a 
doctor diagnosing cancer “just by looking at my behaviour or public 
statements”. But in the case of psychological disorders, unlike physical 
illnesses, behaviour and speech are always the primary sources of diagnostic 
data. And it has often seemed as if we might have more direct access to the 
darkest recesses of Trump’s mind than to some of our closest friends.

“Like many Americans, I was more amused than alarmed by Trump at the 
beginning,” saysBill Doherty <http://dohertyrelationshipinstitute.com/>, a 
marriage and family therapist from Minnesota. But as the Trump movement picked 
up steam, Doherty happened to be travelling in Austria, where he encountered a 
neo-fascist political demonstration and visited a concentration camp. “So I did 
some reading about the responses of mental health professionals in Germany and 
Austria in the 1930s, and they were largely silent, and some were complicit.”

Upon his return, he wrote a manifesto – Citizen Therapists Against Trumpism 
<http://citizentherapists.com/> – which more than 3,300 of his colleagues have 
now signed. Doherty insists this doesn’t violate the Goldwater rule – he’s 
condemning Trumpism as a threat to public health, not diagnosing Trump as, say, 
anarcissist 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/22/is-donald-trump-a-textbook-narcissist/>
 orsociopath 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2016/07/trump-and-sociopathy/491966/>
, the disorders most frequently attributed to him.

As “citizen therapists”, Doherty says, “we must be willing to speak out on 
issues that affect the mental health of our clients, instead of just sitting in 
our offices and dealing with the fallout.”

Trump-induced distress is especially acute, he says, for anyone who has been 
exposed to a personality style like his – focused on bullying, scapegoating and 
the kneejerk demeaning of critics – earlier in their personal lives. His status 
as a presidential candidate “brings legitimacy to his way of relating to other 
people. There have always been personalities like Trump, but his power and the 
hundreds of people at his rallies say to anyone who has any psychological 
vulnerability that, yes, their fears were legitimate, and that there’s no 
accountability for anyone who says and does these things. And that’s exactly 
what’s happened in their lives: there’s been no accountability for the people 
who harmed them.”

Daddy issues: ‘a fantasy of being rescued by a powerful father figure’

Beyond the confines of therapy, the rise of Trump has demonstrated more 
broadly how bad we are at understanding politics in psychological terms. For 
months, analmost entirely futile debate 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/8/15/12462760/trump-resentment-economic-anxiety> 
between pundits has sought to establish whether Trump’s supporters are 
motivated by economic anxiety or by racism, as if the two could be neatly 
distinguished and measured.

For Jonathan Shedler, professor of psychiatry at the University of Colorado 
school of medicine, his appeal is better understood through the lens of 
“transference”: in times of stress, whatever the complex blend of causes for 
that stress, people revert to a childhood desire for an omnipotent protector – 
an understandable need in young children, but dysfunctional in adulthood.

“Trump is benefiting from a childlike fantasy of being rescued by an 
all-powerful, larger-than-life father figure, so all of these qualities get 
attributed to Trump,” he says. If the candidate’s serially outrageous behaviour 
fails to alienate them, that’s at least partly because the appealing qualities 
they’re seeing aren’t really in him; instead, “they’re in the minds of the 
people who are doing the attributing, expressing their not-quite-conscious 
yearnings.”

Meanwhile, the question of whether Trump himself is suffering from a 
personality disorder is beside the point, Shedler argues – the consequence of 
trying to force our thinking about personality into a “medical model” in which 
narcissism or antisocial attitudes, like cancer, are discrete diseases, 
invading an otherwise healthy body. But Trump’s narcissism, insecurities and 
viciousness are intrinsic components of who he is, and they’ve already damaged 
the world’s wellbeing – whether or not they’re best thought of as formal 
disorders.

Pain, anger and fear: US voters deprived of a serious presidential election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/voters-experiences-us-2016-election-trump-clinton-campaign>
At a rally in Henderson, Nevada, earlier this month, Trump told supporters 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/donald-trump-campaign-waste-time-money-energy-if-lose-229206>
: “If I don’t win, this will be the greatest waste of time, money and energy in 
my lifetime, by a factor of 100.”

It was a fairly typical statement from Trump, in its profound self-absorption 
and total lack of interest in the impact of his victory or defeat on the 
country he proposes to lead. But it was also an especially infuriating one, 
given the extraordinary quantities of attention and emotional energy Trump has 
already squandered – not his, but ours.

If he loses on 8 November, that won’t mark the end of the problem he 
represents. But it may nonetheless be a rich source of delight to savor the 
departure of the toxic uninvited guest who has spent the last year so 
stubbornly resident in our brains.

 