
Having watched the blue ball sink into the middle pocket as if pulled by an 
anchor,Alex Higgins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-higgins> chose to 
run his teeth over his bottom lip in penance. He was rooted to his chair at the 
Crucible Theatre and facing snooker’s simplest truth; when you’re not at the 
table, you’re not in control. He had already been given two chances to build 
something in the frame and taken neither. The match had seesawed throughout but 
the odds on him being given a third chance felt so long not even he would have 
been tempted to take them.


His seated vigil continued as his opponent in the 1982 World Championship 
semi-final,Jimmy White <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jimmy-white>, lined 
up a red from the rest. For a man who often appeared to be at war with his own 
body, Higgins was remarkably still. He moved to pick at an imagined itch on his 
finger but then returned to his lonely introspection. Despite the changes he’d 
made, despite listening, despite the promises, despite itall, he was going to 
lose. Alex Higgins was going to lose.

It had been at this very venue a year previous that he had begun to realise 
the Hurricane was in control and Alex Higgins was lagging behind. While a mere 
lift of the Hurricane’s hat could still raise an exhibition crowd from their 
seats, Alex Higgins had been knocked out of the 1981Snooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/snooker> World Championships in the second 
round by an unseeded Steve Davis. Davis would go on to have a banner year but 
courtesy of a bye for the top eight seeds, Higgins had lost his first and only 
match of the tournament.

It was symptomatic of a relentless life. The constant schedule of exhibitions 
and competitions left little time for practice but too much room for his vices. 
After his exit from last year’s tournament was followed by a shambolic Scottish 
Masters, frequent issues with snooker’s authorities and a tour organised by 
Barry Hearn that had lurched from one argument to the next, the Hurricane 
finished 1981 as popular as ever while Alex Higgins was exhausted, alcoholic 
and now saddled with a burgeoning drug habit.

He had started 1982 as a new father, a relatively new husband and a man at war 
with his alter ego. His first step to putting Alex back in the driving seat had 
been two weeks rest in a nursing home. He then fired his management, finally 
finished the practice room at his new house and made it known to Barry Hearn 
that he wanted to join his Matchroom stable – a group of very successful 
players Hearn managed who immediately informed him they wouldn’t allow Higgins 
in.

Higgins found new management but within a couple of months he was on his own, 
memorably using the freedom to represent himself at a disciplinary hearing to 
which he arrived with “a trolley full of Moet & Chandon and a jug of orange 
juice” for his accusers. Despite offering them the white flag the only way he 
knew how, they still fined him just as heavily as always.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3337e6550866f03b8dd70b39db7275d2c71de80a%2F0_142_2356_1413%2F2356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker's%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker%27s%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3337e6550866f03b8dd70b39db7275d2c71de80a%2F0_142_2356_1413%2F2356.jpg>
 Alex Higgins marrying Lynn Avison in Wilslow. Photograph: PA 
There had still been the odd lapse, he had picked up far too many demons to 
simply walk to heaven without ever glancing back, but he’d managed to reconnect 
with the 22-year old man that won the 1972 World Championship in such 
revelatory style. The Hurricane had been put to one side and he had earned this 
semi-final place on his own. But was that enough?

His daughter, Lauren, had become the main love of his life. As Higgins sat 
here watching White stare down his cue at the red ball ahead, his hand 
flickered over the dummy in his pocket, the good luck charm that represented 
the promise he had made to her to win this World Championship. The Hurricane 
broke promises to his family all the time. It looked like Alex would too.

Suddenly the shadows around him filled with noise. The Crucible held less than 
a thousand people but as Higgins instinctively rose from his chair whispers of 
disappointment and excitement were everywhere. It was a familiar sound, one 
that Higgins had been on either side of. He took the three steps to the table 
barely registering what had just happened. White had missed his red a mere 
eight points away from near-certain victory and a place in the World 
Championship final. Higgins had his improbable third chance. He was at the 
table. He was in control.

He glanced at the scoreboard, 59-0 in White’s favour, and then surveyed the 
baize ahead. Two reds were difficult, one had to be moved, the black ball was 
marooned up the table. He needed every red, high colours and a full clearance.

He wiped his hands in turn on his waistcoat and drew breath. Each shot was 
going to matter, position was difficult and if he didn’t win and draw level 
with White it was all over. He came to one inescapable conclusion before 
bending to line up his first shot. He needed help. He needed the Hurricane.

“And so Alex breathes again, [White is] 59 points in front now … and still 
enough points on the table for Alex if he can just take his opportunity.”

BBC commentator Jack Karnehm

Higgins was born on Friday 18 March 1949. A happy childhood was spent being 
doted upon by his parents and three sisters in an austere Belfast. As the only 
boy, Alex was adored within his family, nicknamed “Sandy” and allowed certain 
freedoms his sisters would never earn while still living at home. He learnt at 
an early age he had to find ways to contribute, and this in part led to the 
birth of the Hurricane.

By the age of 10 he was daring to go where he shouldn’t – the notorious Jam 
Pot Billiard Hall. He had graduated from running his father’s bets to the 
corners where they would be taken to keeping score for the Jam Pot’s regulars. 
At a time where numeracy was a highly cherished skill, it had become common for 
the local children to be employed in this way. So much so teachers at Higgins’ 
school had taken to calling it the Glue Pot because “their pupils were never 
out of it”. Higgins observed, did as he was told and, due to a mixture of 
bravado and bluff, became popular enough to be trusted to run messages for 
players and do odd jobs around the hall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58cbd4bf19ed47a64172bc094c6c72ff92c50099%2F0_0_4578_2766%2F4578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker's%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker%27s%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58cbd4bf19ed47a64172bc094c6c72ff92c50099%2F0_0_4578_2766%2F4578.jpg>
 A mural to Higgins in Belfast. Photograph: Peter Morrison/AP 
He had also started playing almost immediately – standing on a box and with a 
broom handle at this point – and by the age of 12 he was hustling “giants” five 
or six years older than him. He became infamous as the kid holding his own with 
the adults before becoming famous as the kid who was beating all comers. By his 
mid-teens he had outgrown the Jam Pot but the notion of becoming a professional 
was still seen as a pipe dream, particularly as his heart was with another 
sport.

His ambition had been to become a jockey and, through a mix of coincidence and 
cheek, he was given the chance to learn at the Reavey Stables in Oxfordshire. 
He left Belfast aged 15 on a ferry and left behind a family who had been 
desperate for him not to go. He then spent nearly two years with the stables, a 
period he described inhis 2007 autobiography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Hurricane-Bill-Borrows/dp/1843548631> as “the 
happiest of my life”, but ultimately a lack of focus and an excess of 
self-belief not backed up by the required talent saw his dream end.

He returned to Belfast briefly but then moved to London for a year where he 
rekindled his previous life – an existence entirely planned around a snooker 
hall and a betting shop’s opening hours. Working at a mill to earn just enough 
to survive, his gambling and smoking habits required the extra funding only his 
cue could provide. He returned home to Belfast in 1967 and set about answering 
the question many had asked: could Alex Higgins, the scrawny kid who never 
stopped talking, become a professional snooker player?

The Jam Pot was in decline so he headed to the Shaftesbury Club, where he 
found a better class of player. His game was such that he was urged to enter 
the 1968 Northern Ireland Amateur Championship, which he won comfortably. This 
was the turning point in Higgins’ life as he now had evidence for the two 
things he had long suspected. Firstly, just by playing his natural game – a mix 
of bravery, speed around the table and the occasional smile or wink at the 
audience – he could hold a crowd in the palm of his hand. Secondly, he might 
just be able to actually do it; he might just be able to make it as a 
professional.

He continued to play in tournaments with mixed success – often succumbing to 
the crowd’s urging to take on that shot he knew he shouldn’t – but via 
exhibition invitations and word of mouth he became the most talked about 
amateur in the UK. The problem with potential is you often have to prove it and 
Higgins needed a bigger stage. Regularly invited to play against pros at 
invitational events, he knew he could compete and, despite struggling with 
money and having no real discernible trade to fall back on if everything went 
wrong, in 1972 Higgins entered the World Championships as a professional player.


“There’s no way he can clean up from here” I insisted. “He’s gone, I’m telling 
you. His confidence has gone”

John Virgo, watching from the player’s boxes at the Crucible

One red in and already he was up against it. Caught in two minds, like an 
amateur. His first red had been a simple cut to the bottom right pocket but 
he’d played to go past the pink and leave himself options. As it was he’d 
under-hit the shot and left himself only a blue that was too straight and too 
long to be confident about taking on, or a green that meant running tight to 
the blue and then using at least two cushions for position.

He took a pause. He went through the full repertoire of ticks to buy himself 
the time to weigh and measure both shots appropriately before letting the 
Hurricane help him pick one. His cue was chalked twice, his hair swept back 
three times, the table tapped and the scoreboard checked and checked again. One 
shot in and he had his first make or break pot. One bloody shot and already the 
Hurricane wanted to take over.

He leaned over and lined up the green. Higgins had blunted his more flamboyant 
urges but the nerve to take this shot on, in this situation, was going to be a 
joint effort. The risk was all in the position. A hushed Crucible broke into 
applause as the green dropped into the pocket but he was watching the white 
bounce from the bottom cushion.

There had been an angle to come back up the table towards his difficult red, 
tied to the rail below the middle pocket. The first wave of applause died 
slightly in anticipation as the collective realisation that the white was in 
line to move the problem ball took hold. As they touched Higgins was off to 
line up his next red, knowing it had enough pace to have bounced away from the 
cushion and into play. It was a shot few would have dared to attempt. He had 
played it, pulled it off and was now busy trying to stifle the Hurricane’s 
smile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ed8469990e4515d4f19eed2d11e04f1ef590ce%2F0_236_3248_2065%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker's%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker%27s%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ed8469990e4515d4f19eed2d11e04f1ef590ce%2F0_236_3248_2065%2F3248.jpg>
 Higgins celebrating in 1982. Photograph: David Muscroft/Rex 
Adrenaline had him and accordingly he took his next red too quickly and again 
let himself down on the position. The white had come the full length of the 
table and now sat and inch or so behind the yellow. Absolute silence returned 
to the theatre but a cacophony of noise wouldn’t have made any difference to 
Higgins. In one shot he had given himself a question that went beyond this 
frame, this semi-final or indeed, this World Championship.

The way the white had fallen left him two options: safety or danger. He could 
simply roll in tight behind the yellow, go against instinct and cede the table 
to his opponent in the hope it would come back to him in a more advantageous 
way. Defend what you’ve got, hope it gets better. Higgins had spent the first 
five months of the year taking control and despite leaving the table, this was 
the way 99 out of 100 professionals would go. He knew this was the safe option. 
Thesafe option.

The other way was the Hurricane’s territory: attack. He could take the black 
on but it had to run two thirds of the table to the bottom left pocket and the 
white had to hold the little angle it had for the next red. It was potable but 
with the table as it was there was perhaps only the Hurricane and his current 
opponent that would have even considered taking it on in a semi-final. It was 
madness. It was dangerous. But the Hurricane wanted to attack. The Hurricane 
wanted to be heard.

A few seconds ticked by but the answer was obvious. In truth he had known 
exactly what he had to do the moment the white finished where it did. As a 
seasoned gambler he knew sometimes the surest thing to do is to back yourself. 
Accordingly, the Hurricane lined up for the black.

“I was watching him putting these drinks down and I was thinking, well, 
y’know, this has got to be in my favour somewhere along the line but he … he 
produced”

Jimmy White talking about the frame in 2010

The 1972 World Snooker Championship 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1972_World_Snooker_Championship> was a world 
away from the Crucible’s relative luxury. Set in the long gone British Legion 
in Birmingham, where the crowd sat around the table on stacked up beer crates, 
the best of 73 frames final was played out over a week. Higgins had beaten a 
couple of players he respected enormously in John Pulman and Rex Williams in 
the quarter and semi-finals, and in the final faced another in John Spencer. 
One brilliant session gave Higgins a six-frame lead and Spencer simply couldn’t 
close the gap.

Higgins’ win sent shockwaves through the tight-knit snooker community. The 
game had its greats but now it had its first player with crossover appeal. For 
as long as anyone could remember, snooker had meant dark and smoky rooms, 
glacially paced frames and pressed suits. Here was a kid who flew around the 
table, moving from one shot to the next while never taking a hand from the 
baize. Here was a player who played not just the game, but also the audience, 
smiling and laughing his way through frames. And here was a poster boy, 
handsome and a world away from the middle-aged men around him.

Over the next five years his career blossomed further. By the mid-1970s he was 
the game’s most recognisable name, with several non-ranking titles won but no 
further majors. His opponents had worked out a plan to nullify him as best they 
could by puling him back to their level with long-drawn out frames and safety 
battles. His impatience and subsequent desire to please the crowd would always 
cost him. But it was exactly those qualities that filled exhibition halls the 
length and breadth of Great Britain, and he loved their adoration.

Alex Higgins, snooker player, dies at 61
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/24/alex-higgins-snooker-dies-61> 
Away from the crowd he was developing a reputation for a prickly attitude to 
authority. While his life was yet to truly leave the rails he had already been 
fined several times for minor misdemeanours and his capacity for drink was 
becoming legendary. He was also a heavy smoker and snooker’s relationship with 
several tobacco sponsors meant he would never be short of cigarettes or matches 
at which to smoke them. Higgins played fast and lived faster, also adding women 
and gambling to his list of vices. Despite this, as snooker moved into the 
world of mass entertainment, he was to become its biggest star.

In 1977 the World Championships moved to the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield 
with a lucrative new sponsorship deal in place with Embassy. Its single 
location and three-camera set-up was perfect for TV and the game moved from the 
black and white backrooms to the bright lights of the BBC. Higgins’ game was 
built for a wider audience and, of course, he embraced them accordingly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7176639ba487e411a6ca1ac9ca9c408e2804ef8c%2F174_0_3458_4534%2F3458.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker's%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker%27s%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7176639ba487e411a6ca1ac9ca9c408e2804ef8c%2F174_0_3458_4534%2F3458.jpg>
 Higgins enjoying his other passion. Photograph: ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Hurricane had already gone primetime, snooker was merely catching up and 
now he found himself welcome at every bar in Great Britain. As his star grew 
throughout the 1970s, things began to get away from him. He had never lived a 
quiet life but suddenly here he was, drunk and running through a 35-room 
mansion as an equally drunk Oliver Reed chased him with an axe. At an 
exhibition match in Ilfracombe he threw his cue “spear-like” at a spectator who 
riled him. He missed tournament games to play more lucrative exhibition games 
and began drifting from match to match losing track of which mattered and which 
were for show.

He was fined continuously for falling out with snooker’s authorities for 
everything from telling the most experienced referee in the game to “read the 
fucking rulebook”, to continuing to lick the white ball to clean it even though 
that had been banned. He refused to wear black, knowing he would be fined, 
until black was outlawed as snooker attempted to modernise, at which point 
Higgins immediately favoured the traditional suit with a black bowtie. He even 
managed to get himself banned from appearing on Pot Black for being caught 
urinating in the sink in his dressing room because the toilets were a “fair 
walk.”

Several nights out with Oliver Reed and Alex Higgins went exactly as you would 
expect them too, one ending in a sword fight, another with the infamous downed 
half-pint of Chanel No5. Practice time went from being elusive to nearly 
non-existent. He drank with Keith Moon, Ian Botham, Elton John, George Best and 
everyone in between. By that fateful 1981 World Championships the Hurricane was 
front and back page news, even earning himself an appearance on This Is Your 
Life. The wake-up call of realising his game now lagged behind was needed as no 
amount of fines, bans, hangovers or arguments had broken through the hedonistic 
ice he had surrounded himself in. The Hurricane was a force of nature, Alex 
Higgins was just a man.

“Never in the history of sporting conflict has there been so much triumph and 
tragedy as there was in the semi-final of the World Snooker Championship in 
Sheffield”

Alan Thompson in the Express, Saturday 15 May 1982

In lining up for that black he had not only admitted to himself that the 
Hurricane was back in control, but he had now told the world. He took the shot 
and unusually stayed down to watch it, willing it to disappear but also taking 
in the moment. It drifted towards the pocket, bounced from side to side and 
dropped to a chorus of cheers. In one shot everything had changed. He chalked 
his cue, walked round to the next red but looked above the scoreboard to the 
commentary box. Catching Spencer’s eye he grinned – he had this, no bother – a 
moment caught on the live BBC coverage. If the halo had ever slipped in the 
public’s eye here was a smile that told them not to worry.

His next difficult red was clipped effortlessly into a middle pocket, leaving 
himself the blue to the bottom right. Position wasn’t easy but he was beginning 
to feel something. Momentum is powerful but to those who can create it from 
nothing it becomes a drug, the one high you can’t replace once the sporting 
lights fade. He took his time to enjoy the feeling, checking the angle but 
knowing exactly what he wanted to do. He checked the score with both board and 
referee, and took the blue on.

How Johan Cruyff nearly signed for Leicester City in 1981
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/in-bed-with-maradona/2016/jan/12/johan-cruyff-signed-leicester-city-barcelona-nasl>
The blue dropped but no one was watching. Higgins had hit the white with so 
much side and screw he had moved it across half the table to one cushion, only 
for it to spin back all the way to the other side and bounce down towards the 
small pack of three remaining reds. Clive Everton called the shot 
“extraordinary” and admitted in a 2010 BBC documentary “to this day I have no 
idea how he got so much spin on the ball.” In the same programme his opponent, 
White, went for the more succinct but no less apt “it was just a crazy shot”. 
Dennis Taylor admitted he’d “set it up a few times and I’ve no idea how he 
created so much back-spin with a flick of his wrist.” A World Championship 
semi-final in which he had no margin for error, and he was playing exhibition 
shots.

From that moment on there was no way he was going to miss a thing. A red 
travelled the length of the table while the white lined up perfectly for the 
black. The commentary team were now effusive with their praise knowing this was 
one of snooker’s greatest ever breaks. Each shot was “tremendous” or 
“beautiful”, every word taking on a little more meaning as the growing 
realisation this was going to be played again and again hit home. That 
red/black combination was followed by another red taken from the rest to the 
same pocket that had cost White his chance. White watched on from his chair, 
cue to the side. The game was up. There may have been one frame to go after 
this but the Whirlwind was spent, blown away by a Hurricane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e7acbc552812c6a453da51c164717cee254e59%2F0_249_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker's%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Alex%20Higgins%20rode%20the%20Hurricane%20to%20produce%20one%20of%20snooker%27s%20greatest%20breaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Falex-higgins-hurricane-snooker-jimmy-white-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e7acbc552812c6a453da51c164717cee254e59%2F0_249_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
 Alex Higgins. Photograph: Empics/PA 
Another red and black were potted and Higgins was on the colours, still 
needing them all to take the frame but by now he was enjoying himself. He moved 
seamlessly from one to the other. His journey through the reds had been marked 
by the way he had dug himself out of trouble he had busily made for himself. As 
he moved through the six colours he was millimetre perfect on each shot, every 
ball dropping centre pocket, white landing perfectly every time. As he lined up 
for the black that would give him the 69-59 frame win, there wasn’t a doubt in 
the room.

The room erupted knowing it had just witnessed sporting genius. “Marvellous” 
said Karnehm as the final ball dropped. Higgins strode back to his table but 
not before another glance towards Spencer. He smiled, pointed and said “yeah”. 
For a man prone to emotional outbursts it was a wonderfully understated 
gesture, but also one that drained any semblance of confidence Jimmy White may 
have held on to. Alex “the Hurricane” Higgins was back, whole again and 
winning. Nothing could go wrong now…
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCAO48WSZnRU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCAO48WSZnRU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCAO48WSZnRU&media=>
• This blog first appeared on In Bed With Maradona 
<http://inbedwithmaradona.com/>
• Follow David Hartrick <https://twitter.com/DavidHartrick> and In Bed With 
Maradona <https://twitter.com/Inbedwimaradona> on Twitter
 