
We can assume that David Cameron is a bit of a gamer, having been busted 
obsessively playing Fruit Ninja and Angry Birds 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2146526/If-gold-medal-chillaxing-Dave-win-New-book-lifts-lid-love-karaoke-tennis-date-nights-Sam-hes-hooked-Fruit-Ninja-iPad-game.html>
 in the past. So there is an outside chance that, finally, he might soften his 
government’s harsh, grudging response to the Syrian refugee crisis. Because one 
of the gaming world’s most famous characters – the moustachioed plumberMario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> – has been co-opted into 
highlighting the plight of those attempting to flee from the Scylla and 
Charybdis of Isis and Bashar al-Assad.

A Syrian artist, pseudonymously known as Samir al-Mutfi, has created Syrian 
Super Mario 
<http://www.techtimes.com/articles/84297/20150914/syrian-super-mario-is-now-a-thing-video-game-depicting-migrant-crisis-in-europe.htm>
, a satirical video that is currently going viral, highlighting the horrors 
faced by Syrian refugees – by tweaking the 1985 video game Super Mario Bros. 
Mario has taken many forms over the decades, but this time he has become 
Refugee Mario. And instead of making his way to Bowser’s castle in order to 
rescue Princess Peach, he merely has to get to the castle, which now bears the 
forbidding legend: “Camp”.

Along the way, many perils (all rendered in the familiar Super Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> Bros style, with sound 
effects to match) await. Grabbing his suitcase and emptying his savings account 
by bashing a money-block with his head, Refugee Mario hands his funds to 
traffickers, undergoes a perilous Mediterranean crossing (thank goodness he has 
multiple lives), evades border-patrolling soldiers eager to lock him up and 
finally reaches the dubious sanctuary of a refugee camp.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjmI2456CzJY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjmI2456CzJY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjmI2456CzJY&media=>
 The Syrian Super Mario video on YouTube 
Speaking to the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-trending-34223795>, Mutfi 
– who himself fled Homs for Istanbul in 2011 – said: “Five months ago, my best 
friend drowned in the sea while travelling from Turkey to Greece: the engine on 
the boat exploded. That’s when I got the idea for the video. It needed to be a 
simple and clear idea that would work irrespective of language. I used Super 
Mario because it’s famous all over the world. It’s like music – a universal 
language.”

Mutfi, now working for a Turkish outfit, Online for Media, fled Homs after two 
of his brothers were killed. He has since made a number of animations parodying 
Assad’s speeches, having discovered that he can mimic his voice uncannily. 
Which may – along with his Syrian Super Mario video – have made him a marked 
man. But that doesn’t worry him: “We used to live inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> without any dignity or freedom, but 
we don’t have anything now. It’s so disappointing to see what is happening with 
this refugee crisis. It’s life or death. We have to make our own futures.”

Mutfi’s Syrian Super Mario video is timely in one respect: last Friday, 
Nintendo releasedSuper Mario Maker 
<https://www.nintendo.co.uk/Games/Wii-U/Super-Mario-Maker-892704.html> for Wii 
U, which lets gamers make their own Super Mario Bros levels – so anyone with a 
Wii U can use Mutfi’s efforts for inspiration. Could the “universal language” 
of gaming – which we know Cameron understands – be the medium that finally 
prompts the PM to take decisive action on Syria? Well, you never know.
 