
What could be more Christmassy than a plum pudding, sitting plumply in its 
shiny red wrapper on a supermarket shelf from pretty much right now until 24 
December? But as it drops with a satisfying thud into the bottom of your 
shopping trolley, have you ever thought what the maker of that plum pudding did 
for a living the rest of the year?

One chance for profit

Christmas products, enticing and exciting though they are for a few short 
weeks a year, have a distinct downside for whoever is selling them, points out 
Stephen Evans, managing director atChristmas Tree World 
<http://www.christmastreeworld.co.uk/>. “The problem with seasonal companies is 
you’re only using your working capital once a year – and so you only have the 
chance to make a profit once a year. It is an unbelievable disadvantage.”


As the owner of a garden centre in Cheadle, Evans’s family business has 
grappled with this problem for more than three decades, and have now come full 
circle in their exploration of ways to diversify out of a dependence on 
seasonality. Garden centres make most of their their money in May and June, 
Evans points out. So when they opted to try selling real Christmas trees in the 
1980s, sales grew to the point that eventually, the business needed to find 
another product with better year-round appeal.

Thanks to existing relationships with factories in the far east, where by now 
the company was sourcing lights and decorations to compliment Christmas tree 
sales, he discovered an illuminated “blossom tree” which for past two years the 
online shop has promoted heavily to wedding fairs, the hospitality business and 
even to individual retail customers as a home decoration. Without it, where 
would the company be now?


“There’d be a significant problem, because our use of working capital would go 
down,” he says. “The bigger the success of the Christmas trees, the more 
warehouse space we need and the more skilled staff we take on – and we’d still 
have to pay for warehouse space and the staffing [the rest of the year]. The 
blossom trees help us do it.”

But diversifying away from a successful product can be hard to achieve, 
particularly when your whole concept is based on the Christmas theme.

Diversifying Christmas

Entrepreneur Sarah Greenwell dreamt up Elf for Christmas 
<https://www.elfforchristmas.co.uk/> on her second maternity leave while 
looking for a Christmas tradition to share with her young daughter. Following a 
“soft” launch on a custom built website last year – paid for with her savings – 
Greenwell was stunned at rocketing sales of her Elf toy, a character which sits 
in a family home making sure that children are good and kind in the lead up to 
Christmas. This year, after huge interest from major stores, it’ll be stocked 
in Waterstones, Selfridges and John Lewis: despite that success, she is keenly 
aware of the need to create a product that will sustain her business throughout 
the months when nobody wants to think about Christmas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-christmas-surge-last-all-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3f6e134f715c8cf26fc9edacef9b3eef45b6a1%2F0_0_5528_3685%2F5528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20Christmas%20surge%20last%20all%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-christmas-surge-last-all-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20Christmas%20surge%20last%20all%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-christmas-surge-last-all-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3f6e134f715c8cf26fc9edacef9b3eef45b6a1%2F0_0_5528_3685%2F5528.jpg>
 Sarah Greenwell dreamt upElf for Christmas <https://www.elfforchristmas.co.uk/>
 while looking for a Christmas tradition to share with her daughter. 
Photograph: Elf for Christmas 
“It’s always going to be in the back of your mind – you’ve got to evolve the 
idea, and keep it fresh,” says Greenwell. “And [being seasonal] is always going 
to be a worry, because you have lots of your eggs in one basket. I think other 
products will be harder to develop.”

With many having bought direct from her website last November and December, 
Greenwell might do best by launching further products initially to those 
customers who have already bought once, says Joey Moore, product director at 
Peerius, which helps businesses to personalise individual customers’ online 
experience.

But can you keep going back to a customer, or do you risk alienating people 
with constant emails urging them to buy again?

Individualising your approach is a great way to nurture existing 
relationships, says Moore. “Customers want the intimacy that small and medium 
sized business often do so well,” he says. “And it is very possible to 
personalise someone’s experience of your homepage, or even at the most basic 
level, get your website to recognise if they’re a new or returning visitor.”

As a brand new business, Greenwell has had to work hard over the past year to 
secure a distributor, at the same time as forecasting demand, and developing an 
updated 2016 version of Elf for Christmas. In the midst of all this, she’s 
inventing a brand new character that will appeal to children in the New Year 
when their Christmas Elf is safely packed away. She suggests that there are 
pros as well as cons to being a seasonal business, and these should not be 
discounted. “Yes, you might have nine months of no sales, but you know there 
will be three months when people definitely want your product,” she says. And 
there is so much to do in the lead up to Christmas that a seasonal business 
“has to plan well, and use those nine months wisely.”

New opportunities are partly about building new relationships, but also about 
telling existing customers about new ideas

A 30-year-old business which has just made a significant investment in taking 
a more year-round approach is theUltimate Plum Pudding Company 
<http://www.ultimateplumpudding.co.uk/> based in Cumbria. The founders, nearing 
retirement, decided to employ a new general manager this year with a specific 
brief to diversify their product range. Ian Stansfield, who took up post in 
March, has already been busy – a new bakery making biscuits and steamed 
puddings aimed at summer fetes is the first and most natural extension to 
maximise on the company’s skillset and reputation – and says that new 
opportunities are partly about building new relationships, but also about 
telling existing customers about new ideas.

Repeat customers

“You have to do quite a bit of blue sky thinking, and not everything comes 
off,” Stansfield explains. One initiative that did bear fruit was his decision 
to take exhibition space at Foodex, one of the largest annual food and drink 
trade fairs held at the NEC in Birmingham. As a result of conversations struck 
up at the company’s display stand, the Ultimate Plum Pudding Company is now 
licensing five products with world famous distillery The Famous Grouse. A 
whiskey laced sticky toffee pudding, chutney and butter are among five new 
products in the offing, which Stansfield hopes will help the business break 
into the lucrative hamper and gift set market, he explains.

“When you’re seasonal you can’t be regimented,” he advises. “Being flexible is 
key - you get the sniff of an opportunity, and you have think ‘how can we turn 
it to something for us?’

Spreading interest sparked at Christmas throughout the whole year requires 
businesses to actively plant seeds in customers’s minds about other services 
they can offer, advises Rebecca Hurley, deputy head of events forBMA House 
<http://www.bmahouse.org.uk/> which hosts parties at Christmas, and aims to 
turn those enquiries into future business.

“We receive a surge of enquiries around the festive period and use these 
opportunities to create longer standing relationships with new clients by 
staying in touch with them and proactively asking them what other events they 
might be planning,” she explains. “This is a prime time to connect with 
personal assistants who will be organising 2017 board meetings and AGMs for 
their bosses, and who may not realise that we can cater for a variety of 
occasions including meetings, AGMs, outdoor receptions and launches.

Hurley says that there is always the chance that a one-off booking at 
Christmas could turn into a valuable future booking or recommendation if you 
nurture the opportunity carefully. “Our motto is, if you don’t ask you 
certainly won’t get the work!”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>, sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub
 