
Todd Solondz, director

After the failure in 1989 of my debut Fear, Anxiety & Depression 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-nN1Tj3Ac40>, an ill-conceived, ill-begotten 
project, I left the film business for several years and taught English to 
Russian immigrants. I was terrified of failing again, and irretrievably so – I 
don’t know that I would have survived. But I didn’t want that first movie to 
have the last word.


I started writing Welcome to the Dollhouse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PTCoF7ZQG0E> around the time of that first 
film. I couldn’t think of any American films that dealt in any serious way with 
childhood. Children in American films were either cute like a little doll or 
evil demons. The early drafts of Dollhouse were all darker and more depressing; 
it took time to find the right level of bleakness. My hope was the film would 
succeed well enough to let me make a living doing after-school specials 
[educational TV films for teenagers].

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5b11482ce75561693204c7dcddbcc76713bcf4%2F0_122_4094_2456%2F4094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5b11482ce75561693204c7dcddbcc76713bcf4%2F0_122_4094_2456%2F4094.jpg>
 ‘Each take made Heather’s mother more and more uncomfortable’ … Matarazzo with 
Brendan Sexton in Welcome to the Dollhouse 
Was [lead character] Dawn Wiener a version of me? I don’t know that I was 
particularly awkward – no more than a typical 11-year-old. We all have our 
childhood and adolescent experiences, and they shape our lives as adults. I had 
materials to draw upon, like anyone else.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9042727147d0ea19250207c9aedce4c18b0cce%2F40_47_1974_2920%2F1974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9042727147d0ea19250207c9aedce4c18b0cce%2F40_47_1974_2920%2F1974.jpg>
 Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
You have to break rules to get a movie made on $800,000. We sometimes worked 
in the middle of the night, which wasn’t really legal in the US, certainly with 
child actors. Heather, who I’d chosen to play Dawn, was a feisty girl who 
always had the energy and desire to work beyond what was required. Her mother 
was on set every day; there was certainly visible in Heather a kind of 
rebelliousness to go to places beyond what her mother felt comfortable with. On 
the second day of shooting, she had to kiss her tormentor, Brandon (played by 
Brendan Sexton). Each successive take made her mother more and more 
uncomfortable. That was Heather’s first kiss.


I had wanted to call the film Faggots and Retards, but I knew I had to be 
responsible if I wanted it to sell. The working title had been Middle Child – 
something that could have been a Disney film – because I didn’t want to attract 
any undue attention. When you’re dealing with children and sexuality, you have 
to be cautious. In the end, I took the title from the song in the movie. The 
poster was my concept: cut-out letters from different magazines and newspapers 
that the kidnapper in the film might have used.

Interviewers would say, “How does it feel to play an ugly girl?” What I'd hear 
was: “How does it feel to be so ugly?”

Because a lot of people who had seen the rough cut were sceptical about the 
film’s content, I wasn’t just being paranoid when I expected it to fail. But 
when it sold to Sony Classics after Toronto film festival, I knew it was going 
places. It was a seismic shift in my life that I was capable of making a movie 
with such an impact. I was happy when I won the Grand Jury prize at Sundance in 
1996 – who wouldn’t be? It’s nice to win prizes, it brings out the child in 
everyone.


Heather Matarazzo, actor

I was due to audition for one of Dawn’s friends, a role that ended up being 
cut. But Todd asked me to read for the lead. I was very candid about the script 
– I didn’t censor myself when I was young. I thought it was a PG version of 
what happened in junior high, and I said as much. Todd just did that nodding of 
the head, that slight smile – “Oh, reeeallly!” – that he has mastered so well. 
But he definitely tapped into a universal truth about a lot of kids being cruel.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44e25fad863fe8c55fb17077d17fecf01884c27%2F0_464_2008_2508%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fhow-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44e25fad863fe8c55fb17077d17fecf01884c27%2F0_464_2008_2508%2F2008.jpg>
 Matarazzo in Welcome to the Dollhouse. Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
There was only one scene I wasn’t in, and we were working 14-hour days, so 
there wasn’t much time to hang out with the other kids. Working with Todd was a 
silent, intuitive collaboration. My mother definitely had some reservations, 
though. In an earlier version, Brandon actually raped me. But I was very 
persistent and very adamant that this script was incredibly honest and spoke to 
me: the concept of a young woman who isn’t necessarily popular, doesn’t have 
any friends, and yet survives. My heroes at the time wereVivien Leigh in Gone 
With the Wind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tU5bQ7W4c6k>, Judy Garland in 
The Wizard of Oz – other underdogs.

They didn’t fly me out to Toronto or Sundance, because of the expense, I 
think. It felt like having helped set up the party, then not being invited to 
it. I went into seventh grade that following year, so I was entering into the 
experience I had just done on film. When Dollhouse came out, there was 
definitely an element of kids being jealous. Acting like little assholes. I 
said to myself: I’m doing what I love right now. And you’ve probably peaked 
already.


I refused to play Dawn again when Todd brought her back in 2004’s Palindromes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/103223/palindromes> [Solondz resurrects 
Dawn again in Weiner Dog, played by Greta Gerwig]. I was 18, and I was trying 
to get away from that kind of “quirky” role. I had internalised Dawn quite a 
bit. Interviewers would say, “How does it feel to play such an ugly girl?” What 
I would hear was: “How does it feel to be so ugly?” Also Todd wanted the 
grownup Dawn to be a domestic terrorist who blows herself up in front of a 
Banana Republic. I didn’t want that to be her legacy. We’re both very 
passionate about Dawn, but I didn’t refuse his offer with the love and grace I 
could have. We didn’t speak again until recently. I found out aboutWiener-Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wiener-dog> on Twitter. 

• Todd Solondz’s Wiener-Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/wiener-dog-review-todd-solondz-daschund-danny-devito>
 is out now.




 