
John Berger, who died on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-art-critic-and-author-dies-aged-90>
, wrote and said a lot of smart things, but he will be remembered longest for 
his 1972 BBC television series and bookWays of Seeing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-of-seeing.html>. The TV series 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pDE4VX_9Kk> belongs to the pixellated past, 
but the brilliantly designed book published alongside it by Penguin, with 
boldly montaged illustrations and stark, pithy text, is a bestselling modern 
classic.

As Berger put it, we are visual animals who see before we learn to read and, 
even as adults, get our most basic orientation in the world with our eyes, 
which makes images extraordinarily powerful.

Works of art are simply images among other images. It is a nostalgic lie to 
see them as lofty spiritual creations. A painting of a naked woman that was 
made by Titian 500 years ago is just as much about sex and power as a piece of 
modern pornography or a titillating poster. The advertising industry loves to 
claim the aura of “art” for its imagery. That is no surprise given that oil 
painting was essentially, for much of its history, a way to visually “own” 
women, commodities and land.

John Berger, art critic and author, dies aged 90
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/john-berger-art-critic-and-author-dies-aged-90>
In 1972, Berger wrote that we are free to see images in collages of our own 
making. Think of a pinboard where you stick your own favourite pictures, of all 
sorts, from magazine photographs to postcards of famous paintings. This is your 
own image world, in which you find your own meanings. It offers utopian 
possibility. Or, in Berger’s inspiring words: “For the first time ever, images 
of art have become ephemeral, ubiquitous, insubstantial, available, valueless, 
free. They surround us in the same way as a language surrounds us … If the new 
language of images were used differently, it would, through its use, confer a 
new kind of power. Within it we could begin to define our own experiences more 
precisely in areas where words are inadequate. (Seeing comes before words.)”

Seeing comes before words – and after them. When you have lost the power to 
speak, when consciousness is fading, there will still be faces surrounding the 
bed. As in the death of a person, so in the decay of a society. The most 
uplifting thing about Ways of Seeing is Berger’s optimism about the age of the 
mass-circulating reproduced image, which, back in 1972, meant images in 
newspapers and magazines, on advertising hoardings and television. Now, of 
course, it also means on Facebook, Instagram and the internet at large. As for 
postcards of paintings, today we are more likely to snap a masterpiece in an 
art gallery on our phones.

The democratisation of the image that Berger welcomed in the era when David 
Hockney was paintingA Bigger Splash 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-a-bigger-splash-t03254> has got so 
much bigger and splashier. This has had some consequences Berger never guessed 
at. High art, which he saw as a snooty, aristocratic preserve policed byhis 
arch-enemy Lord Kenneth Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/16/kenneth-clark-arrogant-snob-saviour-art>
, is infinitely more accessible than he anticipated. Ways of Seeing quotes a 
range of statistics to show that only university-educated toffs went anywhere 
near art museums: those bleak 1970s figures now look very dated. One of the 
reasons art has become so popular is that artists have learned the lesson of 
Ways of Seeing. For my generation, the book was required college reading. It 
cannot be coincidence that artists such asDamien Hirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien-hirst-what-have-i-done-ive-created-a-monster>
,Douglas Gordon <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/douglas-gordon> and 
Jeremy Deller <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jeremy-deller> were to 
mix art and mass media in a “new language of images”. Today, audiences for 
every kind of art, old and new, are as vast as our appetite for images is 
boundless.

Yet a utopia it ain’t. If the 21st-century language of images means art has 
never been so widely loved, it also means that vacuous, deceitful, falsely 
seductive, grossly manipulative images have never bombarded our semi-conscious 
minds so shamelessly. The democratic visual culture that Berger, or for that 
matter Andy Warhol, praised has given way to something much more manic, 
all-enveloping and violently irrational. It is hard to be optimistic about 
modern culture in the dawning age of Trump or to gleefully delight in the 
levelling power of the selfie. Or is it? What might Berger make of some of the 
images that define our age? Can he still offer new ways of seeing them?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2895449c27263829a235be82c36ec54429075b4b%2F0_127_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2895449c27263829a235be82c36ec54429075b4b%2F0_127_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
A statue of Saddam Hussein being toppled in Firdaus Square, Bagdhad, April 2003


Berger was strongly influenced by Marxist ideas of class struggle. In Ways of 
Seeing, for instance, he calls such art historians as Kenneth Clark “a 
privileged minority … striving to invent a history which can retrospectively 
justify the role of the ruling classes”. What might he see here? A statue of an 
authoritarian ruler is being pulled down in what looks like an image of 
liberation. It is a picture that evokes revolutionary hope and yet shows the 
toppling of Saddam Hussein’s image after the US led invasion of Iraq. Few see 
this as a hopeful image now. It marks the birth of a new age in which left and 
right often look bizarrely similar, when, for instance, the champions of Brexit 
can sound like French revolutionaries denouncing elitist “enemies of the 
people”. It might have stumped Berger, but not Karl Marx himself, who in his 
most subtle essay,The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/18th-brumaire/>, writes that 
the new often wears the robes of the past. A conquest borrows the garb of 
liberation, a rightwing reaction dresses itself as a peasant’s revolt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2dee41cfdde1c5c7a3ce90a958cf03329dbe86%2F0_7_4366_2619%2F4366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2dee41cfdde1c5c7a3ce90a958cf03329dbe86%2F0_7_4366_2619%2F4366.jpg>
 Photograph: Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images 
Black Lives Matter demonstrators protesting at a police shooting in Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana, July 2016


This picture of a Black Lives Matter demonstration illuminates one of Berger’s 
key arguments in Ways of Seeing: that if you know your history, then you know 
where you are coming from. He didn’t put it quite like that – Bob Marley did – 
but in Berger’s more classically Marxist formulation: “A people or a class 
which is cut off from its own past is far less free to choose and to act as a 
people or class than one that has been able to situate itself in history.” In 
this image, the protesters use images of previous protest to locate themselves 
in history. Their Black Power salutes recall photographs from the 1960s. The 
face of Martin Luther King on a poster situates them even more self-consciously 
in the history of protest. These young radicals have a powerfully visual sense 
of history that vindicates Berger’s argument that images speak louder than 
words, as well as his belief that our understanding of the past frees us to act 
in the present. It’s worth noting that, on winning the Booker prize in 1972, 
Berger donated half of the cash to the Black Panthers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d737d88473dc1b1e6c579c33605d8e967a0a42%2F0_56_3415_2050%2F3415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d737d88473dc1b1e6c579c33605d8e967a0a42%2F0_56_3415_2050%2F3415.jpg>
 Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
An explosion in a residential area as Russian aircraft bomb Aleppo, October 
2016


This image of a savage bombardment of Aleppo by Russian aircraft on 4 October 
2016 would surely have left Berger as speechless with rage and sadness as 
anyone. The contrast between the humbleness of the dwellings and the intensity 
of a blast that sends smoke and objects high into the empty blue air is 
monstrous. This image conveys the inhumanity of war with gut-wrenching 
eloquence. And if any insight of Berger’s matters, it is the simple human 
ability to learn the moral truth from images. We see, as he said, before we can 
speak, and for him, a war photograph or a painting by Van Gogh are both human 
documents whose truth exceeds words. To see the might of this bomb dropped on 
such a fragile-looking human community is to grasp the nature of cruelty. But 
Berger cannot help to explain what happens next, what to do with the insight 
this image gives. We have more images than compassion, more truths than 
solutions. If only we could see as clearly as Berger could. The smoke gets in 
our eyes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e9ef15bbd658e7a2745ea28614d5196ea865dff%2F0_351_4850_2911%2F4850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e9ef15bbd658e7a2745ea28614d5196ea865dff%2F0_351_4850_2911%2F4850.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
A polar bear on an iceberg, Svalbard, Norway, September 2016


Berger was suspicious of soft romantic images of landscape. He argued that 
Thomas Gainsborough’s iconic 18th-century paintingMr and Mrs Andrews 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/thomas-gainsborough-mr-and-mrs-andrews>
, with its aristocratic couple seated in a rolling Suffolk scene of 
rain-pregnant clouds over bright green fields, is a celebration of ruling-class 
power: “They are not a couple in Nature as Rousseau imagined nature. They are 
landowners and their proprietary attitude to what surrounds them is visible in 
their stance and their expressions.” Perhaps this polar bear is a desperate 
successor to Mr and Mrs Andrews, its ownership of the Arctic ice evident in its 
stance and its expression. And yet the ice is melting around it, the world it 
once ruled is falling apart. Berger taught us to see the landowner’s whip 
behind every painted haystack, and his critical attitude to images of landscape 
is the more telling today when human action is destroying nature even as we 
lovingly photograph and film it. In fact, for all his mistrust of Gainsborough, 
Berger was a lover of nature and landscape who chose to live in the European 
countryside, chronicle rural lives and go in quest of cave art. So perhaps this 
bear is the last ice-age artist lamenting the coming of the plough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ff615e988848048c97bd34e16548896c26e9583%2F0_0_1237_1612%2F1237.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ff615e988848048c97bd34e16548896c26e9583%2F0_0_1237_1612%2F1237.jpg>
 Photograph: PR 
Kim Kardashian on the cover of Paper magazine, September 2014


“A woman must continually watch herself,” says Berger in Ways of Seeing. “She 
is almost continually accompanied by her own image of herself.” These words 
written in 1972 apply uncannily well to this image of Kim Kardashian. The queen 
of self-promotion has embraced what Berger saw as the oppressive demands of 
patriarchy. Does her self-portrayal and the hypersexualised selfie age confirm 
or mock his analysis of the nude? The early 70s saw a feminist intellectual 
revolution and Berger brought a feminist perspective on art into the 
mainstream. He argued that Renaissance paintings of the female nude by the 
likes of Tintoretto and Bronzino are just as much instruments of male power as 
are modern porn images. It has all got so messy since then. Perhaps every 
would-be Kardashian taking a saucy selfie is a self-oppressing victim of the 
patriarchy, but that’s a lot of false consciousness to go around. As with any 
severely moralising critique of modern life, you risk dismissing the people as 
idiots. I would argue that Berger also got Renaissance art wrong, as some of 
the paintings he condemns can be interpreted as sex guides that put all the 
stress on female sexuality (he seesBronzino’s Venus and Cupid 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/bronzino-an-allegory-with-venus-and-cupid>
 as an objectifying image and misses the fact that Cupid is pleasuring his 
mum). It all comes down to ways of seeing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c780edffbde3b6fbb70e1593c4d306c37ec9246%2F186_186_3038_3983%2F3038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20use%20John%20Berger%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98language%20of%20images%E2%80%99%20on%20Trump%2C%20polar%20bears%20and%20Kim%20Kardashian&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fuse-john-berger-language-of-images-view-trump-polar-bears-kim-kardashian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c780edffbde3b6fbb70e1593c4d306c37ec9246%2F186_186_3038_3983%2F3038.jpg>
 Photograph: Joe Mahoney/Getty Images 
Donald Trump holds two babies after a speech at the University of Colorado, 
July 2016


In Berger’s art criticism, it sometimes seems the worst crime in the world is 
to own property. He died as we enter an age when one man thinks the world is 
his property and that he can graduate from playing a reality-TV image of a 
businessman to “making deals” with all our futures. We see before we can speak, 
but the rise of Donald Trump (and Putin, and Brexit, and the European far 
right) suggests a much grimmer conclusion than anyone anticipated. In a world 
shaped, as ours is, by what Berger called “the language of images”, people 
don’t think too clearly. All those images that circulate so free and fast 
befuddle our brains. This image is grotesque and risible but, like a scene for 
Bertolt Brecht’s play The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui, the grotesqueness is 
somehow part of the allure. Transgression is power. Berger was a moral man who 
wanted a better world. His art criticism, like that ofJohn Ruskin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/06/john-ruskin-dehumanising-power-capitalism>
 in the Victorian age, is ultimately an eloquent argument for social justice 
and ethical behaviour. Oh, how far we are from the futures all the good men 
dreamt of. How madly the language of images hums.
 