
One Monday morning last September, Britain woke to a depraved news story. The 
prime minister, David Cameron, had committed an “obscene act with a dead pig’s 
head”, according to the Daily Mail. “A distinguished Oxford contemporary claims 
Cameron once took part in an outrageous initiation ceremony at a Piers Gaveston 
event, involving a dead pig,” the paper reported.Piers Gaveston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/dead-pigs-piers-gaveston-piggate-david-cameron>
 is the name of a riotous Oxford university dining society; the authors of the 
story claimed their source was an MP, who said he had seen photographic 
evidence: “His extraordinary suggestion is that the future PM inserted a 
private part of his anatomy into the animal.”

The story, extracted from a new biography of Cameron, sparked an immediate 
furore. It was gross, it was a great opportunity to humiliate an elitist prime 
minister, and many felt it rang true for a former member of the notorious 
Bullingdon Club. Within minutes, #Piggate and #Hameron were trending on 
Twitter, and even senior politicians joined the fun: Nicola Sturgeon said the 
allegations had “entertained the whole country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/sep/21/cameron-hit-by-student-drugs-and-debauchery-allegations-in-ashcroft-biography-politics-live#block-55ffe013e4b00e7fa159817c>
”, while Paddy Ashdown joked that Cameron was “hogging the headlines”. At 
first, the BBC refused to mention the allegations, and 10 Downing Street said 
it would not “dignify” the story with a response – but soon it was forced to 
issue a denial. And so a powerful man was sexually shamed, in a way that had 
nothing to do with his divisive politics, and in a way he could never really 
respond to. But who cares? He could take it.
Become a Guardian supporter 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=support_the_Guardian>
Then, after a full day of online merriment, something shocking happened. 
Isabel Oakeshott, the Daily Mail journalist who hadco-written the biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/08/call-me-dave-the-unauthorised-biography-michael-ashcroft-isabel-oakeshott-review>
 with Lord Ashcroft, a billionaire businessman, went on TV and admitted that 
she did not know whether her huge, scandalous scoop was even true. Pressed to 
provide evidence for the sensational claim, Oakeshott admitted she had none.

“We couldn’t get to the bottom of that source’s allegations,” she said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rm_Bli5h0Ns> on Channel 4 News. “So we merely 
reported the account that the source gave us … We don’t say whether we believe 
it to be true.” In other words, there was no evidence that the prime minister 
of the United Kingdom had once “inserted a private part of his anatomy” into 
the mouth of a dead pig – a story reported in dozens of newspapers and repeated 
in millions of tweets and Facebook updates, which many people presumably still 
believe to be true today.

Oakeshott went even further to absolve herself of any journalistic 
responsibility: “It’s up to other people to decide whether they give it any 
credibility or not,” she concluded. This was not, of course, the first time 
that outlandish claims were published on the basis of flimsy evidence, but this 
was an unusually brazen defence. It seemed that journalists were no longer 
required to believe their own stories to be true, nor, apparently, did they 
need to provide evidence. Instead it was up to the reader – who does not even 
know the identity of the source – to make up their own mind. But based on what? 
Gut instinct, intuition, mood?

How technology disrupted the truth – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/jul/22/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth-podcast>
Does the truth matter any more?

Nine months after Britain woke up giggling at Cameron’s hypothetical porcine 
intimacies, the country arose on the morning of 24 June to the very real sight 
of the prime minister standing outside Downing Street at 8am,announcing his own 
resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
.

“The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must 
be respected,” Cameron declared. “It was not a decision that was taken lightly, 
not least because so many things were said by so many different organisations 
about the significance of this decision. So there can be no doubt about the 
result.”

But what soon became clear was that almost everything was still in doubt. At 
the end of a campaign that dominated the news for months, it was suddenly 
obvious that the winning side had no plan for how or when the UK would leave 
the EU – while the deceptive claims that carried the leave campaign to victory 
suddenly crumbled. At 6.31am on Friday 24 June, just over an hour after the 
result of the EU referendum had become clear, Ukip leader Nigel Farageconceded 
<http://www.itv.com/goodmorningbritain/news/nigel-farage-labels-350m-nhs-promise-a-mistake>
 that a post-Brexit UK would not in fact have £350m a week spare to spend on 
the NHS – a key claim of Brexiteers that was even emblazoned on the Vote Leave 
campaign bus. A few hours later, the Tory MEP Daniel Hannan stated that
immigration was not likely to be reduced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/leave-campaign-rows-back-key-pledges-immigration-nhs-spending>
 – another key claim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba5323c407c2059115d49ee1b5498c3e699cede%2F0_0_3500_1928%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba5323c407c2059115d49ee1b5498c3e699cede%2F0_0_3500_1928%2F3500.jpg>
 The Vote Leave campaign bus, featuring a widely disputed claim about UK 
contributions to the EU. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
It was hardly the first time that politicians had failed to deliver what they 
promised, but it might have been the first time they admitted on the morning 
after victory that the promises had been false all along. This was the first 
major vote in the era of post-truth politics:the listless remain campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/how-remain-failed-inside-story-doomed-campaign>
 attempted to fight fantasy with facts, but quickly found that the currency of 
fact had been badly debased.

The remain side’s worrying facts and worried experts were dismissed as 
“Project Fear” – and quickly neutralised by opposing “facts”: if 99 experts 
said the economy would crash and one disagreed, the BBC told us that each side 
had a different view of the situation. (This is a disastrous mistake that ends 
up obscuring truth, and echoes how some report climate change.) Michael Gove 
declared that “people in this country have had enough of experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/jun/08/experts-eu-referendum-michael-gove>
” on Sky News.He also compared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/cameron-gove-has-lost-it-in-comparing-anti-brexit-economists-to-nazi-experts>
 10 Nobel prize-winning economists who signed an anti-Brexit letter to Nazi 
scientists loyal to Hitler.

It can become very difficult for anyone to tell the difference between facts 
that are true and 'facts' that are not

For months, the Eurosceptic press trumpeted every dubious claim and rubbished 
every expert warning, filling the front pages with too many confected 
anti-migrant headlines to count – many of them later quietly corrected in very 
small print. A week before the vote – on the same day Nigel Farage unveiled his 
inflammatory “Breaking Point” poster, and the Labour MPJo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/the-guardian-view-on-jo-cox-an-attack-on-humanity-idealism-and-democracy>
, who had campaigned tirelessly for refugees, was shot dead – the cover of the 
Daily Mail featured a picture of migrants in the back of a lorry entering the 
UK, with the headline “We are from Europe – let us in!” The next day, the Mail 
and the Sun, which also carried the story, were forcedto admit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/17/daily-mail-publishes-correction-story-migrants-from-europe>
 that the stowaways were actually from Iraq and Kuwait.

The brazen disregard for facts did not stop after the referendum: just this 
weekend, the short-lived Conservative leadership candidate Andrea Leadsom, 
fresh from a starring role in the leave campaign, demonstrated the waning power 
of evidence. After telling the Times that being a mother would make her a 
better PM than her rival Theresa May, she cried “gutter journalism! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/08/andrea-leadsom-suggests-she-would-make-better-pm-as-she-has-children>
” and accused the newspaper of misrepresenting her remarks – even though she 
said exactly that, clearly and definitively and on tape. Leadsom is a 
post-truth politician even about her own truths.

When a fact begins to resemble whatever you feel is true, it becomes very 
difficult for anyone to tell the difference between facts that are true and 
“facts” that are not. The leave campaign was well aware of this – and took full 
advantage, safe in the knowledge that the Advertising Standards Authorityhas no 
power to police political claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/advertising-standards-authority-political-advertisements>
. A few days after the vote, Arron Banks, Ukip’s largest donor and the main 
funder of the Leave.EU campaign,told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/leave-donor-plans-new-party-to-replace-ukip-without-farage>
 that his side knew all along that facts would not win the day. “It was taking 
an American-style media approach,” said Banks. “What they said early on was 
‘Facts don’t work’, and that’s it. The remain campaign featured fact, fact, 
fact, fact, fact. It just doesn’t work. You have got to connect with people 
emotionally. It’s the Trump success.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ba6ca9366d59eae4b299e18ae027d3f1551266%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ba6ca9366d59eae4b299e18ae027d3f1551266%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Illustration: Sébastien Thibault 
It was little surprise that some people were shocked after the result to 
discover that Brexit might have serious consequences and few of the promised 
benefits. When “facts don’t work” and voters don’t trust the media, everyone 
believes in their own “truth” – and the results, as we have just seen, can be 
devastating.

How did we end up here? And how do we fix it?

Twenty-five years after the first website <http://info.cern.ch/> went online, 
it is clear that we are living through a period of dizzying transition. For 500 
years after Gutenberg, the dominant form of information was the printed page: 
knowledge was primarily delivered in a fixed format, one that encouraged 
readers to believe in stable and settled truths.

Now, we are caught in a series of confusing battles between opposing forces: 
between truth and falsehood, fact and rumour, kindness and cruelty; between the 
few and the many, the connected and the alienated; betweenthe open platform of 
the web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/03/internet-web-politics-money-freedom-state>
 as its architects envisioned it and the gated enclosures of Facebook and other 
social networks; between an informed public and a misguided mob.

What is common to these struggles – and what makes their resolution an urgent 
matter – is that they all involve the diminishing status of truth. This does 
not mean that there are no truths. It simply means, as this year has made very 
clear, that we cannot agree on what those truths are, and when there is no 
consensus about the truth and no way to achieve it, chaos soon follows.

Increasingly, what counts as a fact is merely a view that someone feels to be 
true – and technology has made it very easy for these “facts” to circulate with 
a speed and reach that was unimaginable in the Gutenberg era (or even a decade 
ago). A dubious story about Cameron and a pig appears in a tabloid one morning, 
and by noon, it has flown around the world on social media and turned up in 
trusted news sources everywhere. This may seem like a small matter, but its 
consequences are enormous.

In the digital age, it is easier than ever to publish false information, which 
is quickly shared and taken to be true

“The Truth”, as Peter Chippindale and Chris Horrie wrote in Stick It Up Your 
Punter!, their history of the Sun newspaper, is a “bald statement which every 
newspaper prints at its peril”. There are usually several conflicting truths on 
any given subject, but in the era of the printing press, words on a page nailed 
things down, whether they turned out to be true or not. The information felt 
like the truth, at least until the next day brought another update or a 
correction, and we all shared a common set of facts.

This settled “truth” was usually handed down from above: an established truth, 
often fixed in place by an establishment. This arrangement was not without 
flaws: too much of the press often exhibited a bias towards the status quo and 
a deference to authority, and it was prohibitively difficult for ordinary 
people to challenge the power of the press. Now, people distrust much of what 
is presented as fact – particularly if the facts in question are uncomfortable, 
or out of sync with their own views – and while some of that distrust is 
misplaced, some of it is not.

In the digital age, it is easier than ever to publish false information, which 
is quickly shared and taken to be true – as we often see in emergency 
situations, when news is breaking in real time. To pick one example among many, 
during the November 2015 Paris terror attacks, rumours quickly spread on social 
media that the Louvre and Pompidou Centre had been hit, and that François 
Hollande had suffered a stroke. Trusted news organisations are needed to debunk 
such tall tales.

Sometimes rumours like these spread out of panic, sometimes out of malice, and 
sometimes deliberate manipulation, in which a corporation or regime pays people 
to convey their message. Whatever the motive, falsehoods and facts now spread 
the same way, through what academics call an “information cascade”. As the 
legal scholar and online-harassment expertDanielle Citron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/15/cyber-harassment-cyberbullying-revenge-porn-education-laws>
 describes it, “people forward on what others think, even if the information is 
false, misleading or incomplete, because they think they have learned something 
valuable.” This cycle repeats itself, and before you know it, the cascade has 
unstoppable momentum. You share a friend’s post on Facebook, perhaps to show 
kinship or agreement or that you’re “in the know”, and thus you increase the 
visibility of their post to others.

Here is the news – but only if Facebook thinks you need to know | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/15/facebook-instant-articles-news-publishers-feeding-the-beast>
Algorithms such as the one that powers Facebook’s news feed are designed to 
give us more of what they think we want – which means that the version of the 
world we encounter every day in our own personal stream has been invisibly 
curated to reinforce our pre-existing beliefs. When Eli Pariser, the co-founder 
of Upworthy, coined the term “filter bubble” in 2011, he was talking about how 
the personalised web – and in particular Google’s personalised search function, 
which means that no two people’s Google searches are the same – means that we 
are less likely to be exposed to information that challenges us or broadens our 
worldview, and less likely to encounter facts that disprove false information 
that others have shared.

Pariser’s plea 
<https://backchannel.com/facebook-published-a-big-new-study-on-the-filter-bubble-here-s-what-it-says-ef31a292da95#.o6tt199nn>
, at the time, was that those running social media platforms should ensure that 
“their algorithms prioritise countervailing views and news that’s important, 
not just the stuff that’s most popular or most self-validating”. But in less 
than five years, thanks to the incredible power of a few social platforms, the 
filter bubble that Pariser described has become much more extreme.

On the day after the EU referendum, in a Facebook post, the British internet 
activist and mySociety founder, Tom Steinberg,provided a vivid illustration 
<https://www.facebook.com/tom.steinberg.503/posts/10157028566365237?pnref=story>
 of the power of the filter bubble – and the serious civic consequences for a 
world where information flows largely through social networks:

I am actively searching through Facebook for people celebrating the Brexit 
leave victory, but the filter bubble is SO strong, and extends SO far into 
things like Facebook’s custom search that I can’t find anyone who is happy 
*despite the fact that over half the country is clearly jubilant today* and 
despite the fact that I’m *actively* looking to hear what they are saying.

This echo-chamber problem is now SO severe and SO chronic that I can only beg 
any friends I have who actually work for Facebook and other major social media 
and technology to urgently tell their leaders that to not act on this problem 
now is tantamount to actively supporting and funding the tearing apart of the 
fabric of our societies … We’re getting countries where one half just doesn’t 
know anything at all about the other.

But asking technology companies to “do something” about the filter bubble 
presumes that this is a problem that can be easily fixed – rather than one 
baked into the very idea of social networks that are designed to give you what 
you and your friends want to see.

Facebook, which launched only in 2004, now has 1.6bn users worldwide. It has 
become thedominant way <http://fortune.com/2015/08/18/facebook-google/> for 
people to find news on the internet – and in fact it is dominant in ways that 
would have been impossible to imagine in the newspaper era. As Emily Bellhas 
written <http://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php>: “Social media 
hasn’t just swallowed journalism, it has swallowed everything. It has swallowed 
political campaigns, banking systems, personal histories, the leisure industry, 
retail, even government and security.”

Bell, the director of the Tow Centre for Digital Journalism at Columbia 
University – and a board member of the Scott Trust, which owns the Guardian – 
has outlined the seismic impact of social media for journalism. “Our news 
ecosystem has changed more dramatically in the past five years,” she wrote in 
March, “than perhaps at any time in the past 500.” The future of publishing is 
being put into the “hands of the few, who now control the destiny of the many”. 
News publishers have lost control over the distribution of their journalism, 
which for many readers is now “filtered through algorithms and platforms which 
are opaque and unpredictable”. This means that social media companies have 
become overwhelmingly powerful in determining what we read – and enormously 
profitable from the monetisation of other people’s work. As Bell notes: “There 
is a far greater concentration of power in this respect than there has ever 
been in the past.”

Publications curated by editors have in many cases been replaced by a stream 
of information chosen by friends, contacts and family, processed by secret 
algorithms. The old idea of a wide-open web – where hyperlinks from site to 
site created a non-hierarchical and decentralised network of information – has 
been largely supplanted by platforms designed to maximise your time within 
their walls, some of which (such as Instagram and Snapchat) do not allow 
outward links at all.

Many people, in fact, especially teenagers, now spend more and more of their 
time onclosed chat apps <http:>, which allow users to create groups to share 
messages privately – perhaps because young people, who are most likely to have 
faced harassment online, are seeking more carefully protected social spaces. 
But the closed space of a chat app is an even more restrictive silo than the 
walled garden of Facebook or other social networks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F301445b5a0a81ef2499a99deed909245234a779b%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F301445b5a0a81ef2499a99deed909245234a779b%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
 ‘The centralisation of information is making us all much less powerful’ … 
Iranian blogger Hossein Derakhshan, who was imprisoned for six years. 
Photograph: Arash Ashoorinia for the Guardian 
As the pioneering Iranian blogger Hossein Derakhshan, who was imprisoned in 
Tehran for six years for his online activity,wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/29/irans-blogfather-facebook-instagram-and-twitter-are-killing-the-web>
 earlier this year, the “diversity that the world wide web had originally 
envisioned” has given way to “the centralisation of information” inside a 
select few social networks – and the end result is “making us all less powerful 
in relation to government and corporations”.

Of course, Facebook does not decide what you read – at least not in the 
traditional sense of making decisions – and nor does it dictate what news 
organisations produce. But when one platform becomes the dominant source for 
accessing information, news organisations will often tailor their own work to 
the demands of this new medium. (The most visible evidence of Facebook’s 
influence on journalism is the panic that accompanies any change in the news 
feed algorithm that threatens to reduce the page views sent to publishers.)

In the last few years, many news organisations have steered themselves away 
from public-interest journalism and toward junk-food news, chasing page views 
in the vain hope of attracting clicks and advertising (or investment) – but 
like junk food, you hate yourself when you’ve gorged on it. The most extreme 
manifestation of this phenomenon has been the creation of fake news farms, 
which attract traffic with false reports that are designed to look like real 
news, and are therefore widely shared on social networks. But the same 
principle applies to news that is misleading or sensationally dishonest, even 
if it wasn’t created to deceive: the new measure of value for too many news 
organisations is virality rather than truth or quality.

Of course, journalists have got things wrong in the past – either by mistake 
or prejudice or sometimes by intent. (Freddie Starr probably didn’t eat a 
hamster. <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/jun/19/3>) So it would be a 
mistake to think this is a new phenomenon of the digital age. But what is new 
and significant is that today, rumours and lies are read just as widely as 
copper-bottomed facts – and often more widely, because they are wilder than 
reality and more exciting to share. The cynicism of this approach was expressed 
most nakedly by Neetzan Zimmerman, formerly employed by Gawker as a specialist 
in high-traffic viral stories. “Nowadays it’s not important if a story’s real,”
he said in 2014 
<https://pando.com/2014/07/31/whisper-eic-its-not-important-if-a-storys-real-the-only-thing-that-really-matters-is-whether-people-click-on-it/>
. “The only thing that really matters is whether people click on it.” Facts, he 
suggested, are over; they are a relic from the age of the printing press, when 
readers had no choice. He continued: “If a person is not sharing a news story, 
it is, at its core, not news.”

The increasing prevalence of this approach suggests that we are in the midst 
of a fundamental change in the values of journalism – a consumerist shift. 
Instead of strengthening social bonds, or creating an informed public, or the 
idea of news as a civic good, a democratic necessity, it creates gangs, which 
spread instant falsehoods that fit their views, reinforcing each other’s 
beliefs, driving each other deeper into shared opinions, rather than 
established facts.

But the trouble is that the business model of most digital news organisations 
is based around clicks. News media around the world has reached a fever-pitch 
of frenzied binge-publishing, in order to scrape up digital advertising’s 
pennies and cents. (And there’s not much advertising to be got: in the first 
quarter of 2016,85 cents of every new dollar 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2015/12/behind-closed-doors-the-new-social-media/> 
spent in the US on online advertising went to Google and Facebook. That used to 
go to news publishers.)

In the news feed on your phone, all stories look the same – whether they come 
from a credible source or not. And, increasingly, otherwise-credible sources 
are also publishing false, misleading, or deliberately outrageous stories. 
“Clickbait is king, so newsrooms will uncritically print some of the worst 
stuff out there, which lends legitimacy to bullshit,” said Brooke Binkowski, an 
editor at the debunking website Snopes, inan interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/17/fake-news-stories-clicks-fact-checking>
 in April. “Not all newsrooms are like this, but a lot of them are.”

We should be careful not to dismiss anything with an appealing digital 
headline as clickbait – appealing headlines are a good thing, if they lead the 
reader to quality journalism, both serious and not. My belief is that what 
distinguishes good journalism from poor journalism is labour: the journalism 
that people value the most is that for which they can tell someone has put in a 
lot of work – where they can feel the effort that has been expended on their 
behalf, over tasks big or small, important or entertaining. It is the reverse 
of so-called “churnalism”, the endless recycling of other people’s stories for 
clicks.

The digital advertising model doesn’t currently discriminate between true or 
not true, just big or small. As the American political reporterDave Weigel wrote
 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2013/12/03/buzzfeed_and_elan_gale_s_internet_hoax_too_good_to_check.html>
 in the wake of a hoax story that became a viral hit all the way back in 2013: 
“‘Too good to check’ used to be a warning to newspaper editors not to jump on 
bullshit stories. Now it’s a business model.”

A news-publishing industry desperately chasing down every cheap click doesn’t 
sound like an industry in a position of strength, and indeed, news publishing 
as a business is in trouble. The shift to digital publishing has been a 
thrilling development for journalism – as I said in my 2013 AN Smith lecture at 
the University of Melbourne, “The Rise of the Reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/09/the-rise-of-the-reader-katharine-viner-an-smith-lecture>
”, it has induced “a fundamental redrawing of journalists’ relationship with 
our audience, how we think about our readers, our perception of our role in 
society, our status”. It has meant we have found new ways to get stories – from 
our audience, from data, from social media. It has given us new ways to tell 
stories – with interactive technologies and now withvirtual reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/apr/27/6x9-a-virtual-experience-of-solitary-confinement>
. It has given us new ways to distribute our journalism, to find new readers in 
surprising places; and it has given us new ways to engage with our audiences, 
opening ourselves up to challenge and debate.

But while the possibilities for journalism have been strengthened by the 
digital developments of the last few years, the business model is under grave 
threat, because no matter how many clicks you get, it will never be enough. And 
if you charge readers to access your journalism you have a big challenge to 
persuade the digital consumer who is used to getting information for free to 
part with their cash.

News publishers everywhere are seeing profits and revenue drop dramatically. 
If you want a stark illustration of the new realities of digital media, 
consider the first-quarter financial results announced by the New York Times 
and Facebook within a week of one another earlier this year. The New York Times 
announced that its operating profits had fallen by 13%, to $51.5m – healthier 
than most of the rest of the publishing industry, but quite a drop. Facebook, 
meanwhile, revealed that its net income had tripled in the same period – to a 
quite staggering $1.51bn.

Unreported Britain: without local newspapers, who is keeping tabs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/23/unreported-britain-without-local-newspapers-who-is-keeping-tabs>
Many journalists have lost their jobs in the past decade. The number of 
journalists in the UK shrank by up to one-third between 2001 and 2010; US 
newsrooms declined by a similar amount between 2006 and 2013. In Australia, 
there was a 20% cut in the journalistic workforce between 2012 and 2014 alone. 
Earlier this year, at the Guardian we announced that we would need to lose 100 
journalistic positions. In March, the Independentceased existing as a print 
newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/26/eagle-dares-independent-newspaper-final-print-edition-scoop>
. Since 2005, according to research by Press Gazette, the number of local 
newspapers in the UK hasfallen by 181 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/some-47-regional-newspapers-have-closed-2012-39-have-launched/>
 – again, not because of a problem with journalism, but because of a problem 
with funding it.

But journalists losing their jobs is not simply a problem for journalists: it 
has a damaging impact on the entire culture. As the German philosopher Jürgen 
Habermas warned,back in 2007 <http://www.signandsight.com/features/1349.html>: 
“When reorganisation and cost-cutting in this core area jeopardise accustomed 
journalistic standards, it hits at the very heart of the political public 
sphere. Because, without the flow of information gained through extensive 
research, and without the stimulation of arguments based on an expertise that 
doesn’t come cheap, public communication loses its discursive vitality. The 
public media would then cease to resist populist tendencies, and could no 
longer fulfil the function it should in the context of a democratic 
constitutional state.”

Perhaps, then, the focus of the news industry needs to turn to commercial 
innovation: how to rescue the funding of journalism, which is what is under 
threat. Journalism has seen dramatic innovation in the last two digital 
decades, but business models have not. In the words of my colleague Mary 
Hamilton, the Guardian’s executive editor for audience: “We’ve transformed 
everything about our journalism and not enough about our businesses.”

The impact on journalism of the crisis in the business model is that, in 
chasing down cheap clicks at the expense of accuracy and veracity, news 
organisations undermine the very reason they exist: to find things out and tell 
readers the truth – to report, report, report.

Many newsrooms are in danger of losing what matters most about journalism: the 
valuable, civic, pounding-the-streets, sifting-the-database, 
asking-challenging-questions hard graft of uncovering things that someone 
doesn’t want you to know. Serious, public-interest journalism is demanding, and 
there is more of a need for it than ever. It helps keep the powerful honest; it 
helps people make sense of the world and their place in it. Facts and reliable 
information are essential for the functioning of democracy – and the digital 
era has made that even more obvious.

Hillsborough disaster: deadly mistakes and lies that lasted decades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
But we must not allow the chaos of the present to cast the past in a rosy 
light – as can be seen from the recent resolution to a tragedy that became one 
of the darkest moments in the history of British journalism. At the end of 
April, a two-year-long inquest ruled that the 96 people who died in the 
Hillsborough disaster in 1989 had been unlawfully killed and had not 
contributed to the dangerous situation at the football ground. The verdict was 
the culmination of an indefatigable 27-year-campaign by the victims’ families, 
whose case was reported for two decades with great detail and sensitivity by
Guardian journalist David Conn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
. His journalism helped uncover the real truth about what happened at 
Hillsborough, and the subsequent cover-up by the police – a classic example of 
a reporter holding the powerful to account on behalf of the less powerful.

What the families had been campaigning against for nearly three decades was a 
lie put into circulation by the Sun. The tabloid’s aggressive rightwing editor, 
Kelvin MacKenzie, blamed the fans for the disaster, suggesting they had forced 
their way into the ground without tickets – a claim later revealed to be false. 
According to Horrie and Chippindale’s history of The Sun, MacKenzie overruled 
his own reporter and put the words “THE TRUTH” on the front page, alleging that 
Liverpool fans were drunk, that they picked the pockets of victims, that they 
punched, kicked and urinated on police officers, that they shouted that they 
wanted sex with a dead female victim. The fans, said a “high-ranking police 
officer”, were “acting like animals”. The story, as Chippindale and Horrie 
write, is a “classic smear”, free of any attributable evidence and “precisely 
fitting MacKenzie’s formula by publicising the half-baked ignorant prejudice 
being voiced all over the country”.

It is hard to imagine that Hillsborough could happen now: if 96 people were 
crushed to death in front of 53,000 smartphones, with photographs and 
eyewitness accounts all posted to social media, would it have taken so long for 
the truth to come out? Today, the police – or Kelvin MacKenzie – would not have 
been able to lie so blatantly and for so long.

The truth is a struggle. It takes hard graft. But the struggle is worth it: 
traditional news values are important and they matter and they are worth 
defending. The digital revolution has meant that journalists – rightly, in my 
view – are more accountable to their audience. And as the Hillsborough story 
shows, the old media were certainly capable of perpetrating appalling 
falsehoods, which could take years to unravel. Some of the old hierarchies have 
been decisively undermined, which has led to a more open debate and a more 
substantial challenge to the old elites whose interests often dominated the 
media. But the age of relentless and instant information – and uncertain truths 
– can be overwhelming. We careen from outrage to outrage, but forget each one 
very quickly: it’s doomsday every afternoon.

The challenge for journalism today is to establish what role journalistic 
organisations still play in public discourse

At the same time, the levelling of the information landscape has unleashed new 
torrents of racism and sexism and new means of shaming and harassment, 
suggesting a world in which the loudest and crudest arguments will prevail. It 
is an atmosphere that has proved particularly hostile to women and people of 
colour, revealing that the inequalities of the physical world are reproduced 
all too easily in online spaces. The Guardian is not immune – which is why one 
of my first initiatives as editor-in-chief was to launch theWeb We Want project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/the-web-we-want>, in order to 
combat a general culture of online abuse and ask how we as an institution can 
foster better and more civil conversations on the web.

Above all, the challenge for journalism today is not simply technological 
innovation or the creation of new business models. It is to establish what role 
journalistic organisations still play in a public discourse that has become 
impossibly fragmented and radically destabilised. The stunning political 
developments of the past year – including thevote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and the emergence of 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as the 
Republican candidate for the US presidency – are not simply the byproducts of a 
resurgent populism or the revolt of those left behind by global capitalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a3551edc11e6c5495d1d748505e7f593f2e7ff%2F0_116_4326_2596%2F4326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20technology%20disrupted%20the%20truth%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhow-technology-disrupted-the-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a3551edc11e6c5495d1d748505e7f593f2e7ff%2F0_116_4326_2596%2F4326.jpg>
 The rise of Donald Trump is ‘a symptom of the mass media’s growing weakness’, 
according to academic Zeynep Tufekci. Photograph: Jim Cole/AP 
As the academic Zeynep Tufekci argued in an essay 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/31/opinion/campaign-stops/adventures-in-the-trump-twittersphere.html?_r=0>
 earlier this year, the rise of Trump “is actually a symptom of the mass 
media’s growing weakness, especially in controlling the limits of what it is 
acceptable to say”. (A similar case could be made for the Brexit campaign.) 
“For decades, journalists at major media organisations acted as gatekeepers who 
passed judgment on what ideas could be publicly discussed, and what was 
considered too radical,” Tufekci wrote. The weakening of these gatekeepers is 
both positive and negative; there are opportunities and there are dangers.

As we can see from the past, the old gatekeepers were also capable of great 
harm, and they were often imperious in refusing space to arguments they deemed 
outside the mainstream political consensus. But without some form of consensus, 
it is hard for any truth to take hold. The decline of the gatekeepers has given 
Trump space to raise formerly taboo subjects, such as the cost of a global 
free-trade regime that benefits corporations rather than workers, an issue that 
American elites and much of the media had long dismissed – as well as, more 
obviously, allowing his outrageous lies to flourish.

When the prevailing mood is anti-elite and anti-authority, trust in big 
institutions, including the media, begins to crumble.

I believe that a strong journalistic culture is worth fighting for. So is a 
business model that serves and rewards media organisations that put the search 
for truth at the heart of everything – building an informed, active public that 
scrutinises the powerful, not an ill-informed, reactionary gang that attacks 
the vulnerable. Traditional news values must be embraced and celebrated: 
reporting, verifying, gathering together eyewitness statements, making a 
serious attempt to discover what really happened.

We are privileged to live in an era when we can use many new technologies – 
and the help of our audience – to do that. But we must also grapple with the 
issues underpinning digital culture, and realise that the shift from print to 
digital media was never just about technology. We must also address the new 
power dynamics that these changes have created. Technology and media do not 
exist in isolation – they help shape society, just as they are shaped by it in 
turn. That means engaging with people as civic actors, citizens, equals. It is 
about holding power to account, fighting for a public space, and taking 
responsibility for creating the kind of world we want to live in.

Main illustration: Sébastien Thibault

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, or sign up to the long read weekly email here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.

• Help fund our journalism by becoming a Guardian supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_kathlongread_footer>
.
 