
“I know it sounds awful,” said Alan Bennett in a Guardian interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/alan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie>
 in October, “but I find it quite difficult to take the notion of Hull as a 
European City of Culture.” Many may feel the same way, but from Leeds-born 
Bennett the unusually sloppy remark - Hull has just begun its reign as UK, not 
European, City of Culture – smacks of sniffiness towards an upstart Yorkshire 
rival. As a poetry buff alone he will be aware of its convincing claims to be a 
literary hub.

Alan Bennett: ‘After Brexit, if people had voted out, I wouldn’t give them a 
selfie’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/alan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie>
Can Leeds or any other non-capital city boast, for example, of having two 
poets of the stature of Andrew Marvell (who was born near Hull and was its MP 
in the 1660s and 70s) andPhilip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin> (university librarian there 
from 1955 until his death in 1985)? Or that it features in the beginning of two 
canonical poems? The southward train journey traced in Larkin’s “The Whitsun 
Weddings” clearly starts in Hull, as “the fish-dock” is soon followed by 
scenery “where sky and Lincolnshire and water meet”; while the would-be seducer 
in Marvell’s “To His Coy Mistress” floats the fantasy that, given “world enough 
and time”, the mistress “by the Indian Ganges’ side / Shouldst rubies find”, 
and “I by the tide / Of Humber would complain”. (A less fleeting East Riding 
setting can be found in Marvell’s “Upon Appleton House”, written during his 
time as a tutor employed by Lord Fairfax).

Stevie Smith’s parents took her from Hull to north London when she was three, 
and Roger McGough’s arrival on its university campus happened to coincide with 
Larkin’s (they were briefly in the same hall of residence). But others in the 
remarkable cluster of poets associated with the city were drawn there either by 
Larkin himself or his legacy: the handing on of a relay baton from him to 
Douglas Dunn, whoworked under Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/18/featuresreviews.guardianreview24>
 (“the Himmler of the accessions desk” as a character inThe History Boys calls 
him) in the library, and from Dunn as mentor to the triple Forward prize winner
Sean O’Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/seanobrien>, who grew up in 
Hull and reflects its post-industrial landscape in his collections such asThe 
Drowned Book. Ian Hamilton, Tom Paulin, Christopher Reid and Andrew Motion (a 
colleague and friend of Larkin who was his biographer before becoming poet 
laureate) are among those who also spent stints complaining by the Humber.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-hull-is-a-worthy-uk-city-of-culture-whatever-alan-bennett-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F218e61d19b3323ccb35613b0afdf4bf48cf46899%2F0_93_3676_2205%2F3676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hull%20is%20a%20worthy%20UK%20City%20of%20Culture%20%E2%80%93%20whatever%20Alan%20Bennett%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-hull-is-a-worthy-uk-city-of-culture-whatever-alan-bennett-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hull%20is%20a%20worthy%20UK%20City%20of%20Culture%20%E2%80%93%20whatever%20Alan%20Bennett%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhy-hull-is-a-worthy-uk-city-of-culture-whatever-alan-bennett-says%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F218e61d19b3323ccb35613b0afdf4bf48cf46899%2F0_93_3676_2205%2F3676.jpg>
 Everything But the Girl’s Ben Watt and Tracey Thorn on Top of the Pops in 
1988. Photograph: David Clarke/BBC Photo Library/Redferns 
In other word-based art forms, Hull’s record is less spectacular but 
comparable to other northern cities: the novels of (whose albums includeLondon 
0 Hull 4)Winifred Holtby, Robert Edric and David Mark, and the lyrics of 
Everything But the Girl (who met in Hull and took their name from a local 
furniture shop’s bizarre slogan) and the Housemartins.

Where it also stands out is in drama: as a writer of stage and TV plays, 
Bennett must know that Hull has been something of a powerhouse in those genres. 
That’s largely thanks to the presence and nurturing role in the 60s, 70s and 
early 80s of the prolific playwright and adapter Alan Plater – best known for 
his version of Chris Mullin’sA Very British Coup, a Hull man dramatising a 
University of Hull alumnus’s novel about the rise and fall of a Yorkshire 
politician. Hull Truck was housed in a theatre he launched, and Plater was the 
main factor in John Godber (whose hit plays includeBouncers and Up ‘n’ Under) 
becoming its artistic director.

The most illustrious Plater protege, though, was Anthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, a student and then 
lecturer at the university who saw himself as an academic and part-time rock 
lyricist but was given his first break as a playwright by Plater (who told him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/27/appreciations-alan-plater-obituary>
 “listen, son, you are a writer, don’t even think about doing anything else”). 
This set him on the road, via television, - an early screen project, the 1986 
Channel 4 seriesWhat If It’s Raining?, drew on the break-up of his first 
marriage while he was still living in Hull - to becoming a cinema 
writer-director and winning nine Oscars withThe English Patient.
 