
I struggle to think a more perfect union of medium and message than 
HyperNormalisation, Adam Curtis’s new film for the BBC iPlayer. Though he’s 
spent the best part of four decades making television, Curtis’s signature blend 
of hypnotic archive footage, authoritative voiceover and a seemingly 
inexhaustible appetite for bizarre historical tangents is better suited to the 
web, a place just as resistant to the narrative handholding of broadcast TV as 
he is.

Adam Curtis continues search for the hidden forces behind a century of chaos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/09/adam-curtis-donald-trump-documentary-hypernormalisation>
Safe in the knowledge that his audience now has the ability to pause and 
rewind at will, Curtis crafts a mammoth labyrinth of political storytelling in 
the film, his follow-up to last year’s “war on terror” epic Bitter Lake. 
Launching on Sunday, his 165-minute opus makes a feature of its sheer 
unwieldiness, as Curtis veers from social history to conspiracy theory via the 
odd rambling bar-room anecdote, like a man who’s two-dozen browser tabs into a 
major Wikipedia binge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbvKUN1a2AHE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbvKUN1a2AHE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbvKUN1a2AHE&media=>
He argues that an army of technocrats, complacent radicals and Faustian 
internet entrepreneurs have conspired to create an unreal world; one whose 
familiar and often comforting details blind us to its total inauthenticity. Not 
wishing to undersell the concept, Curtis begins the film with a shot of a torch 
shining limply into a thicket, so that viewers find themselves literally unable 
to see the wood for the trees.

From there, HyperNormalisation tracks a course to the present day, allowing 
Curtis to weigh in on Trump, Putin and Syria. But those expecting a snappy 
crash course in our chaotic world (“You won’t believe how this veteran BBC 
film-maker explains the Islamic State! What happens at 156:34 will shock you!”) 
clearly aren’t familiar with his methods. The film may address some of today’s 
most critical global issues, but it also allocates space to Jane Fonda, the 
fall of the Soviet Union and a supercut of pre-9/11 disaster movies. And unlike 
Curtis’s earlier work for TV, HyperNormalisation refuses to drop the kind of 
storytelling breadcrumbs that might anchor a viewer in its overarching 
narrative.

Adam Curtis: 'I try to make the complexity and chaos intelligible'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/24/adam-curtis-bitter-lake> 
Instead, the film embraces the peculiarities of online viewing, trusting that 
its audience – if confused – will skip back 20 minutes to refresh their 
memories, or supplement Curtis’s argument with research of their own. If its 
colossal running time means it’s unlikely to be watched in a single sitting, 
each viewer must decide for themselves how exactly to navigate the experience. 
For all Curtis’s apparent dogmatism, it’s his audience who have the final say.
 