
Parents of hyperactive children should not be blamed for failing to bring up 
their offspring properly, according to scientists who today publish evidence 
that the condition is genetic.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) find it hard to concentrate and can be wild and 
uncontrollable both at home and at school. Controversy has raged around the 
drug most widely used to calm such children, Ritalin, which is of the 
amphetamine family. In the US, such drugs became popular among families who 
wanted their lively (non-ADHD) boys to do better in class, while in the UK they 
were tagged chemical coshes. Meanwhile, parents have often tacitly been blamed 
for lack of discipline or giving their children a sugar and additive-laden diet.

But today the furore around ADHD moves into a different space. Researchers, 
funded not by drug companies but by the Wellcome Trust and other bodies, are 
publishing the results of astudy which for the first time identifies genetic 
changes in children diagnosed with ADHD 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(10)61109-9/abstract>
.

And the particular DNA markers they found are in the same area of the brain as 
genetic variants linked to autism and schizophrenia. That means, say the 
authors of the paper in the Lancet, that ADHD would be better classified as a 
neurodevelopmental disorder than a behavioural problem.

"We hope that these findings will help overcome the stigma associated with 
ADHD," said Professor Anita Thapar from the MRC Centre in Neuropsychiatric 
Genetics and Genomics at Cardiff University, one of the authors.

"Too often, people dismiss ADHD as being down to bad parenting or poor diet. 
As a clinician, it was clear to me that this was unlikely to be the case. Now 
we can say with confidence that ADHD is a genetic disease and that the brains 
of children with this condition develop differently to those of other children."

One in 50 children is affected by ADHD, and while it used to be thought that 
they grow out of it, many continue to have problems in adult life.A genetic 
link has been suggested for some time, but not proven. Past investigations have 
shown that ADHD is more likely in a child who has a parent that suffers from 
the disorder, and that if one twin has ADHD, the other twin has a 75% chance of 
also having it.

But the study has found the first direct evidence by analysing DNA samples 
from 366 children diagnosed with ADHD, aged five to 17, and 1,047 children 
without the condition. They found the children with ADHD were more likely to 
have certain small segments of DNA either duplicated or missing than the other 
children. Although this finding was limited to 16% of all the children with 
ADHD, they say it is highly likely the rest have other genetic variants that 
have not yet been identified.

The researchers point out that they have not found a single gene that is 
responsible for the condition, and environmental circumstances will also be 
part of the picture â€“ although as yet they do not know what those are. "ADHD is 
a very complex disorder which will have a number of different causes. A number 
of different genetic factors will be involved along with other, non-genetic 
factors," said Dr Kate Langley, another of the authors.

The findings will not be used for diagnosing ADHD, they add, but they result 
in new treatments. The stimulant drugs most commonly used to control the 
symptoms have been around since the 1950s.ADHD support groups warmly welcomed 
the findings, which they said would make life easier for families.

"This is indeed extremely welcome news of clear evidence to confirm that 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is indeed a brain development 
disorder with closer links to autism than was previously thought," said Simon 
Hensby ofAdders <http://www.adders.org/>, an online information organisation.

"I hope this will be a welcome relief to the many families who have to face 
criticism and ridicule on a daily basis, when trying to explain the behaviour 
of their ADHD child. I hope also that many adults with ADHD will feel much 
better knowing that their condition wasn't something to do with their 
upbringing or diet.

"Extremely low self esteem is probably the biggest common factor in those 
diagnosed with ADHD, both children and adults. Now we can point to proof that 
it is a neurodevelopmental disorder. Let us hope that this leads to a better 
understanding and treatment for children and adult sufferers alike."

Sheena Crankson, who has been diagnosed with ADHD herself and whose 
13-year-old son Jesse has the condition, said that people blamed her all the 
time. "So many parents will have been told it's them, for years, in spite of 
the fact that your child is struggling and their self-esteem is going down and 
down and your self-esteem is too," she said.

Crankson, who lives in New Maldon, Greater London, once took her son to an NHS 
sleep and behaviour clinic, even though, she said, "we should have been 
upstairs talking to the psychiatrist about ADHD". The nurse she saw "said I 
think most of it is your fault". Crankson added: "I felt worse by the time 
they'd finished than when I went in."

She is trying to get her son, who also has other problems, a diagnosis of 
autistic spectrum disorder because, she said, ADHD is not taken seriously 
enough.
 