
In my 30s, I had major depressive psychosis and was hospitalised for several 
years. My husband left and my children were put into care. Eventually, I 
recovered, got a good job and made a home for us all. I am now in my 80s and my 
children and grandchildren are all doing well, but I am again becoming 
depressed, introspective and agoraphobic. I go to sleep at night wishing for 
death. My daughters, who live nearby, visit fortnightly for a chat, but I feel 
unwanted and am unable to talk to them about my depression as they shut the 
conversation down if I mention it, perhaps recalling their childhood. I fear 
increasing old age, and have little money or energy for outside activities. 
What friends I have left live many miles away and my social life is now on the 
internet. What should I do?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 