
It’s Halloween eve, and while DVD distributors have oddly refrained from 
flooding the shelves this week with apposite horror fare, Netflix has held up 
their end of the bargain with some class.Landing on the streaming service 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80094648> after last month’s Toronto festival 
premiere, Osgood Perkins’sI Am the Pretty Thing That Lives in the House is one 
of the year’s most elegant chillers. Not a film of gut-knotting shocks, it hits 
the back of your neck like an icy draft blown through a lace curtain. The 
spirit of classic mystery novelist Shirley Jackson courses through Perkins’s 
film in more ways than one, with Paula Prentiss (in her first major film role 
in 35 years) playing a senile, Jackson-inspired horror writer tormented by the 
spectre of one of her own literary creations. Ruth Wilson, terrific as ever, is 
the nervous young homecare nurse drawn into the haunting. It’s a classic gothic 
setup that nonetheless unfolds in obliquely poetic ways. Perkins (son of 
Anthony, aptly enough) gives it a cool but still-beating heart.

Nicolas Winding Refn, on the other hand, doesn’t have much time for feeling in 
The Neon Demon(Icon, 18), though there’s more than enough rapturous beauty (and 
equally ravishing grotesquerie) in this semi-waking Los Angeles nightmare to 
occupy the senses. Both bloody and unnerving enough for 31 October viewing, 
this is a not-so-cautionary tale of an ethereal young model honeytrapped into 
the carnivorous couture scene. Winding Refn’s film is that rare fashion satire 
that doesn’t idly ridicule its milieu, but rather has a peer’s obsessive eye 
for design, form and bodily manipulation. Whether he’s best placed to examine 
how female image merchants destroy each other isup for debate 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/06/22/is_the_neon_demon_gruesome_misogyny_or_brilliant_feminist_commentary_can_it_be_both/>
, but his vision is a stunning, unshakeable one. It’s a film equally, 
breathtakingly, about looking and looks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNRP-4f_vyrY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNRP-4f_vyrY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNRP-4f_vyrY&media=>
I am the Pretty Thing that Lives in the House trailer. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRP-4f_vyrY> 
For those of you fobbing off Halloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> entirely and seeking 
something wholly delightful to watch,Maggie’s Plan (Sony, 15) will do the job. 
Rebecca Miller’s breezy screwball romp of romance and reversal among the New 
York academic set hardly breaks new ground in a territory Woody Allen 
originally demarcated, but Miller and her high-end ensemble execute it with 
no-sweat expertise and sincere human affection. The effect is as warm and snug 
as the cardigans favoured by Greta Gerwig’s sweetly klutzy heroine, though not 
without a barbed (or bobbled?) streak of cynicism.

That’s mostly absent from Learning to Drive (Precision, 15), Spanish director 
Isabel Coixet’s amiable but pappy tale of companionship between a middle-aged 
divorcee (Patricia Clarkson) and her Sikh driving instructor (Ben Kingsley). It 
never goes as deep into the human condition as its homily-filled script 
imagines, but Clarkson’s peppery zeal livens it up. Broadly zealous performing 
is the chief draw – perhaps even the raison d’etre – ofElvis & Nixon (eOne, 
15), a self-explanatory dress-up exercise that imagines the 1970 meeting of the 
two eponymous American titans to little narrative objective. Still, Michael 
Shannon and Kevin Spacey give their respective caricatures some cured-ham 
conviction. Considering that their physical resemblance hovers around nil, 
Shannon’s distended, uh-huh-huh Elvis is particularly inspired.

On the blockbuster front, The Legend of Tarzan (Warner, 12) is somehow a more 
distant memory than its summer release would suggest. Minus the big-screen’s 
magnification of its digital spectacle (and Alexander Skarsgård’s improbably 
non-digital abs), there’s little in this retro revival of Edgar Rice 
Burroughs’s vine-swinging saga to hold on to. There’s more spark toCentral 
Intelligence (Universal, 15), even if this buddy-cop comedy traces sloppily 
around its set template. It’s the daffy, ping-pong chemistry between Kevin Hart 
and Dwayne Johnson that keeps it perky.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fi-am-the-pretty-thing-lives-house-neon-demon-kate-plays-christine-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78191b993072043f46a9d4070fa8e3dedc82390%2F72_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20am%20the%20Pretty%20Thing%20that%20Lives%20in%20the%20House%3B%20The%20Neon%20Demon%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fi-am-the-pretty-thing-lives-house-neon-demon-kate-plays-christine-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20am%20the%20Pretty%20Thing%20that%20Lives%20in%20the%20House%3B%20The%20Neon%20Demon%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fi-am-the-pretty-thing-lives-house-neon-demon-kate-plays-christine-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78191b993072043f46a9d4070fa8e3dedc82390%2F72_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Liam Gallagher in Oasis: Supersonic. Photograph: Ignition/eOne 
Finally, Oasis: Supersonic (eOne, 15), Mat Whitecross’s thorough, absorbing, 
suitably bolshy history of the brothers Gallagher will be the week’s big 
documentary seller, but the nonfiction treasure of the week is a double feature 
from American experimentalist Robert Greene. Fresh from its acclaimed cinema 
release,Kate Plays Christine (Dogwoof, 15) is a spiralling, fascinating 
conundrum that takes the tragedy of 1970s newscaster Christine Chubbuck, who 
famously killed herself mid-broadcast, as the starting point for a bristly 
essay on the ethics and politics of performance – as actress Kate Lyn Sheil 
grapples with the difficulties of playing Chubbuck in a hypothetical biopic. 
(No relation to the excellent, upcoming narrative portraitChristine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/christine-review-rebecca-hall-astonishes-in-real-life-horror-story>
, in which Rebecca Hall takes on the challenge.) Happily, it has been paired in 
a box set with Greene’s equally brilliant 2014 docActress, never before 
released in the UK – another head-scrambling thespian meditation, in which 
working actress Brandy Burre finds her domestic and professional lives trickily 
entangled. Both films sneak under the skin as disquietingly as any Halloween 
horror.
 