
I am an 18-year-old woman and have had two sexual partners. My current 
boyfriend is loving, passionate, not at all selfish, and would do anything to 
make me orgasm. However, I can’t find the mental stimulation that turns me on 
enough. I can orgasm with porn or when masturbating alone, but not with him. I 
feel very ashamed and embarrassed about it.

Orgasm is often elusive if one makes it the primary goal. Both you and your 
partner are currently extremely goal-oriented – for different reasons. He is 
overly invested in achieving your orgasm for you, and this is putting pressure 
on you. This impasse will not improve without a complete motivational switch.

Talk to him about the need to let go of expectations for both of you, and let 
him know that you thoroughly enjoy sex with him, with or without orgasm. During 
love-making, eliminate the anxiety of any kind of goal, and change your focus 
to a relaxed, simple enjoyment of sensations in the moment. Instead of a race 
to the winning post, make lasting pleasure your main goal.

Be more playful, connected and creative. As part of that, you could consider 
experimenting with role-playing, toys, or whatever type of play helps to bridge 
the gap between your fantasy material and reality. Some people find that 
banning climaxing for several weeks can be illuminating and very rewarding. Try 
it if you dare.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 