
I am a man in my mid-50s and my wife is in her late-40s. We have a good sex 
life. We have the greatest experiences either when she is on top or when we are 
both sitting up facing each other. However, every once in a while my wife likes 
me on top, but in this position I come much too soon.

Being on top must be particularly stimulating for you, and therefore you 
struggle to maintain ejaculatory control in that position. Perhaps the shorter 
coital period is no problem for your wife; different positions hold different 
meanings for some women, so she may enjoy it immensely anyway. But if you 
really want to last longer, the trick is to train yourself to recognise your 
point of ejaculatory inevitability.

You can work on this skill first during masturbation, using a technique known 
as “stop-start”. While self-pleasuring, you pause just before you reach the 
point of no return, wait a minute or two, then resume and stop again when you 
reach a similar point. The third time, you can allow yourself to climax. Once 
you have mastered this exercise on your own, you can ask permission to try it 
with your wife – perhaps first with her on top, then eventually progressing to 
your more challenging missionary position. Do not attempt a “quick-fix” of 
focusing on “turn-off” thoughts or imagery; this common mistake leads to loss 
of partner connection and a broad, ultimately disappointing erosion of 
eroticism.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 