
For years now, whenever I have sex, I feel disgusted with myself immediately 
afterwards – other than with the odd partner. The common theme with these 
people is that they don’t get all “lovey dovey” or insecure about anything and 
simply want to have sex and no more. What is wrong with me?

Some people cannot tolerate being seen for what they are: sexual beings. This 
can be a result of highly negative, ingrained beliefs about sex from childhood, 
or it may be trauma-based. In all cases, people tend to be fairly unmotivated 
to seek help to change unless partners or circumstances mandate it. So, it is 
understandable that you seek and feel most comfortable with partners who are 
similarly “wired”. But recognising your sexual needs as healthy and valid is 
worth pursuing: not only may your ability to give and receive pleasure be 
greatly enhanced, but you would then be in a position to form lasting, deep 
relationships that could provide greater happiness throughout your life. It’s a 
choice you have to make. Will you simply do your best to filter your search for 
sexual partners to improve your chances of having non-intimate experiences? Or 
will you try for the joy that true intimacy can bring? Of course, you already 
know intimacy involves showing yourself as you truly are to another person and 
risking painful rejection: it is not for the faint-hearted.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 