
My wife has MS and is registered blind. I cannot physically connect with her. 
I recently saw a sexual counsellor and he told me to masturbate, but I feel 
guilty when I do this. We haven’t had sex for eight years, but I have normal 
urges. I also feel that, because I cannot physically love her, it may be that 
our relationship is spent. I obsess about sex to the extent that it is 
seriously affecting me.

Be kinder with yourself. Desperation and despair is no way to live. You are 
only human, and you need to find a way to fulfil your needs. If the idea of 
masturbation bothers you intellectually, remember that moderate masturbation is 
considered by most leaders in the field of sexual science and therapy to be 
normative, healthy and entirely acceptable. Clearly, your quality of life 
suffers when you are unable to achieve some physical pleasure and release. You 
have inherited a position of caring, and this change in your relationship is a 
form of loss that often leads to depression. Carers need to care for 
themselves, too. Without being able to maintain your own physical and 
psychological health, you cannot be helpful to your wife. Exercise, and try 
meditation or yoga to ease stress and reduce obsessions. Try to find an 
activity or sport that helps you connect socially with others. Above all, do 
whatever you can to avoid the underlying resentment that can poison a 
relationship.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 