
I am 64. My girlfriend is 48. She cannot take the pill, so I wear a condom. I 
have no problem having an orgasm without a condom but when I wear one, I don’t 
get the same sensation. Today, I had her stroke me while having intercourse, 
but the position is uncomfortable for her. Oral is out – she had a bad 
experience in the past.

My husband only wants sex four times a year – what do I do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/14/my-husband-only-wants-sex-four-times-a-year>
First, experiment with different kinds of condoms. A wide variety is available 
on the market, and certain types might allow a better sensation for you. But 
try to think creatively about your sexual styles. Is it important for you to 
climax during intercourse, or could you enjoy “her favourite” for a while, then 
remove the condom and invite her to bring you to orgasm manually – with your 
help and guidance?

As men age, they need more direct genital stimulation, so as a couple you will 
have to find ways to cater to your needs. For example, I am sure that the 
erotic imaginations of you and your girlfriend could lead you both to devise 
exciting ways to achieve orgasm.

It would also be reasonable for your own hand to provide the finishing touch. 
The best sex occurs when teaching, learning and experimentation takes place 
between partners who ask for what they truly need.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pamela-stephenson-connolly> is a US-based 
psychotherapist specialising in sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 