
I have had fetishes for feet and tickling since I was a teenager, but have 
never been confident in opening up about it before. I told my current 
girlfriend and, happily, she did not reject me. However, she will not take 
part. When it comes to me wanting to worship her feet, she declines because she 
believes they are inherently unhygienic. I don’t want these fantasies to be the 
only part of our sex life, but I would like them to play some part.

While it is important that all sexual practices between two people are 
consensual, it’s also reasonable to introduce something unusual or fetishistic 
to a partner cautiously and incrementally. Instead of rushing to propose 
something that might seem radical or even bizarre, help her to get used to the 
idea by gradually suggesting something more palatable. It is often best to 
start with something that would not be generally considered weird. So, rather 
than requesting a full menu of foot worshipping – and knowing that her 
discomfort is partly related to her notion of hygiene – perhaps you might 
initiate love-making in a bath, shower, swimming pool or the sea. Make this 
session 95% “vanilla”, including her favorite sensual stroking or oral 
pleasuring to fully arouse her, then switch to something such as oral 
toe-pleasuring. If she enjoys this, you can repeat and extend it until it 
becomes a regular aspect of your love-making. Eventually, you can introduce 
something slightly more advanced, but it must always be very gradual.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 