
I had a two-year affair with a married man who was in an unhappy marriage. I 
loved him deeply and told him that I was not prepared to share him. For two 
years he made excuses – I’m only there for the kids, my wife would be 
shattered, etc. Then we were discovered and his marriage ended. A few months 
later he finished with me, saying he had not anticipated how hard coping with 
the aftermath was going to be. He said he loved me, but had to put an end to us.

I went into a downward spiral; I ended up taking an overdose. Nearly a year 
later, I still feel terribly depressed. Not having him in my life is 
unbearable. I have written to him several times asking if he could write back, 
explaining why he did what he did, which would help me come to terms with 
things. He won’t respond, even though he knows the state I am in. I feel that 
he has a duty to give me the answers I need to help me heal. Am I wrong to 
insist on this?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/03/private.lives@theguardian.com>
 (please don’t send attachments).
 