
I am what most people would consider a feminist, independent young woman. I am 
an ambitious person, invested in equality and fairness for all. I am not, never 
have been, and never will be a doormat. Yet, since I hit puberty, I have had 
fantasies that horrify and dismay me: rape, bondage and other disturbing things 
are the main features. Am I crazy? Should I get help?

Many people are disturbed by their fantasies. When these are scenarios 
involving non-consensual or coercive sexual acts, they can be troubling but in 
no way whatsoever do they imply you are inviting such realities. If there is 
any question you feel that you may be at risk of such, then help should be 
sought immediately. But otherwise, like dreams, they are expressions of 
unconscious processes over which we have no control. Surveys have shown that it 
is extremely common for women to have rape or bondage fantasies, and these seem 
to surface despite their beliefs or ideology. We also know that the most 
tantalising eroticism is usually created when there is a strong taboo element, 
especially in your case – your imaginings are all the more exciting because 
they are in opposition to your feminist sensibility. But your fantasies are 
private to you. You do not need to share them with anyone. Try to 
compartmentalise these apparently polarised aspects of your complex self and be 
accepting. Your guilt about them only enhances their power.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto: private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 