
Neill Blomkamp plans to ignore 1992’s Alien 3 and 1997’s Alien: Resurrection 
in his ongoing efforts to deliver a new Alien movie starring Sigourney Weaver 
as Ellen Ripley,reports Sky News <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Th8os-IfZhg>.

No space jockeys, no time travel: five things the new Alien film should avoid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/24/no-space-jockeys-no-time-travel-five-things-the-new-alien-film-should-avoid>
The South African film-maker revealed last week that his proposal for a new 
Alien movie centred on Weaver’s extra-terrestrial-exterminating space warrior 
had beengreenlit by studio 20th Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
. The announcement immediately led todiscussion on the web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/24/no-space-jockeys-no-time-travel-five-things-the-new-alien-film-should-avoid>
 as to how Blomkamp planned to bring Ripley back, given the character died at 
the end of Alien 3 and was brought back as a human-xenomorph clone in Alien: 
Resurrection.

During recent interviews for Blomkamp’s new film Chappie, the District 9 
director explained his approach would involve setting aside the later films.

“I want this film to feel like it is literally the genetic sibling of Aliens, 
so it’s Alien, Aliens, this movie,” said Blomkamp, who also signalled he would 
return the series to its horror roots. “It’s a Freudian kind of nightmare,” he 
said. “That element to me is what is so appealing, to try to put the audience 
on the edge of their seat the whole time in a traditional ‘monster stalking 
you/dark corridor’ way. And then when you mix in the life cycle and the design 
elements of theAlien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien>, it’s just a 
powder-keg of creativity to me.”

Meanwhile, Weaver signalled her continued commitment to exploring the 
possibility of a return for Ripley, though it is understood she has not yet 
officially signed on to the role.

“I’m delighted that he is interested in doing this,” she said. “I think it’s a 
great series; it deserves a proper ending. I know the fans would love that, and 
so I hope it works out.”
 Alone out there ... Sigourney Weaver in Alien Photograph: Allstar/20TH 
CENTURY FOX/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Blomkamp also told The Guardian that he would “categorically” rule out any 
return for the cloned version of Ripley, further hinting that the new film will 
ignore later Alien instalments.

The film-maker first alerted fans to his interest in continuing the space saga 
in a series of Instagram posts on New Year’s Day, featuring extensive artwork 
for an Alien project he said he was no longer working on. Themocked-up concept 
art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project>
featured Weaver, who played Ellen Ripley in four Alien movies between 1979 and 
1997, and Michael Biehn, who played Hicks in 1986’s Aliens.

Blomkamp later revealed that he had worked with Weaver on the project during 
downtime from Chappie, which features the former Ghostbusters star in a 
supporting role. And last week he took to Instagram once more with a new 
xenomorph image toconfirm his Alien movie was going ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/neill-blomkamp-my-alien-film-is-ready-to-go>
. The South African film-maker’s caption read: “Um … So I think it’s officially 
my next film. #alien.”
 