
I am 67, married twice and now getting friendly with a lady of similar age. 
She has hinted at missing out on a sex life since her husband was ill 
(dementia) and eventually passed away. My problem is that, due to a complex 
mixture of an old injury, testicular cancer and taking blood pressure tablets, 
I am pretty well useless at straightforward sex. I would, however, do anything 
to help her find satisfaction. I want to get this subject out in to the open, 
but don’t want to appear presumptive.

Don’t dwell on your problems; your willingness to give pleasure to a partner 
will outweigh them. Believe that you can collaborate in finding a style of 
intimacy that suits both of you, because that is always possible, no matter 
what the obstacles. Most importantly, banish your performance anxiety, as it 
will inhibit you and get in the way of your sexual creativity. You have begun a 
warm and promising alliance, but don’t second-guess yourself, and don’t rush 
into anything. Tenderness, soothing touches, hugs and kisses may be the right 
way to establish a physical connection with this person, and I would only go 
further when and if you feel confident and receive the right guidance from her. 
At that point, you can demonstrate your dedication to giving her pleasure 
without having to explain your own difficulties too early. If you allow things 
to take their natural course, you may be surprised by the ease of it all.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 