
I felt shocked and then disappointed listening to the chancellor’s first 
autumn statement on Wednesday. Philip Hammond vowed toimpose a ban on what he 
called “rip-off” letting agency fees for renters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
. As far as I am aware, it was a decision made without talking to any industry 
bodies about the possible consequences.

Chancellor to crack down on letting fees in autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/22/philip-hammond-letting-fees-ban-autumn-statement-affordable-housing>
This comes after Citizens Advice reported that letting fees have surged to an 
average of £337 per tenancy. 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/about-us/how-citizens-advice-works/media/press-releases/it-s-time-to-ban-rip-off-letting-agency-fees-says-citizens-advice/>
 It’s thought that some agents are taking advantage of the housing crisis to 
squeeze extra money out of renters. But as a letting agent myself, while I know 
some agencies charge excessive fees, the vast majority offer a good service.

Tenant fees usually cover processing the application (which is 
labour-intensive), negotiations, referencing and credit checks. They are fair 
considering how much this costs and the service we provide. It takes time to 
deal with tenant requests, do our due diligence (such as theright to rent 
<https://www.gov.uk/check-tenant-right-to-rent-documents/who-to-check> checks) 
and draw up paperwork.

You might argue that’s beside the point, and that these fees should be applied 
to landlords – after all, they are the ones employing us. For the most part 
landlords already pay many charges, including for advertising, marketing, 
accompanied viewings, repairs and maintenance, collecting rent and inventories, 
to name but a few. But certain fees seem appropriate for the renter. When 
setting up a contract or undertaking referencing, for instance, we are doing it 
for that specific individual.

Some agents charge more than others. My agency, based in the north-east, 
charges £180 for contract negotiations, processing the application, arranging 
the tenancy and drawing up the paperwork. We also charge £30 per reference. We 
don’t charge for the inventory or check-in. I know that costs in other parts of 
England will be higher because, for instance in London, overheads will be more.

Agents should be legally required to belong to a lettings body, so they would 
have to follow standards across the board

For those who are putting forward unnecessary high fees, the answer is a cap 
rather than a complete removal. This would target those agencies who are 
charging too much. As rents and costs vary across the country, it may be 
sensible to have a cap specific to where you’re based, so it might be higher in 
the south than the north.

I wish that lettings bodies had been properly consulted about these plans 
because we would have been able to express our concerns and offer positive 
solutions. In September, thehousing minister, Gavin Barwell, said that banning 
tenant fees would result in higher rents 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/letting-fees-ban-landlords-gavin-barwell-attacked-a7433566.html>
, as landlords would pass on additional costs to renters. I am unsure what has 
changed since then.

Richard Price, director at the National Landlords Association 
<http://www.landlords.org.uk/about-nla/nla-staff-profiles/richard-price>, 
agrees that “the unavoidable outcome will be an increase in the proportion of 
costs which will be met by landlords, which in turn will be passed on to 
tenants through higher rents”. In Scotland,where this ban was imposed in 2012, 
rents also rose (by 4.2% the year after, compared with a 0.7% reduction 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/property/tenant-fees-ban-has-speeded-up-scottish-rent-rises-says-report-9696298.html>
 in England over the same 12 months). I fear the same will happen in England. 
Lots of letting companies have already suggested this will happen, as costs are 
transferred from tenants to landlords. Higher rents will end up costing tenants 
more annually than one-off admin charges.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Festate-agent-philip-hammond-cap-letting-fees-ban-them-regulate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F900fa4f431a40a0cb05688f669b84cb65d0e255c%2F0_169_5068_3041%2F5068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20an%20estate%20agent.%20Philip%20Hammond%20ought%20to%20cap%20letting%20fees%2C%20not%20ban%20them%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Parker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Festate-agent-philip-hammond-cap-letting-fees-ban-them-regulate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20an%20estate%20agent.%20Philip%20Hammond%20ought%20to%20cap%20letting%20fees%2C%20not%20ban%20them%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Parker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Festate-agent-philip-hammond-cap-letting-fees-ban-them-regulate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F900fa4f431a40a0cb05688f669b84cb65d0e255c%2F0_169_5068_3041%2F5068.jpg>
 ‘Certain fees seem appropriate for the renter. When setting up a contract or 
undertaking referencing, for instance, we are doing it for that specific 
individual.’ Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty 
It may be the case that splitting the cost over the course of the year is a 
good move for some – and as a company we do this for a few tenants who struggle 
to pay extra up-front charges. We add it on to their rent in small monthly 
amounts so it is affordable (without a premium). But rent increases by 
landlords wanting to pass on extra fees are likely to be at a higher annual 
cost, because landlords have tax issues and management fees to consider.

The most logical step to help tenants is to actually regulate the industry 
properly, something the government has said it won’t do. I think agents should 
be legally required to belong to a lettings body. This would mean they have to 
follow certain standards across the board, including having mandatory client 
money protection. Letting agents should have to sign up with one of these 
schemes just as they must become a member of the property ombudsman or other 
redress scheme. If standards are not met then it should be illegal from them to 
trade. This would raise standards and remove the rogue elements.

Most of the best agents are already signed up to schemes like Arla 
<http://www.arla.co.uk/>, so it shouldn’t create any particular problem or 
expense for good agents. It will also encourage companies to hire qualified 
staff who undertake regular professional development. This in turn would raise 
standards and help improve the quality of companies operating in the industry. 
Unfortunately, as it stands, the legislation around housing seems to be ad hoc 
and self-defeating.
 