
When I took the job as the UK manager of a global campaign for girls’ rights, 
around a year ago, I didn’t think much of my being a bloke.

My gender doesn’t prevent me feeling angry that girls around the world 
continue to face systemic discrimination and widespread violence simply because 
they are girls. Knowing that my working day would involve encouraging the UK 
public to care – and act – about issues such as female genital mutilation 
(FGM), child marriage and denial of education was something I felt excited 
about.

My passion for the job hasn’t diminished – if anything it has grown. But over 
the year, I’ve had cause to reflect on what impact being a man might have had 
on the campaign. Once or twice a campaign email sent in my name has prompted a 
response from a supporter wondering why I’m not a woman (the name Colin leaves 
little room for ambiguity).

If a small number of people on our database have felt compelled to raise this, 
is it possible that others have been put off by the fact I’m a man, less 
inclined to sign a petition or tweet their support?

Does it send the wrong message about how we as an organisation believe that 
the realisation of girls’ rights and greater equality between women and men 
will be achieved? And what implications are there for us as an organisation – 
and indeed for the sector – in terms of the extent to which managers of a 
campaign should be representative of those they are fighting on behalf of?

I’m conscious that my views on these tricky questions are of course coloured 
by being a man. I can’t divorce my own experience from the expectations society 
places on me and the way I interact with society, from my approach to my work, 
even from the way I write this article.

As I’ve written before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/14/fgm-female-genital-mutilation-campaign-girls-summit>
, the issue of FGM – whichPlan UK has worked on 
<http://www.plan-uk.org/because-i-am-a-girl/about-because-i-am-a-girl/violence-against-girls/female-genital-mutilation-fgm/>
 in recent months – raises particular challenges. Quite clearly, the fact I’m a 
man influences how I react to and understand the practice. I’d be lying if I 
said there haven’t been times when it’s been difficult to discuss; can I really 
understand the implications of this sort of abuse?

What I’ve realised is that lots of these questions are borne more of my own 
concerns about getting things right and not, for the most part, of any critique 
by others about the appropriateness of a man doing my job.

Indeed, I often receive a very positive reception – from both men and women – 
when I introduce myself in a professional capacity (or for that matter when I 
tell friends what I do for a living). Could there even be benefits of being a 
male in the role? Certainly, encouraging men and boys to engage with the issues 
we are talking about is important, and if being asked to sign a petition in 
support of girls’ rights by a man gives more guys cause to reflect, then that’s 
a good thing.

In any case, for every question we’ve had raised in response to an email 
campaign, we’ve also received encouraging feedback. And a quick analysis of our 
long-term email response rates certainly shows no evidence that receiving a 
call to action on FGM or child marriage from me instead of my predecessor (who 
was a woman) has had any impact whatsoever.

That’s reassuring, though this is an issue that is somewhat broader than email 
click-through. Our girls’ rights programmes worldwide demonstrate that men can 
play their part in supporting girls and women to realise their rights and to 
take their place in society as full and equal citizens. Successful projects to 
reduce the incidence of violence against girls or to increase girls’ enrolment 
in school have shown the importance of constructive dialogue with fathers and 
brothers, as well as traditional leaders, religious figureheads and 
politicians, who remain predominantly male – and who continue to maintain power 
within these spheres.

It’s vital – of course – that women and girls themselves are at the forefront 
of the fight for equality, identifying the problems they face and the solutions 
needed. My belief is that it’s powerful for boys and men to support girls and 
women in this struggle. Just as a heterosexual can fight for gay rights, or 
someone without a disability can campaign for the equality of those with 
disabilities.

These comparisons are not perfect (I’d be interested to learn more about how 
this issue plays out in organisations with other specialisms) but there is a 
thread common to all campaigns for social justice: where injustice exists, 
everyone has a part to play in ending it.

Read more like this:
• Why should the British public care about FGM? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/14/fgm-female-genital-mutilation-campaign-girls-summit>
• Ziauddin Yousafzai: learn from Malala, demand your rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/09/ziauddin-yousafzai-malala-girls-education>
• What kind of men support FGM? An illustrated guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/01/what-kind-of-men-support-fgm-an-illustrated-guide>
• Advertisement feature: Pictures that tells a thousand words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/nov/06/a-picture-tells-a-thousand-words-especially-these>


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 