
It has been 10 months since my boyfriend and I split up. I miss him. I feel 
utterly stuck and cry every day. He cheated throughout our relationship. There 
were so many betrayals that I have no clue how many there were. Moving out was 
a relief. I was angry for months. But now the anger is gone and all the pain, 
sadness and betrayal is left. I think it was easier when I was angry and hated 
him. I wonder how I will ever trust a man again. I haven’t dated anyone since. 
I am so afraid of getting hurt by another man that I hide at home, and try not 
to think about him. It still makes me utterly nauseated when I think about him 
having sex with another woman. I wish there was a magic pill to take, so I 
could let him go and move on. I am so lonely and I miss the sweet things about 
him. I have so much despair in my heart, and a lot of times I think it would be 
easier just to be dead because I wouldn’t have to go through all this 
heartache. I have never had this much trouble moving on after a relationship 
ends. Cheating is the most painful betrayal there is.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 