
I’m at a loss: I’m unable to get pregnant. I have a loving partner who is my 
best friend. We have been trying for more than 10 years to have a child, but it 
has never happened. Although I was depressed about this for a few years, I’ve 
come to accept it. We talk of adopting or fostering, but we don’t move forward 
with it. I’ve start to realise that I’m happy with my life and who and where I 
am. The problem is, I’m not sure if he is. We’ve talked about kids at length 
and while it seems he would like them, he’s not exactly in a hurry. In fact, he 
seems somewhat satisfied with how things are, too. We’re in our 40s, so time is 
running out. So, how do I approach this subject? Maybe we’re just better off 
childless? Although I thought I longed for a child, I’m not sure that’s what I 
want any more. How do I start this conversation?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 