
About two and a half years ago, I stopped feeling any sensation during sex, 
both on my own and with my partner. I was sexually abused as a child. I am in 
individual therapy and my partner and I recently started sex therapy. I still 
want to have sex and am very sexually frustrated; I just want to understand 
what I’m going through and have some reassurance that this is temporary.

Therapy can awaken memories and elicit strong feelings. This is useful, 
because these phenomena are usually paths to healing. In the case of 
therapeutic work for survivors of sexual abuse, the healing process can shut 
down sexual interest for a while. This drop in libido is an attempt by the body 
and psyche to separate past coercive childhood sex from current consensual 
adult sex. In fact, some therapists advise survivors not to engage in partner 
sex during healing, and to help their partners understand and support this. 
Sexual coercion has a powerful effect on future adult sexuality. Some people 
emerge with a horror of sex, others are only comfortable when they have 
complete control during sex, certain individuals repeat earlier unhealthy 
sexual behaviours and so on. Once healing begins, survivors – as well as their 
partners – usually have to relearn how to connect sexually without aspects of 
lovemaking that owe a legacy to abuse. Be patient with yourself.


• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com>(please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 