
My firstborn son (who I put up for adoption) has found me after 35 years. I 
was so ecstatic when it happened – I bitterly regretted signing the adoption 
papers as soon as I had done so.

We fell into a honeymoon of communication and discovery. He found me through 
social media, and our initial meetings and messenger chats were euphoric, 
frequent and friendly. I adore him.

But now, after six months of almost daily contact, he has suddenly stopped 
reading my messages and replying to texts. It also looks as if he has blocked 
my phone number.

I know that I have to let him find his own way forward, but I hurt. I really 
badly hurt and cry bitterly most days for what seems like a second loss. His 
adoptive mother died, so this must all be confusing for him. How do I find my 
way out of this black hole and show him that I am not trying to replace her? 
How can I remain part of his life without being too needy?

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 