
Poor Iain Duncan Smith: the quiet man’s resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resignation-letter-in-full>
 was drowned out by the roar from Brussels. And even when everyone was paying 
attention to him, it wasn’t entirely clear – probably not even to Mr Duncan 
Smith himself – why exactly he was resigning.

All that was clear was how hurt and angry he was. Flouncing out over the sort 
of benefits cuts that he himself had been enforcing, or trying to enforce, ever 
since arriving in cabinet? It might not even be a cunning Brexit ploy – just a 
matter of personal pride. Maybe onlyAnthony Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/mar/30/news.obituaries> could do 
justice to the minor tragicomedy of Duncan Smith’s career. Taking a cabinet job 
when one has been leader is tough. But playing second banana to a strutting 
young chancellor who can’t conceal his contempt for an old stager associated 
with the “loser” years of Blair? That might just have been intolerable.

IDS is a man out of time. And now his resignation has come at the wrong time – 
it was supposed to embarrass and disconcert the prime minister, who is now 
chairingCobra <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/oct/21/Whitehall.uk> 
meetings and doubtless expressing private thanks for other colleagues’ loyalty.

Portraits of Anna Karenina

Inspired by a review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/16/russia-and-the-arts-national-portrait-gallery-london-tolstoy-tchaikovsky-review>
 from my colleague Jonathan Jones, I visited the exhibition Russia and the 
Arts: The Age of Tolstoy And Tchaikovsky at London’s National Portrait Gallery, 
from theState Tretyakov collection in Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/29/moscow-and-london-to-exchange-greatest-portraits>
. There are captivating, hypnotic studies of glittering-eyed Russian titans 
including, of course, Tchaikovsky and Tolstoy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftragicomic-duncan-smith-cobras-resignation-man-out-of-time-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49d938e0c83174ff0eb171fc318ad89f1fb59f3%2F0_0_3040_3801%2F3040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iain%20Duncan%20Smith%3A%20the%20wrong%20man%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftragicomic-duncan-smith-cobras-resignation-man-out-of-time-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iain%20Duncan%20Smith%3A%20the%20wrong%20man%20in%20the%20wrong%20place%20at%20the%20wrong%20time%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Ftragicomic-duncan-smith-cobras-resignation-man-out-of-time-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49d938e0c83174ff0eb171fc318ad89f1fb59f3%2F0_0_3040_3801%2F3040.jpg>
 ‘The study of Baroness Varvara Iskul Von Hildebrandt has a bit of Anna’s 
mysterious spirit.’ Photograph: Guy Bell/REX/Shutterstock 
I found myself thinking about the world’s most famous imaginary painting, the 
portrait ofAnna Karenina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anna-karenina> in 
Tolstoy’s novel. While in Italy, in retreat from disapproving Russian society, 
Count Vronsky and Anna encounter the scowling modern artist Mikhailov, who 
accepts their commission to paint Anna’s portrait – which he executes 
brilliantly, while maintaining a “polite hostility” to her. And Vronsky’s own 
dilettante-ish attempt to paint Anna is abandoned: a bad and complex omen.

Exactly this polite hostility is to be seen reflected in so many of the faces 
in this new exhibition: a kind of tension in the air. I tried to imagine Anna 
Karenina’s portrait on the wall. The study (below) of a socialite called
Baroness Varvara Iskul Von Hildebrandt 
<http://cultured.com/image/379/A_Portrait_of_Baroness_Varvara_Iskul_von_Hildebrandt/#.VvUvKs44qHk>
, painted after Karenina was published, has a bit of Anna’s mysterious spirit. 
My old Penguin edition of the book hasIvan Kramskoy’s Portrait of an Unknown 
Woman 
<http://www.mystudios.com/artgallery/I/Ivan-Nikolaevich-Kramskoy/Portrait-of-an-unknown-woman.html>
 on the front – also from the Tretyakov Gallery, but not included here. This is 
a great exhibition, and an excuse toreread Anna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/rereading-anna-karenina-james-meek>
.

Mindfulness and painfulness

As someone who suffers from both back pain and chronic spasms of bad-tempered 
incomprehension at the word mindfulness, I was intrigued at the news that this 
technique can relieve back pain. Research by the American Medical Association 
suggests that mindfulness-based stress reduction, such as meditation and yoga, 
canhelp with back pain much more effectively than drugs 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/03/24/health/back-pain-relief-meditation-mindfulness/index.html>
.

Well, maybe it can. My doctor tells me to do a series of dull exercises that 
have the opiate effect of putting me into a trance of boredom just by thinking 
about them – but without curing the pain … yet. Swimming helps. So I do that. 
But my theory is that blokes of a certain age get back pain because of the 
nonstop ritual of bending down to load and unload the dishwasher two or three 
times a day. I really must remember to bend from the knees while I do that.

Meanwhile, I am thinking of trying a daring combination of mindfulness and 
drugs, applied simultaneously. Or is that cheating?
 