
Iain Pears’ Arcadia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/11/arcadia-iain-pears-review>, a 
novel that also comes in the form of an interactive app, is competing with a 
series of stories set in space for theArthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction.

Pears’ novel, which intertwines the story of an Oxford professor, a 
15-year-old girl who finds herself in another world and a scientist from a 
dystopian future who creates a time machine, is one of six novels in the 
running for the prestigious prize, established 30 years ago with a grant from 
Clarke. Arcadia is up against Becky Chambers’ The Long Way to a Small, Angry 
Planet, an originally self-published novel, which was longlisted for the 
Baileys; JP Smythe’s Way Down Dark, which takes place on a spaceship that left 
a dying Earth centuries before, and Adrian Tchaikovsky’s Children of Time, in 
which the last remnants of humanity follow in the footsteps of their ancestors 
to find a terraformed planet.

Writing in the Guardian last summer, Pears called Arcadia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/novel-use-for-app-iain-pears-arcadia>
 “a spy story, a fantasy, a historical novel, a romance, a mythology and a work 
of science fiction”. “It is inevitable that authors, consciously or not, slot 
themselves into some category or other, and if they do not, others will do it 
for them,” said the author. “Writing Arcadia loosened those restraints.

Why you need an app to understand my novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/novel-use-for-app-iain-pears-arcadia>
“Sometimes you get a literary author who thinks they are rediscovering the 
wheel but with Iain it’s obvious he set out to write SF: and he’s said that 
publicly,” said Clarke award director Tom Hunter.

Hunter called the lineup of six books – which also includes World Fantasy 
award winner Nnedi Okorafor’s The Book of Phoenix, in which genetic experiment 
Phoenix, an “accelerated woman”, escapes from the Manhattan tower in which she 
has been imprisoned, and Dave Hutchinson’s Europe at Midnight, which sees 
intelligence officer Jim fall into a world preparing for war with another 
universe – “a quintessentially Clarke award kind of a shortlist”.

“Look once and I’m sure everyone will see a choice they agree with. Look 
twice, and you’ll likely see a new book you want to read next. Look a third 
time, though, and I hope you’ll see how well all of these six books sit 
together, and how they represent a particular, special moment in time for UK 
science fiction. In other words, like all great books, this is a shortlist that 
rewards the more you read into it,” said Hunter.


Hugo awards shortlist dominated by rightwing campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/26/hugo-awards-shortlist-rightwing-campaign-sad-rabid-puppies>
The six books in contention for the 2016 prize, which has been won in the past 
by Margaret Atwood and China Miéville, were chosen from 113 submissions. Dr 
Andrew Butler, chair of the judges, said it had been especially difficult to 
select just six titles this year. “It was toughly argued, in a good-humoured 
way, and as ever I’m blown away by the hard work of our judges,” said Butler.

The Clarke shortlist was revealed the day after the fan-voted Hugo awards 
announced its own lineup. There is no overlap, with six books in contention for 
the best novel Hugo: Ancillary Mercy by Ann Leckie, The Cinder Spires: The 
Aeronaut’s Windlass by Jim Butcher, The Fifth Season by NK Jemisin, Seveneves 
by Neal Stephenson and Uprooted by Naomi Novik.

This year’s judging panel features the British Science Fiction Association’s 
David Gullen and Ian Whates, the ScienceFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> Foundation’s Liz Bourke and Andrew 
McKie, and Leila Abu El Hawa from the Sci-Fi-London film festival. The winner 
will be announced on 24 August.

The Arthur C Clarke award shortlist

The Long Way to a Small Angry Planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/31/science-fiction-roundup> by 
Becky Chambers (Hodder & Stoughton)

Europe at Midnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/20/the-best-recent-science-fiction-horror-novels-review-roundup>
 by Dave Hutchinson (Solaris)

The Book of Phoenix by Nnedi Okorafor (Hodder & Stoughton)

Arcadia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/11/arcadia-iain-pears-review> by 
Iain Pears (Faber & Faber)

Way Down Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/15/review-jp-smythe-way-down-dark>
 by JP Smythe (Hodder & Stoughton)

Children of Time by Adrian Tchaikovsky (Tor)
 