
The government of Iceland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iceland> has 
launched legal action against its namesake British grocery chain over the use 
of its name.

The island of Iceland is challenging Iceland Foods’ exclusive ownership of the 
European-wide trademark registration for the word Iceland which it said was 
preventing the country’s companies from promoting goods and services abroad.

Iceland Foods, which is privately owned by entrepreneur Malcolm Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/12/iceland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters>
 and the South African investment group Brait, had “aggressively pursued and 
won multiple cases against Icelandic companies which use ‘Iceland’ in their 
representation or as part of their trademark, even in cases when the products 
and services do not compete,” Iceland’s ministry for foreign affairs said.

“The Icelandic government’s legal challenge at the European Union Intellectual 
Property Office (EU-IPO) seeks to invalidate this exclusive registration on the 
basis that the term ‘Iceland’ is exceptionally broad and ambiguous in 
definition, often rendering the country’s firms unable to describe their 
products as Icelandic,” the statement added.

The ministry said Iceland had tried several times to negotiate in the hope of 
reaching a fair solution and avoiding legal action but its efforts had been met 
with “unrealistic and unacceptable demands by the supermarket chain leaving 
Iceland with no choice but to proceed with a legal resolution to the situation”.

Iceland Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/iceland-foods> said it 
received no recent approaches about an amicable resolution of the issue, which 
was its preferred approach.

“We very much regret that the government of Iceland has apparently decided to 
take legal action over the use of the name Iceland,” the company said.

“While we will vigorously defend Iceland Foods’ established rights where there 
is any risk of confusion between our business and Iceland the country, we have 
been trading successfully for 46 years under the name Iceland and do not 
believe that any serious confusion or conflict has ever arisen in the public 
mind, or is likely to do so. We hope that the government will contact us 
directly so that we may address their concerns,” the company said.

The supermarket chain’s sales have risen after it introduced better quality 
foods including more seafood and branded ranges with Slimming World and Pizza 
Express. Itssales were up 8.3% in the 12 weeks to 6 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/tesco-aldi-lidl-growth-five-year-low>
, according to analysts at Kantar Worldpanel.

It was founded in Oswestry in 1970 but does have historic links to its 
namesake country. Icelandic retail conglomerate Baugur bought a controlling 
stake in the grocer which it held until its collapse in 2009. Icelandic banks 
Landsbanki and Glitnir took on the stake, which was later acquired as part of a 
management buyout led by Walker. Brait, which is backed by South African retail 
entrepreneur Christo Wiese who also owns stakes in New Look and Virgin Active,
owns 57% of Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/12/iceland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters>
.

The company, whose headquarters are in Deeside, has more than 800 stores 
across the UK and employs more than 23,000 staff.
 