
Sex and disability are rarely thought of in tandem, and when they are it’s 
more often than notin the context of a heterosexual, long-term relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/disability-and-sex-are-not-mutually-exclusive>
. That’s not me. I’m a gay man and have a fairly stereotypical lifestyle for 
someone in his mid-20s in central London.

Sex and disability: yes, the two can and should go together | Fran Vicary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/21/sex-and-disability-yes-the-two-can-and-should-go-together>
There is, however, one big difference between me and my fellow gay men. I have 
severe cerebral palsy. I use a wheelchair, I have jerky involuntary movements, 
I rely on assistants 24/7 and I have a speech impairment. At the same time I 
have a good sex life and really enjoy challenging men’s conceptions of 
disability.

My assistants can always tell by the sudden change in my movements that it’s 
time for them to go on one of their walks. This is the euphemism which has been 
agreed for a very long time. I’m an activeGrindr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grindr> user and my assistants are now 
entirely used to me sitting there on the hook-up app while they feed me my 
dinner rather than feeling apprehensive around that infamous orange glow.

The assistants always disappear one way or another before any encounter. I 
keep what I tell guys to a minimum. I know they are somewhat perplexed by the 
entire set-up; in any case, we both have something else on our minds. It 
doesn’t help that I live in student accommodation and quite often the guys 
think my panic cord flushes the toilet. Not only does this set off a very loud 
alarm which sends my involuntary movements through the roof, but security are 
at the door within seconds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdisabled-gay-twentysomething-grindr-cerebral-palsy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23264db4288bac7e4f2e2267716e6edf60ef8409%2F0_151_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20disabled%2C%20gay%20twentysomething%2C%20Grindr%20is%20a%20godsend%20%7C%20Josh%20Hepple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdisabled-gay-twentysomething-grindr-cerebral-palsy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20disabled%2C%20gay%20twentysomething%2C%20Grindr%20is%20a%20godsend%20%7C%20Josh%20Hepple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdisabled-gay-twentysomething-grindr-cerebral-palsy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23264db4288bac7e4f2e2267716e6edf60ef8409%2F0_151_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 ‘Medically speaking things could be improved: 56 Dean Street are fantastic 
with generic sexual health concerns, but don’t have much experience of cerebral 
palsy.’ Photograph: Chelsea and Westminister NHS 
Guys my age often panic at my movements. People walk towards me and then turn 
back. When I check my phone I see that I’ve been blocked (even though I do 
emphasise the extent of my impairment many times before meeting). I know plenty 
of my non-disabled comrades also get blocked, but it took some time to get used 
to. I remind myself that it’s just sex and nothing more. Though I date boys my 
own age, when it comes to Grindr I generally go for guys around 40 as they tend 
not to have any issues with my movements. I meet around three a week (if not 
more) and have rarely had a bad time. I often have a reality check when I go 
home to the much smaller city in the UK where I grew up to find that sex is not 
available on demand.

This raises a few issues. I am unable to masturbate. I rely on others. Is this 
dignified? Luckily I have had many, many great experiences. I acknowledge that 
not everyone who has issues with masturbation may feel comfortable asking men 
on Grindr (especially if they are straight) to help them perform the deed and 
possibly go further, yet it would automatically, by definition, turn into sex 
work if I relied on paid support. I am not sure of the best solution.

Treating disabled people as asexual is exasperating and offensive | Penny 
Pepper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/disabled-people-asexual-sex-lives-you-before-me-sexuality>
Medically speaking things could be improved: 56 Dean Street 
<http://dean.st/56deanstreet/> are fantastic with generic sexual health 
concerns, but – no surprises here – they don’t have much experience with 
patients who have cerebral palsy. And yet my neurologist gives me the 
impression that she doesn’t believe that any of her patients have sex lives so
when I have questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/20/lets-talk-about-sex-education-disability>
 I have no one to compare myself to. Physios, it seems, can be prudish.

When I joined Grindr 18 months ago, I’d never even had an encounter with a 
man. I was certain of my sexuality for many years, but I’d convinced myself 
that sex would be off the cards unless it was in the context of a very stable 
relationship. Since getting Grindr, I have met around 60 men and have found the 
experience unbelievably rewarding and liberating. The health benefits have been 
enormous and there’s no denying it’s been a lot of fun. I don’t forget how 
disabled I am and I often admire how open-minded these men are. It is a far cry 
from how I am often treated in public. I guess you could argue it’s a case of 
equality between the sheets rather than in the streets.
 