
Impress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>, the press regulator that 
secured royal charter recognition, has been dumped as a sponsor of the British 
journalism awards.

Several of the judges warned that they would not be prepared to continue with 
the judging process if Press Gazette, which organises the annual contest, kept 
Impress as a sponsor.

They are said to have “felt uncomfortable” at Impress’s involvement and viewed 
the matter as “a point of principle”.


Press Gazette’s editor, Dominic Ponsford, issued a statement on Friday 
afternoon saying:

“A number of the British Journalism Awards judges felt uncomfortable about the 
fact that Impress were a sponsor of the event.

Although the judging process is entirely independent of any sponsorship, they 
nonetheless felt troubled by their involvement because of their strongly held 
views on the issue of press regulation.

The 49 independent judges are the backbone of the British Journalism Awards 
and the event cannot happen without their hard work and commitment.

We have therefore taken the decision to remove Impress as a sponsor of this 
year’s awards”.

The issue was first raised at a meeting of judges on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/04/journalism-awards-judges-object-to-impress-sponsorship>
. Some judges argued that the choice of Impress, the regulator founded as a 
rival to the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), was inappropriate.

They viewed Impress as a state-backed body that presents a threat to press 
freedom. One of them pointed out that Impress does not regulate any of the 
newspapers being considered for prizes.

Ponsford and his editorial team were not responsible for Impress being 
selected as a sponsor. It was a commercial matter arranged by the magazine’s 
publisher, Progressive Media Group.

Press Gazette is regulated by Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> 
and its editorial line has been less than supportive of Impress.

The body is largely funded by charities linked to Max Mosley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley>, the former head of Formula One 
motor racing, who is regarded as anathema by certain editors and publishers.

The awards ceremony is due to be staged on 6 December at the Stationers’ Hall 
in London.

 