
I was saddened to see that, once again, the Aga has come under attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/mar/15/aga-cooking>. 
I cook solely on one for 30 guests once a week at myUnderground Restaurant 
<http://marmitelover.blogspot.com/>, and feel I must stick up for this 
behemoth, the Rolls Royce of cookers.

The main argument against the Aga is that it's environmentally unsound, and 
this is often tied to it being representative of a smugmiddle class lifestyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jan/13/heathrow-campaigners-environmentalism-brendan-oneill>
. I bought my gas powered model 18 months ago and it was a big purchase for me 
- in the way that some people spend money on expensive cars, holidays, or a big 
screen telly, I saved and borrowed to get one, as do people from all 
backgrounds. There's a huge market in renovated and secondhand machines, which 
are originally madelargely from recycled iron 
<http://www.bowerandchild.com/faq/aga.htm>.
Since having one, I've saved on other energy use - while my gas bill is 
slightly higher, my electricity bill is lower; I rarely use the heating, the 
iron, tumbledryer, electric kettle, toaster, breadmaker. I concede that these 
last two could apply to other, greener cookers, but when it comes to an all out 
attack on the Aga for its cooking potential, I can't agree.

There's something extraordinary about how the Aga cooks: its tightly enclosed 
ovens mean that it simultaneously steams and roasts. Hence your Aga baked 
potatoes will have flaky flavoursome skins on the outside while remaining 
gloriously fluffy on the inside. Focaccia emerges springy and light with 
crunchy edges, gratin dauphinoise is done beautifully - soft slices of melting 
potato floating in cream with a caramel brown top, roasted fish, rubbed with 
blackened seasoning, has just the right consistency of tender flakes held 
together by crispy outsides. Then there is the peerless simmering overn, which 
I often use for pavlovas and other treats cooked overnight. Aga meringues are 
golden not white.

Yes the machine has some idiosyncracies: the tomb-like silence of the cast 
iron ovens will often mean that you forget things. And those ovens are deep. In 
the first few weeks of my restaurant nights, it became a tradition that a
blackened fossil would emerge from the back of the oven long after customers 
had gone 
<http://marmitelover.blogspot.com/2009/02/vacherin-night-at-underground.html>. 
But most things can be overcome with a bit of thought and planning. I bought 
timers, lots of them, even wore one, sometimes to bed, ticking like a terrorist 
on a mission.

Every week I learn something new about the Aga: chocolate can be melted, 
without the aid of a bain-marie, in a bowl on the black enamel between the hot 
plates. After washing up, wooden boards can be dried on top of it, as can fresh 
herbs that have gone a bit ropey.

Buying an Aga changed my life. Because the oven is on all the time, I cook 
more from scratch, so we eat better, and our cold Victorian flat is a healthier 
and more pleasant environment. To paraphrase Princess Diana, there are three of 
us in this family: myself, my daughter and the cream, black and chrome piece of 
heavyweight design that provides the heart and hearth of our home.
 