
“Do you have high hopes?” “I hope you like being called Hope” are comments I 
get frequently, often followed by a hearty laugh, and “I bet you’ve never heard 
that one before.”

My name is a symbol for something both life-sustaining – the essentialness of 
hope – and dangerous – foolish hopes. I am now reconciled to this. I went 
through a teenage phase of making people use my more normal middle name, but it 
didn’t stick because it wasn’t mine. I now love the name I used to shun, but I 
also understand what a loaded word hope is.

In these turbulent times, take a break from social media to find comfort | 
David Sax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/social-media-election-donald-trump-wellbeing>
At the end of a year so dreadful it has become almost a joke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yv_rl3MYKA>, hope is more precious than ever, 
but also less to be trusted. Where do we find hope in a year which saw an MP
shot and stabbed in the street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
, a triumph of nationalism, a huge swing to the right? My answer is, in books.

I have always sought solace in fiction. As a child with non-verbal autism, I 
was able to understand the motivations of children in novels such asThe Secret 
of Platform 13 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Secret_of_Platform_13> more 
than I was able to understand my peers. From an early age I understood the 
power of the novel. Books were my companions.

Though I now have a good network of friends and a job, I still love books, not 
only as a welcome escape (though the ability to temporarily be someone else has 
always seemed like a special kind of magic) but also for what they teach us 
about the world, ourselves and one another, and the hope they give us for the 
world to come.

I spent the night of the US election curled up with a cup of cocoa and Dodie 
Smith’s novelI Capture the Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview25>
. It was difficult to drag myself away from the internet but it was necessary. 
Twitter and Facebook were calling out to me, but the novel represented another 
world, offering me the chance to be Cassandra Mortmain in a drafty castle with 
her strange family.

In 2013, psychologists at the New School for Social Research 
<http://www.newschool.edu/nssr/> released research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/oct/08/literary-fiction-improves-empathy-study>
 that suggested that reading fiction improves empathy. While I find the study’s 
distinction between “literary” and non-literary fiction a bit off-putting, I do 
believe that reading increases your understanding of the world, and of other 
people – forging connections through story in a way that Twitter never can.

Reading teaches us not only about our common humanity (it is wonderful to see 
something expressed in words and think, “Yes! That’s exactly how I feel”) but 
also about the world. Leo Tolstoydepicted a generation of young Russians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/22/war-and-peace-guide-philip-hensher>
 trying to make sense of the Napoleonic wars, while Charles Dickens showed the 
bleak reality of what it meant to be poor in Victorian England.Charlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> wrote about what it meant 
to be plain and poor, yet clever and sensitive. All of these authors wrote with 
such empathy that the adventures of these characters, their thoughts, perils, 
loves, ideas, can be understood today and related to our own circumstances, 
though the stories are centuries old.

The rise of fascism is not inevitable – just look at Bridges Not Walls | Ellie 
Mae O’Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/bridges-not-walls-protest-trump-20-january>
What has this to do with hope, though? Reading gives me hope because the 
chroniclers of dark times tell us that they pass. There is an element of “once 
upon a time …” to everything, however bleak it now seems.

This is not to negate the potential awfulness of the Trump presidency, the 
horrors of the war in Syria and the conflict in Yemen, and the political mess 
of Brexit in the UK. In her post-apocalypse novel,Station Eleven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/station-eleven-review-emily-st-john-mandel>
, Emily St John Mandel conducts a beautiful take-down of people who say that 
everything happens for a reason.

What novels tell us is not that it’s going to be OK, or that it is all for the 
best, because it’s not. People will go on drowning as they try to flee Syria, 
climate change will get worse, and Trump could do massive damage to the world 
causing an upsurge in the worst kinds of prejudice. But novels and stories tell 
us that this has all happened before, in a different time, with different names 
but similar narratives. They tell us that it’s OK to be scared, to have 
complicated feelings, to feel a bit lost, and they remind us that we are human.

Even in novels with “what if” scenarios – “What if the Earth froze?” “What if 
aliens invaded?” “What if we could travel through time?” “What if 99.9% of the 
Earth’s population were wiped out?” – there is redemption in the humanity which 
survives. Everything is far from OK, but this has happened before, and will 
happen again. There are stories in everything, and reading keeps hope alive.
 