
Russia’s opposition has been cowed, killed or forced into exile, parliament is 
servile and the media largely toothless.

But despite overwhelming apathy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/russia-stays-loyal-kremlin-election-record-low-turnout>
 in parliamentary elections, at the grassroots level Russians from across the 
socioeconomic spectrum have been quietly challenging the authorities – and 
these challenges have become increasingly hard to suppress.

From environmental campaigners holding companies accountable for oil spills 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/climate-change/arctic-impacts/The-dangers-of-Arctic-oil/Black-ice--Russian-oil-spill-disaster/>
 to campaigns against local taxes, activists preserving parks and residents 
taking control of their housing, local activism is gathering strength and 
momentum.

Such movements may be normal for most democracy, but in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> they are unprecedented.

The development should be understood as a reaction to the policies of the 
president,Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, 
which have consistently prioritised the interests of business elites over the 
needs of society. And as those business elites are hit by the financial crash, 
they are increasingly trying to squeeze more money from Russian citizens.

One of most significant victories for community-based action was a countrywide 
strike 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/articles/russian-truck-drivers-strike-for-10-days-against-platon-tax-system-51905>
 organised by long-haul truck drivers against a proposed increase in road 
tolls. The truck tax system, known as Platon, is being operated by the son of 
oligarch Arkady Rotenberg, a close friend of Putin.

The 10-day action was unusual, and effective, because the people who took part 
came from Putin’s support base.

And while the payments weren’t abolished, the tolls were reduced significantly 
and the truckers have gone on to lend their name to other civil protests, 
including a protest convoy made up of famers from theKuban region 
<http://www.interpretermag.com/russia-update-august-23-2016/> outraged that 
their land had been illegally confiscated.

Under Putin there has also been a gradual erosion of trust in the authorities 
to protect their rights, but one positive consequence is that citizens have 
mobilised to plug the gaps.

In 2010 the government was criticised for failing to put out forest fires that 
swept through the central and western regions of the countrywhich left at least 
50 people dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/aug/02/russia-natural-disasters>
.

As residents were chocking on smog it emerged that authorities were actively 
felling the trees in a protected area of the Khimki forest near Moscow and were 
placing their efforts on dispersing protesters, not putting out the flames 
across the country.

And in some cases residents do not just perceive the authorities useless, they 
actively fear them. According to a poll by Russiannewspaper Vedomosti 
<http://www.vedomosti.ru/opinion/articles/2015/06/16/596463-lyudi-stanovyatsya-blizhe>
 44% of Muscovites, 34% in Dagestan and 27% in the Leningrad region believed 
the police were an active threat.


In Moscow environmental activists campaigning to protect green spaces from 
development have faced violence from the police and private security 
contractors.

In April private security guards were accused of attacking women and children 
<http://www.habitants.org/news/inhabitants_of_europe/the_dubki_park_in_moscow_defended_by_the_muscovites_women_and_children_beaten_up_and_arrested_by_police>
 who had joined a protest to protect trees in Dubki park. When the police 
turned up they arrested 15 of the most active protesters, but left the private 
contractors alone.

For the first time in history we are seeing angry Muscovites not just 
collecting signatures online but risking their lives and safety to take a stand.

The growing strength of these civil movements means we can no longer say that 
Russian citizens are passive; they just don’t vote in elections because they 
don’t think their vote will change anything.


But as the government continues to crack down on the independent NGOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/aug/26/ngos-face-restrictions-laws-human-rights-generation>
 that traditionally support grassroots movements the road ahead will not be 
smooth.

Activists need to keep promoting the idea that citizens can no longer rely on 
the state to fix their problems; they need to keep fighting attempts by the 
government to smear them in the press and they must continue to encourage their 
fellow campaigner to local government positions, as three Khimki activists did 
successfully this September.

It would then be possible for these grassroots groups to become the network 
that the Russian society can rely on, not a centralised state that only has the 
interests of the elites at heart.


Translated by Svetlana Graudt

 