
David Clementi has called for a review of “crown jewel” sports rights in his 
first appearance after his appointment asBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> chair, in which he also demanded that 
all senior appointments at the corporation should be politically independent.

In the first two hours of a grilling by members of the Commons culture, media 
and sport select committee to confirm his appointment, Clementi, the 
government’s preferred choice as chair, said he had always been politically 
neutral and that his board and senior executives should be too, adding: “I 
never met the prime minister.”

Asked about the promotion of the former Labour culture secretary James Purnell 
to a key editorial role as head of radio, Clementi said: “There should be open 
competition for all senior appointments and one of the tests will be political 
independence.”

Related: In interesting times, the BBC gets the most unexciting board chairman 
imaginable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/15/bbc-board-david-clementi-ofcom-none-of-that-vision>

Applicants to the new BBC board would also be judged for their impartiality, 
he indicated. “Those who come with a political agenda will not be appointed,” 
said Clementi, the former chairman of the insurance company Prudential.

Clementi surprised observers by suggesting the debate over what constitutes a 
crown jewel sports event – one which should be provided free to air – should be 
reopened. He suggested thatgolf’s Open Championship 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/golf/34399912> was such an event and should not 
have been lost to Sky last year.

Saying he regretted the loss of “one of two national occasions”, he called for 
the list of crown jewel sports to be reviewed. “There were just a few I regard 
as national events and I would like to see free to air,” he said.

The BBC lost live rights to England men’s cricket matches to pay TV in 2005, 
whileEurosport <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-33311902> has 
secured exclusive pan-European rights to the Olympics. The list of crown jewel 
events is governed by legislation and avoluntary code 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/34192650> set up in 2009, which was re-signed by 
sports bodies governing cricket, football, golf, tennis and rugby union and 
league last October.

Clementi said several times that impartiality and accuracy should be at the 
heart of the corporation. “The BBC is nothing if it doesn’t carry the trust of 
the people to be impartial and accurate … Above all the BBC needs to be seen as 
the medium of record in the era of fake news and post-truth era,” he said. “The 
BBC has a real role to ensure it is seen as the place where people go to make 
sure they can distinguish between fact and fiction.”

He backed the corporation’s reporting of the EU referendum, saying it “did a 
good job in a set of very difficult circumstances”.

He said he thought the BBC had “continued to tread a good path down the 
middle”, but he “would like to see some research”.


“I am absolutely determined that we should meet this requirement every time, 
and stand back and question ourselves about bias. My own personal view is that 
the BBC has done a good job,” he said.

“I’ve always been politically neutral. I’ve never belonged to a political 
party.”

On bringing his experience of privatisation or marketisation to the BBC, 
Clementi said the broadcaster would look at what could be outsourced 
effectively. “The BBC is going to be under very significant financial pressure 
as a result of licence fee negotiations,” he said.

“We are bound to spend a good deal of time over the next few years considering 
ways of actually reducing the cost base of the BBC without harming the 
frontline services.”

Although he ducked questions about how he would have dealt with the imposition 
of funding forfree TV licences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/19/bbc-trust-george-osborne-licence-fee-deal>
 for over-75s, Clementi was critical of the behind-closed-doors nature of last 
year’s settlement.

“If I thought financial settlement was incompatible with obligations of the 
charter then I would have to resign,” he said.

Clementi also told MPs the BBC was right not to “chase the money” to keep the 
Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>, and that 
it should not create a copycat baking show to compete with the programme when 
it relaunches on Channel 4.

The rival channel paid £75m for three seasons of the Great British Bake Off 
after negotiations between the show’s makers, Love Productions, and the BBC 
broke down last year. Its presenters,Sue Perkins and Mel Giedroyc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/sue-perkins-and-mel-giedroyc-to-leave-great-british-bake-off>
, the judge Mary Berry and the 2015 winner, Nadiya Hussain, have committed to 
the BBC, with only the judge Paul Hollywood moving to Channel 4.

Asked during his confirmation hearing if the BBC would be right to make a 
similar show, Clementi said such a move would be “quite disappointing” and 
could breach copyright rules.

He told the committee: “If it was a precisely similar cooking show I think it 
would be wrong, but I don’t think that is what they intend. My personal opinion 
is they need to find a different format. My very personal view is that it 
peaked withNadiya Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/nadiya-hussein-bake-off-senseless-love-affair-with-cheese>
. That’s a very personal view not the BBC’s and good luck to Channel 4.”

Clementi said he was not sad that the BBC had lost The Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2017/jan/05/let-it-shine-v-the-voice-let-the-battle-for-most-intolerable-show-begin>
 to ITV, and praised the new talent showLet It Shine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/03/gary-barlow-let-it-shine-will-avoid-the-nastiness-of-other-tv-talent-shows>
, fronted by Gary Barlow.

“The concept is not new, [but] it is quite warm-hearted,” he said. “There’s a 
slight twist in way they do voting. Shouldn’t judge it on the first two 
episodes ... We should allow it a few more Saturdays to judge it.”

 Clementi described himself as an avid TV watcher, saying his “specialist 
subject is BBC1 and BBC2 between 8pm and 11pm”.

He cited Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/sherlock-benedict-cumberbatch-review-james-bond-margaret-thatcher-mark-gatiss-steven-moffat-detective>
, the Agatha Christie adaptationThe Witness for the Prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/27/witness-for-the-prosecution-review-kim-cattrall>
 and Brontë sisters dramaTo Walk Invisible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/02/to-walk-invisible-withering-heights-of-gloom-and-muzak>
 as examples of distinctive programming produced over Christmas, and added that 
the “sheer quality” of other BBC dramas made them distinctive.

Clementi, who authored the report suggesting a unitary board with an 
independent chair should be created, denied he had effectively written his own 
job description.

He said he had not considered applying to be chair until after the BBC Trust 
chair,Rona Fairhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rona-fairhead-to-stand-down-as-bbc-chair>
, had ruled herself out.

“The actual criteria by which the open contest has been judged was not set by 
me, [it was] set by DCMS officials and ministers, no doubt working with a 
headhunter. An open and orderly process has taken place, the result of it is I 
am here in front of you.”
 