
After a week when extraterrestrial spacecraft descending from the heavens to 
nuke the White House doesn’t sound like the worst idea in the world, you could 
be forgiven for turning toIndependence Day: Resurgence (Fox, 12) for some 
post-election succour. I can’t claim it will provide that, but Roland 
Emmerich’s extravagantly ludicrous sequel to 1996’s already daft alien-invasion 
blockbuster is nothing if not a loud distraction: it’s big and stupid and oddly 
warming in the manner of a puppy eagerly licking your face.

Will Smith is absent, replaced by a beaming new generation of patriotically 
upstanding ass-kickers, but you can otherwise guess the drill: skies darken 
before 4 July celebrations, unearthly shots are fired, explosive carnage 
ensues. It’s narratively sloppier than its predecessor, with sundry stray 
characters and their emaciated arcs dodging the debris, but Emmerich 
orchestrates the action with far more purposeful gusto. Even shrunk to the 
small screen, the film’s a veritable symphony of fireball cacophony.

Far softer, more humane pleasures are on offer in Looking: The Complete Series 
and the Movie (Warner, 18), which boxes the two existing seasons of HBO’s 
prematurely pulled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/26/looking-hbo-cancel-gap-gay-culture>
 drama of gay social circling in San Francisco together with the 
feature-length, Andrew Haigh-directed film made to tie up (or at least fray 
more elegantly) its loose ends. It’s a lovely, pensive sendoff, distinct in 
character and atmospheric texture from the television episodes, and just about 
freestanding as an entry in Haigh’s thus far exquisite cinematic oeuvre. It 
helps to know more of the characters’ histories, but this melancholy, 
conversational film listens as much as it informs. As a coda, it treats the 
individual lives it has traced with intimacy and affection, but taken on its 
own it’s an equally satisfying snapshot of a community still, not least in a 
hostile 2016, in quiet crisis.

The vulnerabilities of straight masculinity, meanwhile, are laid savagely bare 
inChevalier (Studiocanal, 18), Greek director Athina Rachel Tsangari’s 
discomfiting, ashily funny allegorical comedy which sees a group of would-be 
alpha males engaged in an increasingly absurd jostle for power over the course 
of a luxury yachting weekend. Tsangari brings a feminist’s bemused long view to 
their loaded competitions and confrontations, but not at the complete expense 
of empathy. Awful as many of these men are, they’re hardly cold caricatures, 
and while Greece’s current political troubles are deftly woven into their 
conflict, the fear and insecurity they embody is alarmingly universal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aef7ad96604b1edd5607aa6a6a8e40ed690e58b%2F116_0_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independence%20Day%3A%20Resurgence%3B%20Looking%3A%20The%20Complete%20Series%20and%20the%20Movie%3B%20Chevalier%3B%20The%20Wait%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independence%20Day%3A%20Resurgence%3B%20Looking%3A%20The%20Complete%20Series%20and%20the%20Movie%3B%20Chevalier%3B%20The%20Wait%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aef7ad96604b1edd5607aa6a6a8e40ed690e58b%2F116_0_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
 ‘Heady visual and sensual richness’: Chloe Sevigny in The Wait. Photograph: 
Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
A grief drama that morphs into a one-sided ghost story of sorts, Piero 
Messina’sThe Wait (Studiocanal, 12) is illuminated by the vivid, aching sadness 
of Juliette Binoche, cinema’s greatest mourner since the days ofThree Colours: 
Blue, <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/09/three-colours-blue-review> 
here playing a bereaved mother enigmatically hiding the fact of her son’s death 
from his girlfriend. Neither her surfeit of feeling, nor the film’s heady 
visual and sensual richness, however, can quite inject credibility into its 
artificial premise.

A valiant Penelope Cruz has even sketchier melodrama to sell in Ma Ma 
(Metrodome, 15), in which a breast-cancer patient and a shellshocked widower go 
through the emotional rinse cycle. There are Sirkian ambitions here, but 
they’re sunk by once-vital director Julio Medem’s surprisingly beige, 
televisual approach.

On the animation front, The Secret Life of Pets (Universal, U) offers exactly 
the kind of synthetic japery you’d expect from the studio factory that brought 
youDespicable Me, but its frantically chaos-prone household critters still lack 
even plush-toy levels of warmth and character. It’s less immediately 
child-friendly, but the medium is infinitely better served by Keiichi Hara’s 
ravishing, emotionally generousMiss Hokusai (Anime Ltd, 12), a historical manga 
adaptation that blends biography and fantasy in surveying the life and work of 
19th-century ukiyo-e painter Katsushika Ōi. It’s a celebration of creativity 
that itself ripples with stylistic invention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F706237edb48fb7e413866cf15bfca236a223e49d%2F0_0_3241_1946%2F3241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independence%20Day%3A%20Resurgence%3B%20Looking%3A%20The%20Complete%20Series%20and%20the%20Movie%3B%20Chevalier%3B%20The%20Wait%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independence%20Day%3A%20Resurgence%3B%20Looking%3A%20The%20Complete%20Series%20and%20the%20Movie%3B%20Chevalier%3B%20The%20Wait%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Findependence-day-resurgence-looking-the-wait-secret-life-of-pets-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F706237edb48fb7e413866cf15bfca236a223e49d%2F0_0_3241_1946%2F3241.jpg>
 The Secret Life of Pets: synthetic japery. 
Couture geeks get a lavish eyeful in The First Monday in May (Dogwoof, 12), an 
entertainingly glitter-brushed, behind-the-scenes examination of last year’s 
celebritasticVogue Met gala and its co-ordination with the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art’s blockbuster China: Through theLooking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/looking> Glass exhibition, though 
it’s a film with precious little critical insight into the ideological 
contrasts between these institutions.

The week’s documentary standout, rather, is a recent Netflix addition 
<https://www.netflix.com/watch/80089199> that bypassed UK distributors 
entirely. Dutch film-maker Tom Fassaert’s fascinating, unsettling domestic 
self-portrait,A Family Affair, unpicks the estrangement between his coolly 
eccentric grandmother Marianne, who severed ties to begin a new life in South 
Africa, and the bewildered, semi-functional family she left behind. His inquiry 
yields confessions alternately confounding and actively shocking, though the 
truth seems locked somewhere between dementia and denial.
 