
Indiana Jones has been named the greatest movie character of all time 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1506918/indiana-jones-defeats-james-bond-in-film-poll>
 ahead of James Bond, Batman and Han Solo in a new poll.

Harrison Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrisonford>, 72, takes two 
places (Jones and Solo) in the extensive survey of 10,000 film fans for Empire 
magazine, but there is only one female character, Alien’s Ellen Ripley, in the 
top 10. Sigourney Weaver’s battling warrant officer lands in fifth ahead of The 
Joker, Die Hard’s John McClane, Fight Club’s Tyler Durden, Darth Vader and The 
Dude from the Coen brothers’ The Big Lebowski.

The poll result comes as something of a shock, given that plans for a new 
Indiana Jones movie seem to be on the back burner at Disney. The studio bought 
Lucasfilm for $4.05bn in October 2012, but has moved forward with proposals for 
a new series of Star Wars movies rather than focusing on the swashbuckling 
archeologist. New Lucasfilm chief Kathleen Kennedy told Vanity Fair in March 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/05/star-wars-force-awakens-photos> 
that a new Indy film would see the light “one day”, but was unable to offer 
definitive timelines.

Could Chris Pratt be the man for another Indiana Jones crusade?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/could-chris-pratt-be-the-man-for-another-indiana-jones-crusade>
“When it will happen, I’m not quite sure,” she said. “We haven’t started 
working on a script yet, but we are talking about it.”

Some reports have suggested Guardians of the Galaxy and Jurassic World’s Chris 
Pratt could be in line to pull on Indie’s battered fedora if and when Disney 
finally moves forward with a new film. Ford would most likely be in his mid 70s 
by the time a fifth movie hit cinemas, though advanced age has not stopped him 
returning as Solo in the upcoming Star Wars: The Force Awakens. Pratt has his 
pick of projects after sci-fi reboot Jurassic Worldroared to $1bn in a record 
14 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/audiences-in-raptor-jurassic-world-hits-billion-dollar-milestone-in-record-time>
 earlier this week.

The Empire poll is relatively light on superheroes, with no place for any of 
Marvel’s cavalcade of box office plundering masked crimefighters in the top 10. 
Cult figures such as Brad Pitt’s Tyler Durden and Jeff Bridges’ The Dude are in 
many ways surprising entries, thoughDurden made the No 1 spot in a similar 
Empire poll from 2008 
<http://www.empireonline.com/100-greatest-movie-characters/default.asp?c=1>.

Top Ten Greatest Movie Characters

1. Indiana Jones


2. James Bond

3. Star Wars’s Han Solo

4. Batman

5. Alien’s Ellen Ripley

6. The Joker

7. Die Hard’s John McClane

8. Fight Club’s Tyler Durden

9. Star Wars’s Darth Vader

10. The Big Lebowski’s The Dude
 