
Social media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> trolling against 
Indian public figures including journalists and actors has been directly 
co-ordinated from inside the country’s ruling party, a new book has claimed.

An Indian former troll has alleged the 2014 prime ministerial campaign of 
Narendra Modi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi> used social 
media volunteers to push critical messages about public figures perceived to be 
opposed to the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP).

Whether intended by the BJP or not, the social media campaigns would often 
spill over into religious and sexual trolling of the target, especially if it 
was a woman, said Sadhavi Khosla, the 37-year-old former party volunteer.

The trolls’ “hit list” included political opponents, such as the Congress 
party vice-president,Rahul Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rahul-gandhi>, and screenshots provided by 
Khosla also show that the Bollywood star Aamir Khan, was among those singled 
out.

She says the social media unit responsible for directing her and hundreds of 
other volunteers continues to operate.

The BJP did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment but the former 
head of the party’s social media unit, Arvind Gupta, told the Indian Express 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/force-snapdeal-to-dump-aamir-khan-bjp-it-chief-told-social-media-cell-4446486/>
 that Khosla’s claims were unsubstantiated and that she was a supporter of the 
opposition Congress party.


He said the BJP had published social media guidelines on its website and never 
“encouraged trolling”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Findia-bjp-party-ordering-online-abuse-opponents-actors-modi-claims-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf94d309ef89e877cc6a9d30d5027b192937729b%2F0_232_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India's%20ruling%20party%20ordered%20online%20abuse%20of%20opponents%2C%20claims%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Findia-bjp-party-ordering-online-abuse-opponents-actors-modi-claims-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%27s%20ruling%20party%20ordered%20online%20abuse%20of%20opponents%2C%20claims%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Findia-bjp-party-ordering-online-abuse-opponents-actors-modi-claims-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf94d309ef89e877cc6a9d30d5027b192937729b%2F0_232_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Sadhavi Khosla, who claims India’s ruling party directly coordinated social 
media campaigns against leading journalists and actors. Photograph: Ahmer Khan 
for the Guardian 
Khosla’s account is contained in a new book by the journalist Swati 
Chaturvedi, published inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> on 
Tuesday, I Am a Troll, which investigates the ties between abusive social media 
accounts and the BJP.

Prominent Indian women, particularly journalists, have been raising concerns 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-22378366> for more than three years 
about the scale and tone of the abuse they face online, with much of it 
anonymous, sexually charged and fiercely nationalist.

Khosla claims in the book that starting late in 2013, and for nearly two years 
after, she was one of hundreds of BJP supporters receiving direct instructions 
on messages to push online from senior members of the party’s social media unit.

She received the orders through WhatsApp but also met senior members of the 
digital unit, she claims.

A fervent Modi supporter at the time, Khosla said she enthusiastically 
participated, using her Twitter account to criticise Rahul Gandhi and his 
mother Sonia, both senior members of the Congress party, which has ruled India 
for much of the 70 years since independence.

But she claims she grew uncomfortable when ordered to tweet criticisms of 
prominent Indian journalists, such as Rajdeep Sardesai and Barkha Dutt, which 
sometimes featured “slanderous claims”.

“It was a never-ending drip-feed of hate and bigotry against the minorities, 
the Gandhi family, journalists on the hit list, liberals, anyone perceived as 
anti-Modi,” she is quoted in the book as saying.

'Blasting and breathless': fears over India's fledgling 24-hour news media's 
march to war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/hype-india-march-to-war-media-24-hour-news-culture-coverage-pakistan>
The targets of the social media unit would end up being swarmed by critical 
messages that occasionally veered into criminal threats, Khosla said.

“I simply could not follow [the] directions anymore when I saw rape threats 
made against female journalists like Barkha Dutt,” she said.

“Every day some new person was a target and they would attack like a swarm of 
bees with vile sexual innuendoes, slander, rape and death threats … It made me 
feel suffocated as a woman.”

Khosla left the unit after she was asked to spread a petition calling for 
SnapDeal, a shopping website, to cut its ties with the Bollywood actor Aamir 
Khan.

Khan, a Muslim, had attracted the ire of Hindu nationalists in November 2015 
after remarking on the “growing intolerance”he felt was taking root 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-34918431> in India.

SnapDeal released a statement at the time distancing itself from the actor’s 
comments anddid not renew 
<http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/Aamir-Khan-loses-Snapdeal-contract/article14062507.ece>
 his contract in February this year. Another Khan endorsement contract, for the 
Incredible India! tourism campaign, was also allowed to lapse, though the 
government has denied this was linked to the actor’s remarks.

“I realised that my hero had become a ‘Muslim’,” Khosla said. “For me he had 
just been an Indian actor. I felt like my country was changing.”


Modi, 66, is a pioneer of social media among Indian politicians, posting 
regular updates to his 25 million followers.

The BJP was among the first major Indian parties to establish a website, and 
the head of its technology unit, Arvind Gupta, has rhapsodised about the 
potential for social media to bypass mainstream TV news and press.

In July 2015 Modi drew criticism for inviting 150 social media supporters to 
his residence for a meet-and-greet, among them Twitter users who hadused sexual 
slurs 
<https://www.thequint.com/india/2015/07/06/twitter-trolls-among-super150-invited-by-pm-modi>
 and levelled other abuse at women online.

Chaturvedi, the author of the new book, has herself been the target of social 
media trolling, filing apolice complaint last year 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/india/swati-chaturvedi-twitter-trolling-a-much-needed-test-for-laws/story-w9IglBH2Iz8ztB3UAdB6KJ.html>
 against an anonymous Twitter account that had deluged her with malicious posts.


Prof K Jaishankar, the executive director of the Tamil Nadu-based Centre for 
Cyber Victim Counselling, said India’s corrosive online culture was partly due 
to the freedom the internet granted women in a conservative society.

'Social media can be a pretty ugly place if you're a woman in politics'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/oct/21/female-politicians-social-media-abuse-european-parliament>
“The problem is that India is typically patriarchal, and women in public space 
are not easily accepted,” he said. “When it comes to cyberspace it becomes very 
easy for them [to participate]

“But the patriarchy pervades in cyber space too … Naturally, [trolls] don’t 
like the presence of women, they don’t like that women comment on issues or are 
very vocal and articulate,” he said.

“Many of the women who are coming online are elites, like the editor of a 
magazine or an actor. Whereas the trollers are typically men from a rural or 
rural-urban continuum, and the internet is the only way they can access these 
women.

“So that is one of the reasons why probably they gain a kind of pleasure from 
targeting high-profile women,” he said.

India’s minister for women, Maneka Gandhi, has acknowledged that 
<http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/online-trolling-against-women-will-be-considered-violence-maneka-gandhi-1407271>
 “viciousness against women on the net” is a problem andset up a hashtag 
<https://twitter.com/Manekagandhibjp/status/750623172421091328> for people to 
report abuse.
 