
Anwar Congo is many things: a gangster, an animal lover, a mass murderer, a 
grandad. He's also – having begun his criminal career scalping tickets outside 
a Sumatran cinema – a film buff. So when, in Joshua Oppenheimer's extraordinary 
documentaryThe Act of Killing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155489/act-of-killing>, Congo is asked to 
stage re-enactments of the executions of Indonesian communistsin which he 
participated in the 1960s 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesian_killings_of_1965%E2%80%931966>, the 
results are cinematic: pure film noir, in fact. He and his fellow bootboys 
transform themselves into sharp-suited enforcers, righteous faces glaring from 
under the awning of a fedora. Their interrogation technique is all Marlowe 
tough-talk: "So it's great to be a communist, huh?"

Well, maybe their patter has a way to go. But the compromised universe of film 
noir is how Congo and his Hollywood-inspired associates choose to dress up 
their part in purges which, across Indonesia, claimed an estimated half a 
million lives. The impact of images and representation might seem like the most 
trivial of the issues (a major historical injustice, present-day Indonesian 
corruption, the foundation of the state through violence, the authorship of 
history) on show in The Act of Killing. But there's a twist. The movie playing 
in Congo's head is now getting a remake from his fellow countrymen: noir shot 
through with cynicism about Indonesian society is also re-emerging as a form in 
the country'sfast-maturing film scene 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/apr/24/indonesian-cinema-gareth-evans>
.

Belenggu <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hskF1NXiUPA>, a dazed, sophisticated 
2012 horror hybrid showing at this year'sTerracotta Asian film festival 
<http://terracottafestival.com/> (which has a special strand devoted to 
Indonesia <http://terracottafestival.com/spotlight-on/>), draws on Donnie Darko 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102331/donnie-darko> and David Lynch for 
its tale of a neurotic family man. In a similar shadowy, paranoiac vein is 
2009'sThe Forbidden Door <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t3XZAUNgNzQ>, about a 
bourgeois sculptor unearthing a ghastly secret, byJoko Anwar 
<https://twitter.com/jokoanwar>, one of the commercially sharp directors now at 
the forefront of the scene; his 2007 film,Kala 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3cuqpwqwdxk>, was a direct homage to 40s 
gumshoe noir.

These works aren't quite bold enough to confront specific instances of 
real-life corruption in Indonesia like The Act of Killing does; judging by the 
amount of "anonymous" contributions onOppenheimer's credits roll 
<https://twitter.com/JoshuaOppenheim>, that is much easier for an outsider. But 
the new Indonesian noir is still notable for being drenched by an atmosphere of 
bone-deep venality seeping out from institutions to poison people's psyches, 
the weather, everything. Rain-lashed Jakarta is such a forsaken place in both 
Belenggu and The Forbidden Door that the protagonists are shepherded into 
diminishing circles, finally unable to trust even themselves.

Twas ever thus in vintage noir, of course – where corruption always reigned. 
It was the genius of American capitalism that, with the help of gifted European 
emigres such as Fritz Lang and Otto Preminger, it gave birth to a genre that 
sold its dark side back to the world. While Hollywood was elsewhere pumping out 
westerns and comedies lionisingmanifest destiny 
<http://www.history.com/topics/manifest-destiny> and the consumer way of life, 
this grubby, grabby little genre – the most American of all, according toRoger 
Ebert <http://www.rogerebert.com/rogers-journal/a-guide-to-film-noir-genre> – 
slipped into the shadows of US individualism, in search of the crooks and the 
kooks (often the same person). Noir beautified these casualties – a romanticism 
obviously appealing to the likes of Congo.

This ambiguous twilight zone is a dangerous place nowadays for film-makers – 
noir can be so seductive it can easily slip into an exercise in retro detail. 
Indonesia, with plenty of its own problems, might be tempted to pull the same 
trick as 40s America: harness the genre's dark power to propel its commercial 
cinema. But it needs to go beyond glamorous surfaces and postures to fully 
transplant it into the new terrain. Anwar's Kala is the most successful example 
so far, with its indignant plotline about the shady origins of an unnamed 
republic (inspired by real-life rumours about a gold hoard belonging to the 
country'sfirst president, Sukarno 
<http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/archive/sukarno-funds-reportedly-turn-up-in-italian-underworld/>
). As it gets drawn into the jungle, with its careful, hardboiled mannerisms 
constantly on the verge of unravelling into something more primitive, it feels 
like noir has one foot in something new and pungent.

But even more than the grand conspiracies, it's personal territory that holds 
the greatest promise for Indonesian noir. The genre was always at its most 
successful when it touched on the frailty and temptation inside everyone. The 
American films were populated by weary molls and petty insurance scamsters, 
inept adulterers and ordinary Joes with a past – everyday folk taking short 
cuts and inevitably paying the piper.

And it's just those sorts of insecurities that, as he stages his past 
misdemeanours in The Act of Killing, catch up with Anwar Congo. There's a 
moment when the muezzin outside interrupts the murderous mood that he and his 
fellow actors are cooking up for their opening scene, and they wait to resume 
filming. Their kitsch is suddenly electrified by something profound; it's like 
God, the voice of judgment lilting down, is teaching them noir's true depths. 
Congo is irritated, and rants about his disdain for human rights. But something 
is happening to him. Later, playing a communist himself in another menacing 
interrogation, he seems to break down, and a redemption of sorts begins.

It's clear that the conscience of the killer has been caught through 
envisioning and staging these tacky scenes. The one-time king of the noir 
underworld is now caught in the whirlpool. Oppenheimer has managed to pinpoint 
a moment where cinema and the real world touch, and create heat. The question 
of representation, and what it can achieve, doesn't look so dumb after all.

• The Terracotta film festival starts tomorrow. Belenggu screens as part of 
its horror all-nighter on Friday. Details:terracottafestival.com 
<http://terracottafestival.com/>. The Act of Killing is out on 28 June.

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at the abandoned-Earth trope. Which 
global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let us 
know in the comments below.
 