
The full extent of the wealth gap between Britain’s rich and poor has been 
laid bare by a thinktank report showing that 9% of households have no assets 
while 5% are worth in excess of £1.2m.

The study by the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-for-fiscal-studies> shows that 
the UK is a more unequal country when measured by wealth – the value of assets 
such as housing, pensions and shares – than it is when measured by income.

At one end of the scale, the poorest 1% of households have negative net wealth 
of more than £16,000 – the result of their debts being higher than the value of 
any assets they might hold.

At the other end, the top 1% of households have net wealth of more than £2.4m. 
With seven out of 10 households owning their homes outright or buying them 
through a mortgage, the IFS analysis found that the wealth of the median 
household – the one in the middle of the distribution – was £172,000.

The IFS said the Gini coefficient measure 
<http://www.investopedia.com/articles/economics/08/gini-index.asp> of wealth 
inequality stood at 0.65, with a rating of zero equivalent to a country in 
which wealth was shared equally and a rating of 1.0 for a country in which all 
wealth was in the hands of a single person. The Gini coefficient for income 
stood at 0.40.

Trade unions, the professions and rising inequality | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/22/trade-unions-the-professions-and-rising-inequality>
The study covered trends in wealth during the four-year period 2006-08 and 
2010-12 – a time when adeep recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/oct/23/uk-recession-timeline> and a 
sluggish recovery led to falling house prices. It found that, largely due to 
changes in pension wealth, younger households were on course to be less 
asset-rich than their parents.

The IFS said that after stripping out changes in how future pension income was 
valued, mean pension wealth increased in real terms (ie after adjusting for 
inflation) by around £13,000 for households aged 25-34, £32,000 for households 
aged 35-44 and £38,000 for households aged 45-54.


“Despite the financial crisis, household wealth on average increased in real 
terms over the late 2000s, driven by increases in private pension 
entitlements,” said Dave Innes, a research economist at the IFS and an author 
of the report. “Even with these increases in average wealth, working-age 
households are at risk of being less wealthy at each age than those born a 
decade earlier.”

The IFS said that among households aged 25-34, nearly a quarter (24%) did not 
expect to receive any income from the state pension in retirement, while nearly 
half (44%) did not expect to receive any income from a private pension. 
However, 28% of individuals expected an inheritance to provide them with some 
retirement resources.


Rowena Crawford, a senior research economist at the IFS and also an author of 
the report, said: “It is striking how many individuals do not expect private 
pensions to have a role in financing their retirement, let alone be their main 
source of income. It will be interesting to see how these attitudes change as
auto-enrolment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/sep/29/auto-enrolment-pensions-saving-retirement>
 into workplace pensions is rolled out.”
 