
Inmarsat shares are flying high after the satellite communications specialist 
beat City expectations with its latest update.

The company reported a near 6% rise in third quarter revenues and a 13.5% 
increase in earnings to $204.6m, helped by growing demand from airlines for its 
onboard wifi services and new government contracts. This offset continuing 
weakness in its maritime business.

On Wednesday, the day before the results, British Airways owner International 
Airlines Group said it would Inmarsat’s network to provide wifi on its 
short-haul fleets from 2017.Inmarsat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/immarsat> had already signed up 
Lufthansa, Air New Zealand and another unnamed European carrier.

But it said its fourth Global Express satellite would be delayed until 2017 
following problems at SpaceX, the proposed launch partner where a rocket 
exploded in September. This would reduce capital expenditure this year from 
$500m-$600m to $400, to $500m, and the impact of the delay was yet to be 
determined.

Chief executive Rupert Pearce said:

Trading continues to be challenging, with economic and budgetary pressures 
affecting our customers generally. We are nevertheless competing aggressively 
and successfully in each of our core markets.

The company’s shares have jumped 71.5p or nearly 10% to 801.5p, and analysts 
at Credit Suisse issued an outperform rating:

Inmarsat has reported a solid third quarter with (1) revenue 1% ahead of 
consensus as better than expected Government revenues offset weaker Maritime 
revenue; (2) a 7% EBITDA beat versus consensus; (3) a reiteration of both 2016 
and 2018 revenue guidance; and (4) IAG yesterday confirming it intends to use 
Inmarsat for passenger connectivity on its short-haul European fleet.

Three recen tmajor commercial airline announcements further boost future 
committed revenue. IAG (short-haul341aircraft), Air New Zealand and another 
European airline have all recently confirmed they will be using Inmarsat’s 
GlobalXpress and/or European Aviation Network (EAN) for passenger connectivity. 
Added to three recent major Maritime deals, the recent US Navy contract win and 
three committed revenue deals in Government, Aviation & Enterprise signed 
several years ago, we believe the airline announcements further underpin 
Inmarsat’s 3-5 year growth outlook.

Jefferies was also positive:

Being a bear on Inmarsat feels increasingly difficult. Key legs of the bear 
thesis (cost inflation, relative competitiveness, revenue visibility, HTS - 
High-throughput satellite -cannibalisation of L-band) are successively getting 
kicked out from under it. The third quarter results were another (albeit, 
pretty big) milestone on this return to better sentiment. Even after today’s 
move, we remain conviction buyers of the name.

When you’ve de-rated 40% because no-one believes your 2018 growth story any 
more, a 2016 quarterly print doesn’t add much one way or another. But for the 
record, mobile satellite service revenue was +0.8% ahead of consensus, mobile 
satellite service EBITDA +7.2% ahead. Within the mix Maritime was soft (-4.2%) 
and Government was very strong (+13.1%)
 