
The Institute of Public Affairs has accused the Coalition of relying on the 
same language asBernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> and Jeremy Corbyn to 
defend its superannuation changes.

The free market thinktank also says the public is seeing the fruits of the 
campaign it began waging against the government’s super changes three weeks 
ago, as moreCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
MPs start to understand how unfair the proposed changes are.

John Roskam, the executive director of the IPA, has told Guardian Australia he 
is “delighted” that voters have a much better understanding of the way super 
works than they did last month and he’s very pleased the government “seems to 
be listening” to the concerns of some Coalition supporters.

Welfare sector calls for poverty reduction target and fairer super system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/02/welfare-sector-calls-for-poverty-reduction-target-and-fairer-super-system>
He says the IPA has done a good job explaining to people in the past three 
weeks – via conversations with politicians, opinion pieces in newspapers and 
appearances on television – how unfair the government’s proposed super changes 
would be.

“I am pleased and delighted that government MPs are listening,” Roskam said on 
Thursday. “If any good has come out of this it is that a lot more MPs have an 
understanding of superannuation as it affects the rest of the population.”

But he also says one of the things that has most upset Coalition supporters in 
recent weeks is the way in which the government has tried to frame the debate.

He says the government’s been relying on the same language as leftwing 
politicians such as the US presidential hopefulBernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> and the UK Labour Party 
leaderJeremy Corybn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, to 
defend its super changes.

Both the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, and the 
treasurer,Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, have said their 
super changes would only affect the top 4% of income earners.

But Roskam says that sounds like: “Why don’t we squeeze the 1% a bit more?” 

He said: “Both the Liberal party and the Labor party feel they should increase 
taxes on the wealthy [at the moment]. That’s what this is about.

“How many more taxes do you want to get out of wealthy people when you’re not 
attacking government spending?”

Arthur Sinodinos flags post-election superannuation changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/arthur-sinodinos-flags-post-election-superannuation-changes>
The Turnbull government’s budget revealed plans to introduce changes to 
superannuation taxes and concessions.


They want to introduce a $500,000 lifetime limit on the amount of after-tax 
contributions someone can make to their super, which will dramatically reduce 
the current limit of $180,000 a year.

They also plan to limit the amount of super from which retirees can derive 
tax-free income to $1.6m, meaning income generated by balances above $1.6m will 
be subject to tax of 15%.

The IPA warned last month that it would run an aggressive public campaign 
against the changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/institute-of-public-affairs-plans-aggressive-superannuation-campaign>
, similar in style to its campaigns on climate change and section 18C of the 
Racial Discrimination Act, because it felt they were unfair.

Until this week, the government has remained steadfast in the face of 
criticism that its changes would be retrospective and unfair.

But the government has showed signs this week of weakening its super stance, 
with the Liberal senatorArthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> saying on 
Wednesdaythe government would be open to consulting with the super industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/arthur-sinodinos-flags-post-election-superannuation-changes>
 about the changes after the election.

The admission from Sinodinos came after three weeks of pressure from the IPA, 
Labor, the super industry and some high-income earners.

Roskam says the government should not be making any changes to super, because 
they should stick to their promise from 2013 that there would be no changes.

But if they did want to make changes, then they must consult before the 
election and they must grandfather as far as possible arrangements of super 
holders who have planned under the existing law.

Turnbull said on Thursday that the superannuation change would make the system 
fairer because they would reduce the super taxes for people near the bottom of 
the income distribution while slightly increasing taxes for those at the very 
top.

He said 96% of people in the super system would “either be better off or 
unaffected” by the government’s super changes.

It's about time superannuation became more than 'tax-lite' for wealthy 
Australians | Sue Boyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/its-about-time-superannuation-became-more-than-tax-lite-for-wealthy-australians>
“It is true that some people, around 4%, of high incomes and with high 
superannuation balances, will have to pay some more tax on their superannuation 
account in the sense that they will pay the 15% tax whereas previously they 
were paying nothing,” he said.


“So if you have someone who has $10m in their superannuation account in 
retirement, currently they are not paying any tax at all on the earnings from 
that. No tax at all.

“Under our changes, they will have no tax on the earnings of $1.6m and on the 
balance they will pay 15%, right? 15% remains a very concessional tax rate. 
That is less tax than a kid pays on his marginal income stacking shelves at 
Woolies. Let’s get real about this.”
 