
Biblioasis <http://biblioasis.com/> opened in its current location on 
Wyandotte St. E. in Windsor in 2012. An earlier incarnation of the store 
existed in downtown Windsor from 1998 to 2007. In the interregnum, Biblioasis 
operated almost exclusively as a publishing house, though it kept its fingers 
in the bookselling game by maintaining an online store of approximately 10,000 
titles. Though its first incarnation was almost exclusively used, it now offers 
a balanced mix of both new, used and antiquarian titles. Dan Wells, the 
founding owner and publisher of both Biblioasis bookstore and Biblioasis Press, 
decided to open the store in part because he struggled to find a job at either 
his local independent bookstore — South Shore Books — or any of the area mall 
chains, and a volunteer stint with another bookseller amounted to little more 
than carpet-cleaning. With an expectation of failure at the outset, Dan is 
enormously grateful to have proven himself wrong.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Dan Wells (owner/publisher): When I need a break and wander into the bookshop, 
I almost always find myself gravitating to one of two spots: the new arrivals 
tables, to see what’s recently come in, or the fiction wall. We’ve one of the 
best selections of literary and independently published fiction this side of 
Toronto, as you would expect from a bookstore associated with an independent 
press. And I’ve wiled away more than a few coffee breaks browsing in both 
places.

Tina Lyons-Hagen (bookseller): If I was asked to close my eyes and envision my 
ideal space for a bookstore, Biblioasis would be what I pictured: worn, creaky 
wood floors, exposed brick walls, and books piled precariously on shelves, 
floors, and tables. When you add in Loki, the resident dog, clanging cast iron 
pipes, the retro Bunn Pour-Omatic commercial grade coffee maker and mismatched 
mugs, it’s almost like a movie set.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Bob Stewart (bookstore manager):  More space for customers to hang out and 
read: armchairs, daybeds, window boxes, and, just for sheer aesthetics and 
whimsy, a spiral staircase.

Tina: Definitely more space—for customers to relax, and for creative displays. 
Add in an impossibly impractical wood-burning fireplace, a sparkly chandelier, 
and a rolling library ladder, and I may never take a day off!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f61adafa651e006001a5e6a9485036f20bf740%2F64_0_672_403%2F672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f61adafa651e006001a5e6a9485036f20bf740%2F64_0_672_403%2F672.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What do you do better than any other bookstore?


Dan: Local history, poetry, philosophy, literature: all of these are the 
strongest sections in the store. Marrying the right book with the right reader 
at the right time. Learning from our customers.

Bob: I think we talk local history better than any other bookstore. And it’s 
not something I set out to do. I just know a lot of Windsor’s official history, 
and maybe even more of the unofficial history, having worked in local 
newspapers for 15 years prior to becoming a bookseller.

Who’s your favourite regular?

Dan: You would think it would be the university professors or lawyers or other 
professionals who would be our best customers: certainly, when I started out I 
assumed this would be the case. But it’s often been the postal workers and 
security guards and janitors and cab drivers who’ve proven to be the true 
bibliophiles, enthusiastic amateurs who read far more widely and are often much 
more knowledgeable than the experts.

Bob: There’s a gentleman named Abdul who came into the store on a regular 
basis. He appeared to be of limited means, but he was curating quite a varied 
collection of used, and often expensive, books on Middle Eastern and Post-War 
European history, political science and philosophy. We would order them in from 
all over the world, and very faithfully he would come in and pick them up, 
often bringing small treats like banana bread and juice for the booksellers. 
Sadly, we haven’t seen him in several months. There are special order books 
waiting for him on the shelf.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd355a572539bad977703aca251a19401815feddc%2F2_0_695_417%2F695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd355a572539bad977703aca251a19401815feddc%2F2_0_695_417%2F695.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Dan: The only bookstore in the town I grew up in was called Clem’s Book 
Exchange, a glorified junk shop with a maze of plywood shelving and books 
rising to the ceiling. There was no heat, at least in the back, where the floor 
wasn’t much more than packed earth, and the light was so dim it could have been 
used as a set for a slasher film. The store closed a little over two years ago, 
and I went back with a writer of ours who knew the store as a kid as well to 
pay tribute: without Clem’s, I’m virtually certain that there wouldn’t have 
been a Biblioasis.

Bob: G.E. Copeland Bookseller and Stationer on Lincoln Road in Windsor. It’s 
where I first encountered the famous bookstore scent, and where I picked out 
many Hardy Boys and Three Investigators books while waiting for my Mom to buy 
gift wrapping and ribbon and Scotch tape.

Tina: I grew up in a very small town in the Ottawa Valley. Sadly, we didn’t 
have a bookstore in town until I was in my teens. I faithfully made a weekly 
trip to the public library, and wrote my library membership number (#3329) on 
the cards of my chosen books. I was so very excited when the librarian waived 
the five book-per-week limit for me, and I was allowed to borrow as many books 
as I wanted.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Dan: Postal worker, perhaps. I got called for an interview at Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> Post the week I signed a lease on my 
first shop. Or a unemployed historian of the Scottish Enlightenment. Needless 
to say, I’m happy I’m neither.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Bob: Contrary to what everyone thinks, there is no time to read.

Tina: Ditto what Bob said! Also, how quick you get at figuring out what 
someone is asking for when they say things like “I don’t remember the title, 
but the author’s name starts with a K, and the cover has flowers on it.”

The staff shelf

What is Bob reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cd16e301a7d46db8f812312aa7e5e1e88a3828%2F0_0_1400_2250%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Biblioasis%20in%20Ontario&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-biblioasis-in-ontario%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cd16e301a7d46db8f812312aa7e5e1e88a3828%2F0_0_1400_2250%2F1400.jpg>
 * Hag-seed by Margaret Atwood (2016): “Part of the Hogarth Shakespeare 
series, Hag-Seed is Margaret Atwood’s novelized re-envisioning of The Tempest 
as a production staged in a prison by an aggrieved artistic director, recently 
ousted from his position with a prominent festival.” 
 * Rose Alley by Jeremy M Davies (2009): “One of my favourite novels of the 
21st Century, it follows a film crew trying to recreate an 18th century fist 
fight between two famous poets against the backdrop of the student riots in 
Paris.” 
 * The Road Not Taken by David Orr (2015): “No one understands Frost’s most 
famous poem—one of the most read and quoted works in the English language—and 
David Orr is on a mission to figure out why. An excellent meditation on poetry 
and American culture.”  