
1) Is it too early to be optimistic for England’s next generation?

The average age of Roy Hodgson’s starting line-up against France was 24 years 
and 113 days. That is the youngest it has been under Hodgson and the numbers 
fell again in the second half when Jack Butland replaced Joe Hart in goal. Dele 
Alli is 19 and Ross Barkley is still a few weeks from turning 22, the same age 
as Butland, Raheem Sterling and Harry Kane. Eric Dier is another 21-year-old 
and there is at least a vibrancy about the squad when Hodgson is emboldened 
enough to go this way. Hodgson’s record suggests he will want a more 
experienced team inEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> 
but there are increasingly signs that England’s next generation is a cause for 
optimism.Daniel Taylor


• Match report: England 2-0 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/england-france-international-friendly-match-report>
• Five talking points from Wembley Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/england-france-friendly-five-talking-points>

2) The Euro 2016 qualifiers delivered more than they promised

It would take admirable casuistry to suggest that the play-offs were a 
quality-laden postscript to the group stage. None of the four ties will linger 
too long in the memory and the worry is, of course, that the same may be said 
for far too much of what is on offer next summer. But the qualifiers as a whole 
were good fun – unless you spent most of it watchingEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> coast through Group E, perhaps – 
and threw up enough engaging stories to ensure that the draw for the finals, on 
12 December, ought to sustain our interest for a further six months.

Uefa will feel satisfied to see Albania, Iceland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
qualify without the need for a play-off and all four certainly provided their 
share of memorable moments; it will also be heartened to see Austria emerge 
from years of dullness to look an attractive prospect and on a broader level 
all areas of the continent will be well represented when millions of supporters 
converge upon France next June. That these fresh faces have performed so well 
will raise hopes that the depth of talent in Europe might justify the 
tournament’s first 24-strong edition; all eyes now will be on whoever draws out 
the balls in Paris next month and the wish must be that the final draw has the 
right mixture of novelty and meetings between age-old foes to keep everyone 
talking.Nick Ames




3) Republic of Ireland must now tend to neglected domestic league

The downside to the Republic of Ireland’s qualification for Euro 2016 is that 
it risks masking the rottenness of football administration and development in 
the country. John Delaney is one of the highest paid association chiefs in the 
world despite the League of Ireland being largely neglected and the country’s 
coaching strategy being shamefully skimpy. The Scottish leagues may be going 
through a tough time but their clubs still enjoy relatively vibrant support and 
most
of their young players do not necessarily have to emigrate to prosper. If 
places at the European Championship finals were intended to reward the 
health of countries’ football scenes, Scotland would deserve to go to Euro 
2016 far more than Ireland. Paul Doyle


• O’Neill has forged Republic of Ireland into a lean, green machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/17/republic-of-ireland-martin-oneill-euro-2016-bosnia-herzegovina-playoff>

4) The finals will be a better tournament with Ibrahimovic there

At the final whistle in Copenhagen, Zlatan Ibrahimovic sunk to his knees and 
looked to the skies, seemingly thanking someone up there for taking him and
Sweden <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> to the European 
Championship. Seconds later he was at the bottom of a pile of team-mates 
thankinghim for taking them to France. Because it was all about Ibra, as it has 
been the whole qualifying campaign. He scored 11 goals in total, as many as the 
whole Denmark team, including three in the two play-off legs. His second on 
Tuesday night was a wonderfully executed free-kick from 20 yards out, curled 
around the wall, leaving Kasper Schmeichel no chance. Ibra deserves to be 
there, even if you were left with the feeling that the Danes had gifted this 
tie to the Swedes.

It was a meek and miserable way for Morten Olsen to leave his post after 15 
years in charge. The Danes offered precious little in the first leg and, apart 
from the opening 20 minutes and the last 10 minutes, carried very little threat 
at home either. There was consternation at Parken – and a few boos – as Olsen 
replaced his only striker (Nicklas Bendtner) with another striker (Morten 
Rasmussen). As one Danish journalist tweeted: “We need to score at least two 
goals and Olsen takes off a striker for another striker – we can play from now 
until the Euros start and still not score”. In the end they did score two to 
draw 2-2 on the night but it was far too late to threaten the Swedes. Denmark 
will have to regroup. Sweden go to the Euros as a one-man team but they won’t 
mind because that one man is pretty special.Marcus Christenson


• Match report: Denmark 2-2 Sweden (Sweden win 4-3 on aggregate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/denmark-sweden-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdenmark-v-sweden-top-five-meetings-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F16%2F1447697336047%2FKP_599292_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denmark%20v%20Sweden%3A%20top%20five%20meetings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdenmark-v-sweden-top-five-meetings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denmark%20v%20Sweden%3A%20top%20five%20meetings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdenmark-v-sweden-top-five-meetings-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F16%2F1447697336047%2FKP_599292_crop_640x480.jpg>
Denmark v Sweden: top five meetings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/nov/17/denmark-v-sweden-top-five-meetings-video>
5) Hungary go through but praise must be qualified

Hungary’s achievement in reaching their first European Championship since 1972 
should not be scoffed at but does provoke somewhat mixed feelings. They 
deserved to beat Norway (even if the Scandinavians might still have made hay 
with a Solskjaer or an Iversen on the end of their countless crosses) and the 
temptation would be to strain for hints that an exciting new generation might 
be emerging from a country whose name still evokes a certain degree of romance.

Yet even if the Puskas Academy is now producing one or two national team 
players – such as the unlikely first-leg hero Laszlo Kleinheisler – the truth 
is slightly less thrilling. Hungary would not have been near the finals in its 
previous 16-team format and those who sat through much of a turgid Group F, a 
sextet eventually topped by Northern Ireland, will not be particularly 
enthusiastic for much more of this next summer. They are the perfect example of 
an unremarkable team that has benefited from Michel Platini’s decision to 
expand the tournament and, in fairness to them, it simply feels like a shame 
that any praise aimed in their direction feels as if it needs to be qualified. 
You expect thatHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> or one of 
their equivalents will need to pull off a shock or two in France if any of this 
is to feel worth it in terms of the tournament itself. Then again, the joyous 
scenes in Budapest at the final whistle – and the poignant coincidence of the 
former national team goalkeeper Marton Fulop’s death on the day of the first 
game – may just serve as a reminder that success has meaning, however it is 
served up.NA


• Match report: Hungary 2-1 Norway (Hungary win 2-1 on aggregate) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/15/hungary-norway-euro-2016-playoff>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6bfd304a2c9996ea64648e691b83f5c3ff7e9c%2F0_94_2849_1710%2F2849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6bfd304a2c9996ea64648e691b83f5c3ff7e9c%2F0_94_2849_1710%2F2849.jpg>
 The Hungary head coach, Bernd Storck, celebrates with his unlikely first-leg 
hero, Laszlo Kleinheisler. Photograph: Vegard Wivestad Groett/AFP/Getty Images 
6) Ukraine’s wing pair now have the chance to shine in France

It was pretty mucky at times in Maribor, and only put beyond doubt when Andriy 
Yarmolenko joined a counterattack to score in the seventh minute of stoppage 
time, butUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> merited their 
progress against a limited Slovenia and became the final team to qualify for 
next summer’s tournament.

Ukraine were knocked out of Euro 2012, which they co-hosted, in the group 
stage but did at least provide one feelgood moment in a veteran Andriy 
Shevchenko’s double to defeat Sweden. Manning the wings back then were 
Yarmolenko and the Sevilla winger Yevhen Konoplyanka; both were well-rated 
prospects but now, at 26, they are far better players and it would not be a 
huge stretch to suggest that they, along with Ibrahimovic, are the only 
competitors of world class potential in the four teams that have progressed 
through the play-offs. If you believe the rumours, Yarmolenko may have left 
Dynamo Kyiv for Chelsea by next summer; regardless, the tournament should be 
better for the pair’s presence and Ukraine’s performances during their two 
single-goal defeats to Spain suggested that they should at least have enough 
spark to cause the best a flutter or two.NA


• Match report: Slovenia 1-1 Ukraine (Ukraine win 3-1 on aggregate) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/slovenia-ukraine-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>

7) Qatar’s form raises prospect of an early World Cup bow


Qatar’s footballing development is based on a wish to thrill the home crowds – 
if that is not a misnomer – at the 2022 World Cup but the odds on their 
providing a snapshot rather sooner are shortening rapidly. José Daniel 
Carreño’s side are the first to have qualified for the decisive third round of 
the labyrinthine Asian qualifying competition for Russia 2018 and has been in 
utterly ruthless form. A caveat to their 27-goal haul in Group C should be that 
15 of them came at home against Bhutan, but several of the continent’s 
traditional leading lights have struggled to put minnows away convincingly and 
the manner of Qatar’s advancement suggests they may be capable of a genuine 
tilt at arriving on the world stage four years ahead of schedule.

It owes more than a little to a core of naturalised players whose influence 
has been unarguable. Among them is Mohammed Muntari, a towering 21-year-old 
born in Ghana who scored his latest international goal in Tuesday’s 3-0 away 
win over the Bhutanese and will probably soon be worthy of a better standard of 
play than is available in the Qatari league with Lekywiya. Qatar’s methods 
provoke more questions than answers but their improvement suggests something is 
stirring in the Gulf and it will be enough to make whoever they face in the 
third round sit uncomfortably. Four teams, perhaps five, of the remaining 12 
will reach Russia and none of the established powers will want to suffer a 
similar fate to Qatar’s group rivals China, whose goalless draw with Hong Kong 
means their own hopes of going through are hanging by a thread.NA
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0abaf0322cf5f4b10498294590ee612874a46348%2F0_346_5182_3110%2F5182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0abaf0322cf5f4b10498294590ee612874a46348%2F0_346_5182_3110%2F5182.jpg>
 Mohammed Muntari, grounded, scores Qatar’s opener against Bhutan in Thimphu. 
Photograph: Upasana Dahal/AFP/Getty Images 
8) However you contextualise it, Syria’s form is remarkable

The direness of the situation in Syria is such that it would probably be 
facile to wax lyrical about the healing power of sport just now but, however 
you want to put it in context, the national team’s performance in these 
qualifiers has been something to behold. A goal deep into added time by Omar 
Khribingave them a 2-1 win in Singapore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGinuLI5-EM&t=2m29s> and was celebrated 
wildly; it strengthened their hold on second spot in Group E and, even if they 
are beaten to first place by the incumbents Japan, they are very well 
positioned to reach the next stage as one of the best runners-up.

It is some achievement that Syria’s team have kept on going; the local league 
has somehow struggled on, now confined to Damascus, but footballers have not 
been immune to the bloody and life-altering situations faced by millions in the 
country and the fact that the coach, Fajr Ibrahim, has been able to field a 
side for six qualifiers seems noteworthy enough. The current squad is largely 
Iraq-based and in Khribin, a 21-year-old second striker who has scored five 
times in these qualifiers, they havean exceptional talent 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28tRtgcUwXQ> who may well be set for bigger 
things. Syria – whose Under-17s made an equally remarkable appearance at last 
month’s World Cup in Chile – will be rank outsiders if they do make it through 
to the third round, but uniting behind a common cause can do unusual things to 
a group of sportsmen.

It would be remiss at this point to ignore that, in their press conference 
before the Singapore game, the cause chosen by Ibrahim and the midfielder Osama 
Omari was that of the country’s president, Bashar al-Assad, in support of whom 
they wore specially-made T-shirts. The background to whatever Syria’s team do 
in the coming months will be complex and tragic, but in football terms alone 
they are creating quite a story.NA

9) Argentina begin digging themselves out of a hole

A World Cup without Argentina would be near-unthinkable – indeed there has 
been no such prospect since 1970 – but the prospect would have loomed somewhat 
larger if Gerardo Martino and company had fallen to a perfectly plausible 
defeat in Colombia on Tuesday night. They had taken only two points from their 
first three games but avoided falling behind any further thanks to Lucas 
Biglia’s 20th minute goal, showing good character to hold on thereafter amid 
heavy Colombian pressure. They still have Lionel Messi to return and will need 
him for an unrelenting fixture list that next takes them to Chile. This is 
shaping up to be one of the tighter editions of a brutal Conmebol qualifying 
tournament and any team that can string a few wins together – as a hugely 
impressive Ecuador have managed to do by taking 12 points from 12 – will save 
themselves the prospect of a hair-raising final few matches.Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> travel to Quito on the final 
matchday, two years from now – plenty can, and will, change in that time but 
they may hope their opponents are home and hosed by then.NA


• Brazil beat Peru as Argentina see off Columbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/18/brazil-beat-peru-world-cup-qualifier-salvador>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab4071e99c898bdb0af8b2c01d13a5d83dad3f8%2F0_132_4678_2808%2F4678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F18%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab4071e99c898bdb0af8b2c01d13a5d83dad3f8%2F0_132_4678_2808%2F4678.jpg>
 The Argentina goalkeeper Sergio Romero celebrates after Argentina beat 
Colombia. Photograph: Luis Robayo/AFP/Getty Images 
10) African off-field toils do the game a disservice yet again

It was hard not to feel wearied when hearing that Kenya, their charter flight 
to Cape Verde delayed due to an argument about payment for the journey, arrived 
in Praia – four time zones away from Nairobi – just five hours before kick-off 
in their World Cup qualifying second leg. Kenya are managed by Bobby 
Williamson, formerly of Kilmarnock, Hibernian and Plymouth Argyle, and had 
defeated their fancied opponents 1-0 in the first game. Seeing the job through 
would still have been a tall order but you have to give yourselves a chance and 
one can only imagine Williamson’s exasperation at seeing his careful 
preparations derailed on the tarmac by a bizarre situation that culminated – 
for unclear reasons – in the arrest of the Kenyan FA head Sam Nyamweya.Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kenya> lost 2-0 and they were not the 
worst offenders either: Chad, who had laudably beaten Egypt 1-0 in their first 
leg and are now coached by Rigobert Song, touched down in Alexandria three 
hours before the return match began and entered the stadium 30 minutes before 
kick-off. That they conceded twice in the first 10 minutes says everything 
necessary about what good their preparation did them.

There are sometimes mitigating factors at play – resources are slim for many 
associations and it can seem a miracle that these cross-continent journeys take 
place at all – but all too often the progress of African teams is stymied by 
incompetence, corruption and rank bad administration. It is not always easy to 
broach, and perhaps even less to hear, but the days when such tales were 
treated an endearing antidote to the sheen of European football need to end if 
countries such as Kenya (population 44 million) are to challenge the 
established order. At present, suggestions that African football is on the 
right course to attaining the depth it requires are all too easily rebutted.NA
 