
A new generation of comedy fans are turning away from the multiplex and towards
YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>, Vine and Snapchat – 
but that doesn’t mean their idols are immune to the allure of mainstream 
stardom. Beloved online personalities like vlogger JennXPenn, sketch duo Smosh 
and full-time BFFs Joe Sugg and Caspar Lee have all answered Hollywood’s call 
and made the leap to the big screen, with varying levels of success.

Netflix v Amazon: who will win the streaming wars?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/27/amazon-versus-netflix-streaming> 
If those names don’t mean much to you, then neither will the cast list of 
Internet Famous, a new feature-length mockumentary that both satirises and 
stars twentysomething web celebrities. Newly added to theNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> catalogue, the film sees five 
online sensations compete in a nationwide talent contest to win a TV show – and 
the mainstream validation that comes with it.

In a neat bit of reflexivity, most are played by real-life web personalities 
for whom Internet Famous represents a similar grab for crossover success. Among 
them: vlogger Shane Dawson (7.5 million subscribers) as a grotesquely 
self-centred “parody artist”,Vine <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/vine> 
superstar Amanda Cerny (4.6 million followers) as a self-styled comedian with a 
low-cut top and a 95% male fanbase, and YouTube prankster Steve Greene (126m 
views) as a man whose online brand consists entirely of videos in which he 
intentionally traumatises his infant daughter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDyd2Gp8UvGE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDyd2Gp8UvGE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDyd2Gp8UvGE&media=>
The film’s backers are no doubt hoping that each cast member will bring a 
sizeable built-in audience, but Internet Famous mercifully avoids the trap of 
assuming that the comedic sensibility of a six-second Vine will stretch to 90 
minutes. Instead, director Michael J Gallagher blends his experiences in 
traditional film-making (he made low-budget slasher movie Smiley) and YouTube 
sketch comedy to ensure the film’s robust pace is always in service of its 
characters – relatively nuanced creations that rise above the superficial 
archetypes of so much online comedy.

Gallagher’s role model seems to be Christopher Guest (he even casts Guest 
regular John Michael Higgins in a small role), and though he never reaches the 
dizzying heights of that director’s work, Internet Famous is an assured, 
culturally observant piece of contemporary satire. The jokes aren’t all what 
you’d call subtle, but they’re substantive, calling out the ruinous insularity 
of online celebrity, and the power imbalance between YouTubers and their 
adoring fans. Had Guest been born 40 years later – and made Shit Dog Owners Say 
instead of Best In Show – he might have been drawn to similar territory.
 