
Men aged 65 living in metropolitan areas, who have more than £30,000 in 
savings, are the chief target for investment fraudsters, according to detailed 
profiling by the City ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> police.

Most victims are duped by “boiler rooms” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/aug/01/boiler-room-offices-fraud-addresses>
, which use high-pressure tactics to sell shares to people who are persuaded 
that they are about to soar in value. Only later does the victim find that the 
shares are worthless and the sellers have disappeared.

Figures released by Action Fraud 
<http://www.actionfraud.police.uk/fraud-az-guardians-allowance-fraud> and the 
City of London police show that 77% of people reporting investment fraud are 
men, with an average age of 65. The average loss is more than £32,000 and most 
victims live in metropolitan areas.


Boiler room operators usually set up sophisticated websites and often rent 
office space in well-known locations in the City. Servcorp UK and Regus, two 
serviced office providers, were prosecuted last year, under the 2007 London 
Local Authorities Act, for allowing suspected boiler room fraudsters to operate 
on their watch.

The police force has raided about 100 offices in the City and Canary Wharf 
since the start ofOperation Broadway 
<http://www.actionfraud.police.uk/operation-broadway>, a clampdown on 
investment fraud. But despite the raids, the problem continues to grow, with 
reports to Action Fraud rising by 9.5% last year. Many boiler rooms also 
operate in Spanish coastal resorts, using young English expats to smooth talk 
people into parting with their money.

Some victims have commited suicide after discovering they have lost their life 
savings.

In June, Martin Rhys-Jones from Cardiff admitted ripping off 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/uk/briton-faces-us-jail-sentence-after-admitting-boiler-room-fraud-34768338.html>
 250 investors in a £2m fraud operating from Barcelona between 2006 and 2009. 
Twelve people were arrested: four Britons, seven Americans and a Kuwaiti. 
Rhys-Jones, who ran a series of boiler rooms, was extradited to the US, where 
he wassentenced to six years 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-south-east-wales-37218083> in prison. 

DCI Dave Manley, who leads Operation Broadway, said: “Investment fraud 
continues to be a major threat to individuals in this country and statistics 
show that those who are over 60 are particularly vulnerable to this type of 
crime.


“Unfortunately, once a victim is sucked in by a fraudster, they often end up 
parting with a significant amount of money and this can have devastating 
effects on both the individual and their families.”

This week, the City of London police, alongside Trading Standards, will launch 
a series of videos highlighting the impact of investment fraud, with advice on 
how people can protect themselves. A specialist role is being created to help 
local authorities across the country take on bogus investment companies 
operating from serviced offices and using mail forwarding services.

Jon Averns, the City of London Corporation’s head of trading standards, said: 
“We are creating a hostile environment for fraudsters, who are duping people 
with the promise of high returns on false investments.

“Our message is simple: don’t send your money to someone you don’t know, for a 
product you haven’t seen.”

 