
The last time the Republic of Ireland played in Dublin, they beat the world 
champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/republic-ireland-germany-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
, but Shane Long said after his winning goal against Germany in October that 
the Irish would have to reach Euro 2016 for his strike to be truly significant. 
On Monday night that wish could come true.

Martin O’Neill’s men go into the home leg of their playoff against 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in a strong position thanks toFriday’s 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/republic-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off-report>
 in the away leg. Long would dearly love to help give that goal more meaning 
and O’Neill is equally keen to deploy the Southampton striker, despite the knee 
injury that has kept him out of action for the past month.

“All his messages for me the whole time have been ‘don’t exclude me at this 
minute’ and I wouldn’t do and I’ll wait until the last possible moment because 
he’s come up with some big things for us,” said O’Neill. Asked what the last 
possible moment means, O’Neill said: “I’d say about a minute and a half to kick 
off. You have to put a squad in at some stage, but I will genuinely see. 
Honestly I don’t really want to push it because he hasn’t played any football 
since the injury. At this stage, you can gamble with certain people and 
obviously we had to with Stephen Ward who has played no proper football for 
Burnley at all [but was selected against Germany and Bosnia-Herzegovina]. We’ll 
look, we’ll see.”

Shane Long keeps alive Republic of Ireland hopes in win over Germany
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/republic-ireland-germany-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
Long’s unlikely return would be a major plus for Ireland and give O’Neill’s 
side a much more powerful attack than in the first leg, with Jonathan Walters, 
who missed the trip to Zenica due to suspension, available again. If Long does 
not make it, the manager may persist with Daryl Murphy, who has yet to score in 
18 appearances for his country.

Another option would be Robbie Keane who, at 35, no longer has the mobility to 
trouble international defences regularly. His role for his country has 
necessarily waned but, according to O’Neill, the veteran is certainly not 
redundant yet. “It’s a possibility,” said O’Neill of the prospect of starting 
the Los Angeles Galaxy striker. “I wouldn’t rule anybody out at all, absolutely 
not. Robbie Keane is our leading goalscorer and there’s a reason why he is.” 
But he then added: “I can’t turn the clock back. A 27-year-old Robbie Keane 
would be in the side, home or away.”

Robbie Brady’s goal in Zenica means that, irrespective of how their forwards 
do, Ireland will win the tie if their defenders shut outBosnia-Herzegovina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bosnia-herzegovina>. Their defence could 
be reinforced by the return of John O’Shea, another who missed the first leg 
through suspension. Until then the Sunderland defender was the only player to 
feature in every match of the campaign and it is probable that he will be 
restored to the centre of defence even though Ciaran Clark performed valiantly 
alongside Richard Keogh in the first leg.

O’Neill said he was pleased to have such options and pointed out that omitting 
Clark represent an unfortunate repetition of history. “He was absolutely 
outstanding,” he said. “I reminded him it was a wee bit like his debut which I 
gave him way back years ago [in 2009] for Aston Villa against Fulham and he 
performed outstandingly well then. So much so that I left him out for the next 
game.”

Although Ireland may not need to score to advance, O’Neill says it would be 
folly to set out for a goalless draw against opponents who have dangerous 
players, particularly the former Manchester City striker Eden Dzeko, who scored 
his eighth goal of the qualifying campaign within three minutes of Brady giving 
Ireland the lead in the first leg.

“The message for us in the dressing room is that we have got to try and win 
the game,” O’Neill said. “We will have that attitude, that’s been our attitude 
at home in every single game that we play, maybe with the exception of away to 
the world champions [Irelanddrew 1-1 in Germany  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/14/germany-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
during the group stages].

“If you’d said to me that we were going to get a result out there, I’d 
probably have taken it before the game. But our attitude has been very, very 
positive at home and Bosnia are capable of scoring, and that would put it back 
into the melting pot.”
 