
There's all sorts of meta-cinematic devilry going on in one of the strangest 
blockbusters of the decade –Iron Man 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3>. In one scene Ben 
Kingsley <http:>'s nemesis, the Mandarin, halts for a lecture on the 
authenticity, or otherwise, of the "Chinese" fortune cookie – right before 
laying waste toGrauman's Chinese theatre in Hollywood 
<http://www.tclchinesetheatres.com/>: "Another cheap American knock-off." You 
can't help but wonder whether this particular tirade is Iron Man 3 writersShane 
Black <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/19/shane-black-iron-man-3> and 
Drew Pearce <https://twitter.com/mrdrewpearce> comment on the process of trying 
to adapt the film for Chinese audiences, and the bigger, east-facing game the 
whole of Hollywood is playing.

With an eye, like everyone else, on a fistful of yuan, Iron Man 
franchise-holders Disney and Marvel partnered with Shanghai-based media agency
DMG <http://www.dmg-entertainment.com/>, who also helped produce Looper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148727/looper> last year, for the third 
film. Butthe suggestion last summer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/apr/17/iron-man-3-collaboration-china> 
that Tony Stark might be making a radical turn towards China never quite 
transpired. The Mandarin was tactfully steered away from the yellow-peril 
caricature of the comics, becoming a prototypical icon of terrorism instead. 
Some scenes were filmed in Beijing in December;Fifth Generation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/mar/21/3> veteran Wang Xueqi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wang_Xueqi> appears in an early party scene, and 
more of this material – including a cameo for starletFan Bingbing 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1549063> – will appear in a special Chinese cut.

And that's it. Another cheap American knockoff. It's essentially the same 
piece of blockbuster chinoiserie that we're seeing more and more these days as 
the studios make eyes at China: likeThe Karate Kid remake's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/134746/karate-kid> relocation to Beijing 
(still with an American protagonist), the Asian-scented water approach ofGI 
Joe: Retaliation <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154129/g.i.-joe>, or 
James Bond's luminescent Shanghai skyscraper fight 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kUyrRn-9rEQ> in Skyfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144416/skyfall>.

Iron Man 3's tweaks are enough to secure it a host of preferential perks in 
terms of media access – Robert Downey Jr's charm offensive ("I live a very 
Chinese life in America") at the Forbidden City at the beginning of the month 
wouldn't have been possible otherwise. But a full-blooded commitment to Chinese 
elements that would have secured it full co-production status (meaning, among 
other things, the highest box-office share possible) would have endangered Iron 
Man 3's universal global appeal too much.

Unfortunately, Hollywood's ersatz "fortune cookie" approach to its Chinese 
product probably won't work for much longer. Increasingly discriminating 
Chinese filmgoers are seeking entertainment that unabashedly speaks for them, 
and the local industry is increasingly able to provide it. Since the turn of 
the year, Hollywood has slipped behind not because of the Chinese government's 
anti-competitive practices, but because of a stream of hits from Chinese 
film-makers.

Low-budget comedy Lost in Thailand 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/13/lost-in-thailand-lost-in-translation>
 was a surprise hit in December, followed by Jackie Chan'sChinese Zodiac 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPQogQKVeTk> and more martial arts from Wong 
Kar-wai's The Grandmaster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/08/the-grandmaster-review>. Stephen 
Chow's comeback filmJourney to the West 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g7uhC1nKkpQ> was another predictable rainmaker, 
but there was also a pair of breakout performers in cable TV spin-offBring 
Happiness Home <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bring_Happiness_Home> and romcom 
Finding Mr Right <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finding_Mr._Right>. And more are 
on their way. A formidable showing, then, for homegrown Chinese films in 2013's 
first quarter. Lost in Thailand, Chinese Zodiac and Journey to the West all 
grossed $100m+ at home – and it's been a year since a Hollywood import (
Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145386/mission>) managed that. Despite 
the oriental mood music, Skyfall disappointed in China compared to Daniel 
Craig's first two outings – taking just under $60m.

Could this be the start of a divergence of tastes that will make US films try 
a lot harder to woo Chinese audiences? Buying preferential treatment and 
milking the PR works for single, high-impact projects such asIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man-3>, but it's hardly the kind of 
comprehensive rethinking needed by the studios to be seriously in the running 
against local competitors operating with Hollywood savvy. There will come a 
point when the Chinese, quite understandably, want a Chinese Iron Man.
 More martial arts ... Zhang Ziyi in Wong Kar-wai's The Grandmaster. 
Photograph: AP 
Hollywood, therefore, seems likely to fall between two stools for the next few 
years. It's the first time a single foreign territory has become so important 
to it so quickly – Japan is a similar size, but it's not promising 30% growth 
over the coming years – yet the demands of the global market still need to 
considered. No one has worked out how to consistently find a crossover sweet 
spot, where global and Chinese audiences overlap. Looper seems to have been the 
closest so far, with its healthy grosses in the US, China, the UK and 
Australia. But it was still a bit of a gauche compromise, the Chinese dimension 
added midway through production by DMG: potential remained to aggressively play 
off the film's retro midwest Americana against the idea of a future, dominant
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and really exploit the 
geopolitics to enhance the storyline.

It's not clear whether it's a question of story values, and the kind of 
struggles over narrative perspective that Iron Man 3 opted to duck out of, or 
of the much-publicised politics of making cinema in China, that is hindering 
the search for a crossover point. The two big private-equity-backed,east-west 
partnerships announced at the end of 2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/sep/27/hollywood-china-chinese-film-industry>
 – between Huaxia and Relativity, and Huayi Brothers and Legendary – have so 
far produced zilch: the latter's first project, 15th-century epicThe Great Wall 
<http://www.deadline.com/2012/09/ed-zwick-falls-off-the-great-wall/>, has 
suffered a serious of delays. There is no obvious solution in sight yet – so it 
may be time to crack open the fortune cookie after all.

• Iron Man 3 is out on 25 April.

• Next week's After Hollywood 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/series/after-hollywood> will look at a Mexican 
class comedy. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in 
the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 