
Casual sex, hookups or one-night stands: whatever you call it, more than half 
of us will have sex with someone we barely know or don’t expect to date in the 
future. We’re most likely to do this at university, where up to80% of 
undergraduates have hookups 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00224499.2013.772088>. Sex within 
relationships is said to improve cardiovascular health, reduce depression and 
boost immunity, but social science research has often linked casual encounters 
to feelings of sexual regret, low self-esteem and psychological distress, 
especially among women.Studies show 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5376087_Hookups_and_Sexual_Regret_Among_College_Women>
 that while men regret the sexual opportunities they missed, women often regret 
some of the casual sex they did have.

The solution

A Canadian study of 138 female and 62 male students 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/51793381_Feelings_of_Regret_Follo> 
who had casual sex found that men selected physical reasons for regret – such 
as their partner being insufficiently attractive. Women’s regrets focused on 
shame and self-blame.But the evidence as to whether casual sex 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260094334_Does_Casual_Sex_Harm_College_Students%E2%80%99_Well-Being_A_Longitudinal_Investigation_of_the_Role_of_Motivation>
, when done with protection against sexually transmitted diseases, is actually 
bad for anyone is unclear. The studies are overwhelmingly on heterosexual 
American university students and have varying definitions of hookups – from 
knowing someone for less than 24 hours, to sex in a “friends with benefits” 
relationship. Some show both men and women feel depressed, used and lonely 
after hookups; others find casual sex promotes more positive emotions than 
negative ones.In a study of 832 university students 
<https://www.researchgadrivete.net/publication/46109115_Young_Adults%27_Emotional_Reactions_After_Hooking_Up_Encounters>
, only 26% of women compared with half of men felt positive after a hookup. 
Nearly half of women and 26% of men felt negatively about the experience.

Some factors are associated with an increased risk of feeling bad afterwards – 
these include having sex with someone you have known for less than 24 hours, 
drinking heavily or taking drugs beforehand, feeling you ought to rather than 
you want to, and hoping for a relationship afterwards. Interestingly, the 
Canadian study found that high-quality sex rarely led to regret.

Zhana Vrangalova, a professor of psychology at Cornell University, New York, 
who runs theCasual Sex Project <http://casualsexproject.com/> – a website where 
people graphically share their encounters – argues that casual sex can improve 
wellbeing by increasing confidence, sexual pleasure and making people feel 
desirable.She points out in a TEDx talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Soe7yjlFEJ8> that a study of 20,000 college 
students found that only 42% of women, compared with 78% of men, had an orgasm 
in their last hookup. This “pleasure gap” may partly explain the difference 
between men and women’s feelings about casual sex. But however pro-casual sex 
she is, Vrangalova warns that you shouldn’t hook-up if you care about seeing 
them again. Casual sex is not, she says, like doing the laundry.
 