
“I don’t need to floss” is a sentence my dentist never used to hear – not 
until recently, when the latestDietary Guidelines for Americans 
<https://health.gov/DietaryGuidelines/> stopped recommending it. Now, lots of 
his patients are telling him they’ve stopped. Despite the NHS advising daily 
flossing – and almost all dentists being fans ofinterdental cleaning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/aug/03/forget-flossing-four-ways-to-keep-your-teeth-healthy>
 –an investigation by Associated Press  <http://apne.ws/2aN6zoC> found “little 
proof that flossing works”.

But how can it not be good for you? Between our teeth are interdental sites 
coated in dental plaque. Plaque is a layer of bacteria mixed with organic 
matter that coats teeth and causes gum inflammation (gingivitis) and tooth 
decay. Early warning signs include bleeding gums. Toothbrushes get rid of 
plaque from other surfaces, but are not so good between teeth. Surely floss can 
reach the parts that brushes can’t?

The solution

The lack of good research emerged in a 2011 systematic review by the Cochrane 
Oral Health Group 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD008829/ORAL_flossing-to-reduce-gum-disease-and-tooth-decay>
. Its summary of results from 12 studies found only weak evidence that flossing 
(plus brushing) reduces bleeding from gums, and none for plaque reduction. But 
good studies are hard to do. The quality of flossing varies. One study showed 
that professional flossing five times a week can reduce tooth decay – a result 
not seen in any studies of self-flossing – so it’s clearly a skill.Experts 
advise moving the floss, held in a C shape, away from the gum 
<http://www.mouthhealthy.org/en/az-topics/f/flossing-steps> in an up-and-down 
motion.

However, the Cochrane paper actually said that, although the research was 
poor, the benefits of flossing probably outweighed any risks.Bleeding gums is a 
risk factor in developing chronic gum disease 
<http://www.nature.com/ebd/journal/v16/n3/full/6401113a.html> than can destroy 
the bone underneath. Professor Damien Walmsley, a scientific adviser for the
British Dental Association <https://www.bda.org/>, says that brushing teeth 
twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste and only occasionally eating sugar 
treats after meals is the best way to prevent tooth decay. He believes flossing 
is of little value and that small interdental brushes are better at cleaning 
the gaps between teeth.

No one, however, is arguing that flossing isn’t useful for dislodging 
unsightly food stuck between teeth. My own dentist, Richard Travers, thinks we 
can drop the daily enslavement and reduce flossing to twice a week, increasing 
if our gums start bleeding. His gut feeling, from what he sees, is that both 
flossing and interdental brushes are useful. And,in a recent feature in the 
British Dental Journal 
<http://www.nature.com/bdj/journal/v221/n4/full/sj.bdj.2016.588.html>, senior 
dentists including Phil Ower, the president of the British Society of 
Periodontology, announced that they still floss their own teeth.
 