
When the horror film The Orphanage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/21/worldcinema.horror> opened big in 
its home country of Spain in October 2007, distributor Warner Brothers wanted
director JA Bayona <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juan_Antonio_Bayona> to know 
he was loved. "We call him Jota," says Richard Fox, executiveVP of 
international at Warner 
<http://www.warnerbros.com/studio/executives/operation-officers/richard-fox.html>
. "He's an amazing Superman fan, and I had a piece of kryptonite from the Bryan 
Singer version sent to my hotel in Barcelona. After this huge opening weekend, 
we went to a fish restaurant on Monday night to celebrate. I got there early, 
so I was sat there with my box of kryptonite, looking at the portraits on the 
wall: Bill Clinton, Tom Cruise, Zinedine Zidane. When Jota arrived, I gave him 
the kryptonite, and a guy took a photo. We sat and had a three-hour dinner. 
When we left, whose photo was now above Clinton's, but Jota's?"

Bayona – the Catalan fanboy making it global – had found himself a prime spot 
in one of cinema's newest growth areas. The Orphanage went on to take $78m 
worldwide, one of the largest non-English-language crossovers of the decade. 
Part-produced by Warner, it was a trophy example of Hollywood's entry in the 
noughties into what, in studio parlance, was called "local-language 
production": developing, or picking up for distribution, foreign-language films 
in their native countries. Since Warner, Sony and Disney first set up such 
operations in the late 90s, there have been dozens of these works:A Very Long 
Engagement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/104538/very.long.engagement> 
(Warner, 2004),Night Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107682/night.watch> (Fox, 2004), My 
Name Is Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/12/india> (Fox, 2010), 
Heartbreaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/01/heartbreaker-film-review> 
(Universal, 2010), to name a few your DVD player may have gobbled. Last year, 
there were apparently as many as 100 associated with the major studios.

"It's old-fashioned just to be making English-language movies," says Sanford 
Panitch <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=16EVPhMDhMU>, president of Fox 
International Productions (FIP). "You look at it, and think: 'How could this 
not have happened from the beginning?'" It certainly feels in step with the age 
of globalisation, which gave birth to the one-size-(XXXL)-fits-all blockbuster 
strategy, but also calls for more sensitive approaches. "Blockbusters are made 
for the whole world," continues Panitch, "but audiences are made up of 
different quadrants. Not everybody eats the same food. It doesn't work like 
that in the world."

But, to go back to Bayona and the fish restaurant, perhaps film-makers around 
the world should beware of Americans bearing gifts (especially kryptonite). 
Could local-language film be simply a Trojan horse – a backdoor method of 
gaining a greater share of overseas box office? This, with the US cinema market 
stagnant and the emerging economies still producing double-digit growth, is the 
all-important prize these days. David Kosse, president of international at 
Universal Pictures, is quick to dispel any suggestion that Hollywood incursions 
weaken foreign industries: "You could categorise it as more competition, or you 
could categorise it as more support. I tend to view it as more support, and I 
think most people do. If you're a producer, you have more people to sell your 
film to, and more people to allow you to realise your vision."

Richard Fox and Sanford Panitch say similar things. JA Bayona, who went on to 
make the$28m The Impossible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148744/impossible> (again partly under 
Warner stewardship), would presumably agree. He is one example of a local 
film-maker who has benefited, but not everyone is convinced Hollywood's 
attitude to local-language production is fundamentally nurturing. 
"Realistically, what they're looking for is free money [such as foreign 
companies willing to fund development, and/or government subsidies]," says Toby 
Miller, media academic and co-author ofGlobal Hollywood 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/film/9781844570393/global-hollywood-no>
. "Free money to which they can attach their name, and the production risk is 
away from them. It doesn't mean all individuals associated with the studios are 
like that. It doesn't mean everyone associated with the films is. But that's 
the logic of the studios, and how they operate."

Miller believes the strength of the studios' commitment to overseas cinema 
should be judged by the level of their own cash invested; but it's impossible 
to pin down the broad picture amid the tangle of co-productions, distribution 
acquisitions, part-financing, and fully chaperoned projects that make up the 
local-language coalface. Universal seem to have the most hands-off stance. 
Kosse says they rarely develop from scratch, preferring a more "opportunistic" 
approach to pick up films to complement what's happening in individual 
countries. "It depends on the kind of movies that are coming out from the main 
slate from the studio in America: how many of those there are, and what types 
of movies we end up making that year." That's in contrast to Fox, who develop 
fully in close to half of their 28 worldwide offices, and Warner, who also 
favour a more long-term approach.

Richard Fox refers to a five-year plan that Warner put in place after their 
early disjointed attempts at local-language films, promising 20 films across 
their various territories. "You can't just go, 'I'm going to do one film,'" he 
says. "I see some other players, they may come in, do one or two films, and get 
crushed on them. That happens to all the studios. You have four or five that 
bat during a season – maybe you get a home run, maybe three strike-outs. But 
you've really got to play for the portfolio, play for the long-term." Warner 
have now made 420 across all countries. That diligence has resulted in several 
high-profile partnerships, including with superstar-writer-directorTil Schweiger
 <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001709/> in Germany, whose Kokowääh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kenoyAhTsYI> and Rabbit Without Ears 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LdqXs3rvqHc> franchises are some of the most 
lucrative ever in that country; Pedro Almodóvar, whose last three films were 
handled by Warner in Spain; and with Guillermo del Toro for his 
Spanish-language work (the director also introduced Bayona to the studio).

Are these films still German, or Spanish, or whatever – or are they, hopped up 
on American cash and conglomerate marketing, a sort of mestizo-Hollywood? As 
with most questions of authenticity, it's probably too late for a meaningful 
answer. But the sustained involvement of the studios begs sharper questions 
about the effects of that influence.

Undoubtedly, Hollywood often brings in a focused professionalism and unmatched 
technical expertise that can raise the bar in overseas industries. Panitch 
points to the Avatar 3D technicians who worked on Fox Star's Bollywood horror,
Raaz 3 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdGMo3fffkg>. Another Fox 
local-language exec working in Russia refers to the tougher standards of script 
development put in place there. Panitch views these sorts of arrangements as a 
new era of collaboration: "It couldn't really have happened in the Hollywood of 
the 50s and 60s. Bertolucci would be working with an Italian producer, be 
discovered, come to Los Angeles, and someone would take a shot on him. But the 
Hollywood studios weren't involved in making the original Bertolucci film." 
It's equally possible, however, that American involvement at this earlier stage 
heightens the chances of talent moving on too quickly instead of tilling their 
home turf. That looked strongly the case with Kazakh directorTimur Bekmambetov 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0067457/>, who abandoned the projected Watch 
fantasy trilogy he was making with Fox in the mid-noughties, in favour of 
Angelina Jolie's Wanted.

Like Bayona, Del Toro, Park Chan-wook, Neill Blomkamp and other film-makers 
who split their time between home and Hollywood, it seems undeniable 
Bekmambetov's American links also bring side benefits to Russia. His production 
company,Bazelevs <http://www.bazelevs.ru/>, has supplied a stream of 
Hollywoodised commercial hits in recent years – some, like the 
Universal-producedBlack Lightning <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jzhQnJo-D-0>, 
part of the local-language train.
 Russia goes to Hollywood ... Black Lightning 
But again, it's open to debate whether an elevated Hollywood presence in a 
country works to increase the overall market share for local films. Lots of 
variables can affect that figure. It's striking, though, that the studio's 
local-language activity often thrives most in countries with markedly lower 
shares for local films, such as Spain, Russia, Mexico and Germany; perhaps 
where tastes have been more deeply sculpted by mainstream US fare that 
dominates the market. So the studios are most likely to have solid 
infrastructure there, with receptive audiences for the kind of local-inflected 
commercial genre films that constitute the meat and drink of local-language 
output – as in Germany (which, since Jack Warner tried to persuade the US 
government to suppress the native industry after the second world war, has been 
acompliant market for Hollywood 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/hollywood-s-pact-hitler-how-595717>).

Panitch and Richard Fox both argue that the studios are just serving 
mainstream popular tastes that would exist anyway, regardless of their presence 
– and promoting foreign film-makers in the process. "Hollywood doesn't just 
mean English language – what it means is high-quality cinema, in any language," 
says Panitch. "We're basically trying to get the most successful films," says 
Fox, "we're not out to make art movies in any country. So, almost by 
definition, we're not the only one going for that movie; other local players 
are, too."

The Warner chief does concede that the studios can sometimes be too rigidly 
commercial, and overlook more intrepid routes. All the executives I spoke to 
say they no longer look to create breakout hits that will travel outside of 
their country of origin; local-language content has to be profitable at home 
first, and anything else is an added bonus. I wonder if the film-makers feel 
the same. Hollywood can wait for its flagship blockbusters to trawl for global 
audiences, but any ambitious director would want the same opportunity for his 
movie. Warner initially pushed for Bayona to film The Impossible in Spanish, 
before other partners insisted that he should maximise his audience by making 
the characters British. And maybe that switch wasn't even necessary. The 
noughties showed, from City of God to Slumdog Millionaire or Let the Right One 
in, that non-English language work was capable of grabbing mass audiences – if 
US studios, or ambitious overseas ones, had the courage to go the extra mile.
 Na Hong-Jin's The Yellow Sea (2010) was a shrewd investment on the part of 
FIP. Photograph: Cho Wonjin 
Clearly, we're living in a different world when American studios demand that 
local film-makers keep it real. If local-language production is a Trojan horse 
gambit, then the hardest fighting is still ahead for Hollywood. The countries 
offering the most cultural resistance and local pride – France, South Korea, 
Turkey, India, China – are firmly in its sights, but it's far from certain that 
it will enjoy the same levels of domination there. But maybe it's progress that 
the struggle for the mainstream now needs subtitles.

Five films where Hollywood got its phrasebook out

The Road Home (1999) <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0235060/>

Everyone's talking Chinese box office now, but Sony was the first Hollywood 
outfit to really recognise its importance. Subsidiary Columbia Pictures Asia 
started its local-language dabblings there in the late 90s, including this 
Zhang Yimou drama, which introduced us toZhang Ziyi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhang_Ziyi>, a year before she broke out in 
another Columbia film: Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.

Roadside Romeo (2008) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126734/roadside.romeo>

Part of Disney mid-noughties push into Bollywood, this $1.8m animation spin on 
The Lady and the Tramp posted disappointing results – like a lot of US sallies 
into India (until very recently). Disney – perhaps clearing their decks for the 
portfolio of mega-franchises with which they're spearheading their global 
strategy now – ultimately decided local-language was not for them, and closed 
their specialist unit in 2011.

How to Lose Friends and Alienate People (2008) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125872>

The snark in Film Four's adaptation of Toby Young's memoir was in unapologetic 
British, which counts as a foreign language to the American studios. A 
distribution pickup for Paramount's Worldwide Acquisitions Group, its 
disappointing box office was part of a so-so slate of results for the studio's 
international arm. The unit closed in 2011 – with Paramount preferring 
off-the-peg tailorings for the juiciest territories, such asfilming sections of 
Transformers 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/19/transformers-4-reality-tv-china> 
in Beijing.

The Yellow Sea (2010) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143492/yellow-sea>

Na Hong-Jin's followup to his much-praised The Chaser looked like a chip off 
the old Korean block: gritty, dynamic and hurtling towards a Senecan bloodbath. 
Actually, it was a shrewd investment on the part of FIP, their first in Korea; 
a bet on one of the country's most exciting up-and-coming directors that 
seriously paid off.

The Artist (2011)  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142801/artist>

The best picture Oscar-winner was billed as a beautiful irony: the outsiders' 
homage to old-time Hollywood, fromla belle France. Actually it was from la belle
 Burbank, partially funded and co-produced by Warner France – though the 
creative team, led by director Michel Hazanavicius, was certifiably Gallic. 
Warner got cold feet on handling it worldwide – put off by black-and-white 
visuals and lack of dialogue – and let the Weinsteins take the strain.
 