
What is it? Just a nice long walk.

How much does it cost? Probably an initial outlay of about £50 for some decent 
gear, and then free for ever.

What does it promise? Improved cardiorespiratory fitness, improved muscular 
fitness, weight control, better balance and – according to the president of the 
American Hiking Society – reduced stress and anxiety.

What’s it actually like? Are you kidding? The hit of fresh air in your 
nostrils? The beauty of the countryside? The clearness of mind that comes from 
ditching everything and setting off into the great unknown? Hiking is amazing. 
You might not want to go all in straight away – this month’s Caledonian 
Challenge, for example, is a hilly 54-mile slog that only the fittest walkers 
should attempt – but the beauty of hiking is that there’s nothing stopping you 
from picking a route that fits your ability. Start by consulting theNational 
Trails website <http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/> – which has distance and 
gradient calculators – pick your trail and away you go. It’s a steady but 
comprehensive workout; the perfect antidote to the veiny, bulge-eyed intensity 
of something likeCrossFit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/03/crosstfit-the-new-fitness-craze-has-a-lot-to-tell-us-about-late-western-capitalism>
. There’s nothing quite as satisfying as breathlessly exploring the countryside 
by yourself. If you happen to see me out on theNorth Downs Way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/23/british-walks-uk-family-long-distance-paths-trails>
 this summer, do say hi.

Is it worth doing tricep dips? Exercise review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/is-it-worth-tricep-dips-exercise-review>
Best and worst bit So long as you prepare properly, and you’re fit enough to 
walk any distance at all, there is no worst bit. Hiking is great.

Is it worth it? Yes. By the way, this is the 87th and final instalment of this 
column. I’ve just checked, and the vast majority of them were worth it. 
Everything is worth trying, that’s what I’ve discovered. Apart fromburpees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/02/is-it-worth-it-burpees-exercise-review>
. Jesus, I hate burpees.
 