
What could be more wholesome than Johnson & Johnson’s talcum powder? It is the 
fragrant way to dry the bits towels can’t reach.Up to 40% of women 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2343974/Women-regularly-use-talcum-powder-increase-risk-ovarian-cancer-24.html>
 may use talc at least occasionally.But last week a Missouri jury awarded $72m 
(£51.5m) in damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/johnson-johnson-72-millon-babuy-talcum-powder-ovarian-cancer>
 to the family of Jackie Fox, who died of ovarian cancer having used the 
well-known brand of powder for years. More than 1,200 other cases are still 
waiting to be heard.

Johnson & Johnson to pay $72m in case linking baby powder to ovarian cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/johnson-johnson-72-millon-babuy-talcum-powder-ovarian-cancer>
The scientific evidence linking talcum powder to ovarian cancer is not 
overwhelming, but the trial saw an internal memo from a medical consultant 
employed by Johnson & Johnson that suggested that “anybody who denies [the] 
risks” between “hygienic” talc use and ovarian cancer would be publicly 
perceived in the same light as those who denied a link between smoking 
cigarettes and cancer.

The solution


Three years ago I wrote about a paper linking talc to an increased risk of 
ovarian cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/23/should-i-stop-using-talcum-powder>
. It is a debate that has rumbled on for decades. Talc is naturally occurring 
and consists of magnesium, silicon, hydrogen and oxygen. It is mined from the 
soil and, before 1973, was often contaminated with asbestos (a naturally 
occurring close neighbour in the ground).

Last year, a court awarded a woman in California $13m for developing 
mesothelioma 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2015/04/29/jury-awards-woman-13m-for-exposure-to-asbestos-in-talcum>
 (a tumour of the lining of the lungs) from using talc with asbestos in it – 
the tiny fibres in talc are easily inhaled. Removing the asbestos, however, did 
not stop some studies continuing to link talc with ovarian cancer.A 2003 
meta-analysis looking at 16 studies 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12820486> involving 11,933 women found talc 
was associated with a higher risk of ovarian cancer, but a 2014study of 61,576 
women found no such link <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25214560>. The 
International Agency for Research on Cancer <http://www.iarc.fr/> (part of the 
WHO) has classified talc applied to the genitals as “possibly carcinogenic”. 
The studies that have found the weak links have been case-control studies that 
compare the use of talc by women with ovarian cancer to those without it. They 
rely on self-reported talc use, which is not terribly reliable.

Should I stop using talcum powder?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/23/should-i-stop-using-talcum-powder>
There is a plausible mechanism by which talc could promote cancer – by 
triggering long-term inflammation. But since ovarian cancer is uncommon, the 
use of talc will only raise a small risk by a smallish amount (up to a third). 
There are stronger risks for ovarian cancer, such as genetic abnormalities, 
hormone replacement therapy and being overweight. Studies do not show a 
relationship between the amount of talc used and the likelihood of ovarian 
cancer – if there was a strong link they would do. But while talc may not be 
unsafe, a fluffy towel is safer. The popularity of talc is already waning and 
won’t be helped by more lawsuits.
 