
Has any comic book icon in history proven quite so controversial as Robin, 
Batman’s perennial sidekick, occasional ward, and partner in crime-fighting? 
Chris O’Donnell’s paper-thin portrayal of Dick Grayson (along with George 
Clooney’s Batnipples and a script from the seventh layer of Hades) saw Joel 
Schumacher rudely ejected from the directorial hot seat after 1997’s critically 
reviledBatman & Robin <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118688/>. The sometime teen 
titan was so unpopular with fans that they voted to kill off the Jason Todd 
incarnation in the 1988-89 comic book story arc A Death in the Family. And so 
uncertain was Christopher Nolan about bringing back the perky superhero that he 
hid Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s version behind the unimposing moniker Sgt John Blake 
for almost all of 2012’sThe Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/19/the-dark-knight-rises-review>.

Magic Mike's Joe Manganiello to play Deathstroke in solo Batman movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/09/joe-manganiello-is-deathstroke-in-ben-affleck-batman-movie>
Why then is Ryan Potter, the brilliant young Asian American star of Disney’s 
Big Hero 6, touting himself to play the Dark Knight’s sidekick in the upcoming 
stand-alone Ben Affleck–directed Batman movie? Potter has posted a short film 
of himself taking down bad guys in style, signing off with the line: “Hey Ben, 
like Tim said,Batman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> needs a 
Robin.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsdwfSxgTP4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsdwfSxgTP4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsdwfSxgTP4&media=>
The short answer seems to be that viral videos are the fastest way to get 
Hollywood bigwigs to prick up their ears in 2016 –just ask Deadpool’s Ryan 
Reynolds <http://www.dailydot.com/parsec/new-deadpool-test-footage-leaks/>. The 
long one is that Potter sees Tim Drake as the ideal boy wonder to make a return 
inAffleck’s new Batman movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/09/joe-manganiello-is-deathstroke-in-ben-affleck-batman-movie>
, and also reckons it’s about time an Asian American actor like himself got a 
plum role in the new DC expanded universe. He’s certainly made a convincing 
case thus far.

“Marvel has done a really amazing job lately of adding a lot more diversity to 
their universe,” Potter, who is half Japanese, half Caucasian,told the 
Hollywood Reporter after his video went viral 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/robin-fight-video-ryan-potter-927966>
. “One thing I noticed about the DC universe is it’s very one note at the 
moment in terms of age and diversity.”

The 21-year-old, who says he has been turned down for roles for not being 
“white” or “Asian” enough, added: “I fall into this paradox where ‘either you 
get a little too much of this or a little too much of that’ … I thought it 
would be absolutely amazing to see an Asian American face in that cast.”

Potter seized upon Drake because he believes he bears some resemblance to the 
third Robin, who debuted in 1989 in the comics and held the mantle 20 years 
before rebranding himself as Red Robin seven years ago. But is the world really 
ready for Batman’s oft-reviled sidekick to return to the big screen? And is 
Affleck at all likely to bring him back in his debut solo outing as Gotham’s 
furrow-browed, steely-eyed defender?

Deathstroke: the perfect Batman villain for DC's vision of violence?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/deathstroke-batman-villain-dc-vision-of-violence>
To answer the first question, it’s clear that attitudes towards comic book 
movies have been transformed since Robin became persona non grata in Gotham 
almost two decades ago. Marvel has shown that superheroes don’t have to be 
toned down, Nolan-style, to be successful. In fact, the Disney-owned studio is 
ploughing ahead with big-screen debuts for some of the most far-out comic book 
creations in history, namely Benedict Cumberbatch’sDoctor Strange  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/benedict-cumberbatch-doctor-strange-trailer-marvel-scott-derrickson>
and the African heroBlack Panther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/lupita-nyongo-in-black-panther-marvel-superhero-movie>
. So why not Robin? And why not Tim Drake?

If director Zack Snyder was following comic book canon, it seems likely the 
version of the boy wonder who died in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, most 
likely at the hands of the Joker, was the much-hated Todd iteration. According 
to the timeline seen in the comics, Drake should be next to inherit the 
moniker, though DC might easily throw us a curveball by reintroducing Dick 
Grayson, or even the female Robin, Carrie Kelley, from the famous 1986 Frank 
Miller graphic novel The Dark Knight Returns.

Nolan’s decision to shelve Robin for 2005’s Batman Begins was entirely 
sensible as he retooled Batman for the 21st century, jettisoning the 
superhero’s fantasy trappings and returning him to his hardboiled late 1930s 
origins. But Warner Bros’ upcoming slate includesDC Comics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dc-comics> movies based on superheroes as 
whimsical and fanciful as Aquaman, Shazam and Green Lantern. With such an 
eccentric cavalcade of costumed titans set to debut in multiplexes, it surely 
no longer makes any sense to keep the caped crusader’s long-term sidekick on 
ice.

Must Robin really remain firmly locked away in the deepest vault of the 
Batcave, his name never to be mentioned in polite company again? Or is it 
finally time for comic book fans to forgive and forget?

 * This piece was amended on 14 September 2016; Frank Miller, not Alan Moore, 
wrote The Dark Knight Returns.  