
You’re watching a PowerPoint presentation and it’s slide 10 out of 75. Your 
boss is present, so you can’t risk a quick game of Football Manager 2016 on 
your phone. But time is stationary. You feel dejected and trapped. You 
experience something that the Romans documented on the walls of Pompeii: 
mind-numbing boredom. And you wonder, is being “bored to death” a real thing?

The solution

Well, yes and no. Boredom traditionally has a bad reputation. In 2009, a study 
of 7,524 civil servants <http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/content/39/2/370.full> 
found that those with the highest levels of boredom were nearly 40% more likely 
to have died by the end of the 25-year trial, compared with those who weren’t 
bored. The bored civil servants were also more prone to rate their health worse 
and to be less active and have more menial jobs. The authors speculated that 
boredom and inactivity might drive people to drink more heavily and smoke – 
activities not related to longevity.

Boredom is often defined as a state of dissatisfaction with the dullness of 
a situation – usually with a bit of restlessness and fatigue. So it may seem 
counterintuitive that researchers are suggesting boredom might have benefits, 
and, indeed, be an evolutionary insurance scheme for making us seek new 
experiences. A series ofstudies from the University of Virginia 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-28130690>, published in the 
journalScience <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/345/6192/75> in 2014 
found that 18 out of 42 students who were left in a room with nothing to do for 
15 minutes gave themselves at least one mild shock on the ankle to alleviate 
the boredom. The authors concluded that people would rather do something 
unpleasant than nothing.

So whatever happened to daydreaming? A study from the University of Central 
Lancashire <https://hbr.org/2014/09/the-creative-benefits-of-boredom/> links a 
period of boredom with heightened creativity immediately afterwards. It is not 
the most robust study: 40 people copied numbers from a telephone directory for 
15 minutes and then had to come up with different uses for a pair of 
polystyrene cups. Their ideas were rated more creative than those of 40 people 
who didn’t do the boring task first. Another group, who read the numbers, were 
even more creative with the cups than those who wrote them out. Dr Sandi Mann, 
one of the authors, concluded that we should embrace boredom “to enhance 
our creativity”.

Regardless of the science, I am all for boredom in small doses. I worry that 
mobile phones mean my children don’t daydream at all. Being bored as a child 
used to mean using your own resources to amuse yourself. Now it means plugging 
yourself into an iPad. Being bored is a useful reminder that we want to do 
something meaningful. So, hopefully, this article will have bored the pants off 
you.
 