
Barbara Ellen, Observer writer First, Robert De Niro walks out of a Radio Times
 interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/22/robert-de-niro-walks-out-radio-times-interview>
 with journalist Emma Brockes, because of her “negative inference” (nope, me 
neither). Then architectZaha Hadid cuts short a tense Today interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/24/architect-zaha-hadid-cuts-short-bbc-today-programme-interview>
 on Radio 4, accusing Sarah Montague of not doing her research.

Most journalists have similar stories. I had Izzy Stradlin from Guns N’ Roses 
storm out because I had the temerity to ask about heroin references in songs 
the band had gone on record as saying were, um, about heroin. Once, a painfully 
sulky John Hurt seemed to hold me personally responsible for questions he 
hadn’t liked from a previous interviewer. Another time, Steven Berkoff snarled 
at my questions from the off, like a bear with its face stuck in a beehive, 
before finally stomping out.

It’s not as if anyone has been ambushed – these are pre-arranged, professional 
engagements
Barbara Ellen 
Unless interviewees have been tricked into the room on a promise of jelly and 
ice cream, there’s no excuse for such tantrums. While they’re not answerable as 
such, the fact is that, if they’ve agreed to do an interview, then they should 
be professional and do the bloody interview. They should also accept that 
questions will be asked – and the journalist isn’t some obsequious branch of 
their marketing team, whose only duty is to dribble on about how fascinating 
they are, darling.

Krishnan Guru-Murthy, Channel 4 news presenter I can’t help feeling sorry for 
the poor souls. For 99% of their working lives they are treated like gods by an 
army of assistants who dare not question a thing. Then along comes someone like 
me or you who wants to ask what they think, tease out an opinion or explore 
something done or said before. They hate it, and they panic. When I interviewed 
De Niro he was promoting another slightly disappointing comedy and was so 
obviously cringing from the moment he walked in to our interview room that it 
was like seeing a caged tiger at the circus. I almost felt guilty. I suspect 
this time he just lost control and couldn’t cope.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdebate-is-it-ever-ok-to-walk-out-of-interview-robert-de-niro-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443187241010%2Fd95b9e8f-93af-462a-b9ac-7a4be7eee0ee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20ever%20OK%20to%C2%A0walk%20out%20of%20an%20interview%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdebate-is-it-ever-ok-to-walk-out-of-interview-robert-de-niro-zaha-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20ever%20OK%20to%C2%A0walk%20out%20of%20an%20interview%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F26%2Fdebate-is-it-ever-ok-to-walk-out-of-interview-robert-de-niro-zaha-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443187241010%2Fd95b9e8f-93af-462a-b9ac-7a4be7eee0ee-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robert De Niro: mind your inferences. Photograph: Ernesto Di Stefano 
Photography/WireImage 
Actors are pushed out on to the publicity stage as good as naked. The PRs 
rarely seem to prepare them or warn that there’s a difference between Brad from 
IReallyLoveMovieStars.com at the junket and an interview with the British 
newspapers,Channel 4 News or Today.

I have some sympathy too for Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>. She’d won a prize. In 
the normal world that provokes praise. In the media it invites questions. Of 
course, she’d have done much better to stay and point out the facts about her 
proposed Tokyo stadium, but it’s her right to walk, so long as she understands 
some people will have drawn what De Niro would call a “negative inference”.

The trouble when it comes to criticising bad manners is that I admit some of 
my questioning fails the dinner party test
Krishnan Guru-Murthy 
BE I appreciate what you’re saying about soul-sapping, confusing junket-type 
interviews. And yes, it must be a shock for cosseted stars to cope with more 
serious media (especially with cringeworthy product to push). But why do their 
lousy career choices and paper-thin skin have to be the journalist’s problem?

At least Hadid was on the radio. The number of times I’ve observed some 
monosyllabic, charmless celebrity buffoon I’ve interviewed mysteriously 
transform into a delightful, effusive television/radio interviewee… I 
personally believe that the famous behave far worse in print interviews, 
because there are no witnesses, and they can claim they’ve been 
“misrepresented” or “misquoted”, and the rest. So I’ve got a modicum of 
grudging respect for those who lose their cool during radio or TV interviews.

Saying that, what a wasted opportunity. Robert Downey Jr was a petulant 
man-brat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/28/robert-downey-jr-krishnan-guru-murthy-interview-howard-stern>
 during your interview. And why would Quentin Tarantino“shut your butt down” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/11/tarantino-krishnan-guru-murthy>, 
instead of welcoming an intelligent debate onDjango Unchained? These people 
have been famous for decades – do they seriously expect you to use the time 
inquiring as to whether they’ve been on the London Eye? I’m wondering if the 
aggrieved walk-out is almost turning into a scalp for celebrities? It certainly 
ramps up the publicity…
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALBwaO-rAsE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALBwaO-rAsE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALBwaO-rAsE&media=>
 Watch Krishnan Guru-Murthy’s interview with Robert Downey Jr. 
KGM That’s certainly true: the internet loves this stuff. Robert Downey Jr 
stoked his own viral walkout by tweeting and slagging me off on the radio. He 
probably thinks he came out of it well. Tarantino, to his credit, was 
different. He didn’t actually walk out on me but stayed until the end – long 
enough to realise, I’m told by a friend of his, he’d perhaps made a mistake. 
You are right, though: it is a massive wasted opportunity. These are 
intelligent people, usually, and some, such as Robert Redford, relish an 
intelligent chat. Sometimes a bit too much; when I talked about the Blurred 
Lines lyrics with Pharrell, he was so wound up about me questioning the sexual 
politics of “I know you want it” he kept arguing for 20 minutes afterwards 
while I was trying to get in the lift. If only they were all like Grace Jones – 
your interview with her last week was gripping. But you get much longer with 
them than we do in television. We get 10 minutes, if we’re lucky.

'I'm shutting your butt down': 10 interview walkouts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/24/10-interview-walkouts-zaha-hadid>
The problem is their people. The people who hover in the background waving 
when they want the questions to stop, who demand the interview isn’t broadcast 
when things go awry, and who threaten never to let you interview one of their 
stars again when you tell them where to jump off. The trouble is, some 
broadcasters give in. The entertainment shows know if they don’t do as 
instructed, their supply of guests will dry up. Even some news programmes have 
been known to bow to outrageous demands, such as sending questions in advance 
for approval. One PR told me the star I was waiting for had walked out on a 
previous interview because the room wasn’t cold enough. Funny thing is, the 
jilted broadcaster never revealed that, but just sucked up the bad behaviour. 
So no wonder the stars and their people become spoilt brats. It is our 
industry’s fault for letting them behave like angry toddlers in the first 
place. Am I going soft?

BE No, in your game, empathy is a strength. I agree with you about the 
wretched, warped system, though sometimes I’m suspicious that the famous hide 
behind it (and their people), because ultimately it suits them.

It’s interesting to hear that Tarantino and Williams were still willing to 
engage – it gives you a scintilla of hope. Of course, journalists mess up too – 
and the famous and the powerful are entitled to stick up for themselves, 
clarify their positions, correct mistakes and passionately disagree. What 
grates is when they try to make a virtue out of bolting, as if it’s some noble 
act of integrity – when all too often it’s about arrogance, vanity or weakness. 
It’s also absurdly rude – in what other business would it be acceptable for 
grownups to sulk, strop and run out of the room?

It’s not as if anyone has been ambushed – these are pre-arranged, professional 
engagements. However artificial and vexed the circumstances forboth parties, 
surely there should be a covenant of courtesy to see it through? Then again, if 
you can’t beat ’em, join ’em – Krishnan, perhaps you could lead the way by 
walking out on your next snotty, difficult interviewee?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGrsJDy8VjZk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGrsJDy8VjZk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGrsJDy8VjZk&media=>
 Watch Krishnan Guru-Murthy’s interview with Quentin Tarantino. 
KGM There have been times when it crossed my mind, though in truth more out of 
boredom than fury. And I have threatened to leave a few times when PRs kept us 
waiting too long (for less than A-listers), on the bluff that they need us more 
than we need them. I’ve always thought extreme lateness is as rude as any 
walkout. The trouble when it comes to criticising bad manners is that I fully 
admit some of my questioning fails the polite dinner party test. But I’m not 
there for steamed fish and broccoli. And while questioning can sometimes be 
persistent, and on topics they wouldn’t choose themselves, I don’t attack the 
way I might with a wayward politician.

When it comes to Westminster dodgeball, as the political interview can 
sometimes become, a bit of rudeness from the journalist is often inevitable 
when questions are being avoided. For a while now, a vogue has been developing 
among politicians for out-bellowing the interviewer and interrupting the 
interrupter. Perhaps they think that if they look indignant and attack the 
question, the viewers will forget that it hasn’t quite been answered. And with 
legions of cheerleaders on social media, they can walk out of an encounter 
thinking it has gone brilliantly. But it is what the rest of the viewers think 
that they should worry about.Whether it is the walkout, the dodge or the temper 
tantrum, these tactics are all, as you say, a bit weak and foolish. Whenever 
anyone asks my advice (and amazingly, they do from time to time), I always say 
the same thing: answer the question and have a conversation you might even 
enjoy. Or don’t do the interview in the first place. I will defend anyone’s 
right to act like an arse, but if they do, they shouldn’t be surprised if 
anyone else decides to park their bike somewhere painful.
 