
Last year’s flame-throwing guitar montage Mad Max: Fury Road grossed $378m and 
won six Oscars, but was that enough to satisfy director George Miller? No it 
was not. “The best version of this movie is black and white,” he lamented 
before an audience of critics at a Q&A last May, “but people reserve that for 
art movies now.” Yes: were it not for studio intervention, Miller would’ve seen 
to it that the fourth entry in Australia’s premiere post-apocalyptic film 
franchise shared a colour palette with such latter-day monochrome romps as 
Farsi vampire westernA Girl Walks Home Alone At Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_YGmTdo3vuY> and Polish nun travelogue Ida 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXhCaVqB0x0>.

Today, Miller’s dream can be a reality, as iTunes users everywhere are given a 
choice between the theatrical version ofMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> and its desaturated 
cousin, the Black & Chrome Edition. An experience previously available only to 
those with a copy of the film on DVD and access to their TV’s colour settings, 
the latter transforms Miller’s opus into something more grand, grainy and 
self-consciously baroque, by stripping the film of its signature oranges and 
blues. As he notes in an introductory video, “some scenes in particular play a 
lot better, and some, there’s information we got from the colour that’s 
missing,” making this less a superior version of the film, and more an 
illuminating counterpoint to the one we saw in cinemas.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5s62tpM5fo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5s62tpM5fo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5s62tpM5fo&media=>
Hardcore cinephiles still bemoan the rise of home viewing, but DVD, Blu-ray 
and streaming have long provided space for cinematic oddities like this one 
that might otherwise have languished in studio store cupboards. Earlier this 
year, Brian De Palma took the unprecedented step of endorsing an online fan 
edit of his poorly received 1992 film Raising Cain as his preferred director’s 
cut, even convincing distributor Scream Factory to include it on the official 
Blu-ray. Having never been happy with the version of the film that made it to 
cinemas, he joined Miller in seeking satisfaction on home video.

Also eager to explore an assortment of cinematic what-ifs is the absurdly 
active “retired” director Steven Soderbergh, whose personal websiteExtension 765
 <http://www.extension765.com/> has become something of a Big Yellow storage 
centre for his re-edits of such hallowed classics as Psycho, Raiders Of The 
Lost Ark and 2001: A Space Odyssey. The latter was recently removed from the 
site after a claim by the Kubrick estate, but inevitably lives on among fans. 
The genie of cinematic miscellany won’t go so easily back in the bottle.
 