
Tarantinoesque (adj) – referring to or reminiscent of the work of the American 
film-maker and actorQuentin Tarantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/quentintarantino> (born 1963), known for the 
violence and wit of his films.

No one these days, not even the Collins English Dictionary 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/tarantinoesque>, doubts 
how influential Tarantino has been over his 21-year career. Any lippy thriller 
featuring pop culture-fried dialogue and flip violence in the wake ofReservoir 
Dogs <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34798/reservoir.dogs> – 8 Heads in a 
Duffel Bag <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118541/>, The 51st State 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/90421/51st.state>, the works of Guy 
Ritchie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/guy-ritchie> – were branded you know 
what. And, impressively, it cemented into an enduring idiom: Joe Carnahan was 
still painting from the palette in 2007'sSmokin' Aces 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116743/smokin.aces>, and reviewers were 
handing out the Tarantinoesque badge, a touch dog-eared now, as late as this 
Christmas gone, to Martin McDonagh'sSeven Psychopaths 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149647/seven-psychopaths>.

Let's hope they save a badge for the main man, who with his latest, Django 
Unchained <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144406/django-unchained>, is 
looking ever more like his own worst imitator (supposedly the fate of all 
artists). But it has got me thinking: are there other film-makers from the same 
time period with a similar level of influence? The adjectivally ennobled: the 
ones whose names sprout "-esque" and "-ian". Even that might not indicate 
rainmaker status, though.Coenesque 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/coenesque> ("featuring 
bizarre and involved plots, use of irony and black humour, and allusions to 
film classics") is the only other mention for a Tarantino contemporary I can 
find in the Collins, but have the brothers really sent out the same shockwaves? 
I can't think of many obvious descendants.

What Tarantino has over the Coens, influence-wise, is that he has never 
attempted to hide himself. The Coens have successfully insinuated themselves 
into multiple genres; the more Tarantino attempts the same thing, especially in 
his post-Jackie Brown <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34627/jackie-brown> 
work, the louder his voice comes through anyway. With the man never willingly 
on the QT, there's more of a tangible essence to imitate and ingest. Perhaps 
this ostentatiousness obscures the real question of how deep his influence has 
been. On dialogue, pulpy milieus, violence – and the way the three snowball 
into a "sensibility" – there's no debate; but I'd contend that he has had 
virtually no sway on visual aesthetics, surely the most vital of cinema's vital 
signs. (Talk me through a Tarantinoesque shot, if you can.) And you can 
question his impact on non-Anglophone cinema: he has borrowed far more from 
Asia than the other way around.

But, hey, no one can do it all. So who else is there to compare on a global 
scale since the early 90s? I'd pick out Lars von Trier's call to arms for 
authenticity in1995's Dogme manifesto <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dogme_95> 
as having a deep-bore influence on the takeup of handheld shooting styles in 
commercial cinema – although he practised it only sporadically afterwards, so 
it's questionable how much it is "his" style. At the opposite end of the 
spectrum is the CGI-orchestrated high styleI once tried dubbing Helvetica 
Blockbuster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/oct/04/clones-hollywood-mutant-movies>
, which can perhaps be laid most squarely at Peter Jackson's door. You can see 
the mark of the Lord of the Rings trilogy on lots of work from around the world 
sitting on the historical-period-fantasy continuum: Russia'sMongol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122907/mongol.-.the.rise.to.power.of.genghis.khan>
, Turkey'sFetih 1453 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/12/turkish-fetih-1453>, China's Red 
Cliff <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/jun/12/film-review-red-cliff> …

Wes Anderson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/wes-anderson> is another director 
I'd cite as having a large sphere of recent influence; less in terms of his 
shooting style – so stylised and specific that it's impossible to appropriate 
without parodying it – than his general sensibility. There seem to have been an 
awful lot of takeups for his man-child characters and their studiously quirky 
adventures:Napoleon Dynamite 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/103373/napoleon.dynamite>, Everything Is 
Illuminated,Wristcutters: A Love Story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/114898/wristcutters>, The Brothers Bloom, 
Submarine,Seeking a Friend for the End of the World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148376/seeking-a-friend-for-the-end-of-the-world>
, to name a few.

The problem with Anderson is that it's tricky to pin that wispy sensibility 
down as his personal property. He occupies the centre of a Venn diagram 
(circles include "quirk", "ironic delivery", "men-children", 
"manic-pixie-dream-girls", "preoccupation with retro handicrafts", etc) with 
plenty of peer film-makers looping into its outer rings:Spike Jonze 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/spike-jonze>, Michel Gondry and Miranda July 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/miranda-july> stand out among them. In light of 
that, Anderson looks more like someone who has managed to put particularly 
forceful visual branding on to the attitudes of his generation.

Perhaps it's a perk of having brilliant, belligerent publicists such as the 
Weinsteins to write your personal myths, but the key Tarantinisms have gone 
down on historical record as originating solely with the genius creator himself 
– one reason why his influence appears more significant. In reality, like 
everyone, Tarantino was the product of a time and place, and there were others (
Shane Black springs to mind <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000948/>) working on 
parallel tracks.

It's a very western preoccupation – the tectonic weight of past pop culture 
pressing on present-day reality – for which Tarantino became a mouthpiece. 
Sometimes a conscious theme, sometimes just the tune he was humming. Being so 
influenced himself, the grand game of influence has become his central 
preoccupation, both as a producer (he used hisRolling Thunder label 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rolling_Thunder_Pictures> in the 90s to patronise 
Takeshi Kitano and Wong Kar-wai, and last bestowed the "Quentin Tarantino 
presents" kitemark on RZA'sThe Man With the Iron Fists 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150828/man-with-the-iron-fists>, and in 
terms of his legacy as an artist.

Ultimately, I think that's why his influence has largely been restricted to 
the west so far. Other countries are catching up now in terms of technology and 
media saturation, and maybe his ever-improving box office numbers since Kill 
Bill are a sign that there is a cine-slaked audience on a global scale for his 
reference-heavy, ever-expanding crib guide to celluloid history. The emergence 
of a Chilean or Chinese Tarantino would be the clincher, one to delight the 
originator, and be proof of the strange, haunted paradox of our times that 
influence – what we owe others – now passes for a great marker of unique 
personal style.

• Next week's After Hollywood looks at Korean animation's second-class status. 
Meanwhile, what global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.
 