
There are countless examples of cult movies that changed in the making, and 
ended up being better for it. Jeff Bridges reckons 2008’s Iron Man, the movie 
that launched the Marvel superhero megaverse,began shooting without any script 
whatsoever 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/5417310/jeff-bridges-admits-iron-man-movie-had-no-script>
. Steven Spielberg’s Jaws was retooled as a Hitchcockian suspense thriller, 
rather than a monster movie exploitation flick, because the director was forced 
to admit halfway through filming that the mechanical shark doubling for a real 
great white looked faker than a $3 bill.

But at least these movies had a reasonable sense of identity from the 
beginning. Iron Man, even if much of the dialogue was improvised on set by 
Downey Jr and Bridges, always knew it wanted to be a superhero movie about a 
billionaire in a supercharged tin can. Jaws was always going to be a fishy 
disaster flick.

Sorry, Ridley Scott: Sigourney Weaver is the only true Alien scream queen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/25/ridley-scott-sigourney-weaver-alien-covenant-prometheus-sequel>
By contrast, Ridley Scott’s Alien: Covenant doesn’t appear to be entirely sure 
what kind of movie it wants to be,even though the veteran film-maker began 
shooting in April 
<http://movieweb.com/wolverine-3-avatar-2-alien-covenant-production-start-dates/>
.

For the record, here are the various permutations the film has gone through 
since it wasfirst mentioned by Scott in March 2012 
<http://collider.com/prometheus-wondercon/>. Back then, we thought we were 
getting a direct sequel to Prometheus, perhaps with screenwriter Damon Lindelof 
being duct-taped to a typewriter and forced to explain away some of the 
original movie’s gaping, incomprehensible plot holes. Later that year, Lindelof 
conveniently stepped aside, afteradmitting the sequel might “benefit from a 
fresh voice or a fresh take or a fresh thought” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/prometheus-damon-lindelof-sequel-ridley-scott-paradise-332875>
 (perhaps in the same way that Lost really ought to have brought someone in 
after season three to explain what the fricking smoke monsters were up to and 
why those darned numbers were so important). But not before telling us thatany 
sequel was likely to shift even further away from the Alien movies 
<http://collider.com/ridley-scott-damon-lindelof-michael-fassbender-prometheus-interview/>
 to which Prometheus had at one point been intended as a prequel-of-sorts.

Scott himself followed up in 2014 with a promise that the new movie would not 
feature any of the classic, HR Giger-spawned xenomorphs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/25/ridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien>
, the acid-blooded, multiple-mawed monstrosities that have haunted the waking 
nightmares of Alien fans ever since the director’s own pioneering 1979 slasher 
flick in space. “The beast is done. Cooked,” said Scott, speaking to Yahoo 
Movies. “I got lucky meeting Giger all those years ago. It’s very hard to 
repeat that. I just happen to be the one who forced it through because [the 
studio] said it’s obscene. They didn’t want to do it and I said, ‘I want to do 
it, it’s fantastic.’

Katherine Waterston signs up for Ridley Scott’s Alien: Covenant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/actor-katherine-waterston-cast-ridley-scott-alien-covenant-prometheus>
“But after four [Alien films], I think it wears out a little bit. There’s only 
so much snarling you can do. I think you’ve got to come back with something 
more interesting. And I think we’ve found the next step. I thought the 
Engineers were quite a good start.”

But then, somewhere along the line, something seemed to change. Perhaps 
influenced by the palpable sense of disappointment over the idea of a 
Prometheus sequel with no connection to Alien, and presumably a whole lot more 
Lindelof-influenced portentous hogwash about the origins of mankind (which will 
still probably be in the movie 
<http://www.idigitaltimes.com/first-alien-covenant-reveal-proves-religious-gibberish-back-prometheus-sequel-529937>
), Scott announced that everything he had previously told us was wrong.

“There was always this discussion: is Alien, the character, the beast, played 
out or not? We’ll have them all: egg, face-hugger, chest-burster, then the big 
boy,”Scott told The Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/ridley-scott-martian-humor-prometheus-alien-prequel/> 
in December. “I think maybe we can go another round or two.”

Far be it for me to complain about a film-maker giving the public what they 
want, but the entire process smacks of the kind of reactive film-making that 
caused fan-inspired movies such as Samuel L Jackson’s Snakes on a Plane to be 
such a mess. This isRidley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott>
, director of Alien and Blade Runner. Apparently changing his movie every five 
minutes because someone on the internet complained.

The latest shift to Alien: Covenant, previously titled Alien: Paradise Lost, 
previously titled Prometheus 2, etc etc, is that we will, after all,see the 
return of Noomi Rapace’s Elisabeth Shaw 
<http://deadline.com/2016/06/noomi-rapace-alien-covenant-reprises-role-1201776038/>
, Scott havingearlier said the Swedish actor would not be involved 
<http://www.empireonline.com/movies/alien/alien-covenant-noomi-rapace-will-return-elizabeth-shaw/>
. Those who watched Prometheus will remember that the film climaxed with Shaw 
and David the android heading off in one of the Engineers’ ships in search of 
the mysterious human-like extra terrestrials’ home planet. So it always seemed 
a little strange that part two would not continue the story.

Actor who played Aliens' Newt back after three decades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/01/aliens-newt-to-return-in-fan-film-after-three-decades>
Moreover, Alien fans have been here before, specifically when 20th Century Fox 
moved to kill off Newt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/01/aliens-newt-to-return-in-fan-film-after-three-decades>
, the little girl star of James Cameron’s Aliens, at the beginning of David 
Fincher’s disappointing Alien 3. Perhaps Scott didn’t want a similar fan 
revolt, so it now appears we will at least get to see what happened to Shaw, 
albeit most likely via some kind of flashback.

Alien: Covenant may yet turn out to be the best instalment since Cameron laid 
down the baton in 1986. And it may simply be that Scott is the victim of a 
modern internet culture that rebroadcasts every snippet of information about 
upcoming movies to the entire world. The gleaming carapace of the creature is 
cut away to expose the ghastly guts of film-making reality, leaving us all 
wishing we’d covered our eyes.

But the abiding sense here is that the new movie is suffering from the same 
lack of a clear flightpath that saw Fincher virtually disown Alien 3 and helped 
make Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s Alien: Resurrection a perennial source of the 
entirely wrong sort of horror. Once again it is film-making by numbers, as if 
the venerable space saga is being produced by a studio offshoot of 
Weyland-Yutani, the evil corporation that’s usually at the heart of everything 
rotten in the Alien universe. And as long-term acolytes will know all too well,
it never ends positively when the men in suits have ultimate control of the 
mission <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Z5sX4qC5HE>.
 