

 <>Today, Wasila Tasi’u has her day in court, though she may struggle to see 
over the witness box. Aged just 14, Tasi’u is accused of lacing food prepared 
for a celebration two weeks after her wedding with rat poison,killing her 
35-year-old husband, Umar Sani, and three others 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-27/murder-case-opens-against-nigerian-child-bride/5921202>
.

The prosecution is seeking the death penalty if she is convicted at Gezawa 
High Court in northern Nigeria.Four Nigerian men were hanged in 2013 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/for-media/press-releases/nigeria-reportedly-hangs-four-first-executions-2006-2013-06-24>
 - the first known executions in the country since 2006. 1,233 Nigerians are 
currently under a death sentence, according toThe Death Penalty Worldwide 
<http://www.deathpenaltyworldwide.org/country-search-post.cfm?country=Nigeria>. 

Hussaina Ibrahim, a senior lawyer at the Kano branch of the International 
Federation of Women Lawyers (FIDA) <http://www.fidafederation.org/> who 
representing Tasi’u says the teenager has “no business” being on trial.

“We are against the trial. The whole process violates her fundamental rights. 
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child says she should be in education. 
She should be in school,” she says.

With no school in the village of Unguwar Yansoro, where she was born and 
raised, her parents argue they had little option but to marry her off as soon 
as possible. Zubeida Nagee, a women’s rights activist in Kano, told the 
Associated Press in October thatTasi’u had been forced into the marriage and 
had been the victim of systematic abuse 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/27/wasilat-tasiu-death-sentence_n_6233832.html>
.

On the night of her wedding, Ibrahim says Tasi’u told her she was taken at 
night to Sani’s house, where he proceeded to tie her to his bed and rape her. 
She was not freed until the following morning.

According to the charity Girls Not Brides, 39% of Nigerian girls are married 
before they turn 18 <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/child-marriage/nigeria/>. 
The organisation estimates that Nigeria has the third highest number of child 
brides in the world, with incidents particularly high in the Muslim majority 
north of the country.

Ibrahim has filed an action against the Nigerian government over the absence 
of education facilities in Tasi’u’s area. She argues that this state of affairs 
makes children vulnerable to falling into forced marriages.

As the only woman with a private legal practice in her state, and the first 
female to go to school in her area, Ibrahim knows all about the transformative 
capacity education can have on a girl’s life. She handles around 20 cases 
involving forced marriage each year, with the rest of her work dealing with 
everything from domestic abuse to child labour.

Threats and intimidation are a regular occurrence, either from angry 
defendants, or sympathisers with the notorious terror group, Boko Haram. She 
was recently attacked in the street, with thieves making off with her car and 
work bag.

“The way they were abusing me, I thought they were not usual criminals,” she 
recalls. “But you know these are the kind of things we have to go through.”

Ibrahim first met Tasi’u after hearing about her case in local media. She had 
already confessed to the crime and been interrogated by police.

“She was crying. So I just sat down with her and explained she should take it 
easy,” she remembers. “Then I took my daughter with me to see her, and they 
became friends.”

In recent weeks, despite Ibrahim’s best effort to hide the gravity of the 
situation from her, Tasi’u has become aware of the predicament she is in. She 
knows she could be sentenced to death, as difficult as that is for any child to 
comprehend. Despite urging from the judge,she was mute during her initial trial 
in October 
<http://www.thisdaylive.com/articles/drama-in-court-as-14-year-old-murder-suspect-goes-numb/192783/>
.

“She is an ordinary child, like my own daughter. I’m just looking at her as an 
ordinary child. She has the potential to become something, if she had an 
education. She is intelligent, you can tell from the way she answers 
questions,” says Ibrahim.

“She is scared now. Not as jovial as she was. She looks down. I’ve told her 
parents that they have to come more regularly. She needs her mother.”

Each day the teenager sees young offenders who are accused of minor offences 
come and go from her institution. She regularly asks Ibrahim when she will be 
able to go home.

The death sentence has been handed out in similar cases. Last year, Maimuna 
Abdulmumini, a teenager who was accused at the age of 13 of killing her adult 
husband by setting him alight as he sleptsaw her death sentence quashed in a 
regional court 
<https://www.crin.org/en/library/publications/nigeria-child-bride-dead-husband-and-long-battle>
. Though even after a six-year legal battle, Abdulmumini still faces an 
uncertain future.

Ibrahim has no doubt that with young girls desperate for a route out of forced 
marriages, there are hundreds of similar cases to Tasi’u’s inNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> today which are receiving no 
attention.

Applications to have the case heard in a juvenile court have so far fallen on 
deaf ears. In September last year, Nigerian senators failed to strike down a 
constitutional provision which meant thatchild brides could be considered 
adults in criminal trials <http://allafrica.com/stories/201309040944.html>.

Veronica Yates, director of Child Rights International Network 
<https://www.crin.org/en>, an organisation monitoring child marriage across the 
world said:

“The forced marriage of girls - and to a lesser extent boys - all too often by 
the very people who are supposed to protect them is not only unacceptable in 
international law, it is an affront to humanity.”

Read more stories like this: 

• FGM and child marriage: grandmothers are part of the problem and the solution
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/17/mothers-grandmothers-fgm-child-marriage>

• Ending child marriage: NGO hopes for the Girl Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/22/ending-child-marriage-ngo-girls-summit>


• Aids, pregnancy and the church: young Hondurans take a stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jun/11/honduras-hiv-teen-pregnancy-rates>


• Advertising feature: When is violence against girls going to stop? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/dec/11/when-is-violence-against-girls-going-to-stop>

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 