
During Tuesday night’s 126-121 win 
<http://www.charlotteobserver.com/sports/article122138219.html> over the 
Portland Trail Blazers, DeMarcus Cousins had one of the most DeMarcus Cousins 
games of all time. He poured in 55 points, snagged 13 rebounds, managed to get 
an ejection reversed and then ended the night by going on an anti-official rant 
before someone in charge wisely cut off his microphone. Over the course of a 
few hours, Cousins showed both why he was one of the best players in the league 
and why, despite that, the Kings need to strongly consider moving on from the 
talented but troubled big man.

It was a relatively ordinary game, box score excepted, until its closing 
minute when Cousins picked up his second technical foul of the night, and an 
automatic ejection, after spitting out his mouthpiece in the general direction 
of the Trail Blazers bench. The officials ended up rescinding the technical 
foul and the ejection after determining that the mouthpiece incident was 
accidental. The reversal wasn’t enough to prevent Cousins from calling them out 
immediately after the win.
Ben Golliver (@BenGolliver) 
PEAK BOOGIE: DeMarcus Cousins scores 54th point, spits mouthguard, gets 
ejected, sprints to locker room, gets un-ejected! (full sequence)
pic.twitter.com/kNQ7TRQCOs <https://t.co/kNQ7TRQCOs>
 <https://twitter.com/BenGolliver/status/811455199717912576> December 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BenGolliver/status/811455199717912576> 
“It’s ridiculous. It’s obvious what’s being done here. It’s a nightly basis. I 
hope the world can see what’s really going on out here,” Cousins said in an 
exchange that was eventually cut short before he could get himself into further 
trouble.
James Herbert (@outsidethenba) 
they cut his mic!! pic.twitter.com/lqIbYMVERv <https://t.co/lqIbYMVERv>
 <https://twitter.com/outsidethenba/status/811456526665809924> December 21, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/outsidethenba/status/811456526665809924> 
Further trouble, of course, is absolutely the last thing Cousins needs right 
now. Earlier in the day he wasfined 
<http://nba.nbcsports.com/2016/12/20/report-kings-fine-demarcus-cousins-50000/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
 $50,000 by the Kings and forced to issue an apology for the profane tirade he 
directed towards Sacramento Bee reporter Andy Furillo a few days earlier. 
Furillo drew his ire when he attempted to ask Cousins questions about the 
nightclub altercation he and teammate Matt Barnes were involved in earlier in 
the month.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQixvmP5hnk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQixvmP5hnk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQixvmP5hnk&media=>
 DeMarcus Cousins’s relationship with the local media in Sacramento summed up 
in two clips. 
Cousins will have to answer more questions about what happened in New York’s 
Avenue Nightclub on 5 December. Both he and Barnes aresubjects of a lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/kings-matt-barnes-demarcus-cousins-sued-alleged-nightclub-assault>
 issued by a couple who allege that Barnes assaulted her and that Cousins 
attacked her boyfriend when he attempted to intervene. This incident by itself 
would be enough to strain the relationship between the Kings and Cousins. That 
he has managed to make things even worse in its aftermath is downright 
troubling.


These, of course, are just the latest incidents for a player whose obvious 
skills are overshadowed by legitimate concerns about his attitude, maturity and 
game-to-game effort. While “coach-killer” is a label that gets thrown around 
far too often in the media, Cousins has earned that distinction. He’s already 
played for six head coaches since entering the league in 2010 and had a good 
relationship with exactly one of them: Mike Malone, who coached the team in 
2013-14.

Under Malone, Cousins was having what was then the best season of his career, 
he even showed flashes of maturation. Unfortunately, Cousins got hurt and the 
Kings slumped in his absence which gave owner Vivek Ranadive an excuse to fire 
Malone in one of the most short-sighted moves in franchise history. Malone’s 
eventual full-time replacement was the terminally old school George Karl, an 
all-time great coach but the worst possible fit considering the volatile 
situation. As nearly everyone predicted when Karl was hired, he and Cousins 
almost immediately got into a power struggle that ended with Karl’spremature 
dismissal 
<http://www.sacbee.com/sports/spt-columns-blogs/ailene-voisin/article74937347.html>
.

Not all of this is on Cousins. The Kings have been one of the most 
dysfunctional teams inUS sports <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/us-sport> 
for the entirety of Cousins’ career. Not even an overdue change in ownership, 
from the absentee landlords that were the Maloofs to Ranadive’s technocratic 
buffoonery, was able to change the culture for the better. It’s hard to imagine 
Cousins being stuck in a worse environment for those crucial early years of 
development.


 It certainly wasn’t a winning environment, that’s for certain. The last time 
the Kings made the playoffs was in 2006, four years before Cousins’ arrival. 
Even if Cousins were a Tim Duncan-like “perfect soldier”, and assuredly he is 
not and never will be, no amount of poise and leadership could have overcome 
his team’s inability to surround him with anything resembling a solid 
supporting cast. As of right now, Rudy Gay might end up being remembered as 
Cousins’s best teammate. That’s not a good thing.

Meanwhile, the Kings only have Cousins under contract until 2018. Unless they 
somehow manage to pull a Miami Heat and convince two Hall of Fame caliber 
players to join them, they won’t be much closer to championship contention than 
they are today. Theoretically, they could convince Cousins to sign an extension 
but that seems unlikely considering how untenable things have become for both 
parties. The wise move would be for Sacramento to finally move Cousins, and all 
his baggage, and start to rebuild again.

Since these are the Kings, however, there’s no reason to expect them to ever 
make the wise move. As much as it makes sense to move on from Cousins, right 
now it seems unlikely for several reasons. First of all, the Kings simply are 
not going to get fair value back for Cousins who, despite his off court issues, 
is averaging 29.3 points per game, good for fourth in the league, along with 
10.8 rebounds. He very well could be the best big man in theNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> this season.

Meanwhile, even though the Kings’ record is a lowly 11-17, that’s good enough 
to put them just two wins behind the Denver Nuggets for the eighth seed in the 
Western Conference. The Kings are still very much alive in their quest for 
their first playoff appearance in a decade. Unless they fall out of the hunt 
completely, which would shock no one, it will be hard for them to sell their 
already skeptical fan base on trading away their only all-star caliber player, 
and effectively punting away their chances of the postseason,unless they get a 
haul 
<http://www.basketballinsiders.com/nba-am-what-is-the-right-value-for-a-trade/> 
in return.

And they won’t get a haul. Even though Cousins might be having a breakout 
season, his trade value has never been lower. Already there are reports that 
rival GMsare against 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/news/nba-executives-are-reportedly-starting-to-get-cold-feet-about-trading-for-demarcus-cousins/>
 bringing in Cousins at any price, believing that he’s too big of a risk from 
both a locker room perspective and a PR perspective. The general feeling is 
that he could help take a team to the next level but he could also completely 
destroy it from the inside. While Sacramento could surely find teams willing to 
take the gamble, they would most likely be trading pennies on the dollar.


So even though he is doing everything he can to wear out his welcome in 
Sacramento, it’s likely that Cousins and the Kings are stuck at least for the 
time being. Maybe they deserve each other.
 