
For the past few years banking has been facing what former Barclays chief 
executive, Antony Jenkins, predicted would be its“Uber moment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/banking-facing-uber-moment-says-former-barclays-boss>
 as technological advances loosen providers’ grip on customers and their 
financial records.

If one moment could underline this fast-approaching technological reckoning, 
it was theannouncement 
<http://opendata.institute/news/uk-open-banking-working-group-publishes-report> 
on 8 February that the Open Banking Working Group is developing an industry 
standard to free customer data.

When the standard is launched, possibly next year, customers will be free to 
empower any financial services provider to access their accounts so applying 
for mortgages and loans will not mean photocopying bank statements.

They will also be able to move banks and take their data with them as easily 
as if they were switching their telephone or gas provider. A single view of all 
their finances will be pooled from different organisations into one dashboard, 
where income and expenditure can be examined and impartial money-saving 
recommendations offered.

In fact, this is already starting to happen and one of the early beneficiaries 
will be the startups behind personal finance management apps. Often dubbed 
“screen scrapers” in the banking world, they offer customers a single view of 
multiple accounts with different providers on one screen.

Why open data doesn't mean open government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/dec/02/china-russia-open-data-open-government>
Steve Tigar, chief executive of Money Dashboard 
<https://www.moneydashboard.com/>, says this is currently done against the 
wishes of customers’ banks, but when the high street names are on board with a 
secure open banking standard, it will revolutionise how people manage their 
finances.

“The banks have been warning against services like ours for several years 
because they don’t like us allowing their customers to pool together their 
finances in one service, through which we can offer advice that doesn’t come 
from the bank itself,” Tigar says.

“They’re now seeing that they can’t hold this back. They realise there is a 
service to be offered in providing a view of someone’s finances, showing where 
their money is going and how they could make better use of it. Moving forward, 
open banking will free up so much data that we’ll be able to suggest bank 
accounts where people would get a better deal. It would even allow us to 
suggest which energy or broadband tariffs they should sign up for and where 
they should shop for their groceries.”

The other beneficiary of open data will be any bank that is looking to tempt 
customers away from their normal banking arrangements. That could mean high 
street banks, building societies and challenger banks luring customers with new 
current accounts, saving deals and mortgages.

According to Sophie Guibaud, vice-president of European expansion at German 
bankFidor <https://www.fidorbank.uk/>, which recently launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/21/german-bank-fidor-current-account-debit-card>
 in the UK, the opportunity is massive.


“It’s going to make it a lot easier to switch banks because you’ll be able to 
take your data with you,” she says. “It also means a new bank will know a lot 
more about you. That’ll make it a lot easier to apply for a loan, a credit card 
or mortgage with another provider rather than relying on endless form-filling 
and photocopying bank statements.”

As far as the high street banking industry is concerned, there is no reason 
why the established names cannot be among those leading the charge to open 
banking. Matt Hammerstein, co-chair of the OpenBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Working Group and head of client 
and customer experience at Barclays, admits that some banks have resisted 
change, but insists that all are now focussed on an open banking standard 
because it will allow them to offer more value-added services.

OpenAI won't benefit humanity without data-sharing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/dec/14/openai-benefit-humanity-data-sharing-elon-musk-peter-thiel>
“It’s fair to say banks have been working at different speeds on this but open 
data is happening and we’re better off leading and being proactive than just 
following and being reactive,” Hammerstein says.

“Customers already release their banking information, whether it’s through 
photocopied statements or Excel files, so we just need to make it easier for 
them to do it properly and safely. The bonus for us is that we will be able to 
process applications a lot quicker and efficiently, and we’ll also be able to 
offer value-added services, such as financial services recommendations that are 
better suited to a customer’s financial position.”

Banking customers should be excited that the big names in financial services 
have moved from a position of seemingly dragging their heels to encouraging an 
open banking standard, according to Gavin Starks, chief executive of theOpen 
Data Institute <http://theodi.org/> and also co-chair of the Open Banking 
Working Group. He believes the industry will change at breakneck speed.

“It’s good for banks because they can save costs on administration but it’s 
also great for consumers because they are going to be far better placed to find 
products that suit them best because an aggregator they trust will be able to 
have full access to their entire financial position,” he says.

“Access to the vast array of services on offer is going to be a lot easier and 
applying for products and switching is going to have most of the friction taken 
out it – anyone who’s had to apply for a mortgage will know how excruciating 
the process is. This is bringing banking into the 21st century, so it’s going 
to be interesting to see who the pioneers and which laggards get left behind.”

Much work still needs to be done on the standard, particularly around the 
informed consent its proposers vow it will adhere to. This means telling 
consumers explicitly who will have access to which parts of their data and for 
what purpose. Those working on the standard are also committed to setting up an 
independent body that will certify which organisations are trustworthy enough 
to receive a person’s banking data and handle it securely, respecting their 
right to privacy.

Nevertheless, both Hammerstein and Starks agree that next year the technology 
will be in place to allow customers to take their data with them when they 
switch bank. This will be the first move in paving the way for an open banking 
transformation of the industry.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 