
An Israeli embassy official has been caught on camera in an undercover sting 
plotting to “take down” MPs regarded as hostile, including foreign office 
minister Sir Alan Duncan, an outspoken supporter of a Palestinian state.

In an extraordinary breach of diplomatic protocol, Shai Masot, who describes 
himself as an officer in theIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> 
Defence Forces and is serving as a senior political officer at the London 
embassy, was recorded by an ­undercover reporter from al-Jazeera’s 
investigative unit speaking about a number of British MPs.

The Israeli ambassador, Mark Regev, apologised to Duncan on Friday. An Israeli 
spokesman said Regev made clear that “the embassy considered the remarks 
completely ­unacceptable”.

The Israeli embassy said Masot “will be ending his term of employment with the 
embassy shortly”. Masot declined to comment or to elaborate on what he meant 
when he said he wanted to “take down” a number of MPs.

Masot had been speaking to Maria Strizzolo, a civil servant who was formerly 
an aide to another Conservative minister. Also present was a man they knew as 
Robin, whom they believed to be working for Labour Friends of Israel, a 
pressure group. In fact, Robin was an undercover reporter.

Strizzolo, discussing with Masot how to discredit MPs, said: “Well, you know, 
if you look hard enough, I’m sure that there is something that they’re trying 
to hide.” Later she added: “A little scandal, maybe.”

During the conversation, in October, Strizzolo boasted that she had helped to 
secure a promotion for her boss, the Conservative MP Robert Halfon. She had 
been his chief of staff when he was deputy chair of the Conservative party. 
Last year Halfon was appointed as an education minister and Strizzolo was 
appointed as a senior manager at the Skills Funding Agency. She continues to 
work part-time for Halfon.

In the footage, Masot agreed that Strizzolo had assisted Halfon and then asked 
whether she could also achieve the opposite effect. “Can I give you some MPs 
that I would suggest you would take down?” he asked. He went on to say that she 
knew which MPs he was referring to.

She asked him to remind her. “The deputy foreign minister,” he said. Strizzolo 
said: “You still want to go for it?” Masot’s reply is ambiguous but he said 
Duncan was still causing problems. Strizzolo asked: “I thought we had, you 
know, neutralised him just a little bit, no?” Masot answered: “No.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd25315936f4ded14b16dcd46624dafdf3e748e2%2F315_220_3785_2271%2F3785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20diplomat%20caught%20on%20camera%20plotting%20to%20'take%20down'%20UK%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20diplomat%20caught%20on%20camera%20plotting%20to%20%27take%20down%27%20UK%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd25315936f4ded14b16dcd46624dafdf3e748e2%2F315_220_3785_2271%2F3785.jpg>
 Foreign minister Sir Alan Duncan, who is an outspoken supporter of a 
Palestinian statehood. Photograph: Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP/Getty Images 
Masot did not elaborate on what he meant by “take down”, but it is normally 
used as meaning to engineer a downfall, possibly through discrediting them in 
some way.

The conversation then turned to the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson. 
Strizzolo said he was solid on Israel. Masot agreed, adding that Johnson just 
did not care. “You know he is an idiot …” Masot said.

Strizzolo returned to the subject of Duncan later in the conversation, 
suggesting he had had a run-in with Halfon in the past and that Halfon had 
reported Duncan to the whips. So never say never, she added. Masot replied: 
“Never say never, yeah, but …” Strizzolo said: “A little scandal, maybe.”


Other prominent Conservatives named during the conversation include Crispin 
Blunt, chair of the Commons foreign affairs select committee, who is also a 
vocal supporter of the Palestinians.


Blunt said: “Whilst this apparent activity of a diplomat of a foreign state in 
the politics of the United Kingdom is formally outrageous and deserving of 
investigation, the real questions should be for the state of Israel itself. 
Israel’s future peace and security is not being served by ignoring the 
substantial peace lobby in both Israel and the world wide Jewish community and 
working to undermine those foreign politicians who share that perspective”

In another conversation, Masot agreed that Blunt was among MPs that were 
“strongly pro-Arab rather than pro-Israel”. Strizzolo referred to him being on 
a “hitlist”.

UK ministers are understood to regard such plot talks as a matter of serious 
concern, crossing the line beyond normal diplomatic activity. Duncan declined 
to comment.

Although the Israeli embassy insists Masot was a junior embassy official and 
not a diplomat, his business card describes him as “a senior political officer” 
and his LinkedIn page lists him as having worked for the embassy since November 
2014. He describes his work as being the chief point of contact between the 
embassy and MPs and liaising with ministers and officials at the Foreign Office.

He also describes himself as having been a major in the Israeli Defence Forces 
(IDF) between 2004 and 2011 – serving part of that time on a patrol boat off 
Gaza – and still employed by the IDF as deputy head of the international 
organisations sector.


The disclosures comes at a sensitive moment, just over a week after Theresa 
May put herself at odds with the Obama administration by expressing strong 
support for Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 in a row over the expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank.

The sting operation, which began in June and ran through to November last 
year, recorded conversations on a number of occasions that include a wide range 
of pro-Israeli activists as well as British politicians and Israeli embassy 
staff.

The recordings form the basis of four half-hour documentaries that al-Jazeera 
is to broadcast from 15 January.


Strizzolo sought to play down what had been discussed. Asked a series of 
questions by the Guardian, she issued a statement that said: “The implications 
the Guardian is seeking to draw from a few out-of-context snippets of a 
conversation, obtained by subterfuge, over a social dinner are absurd.

“The context of the conversation was light, tongue-in-cheek and gossipy. Any 
suggestion that I, as a civil servant working in education, could ever exert 
the type of influence you are suggesting is risible. Shai Masot is someone I 
know purely socially and as a friend. He is not someone with whom I have ever 
worked or had any political dealings beyond chatting about politics, as 
millions of people do, in a social context.”


A Foreign Office spokesman said: “The Israeli ambassador has apologised and is 
clear these comments do not reflect the views of the embassy or government of 
Israel. The UK has a strong relationship with Israel and we consider the matter 
closed.”
 