
An Israeli embassy official who plotted to “take down” MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
 regarded as hostile has also set up a number of political organisations in the 
UK that operated as though entirely independent.

Shai Masot was filmed covertly as he boasted about establishing several 
groups, at least one of which was intended to influenceLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party policy, while appearing to 
obscure their links to Israel.

The disclosure comes as Labour demanded the government launch an immediate 
inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/labour-calls-for-inquiry-into-israeli-diplomats-take-down-mps-plot>
 into “improper interference in our democratic politics”. A former Tory 
government minister also called for an inquiry into the Israeli embassy’s links 
with two organisations, Conservative Friends of Israel (CFI) and Labour Friends 
of Israel (LFI).

Meanwhile, Masot is being sent back to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in disgrace, and a civil servant and 
Conservative official who was also filmed discussing ways to discredit MPs has 
resigned from her post.

Masot and Maria Strizzolo, a manager with the Skills Funding Agency and aide 
to Robert Halfon, an education minister, were filmed by a man they knew as 
Robin, who they believed to be an LFI activist but who was actually an 
undercover reporter with al-Jazeera’s investigative unit.

Among the MPs that Masot and Strizzolo discussed “taking down” was Sir Alan 
Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/why-might-an-israeli-diplomat-believe-alan-duncan-needs-taking-down>
, a foreign minister and a vocal supporter of a Palestinian state.

In the latest recordings, Masot boasts of establishing organisations “in 
Israel and here [in the UK]”. When asked what he means, the Israeli official 
replies: “Nothing I can share, but yeah,” adding: “Yeah, because there are 
things that, you know, happen, but it’s good to leave those organisations 
independent. But we help them, actually.”

LFI and CFI are established organisations, founded in the 1950s and 1970s 
respectively to support Israel and combat antisemitism. The footage taken by 
al-Jazeera shows Masot wanted Robin to head up a new organisation, Young Labour 
Friends of Israel.


At a meeting last July, Masot explains that he had the idea for a group called 
Young Conservative Friends of Israel in 2015, and wanted to set up a Young 
Labour Friends of Israel at that time. “When I tried to do the same in Labour 
they had a crisis back then with Corbyn. So instead of that I took a delegation 
to Israel … I took aFabians <http://www.fabians.org.uk/> group to Israel,” he 
says.

Masot also says in the footage of that meeting that he does not wish to see 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> win the 
leadership contest with Owen Smith. During another meeting, he describes Corbyn 
as “a crazy leader”.

Why might an Israeli diplomat believe Alan Duncan needs 'taking down'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/why-might-an-israeli-diplomat-believe-alan-duncan-needs-taking-down>
 “I would prefer that the party will not stay with Corbyn,” he says. Referring 
to a number of Labour MPs who had recently visited the West Bank, he adds: 
“Some of them are against Corbyn, so who knows?”

Masot advised Robin that he should launch the Young Labour Friends of Israel 
by first organising a reception, and then setting up an email list. LFI needs 
to be rejuvenated by a new youth group, he adds.

“Not a lot of young people want to be affiliated. For years, every MP that 
joined the parliament joined the LFI. They’re not doing it any more in the 
Labour party. CFI, they’re doing it automatically. All the 14 new MPs who got 
elected in the last elections did it automatically. In the LFI it didn’t 
happen. We need to get more people on board. It’s a lot of work, actually.”

At a meeting the following month, Masot suggests Robin might want to be 
chairman of the group he is establishing. He also says Robin should not tell 
other people that the embassy has established the group. “LFI is an independent 
organisation. No one likes that someone is managing his organisation. That 
really is the first rule in politics.”

In September, while on a train to Liverpool for the Labour conference, Masot 
tells Robin he is also establishing a group called City Friends of Israel. Once 
in Liverpool, the footage shows Masot introducing Robin at conference social 
events as the “Young LFI chairman”.

The disclosure that Masot was also attempting to influence Labour affairs by 
establishing new political groups is likely to enrage the party’s leaders, who 
have already characterised the threat to “take down” MPs as a serious national 
security issue.

The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry>, said: “The exposure of 
an Israeli embassy official discussing how to bring down or discredit a 
government minister and other MPs because of their views on the Middle East is 
extremely disturbing.

“This is a national security issue. The embassy official involved should be 
withdrawn and the government should launch an immediate inquiry into the extent 
of this improper interference and demand from the Israeli government that it be 
brought to an end.”

One former minister in David Cameron’s government said the embassy’s efforts 
to exert improper influence on British public life went far further than any 
plot to “take down” unhelpful members of parliament.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-official-shai-masot-discredit-uk-mps-undercover-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20official%20discusses%20how%20to%20discredit%20UK%20MPs%20in%20undercover%20footage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-official-shai-masot-discredit-uk-mps-undercover-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20official%20discusses%20how%20to%20discredit%20UK%20MPs%20in%20undercover%20footage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fisraeli-official-shai-masot-discredit-uk-mps-undercover-video&media=>
Israeli official discusses how to discredit UK MPs in undercover footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/07/israeli-official-shai-masot-discredit-uk-mps-undercover-video>
Writing anonymously in the Mail on Sunday, the former minister said: “British 
foreign policy is in hock to Israeli influence at the heart of our politics, 
and those in authority have ignored what is going on.

“For years the CFI and LFI have worked with – even for – the Israeli embassy 
to promote Israeli policy and thwart UK government policy and the actions of 
ministers who try to defend Palestinian rights.”

 The former minister said there needed to be a full inquiry into the Israeli 
embassy’s links with CFI and LFI, and that while political parties should 
welcome funding from the UK’s Jewish community, they should not accept any 
engagement linked to Israel until it ceases new developments on Palestinian 
land.

“This opaque funding and underhand conduct is a national disgrace and 
humiliation and must be stamped out,” he wrote.

After an apology from the Israeli ambassador to the UK, Mark Regev, the 
British government said it considered the matter closed. However, Alex Salmond, 
the Scottish National party’s foreign affairs spokesman, said this position was 
not acceptable.

“I would expect the UK government to fully investigate this matter so that we 
can be confident our elected officials are free to carry out their jobs to the 
best of their ability and without fear of having their reputation smeared by 
embassy officials who do not agree with their views.”

Masot’s precise role at the embassy is unclear. He is known to be a former 
officer in the Israeli navy and is thought to remain an employee of the Israeli 
defence ministry. His embassy business card describes him as a senior political 
officer, but the embassy says he is not a diplomat.

In his LinkedIn profile, Masot says his work includes “founding several 
political support groups in the UK to maximise the Israeli ‘firewall’”. He also 
says he helped to secure “adjustments to legislation” in the UK.

Former diplomats said Masot was highly unlikely to be operating without 
authority. Sir William Patey, a former British ambassador to Saudi Arabia, 
Iraq, Afghanistan and Sudan, said: “The idea that he would be operating on his 
own I find fanciful. We know there is a lobby in this country that seeks to 
portray in the best possible light and seeks to isolate and denigrate critics 
of Israeli policy.”

A senior Conservative said: “No MP who has taken an active interest in the 
affairs of the Middle East, not least the central issue of the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, will be unaware of the strength of the Israeli 
lobby. Like Israel itself they are powerful and effective and sail pretty close 
to the line of what is normally acceptable.”
 