
For those who enjoy historical parallels, there was something particularly 
irresistible about the news in 2013 that the world’s deepest underwater railway 
tunnel linking Europe and Asia through the Bosphorus had opened beneath 
Istanbul. The record-breaking continental connection recalledHerodotus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/03/herodotus-charlotte-higgins>’s 
description, two-and-a-half millennia earlier, of the Persian emperor Darius I 
ordering the construction of a mile-long pontoon bridge across the water 
sometime around 513BC, the first literary reference to the city and an act of 
imperial hubris that would, inevitably, result in the nemesis of the Persian 
wars and defeat at the hands of the Greeks.

It is difficult to imagine the Turkish prime minister being gripped by such 
parallels.Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, a former mayor of 
Istanbul, instead made disparaging comments about the long delays to the tunnel 
caused by “clay pots” and “other stuff”, such stuff including the largest 
remains of a Byzantine fleet ever discovered, among other important 
archaeological findings. The modern Islamist is not generally known for his 
interest in non-Islamic history.

Fortunately for today’s readers, the historian and broadcaster Bettany Hughes 
has a rather broader outlook, sufficiently wide to encompass everything from 
the earliest spear-carrying bronze age inhabitants to marauding ancient Greeks, 
Christian-slaughtering Roman emperors, pious Byzantine ascetics, 
world-conquering Ottomans and hatchet-faced 20th-century nationalists. She 
populates her three cities of Byzantium, Constantinople and Istanbul with a 
rich and dizzying cast of ordinary and extraordinary men and women.

This is historical narrative brimming with brio and incident. Hughes’s 
portraits are written with a zesty flourish. The Athenian general, chancer and 
turncoat rogueAlcibiades <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alcibiades> of the 
fifth century BC is “feckless, over-sexed, immoderate, dazzling, raffish, 
louche”, remembered among other things for starting the regrettable trend of 
“peeing into a pot while still at dinner”. The chapter on eunuchs – “Sex and 
the City” – was, for this male reader, by turns captivating, dispiriting and 
wince-inducing. Eunuchs roved far and wide beyond the narrow confines of palace 
slavery. They could be famous soldiers, fabulously wealthy art collectors, 
devout monks and, not least, patriarch leaders of the Orthodox church, 
guardians of the city’s spiritual DNA.

Given the landmark prominence of 1453 as a date in the city’s history that, 
depending on your perspective, lives on either in fame or infamy, it is a 
surprise that the calamitous fall (for Christians) or glorious conquest (for 
Muslims) of Constantinople in that year is dealt with relatively briefly. This 
is one of the great oppositional set-pieces in its tumultuous history and one 
might expect Hughes to go to town on the confrontation between the youthful 
Ottoman sultanMehmed II <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mehmed_the_Conqueror> 
and the last Byzantine emperor,Constantine XI Palaiologos 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantine_XI_Palaiologos>.

The grandest and richest city in Europe from the middle of the fifth century 
to the beginning of the 13th, the successor to Rome as imperial capital from 
the age of Constantine, a source of pride for Christians of the Byzantine 
empire – Constantinople had long attracted covetous Muslim eyes.
 Traditional houses in the Balat district of Istanbul. Photograph: Alamy 
For Turks to this day, the iconic image of 1453 is the triumphant entry on 
horseback of Mehmed – from this moment basking in the sobriquetfatih: “the 
conqueror” – through the corpse-strewn Charisus Gate. He is invariably pictured 
striking a pose of indomitable power, raising aloft his crescent-topped 
standard with its green banner ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>
, towering above his turbaned officers who crowd around him on foot. Smoke 
rises from the battlefield behind him, partly obscured by a forest of lances, 
turbans and red and green banners. The vigour of Mehmed and his warriors is an 
obvious counterpoint to the pile of lifeless bodies, symbol of Islam’s victory 
over the infidels. For Halil İnalcık, Turkey’s greatest Ottoman historian, this 
was “conquest as an act of faith”, the long awaited, divinely ordained 
fulfilment of the hadiths, or sayings of the Prophet Muhammad, foretelling the 
fall of Constantinople to the faithful.

For those God-fearing Byzantines of Constantinople who did not meet their 
maker at the sharp end of an Ottoman sword, the fall of “the City of the 
World’s Desire” – often just “the City” – and the great basilica of Hagia 
Sophia after 1123 years of Christian worship was nothing less than the end of 
the world. Yet as Edward Gibbon presciently remarked in the 18th century, the 
demise of a once world-illuminating empire was not even the end of the city: 
“the genius of the place will ever triumph over the accidents of time and 
fortune”. The “new Rome” and the “new Jerusalem” would live on.

Mehmed’s brilliant conquest of a city that had resisted 12 Muslim sieges 
kick-started the world-changing Ottoman empire

Mehmed’s ruthless and brilliant conquest of a city that had resisted 12 Muslim 
sieges over nine centuries kick-started the world-changing Ottoman empire, 
which for the next five centuries wrote its destiny across the Middle East, 
north Africa and through the Balkans, right up to the gates of Vienna, with 
Istanbul as its dazzling Islamic capital throughout. It was the realisation of
Osman <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osman_I>’s famous dream in which the 
14th-century founder of the Ottoman empire, a shadowy Turkoman tribal leader, 
had seen the city as “a diamond mounted between two sapphires and two emeralds 
… the precious stone in the ring of a vast dominion which embraced the entire 
world”.

As for Byzantium, it flickered on in a fading afterlife in the Peloponnesian 
town of Mystras, beneath the sunburnt crags of Mount Taygetus. Today it is a 
ghost town attracting tourists, pilgrims and scholars such as Hughes, who 
summons up the spirit of the place with a few typically evocative lines. 
“Frescoes appear out of the dusk, unlikely survivors among the ruins. At dawn 
the mist can be so thick that there is no other world; cold air falls off the 
mountain. Martins in the palm trees squabble over the news of the day.”

Greeks and philhellenes may still mourn the transformation of Christian 
Constantinople into Muslim Istanbul (“Istanbul was Constantinople, now it’s 
Istanbul not Constantinople” as the Jimmy Kennedy and Nat Simon song went in 
1953) but the city long remained a bastion of metropolitan cosmopolitanism. 
Expelled from Granada in 1492, the Camondo family of Sephardic Jews arrived in 
Istanbul in 1798 and wasted little time in establishing a business dynasty that 
came to be known as “the Rothschilds of the east”. By the 1860s, having helped 
finance the Bosphorus steam ferries and tramways, they had become the largest 
landowners in the city. It was the Nazis of Germany, not Ottoman Muslims, who 
wiped out the last of the family: in Auschwitz.

And it was the modernising Mustafa Kemal 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/ataturk_kemal.shtml> – Atatürk, 
father of the Turks – who wiped out the 470-year-old caliphate, bundling off 
the last sultan and caliph, Abdülmecid II, into exile on a midnight train to 
Switzerland on 4 March 1924, having moved the new republic’s capital from 
Istanbul to Ankara a year earlier. The once great Ottoman empire had collapsed 
and been dismembered. “Peace abroad, peace at home” was to be the mantra of the 
new state.
 A boy is wrapped in a Mustafa Kemal flag following the failed coup in July 
2016. Photograph: Daniel Mihailescu/AFP/Getty Images 
If Turkey’s latest drift into Islamist authoritarianism is dispiriting for 
many, one can perhaps take solace in the thought that Istanbul has survived 
successions of tyrants great and small for many centuries, and will surely live 
on as one of the world’s pre-eminent cities for many more. A rich strand of 
metropolitan disdain for their rulers seems hardwired into Istanbullus’ spirit. 
The 13th-century chronicler Niketas Choniates remarked of this “populace of the 
marketplace” that “their indifference to the rulers is preserved in them as if 
it were inborn”.

If it is stretching it a bit to call Istanbul the “Rosetta stone for 
international affairs” in the 21st century, the city’s fortunes remain 
inextricably connected to frontline global issues, from the role of Turkey in 
the European Union to Russian expansion, the future of Syria and Iraq and 
conflict in the holy land. However narrow the politics around it, this 
bridgehead between two continents, ringed by Yeats’s “dolphin-torn 
… gong-tormented sea”, is inherently outward-looking and dynamic, its character 
determined as much by its unique geography as its enthralling history. 
Sprawling across 100 miles, teeming with a population of around 16 million, the 
“queen of cities” can still strut her stuff with the best of them.

One wonders whom Hughes could possibly be thinking of in 10 Downing Street and 
the White House when she concludes that “to know Istanbul is to know what it is 
to be cosmopolitan – this is a city that reminds us that we are, indeed, 
citizens of the world”. Istanbul is a visceral, pulsating city. In Bettany 
Hughes’s life-filled and life-affirming history, steeped in romance and written 
with verve, it has found a sympathetic and engaging champion.

• Justin Marozzi’s Baghdad: City of Peace, City of Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/15/baghdad-city-of-peace-blood-review-justin-marozzi-sublime-horror>
 is published by Penguin.Istanbul: A Tale of Three Cities is published by 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson. To order a copy for £25 (RRP £19.99) 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/istanbul-460416.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 