Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpbUXsMunVbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpbUXsMunVbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpbUXsMunVbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Nostalgia used to be saved for special occasions. Now it's a neverending 
business – and not just in the west. Russian blockbuster season opened on New 
Year's Eve – which, as the start of the winter holidays, is a far more 
significant deal in that country – and the most important release window of the 
year for local films is being lined up as the perfect opportunity to get 
audiences harking back. Top of the pile of this year's releases is a remake of 
1971 comedyDzhentlmeny Udachi (Gentlemen of Fortune) 
<http://youtu.be/pw0D_ctints>, one of a mini-oeuvre of classic Soviet-era films 
<http://rbth.ru/articles/2012/12/27/a_russian_guide_to_best_new_yaers_movies_21537.html>
 that, over the years, have become required misty-eyed viewing over the herring 
salad and vodka.

Paid-up reminiscers have Bazelevs <http://www.bazelevs.ru/> – the production 
company run byTimur Bekmambetov <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0067457/> (Wanted; 
Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter) – to thank. They've run up form in the 
nostalgia-film stakes: at the close of 2007, they released their sequel to
Ironiya Sudby (Irony of Fate) 
<http://ruslovo.blogspot.co.uk/2010/12/russian-most-popular-new-year-movie.html>
, the beloved 1976 TV film with the same Yule cool asIt's a Wonderful Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36171/it-s-a-wonderful-life> holds for 
western audiences. The remake did what Terminator 2 did to Terminator: retraced 
over the original plot – in which a Moscow doctor gets blind-drunk on New 
Year's Eve and accidentally ends up at an identical address in St Petersburg – 
with some contemporary embellishments. But the memento factor worked wonders 
for Bazelevs: Ironiya Sudby 2, with a $50m domestic take,became by far the most 
successful Russian film ever 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/intl/?page=&country=LT&id=_fIRONIYASUDBYILI01>.

Bazelevs are hoping for a repeat with Dzhentlmeny, Udachi! (the new one seems 
to have acquired some excitable punctuation); the original, with 65m admissions 
first time round, has similar affection-reserves as Ironiya Sudby. Bekmambetov 
is only producing, but his team have a harder renovation job on their hands: 
the film, about a kindergarten teacher asked to infiltrate a gang of thieves 
who've stolen a helmet once belonging to Alexander the Great, is much more 
dated. Ironiya Sudby builds into a winningly wry take on relationships and 
ageing influenced by screwball comedy as well as older Russian literary 
traditions, but starts out foremost as a sly satire on identikit Soviet 
architecture and lifestyles; Dzhentlmeny Udachi, with its schooly 
finger-wagging about the criminal lifestyle, feels much more like something 
scripted by the Politburo (though both were produced byMosfilm 
<http://www.cinema.mosfilm.ru/MainPage.aspx?AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1>, the 
former national film studio).

The new Dzhentlmeny, Udachi! trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pbUXsMunVbc> suggests it's added a global 
dimension: the prison where the teacher meets his associates seems to have been 
switched to the Middle East, and the glimpse of the burqa-clad gang in the 
Russian snow could mean an edgy Baron Cohen-style piece of culture-hacking. But 
the real trick to pull off would be an update that meaningfully reflects on the 
nostalgia factor in play here for Russian audiences, and the gulf between 
Soviet and capitalist generations. Despite the mountainous box office, Ironiya 
Sudby 2 didn't make that breakthrough. It lacked most of the philosophical 
charm of the first film, and Bekmambetov's typical nitro-charged style did a 
bit of a hit-and-run on any poignant statement it could have made on 
relationship pressures in Putin's accelerating, on-the-make new Russia.

Given how faded the original seems, perhaps there's more room to stamp a mark 
on Dzhentlmeny Udachi. And Bazelevs needs to: its level of success could have 
implications for the commercial Russian industry. It's an increasingly 
Hollywood-dominated market, with the share for domestic films due todrop from 
15.9% in 2011 to 13.8% in 2012 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/russian-box-office-reach-13-406078>. My 
hope that the 2012 New Year's/early January rally for local films would be 
sustained throughout the yeardidn't come to pass 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/jan/17/russians-coming-2012-film> 
– there seems to be a bit of an imagination vacuum outside of the winter 
release slot. Whether polishing up another hallowed chunk of classic culture 
qualifies as the remedy is debatable, but Dzhentlmeny, Udachi! should at least 
indicate how high the high-water mark currently is for local films. Nostalgia 
is one half of the Janus equation, but it's customary to see in the New Year 
with a dose of apprehension, too.
 