
For most of its history, Hollywood has been all over the skyscraper like a 
colossal gorilla with a fistful of starlet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CuRQH_hLcTw>: helicopter shots gliding over 
teetering architecture are part of the long-established blueprint for 
high-octane cinema. In the UK, we've been slower to build tall, and as befits 
our world-famous self-deprecation we're slower to cinematically brag about 
skyscrapers once they're up: the likes ofOne Canada Square 
<http://www.canarywharf.com/workwithus/The-Estate/One-Canada-Square> and 30 St 
Mary Axe <http://www.30stmaryaxe.info> normally appear hazily in the background 
of the drab streets and precincts where our films feel more comfortable 
unfolding.

That's about to change. Three new films focus on the elevated London skyline 
of the past 15 years; the capital is about to have its pop-culture coronation 
as a blinged-up 21st-century global metropolis.The Shard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/the-shard> has its first feature-film 
closeup in Eran Creevy's crime thrillerWelcome to the Punch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150232/welcome-to-the-punch>, which also 
cloaks Canary Wharf's South Colonnade in pristine gun-metal silvers and 
computer-blues.Trance <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92543/trance>, 
Danny Boyle's art-heist noir, shares the hard-on for the steel-and-glass 
environments that are the wallpaper of the Blair years: it gazes longingly at 
the Wharf from James McAvoy's penthouse windows and loiters around the 
Docklands Light Railway, shot futuristically to look like something out of
Metropolis <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75782/metropolis>, rather than 
Mudchute <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mudchute>.

Finally, in May, there's Star Trek Into Darkness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150829/star-trek-into-darkness>, in which 
–judging by the trailers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/dec/06/star-trek-into-darkness-benedict-cumberbatch-trailer-video>
 – 23rd-century London has completed the transition to high-rise, and St Paul's 
Cathedral is dwarfed by a thicket of signature-silhouette towers. The Shard, 
the Gherkin, theRazor <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strata_SE1> and the like 
are a breed of building that could only have emerged from computers, so the JJ 
Abrams CGI tribute to our era of construction is fitting (and even more 
fittingly, none of it was filmed for real in the capital).

The new, coruscant London has attracted surprisingly little direct attention 
from film-makers up to now: it's mostly been used to double for futuristic 
interiors (the Lloyds building inCode 46 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/99472/code.46>) and exteriors (in the 
first two Chris Nolan Batmans) for other cities. The demise of the Smoke was 
prophesied by Bob Hoskins – 19th-century Tower bridge receding into the 
background as his barge full of property developers heads off to Docklands – in 
his"hands across the ocean" speech <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1jX2YoCBafc> 
in 1980's The Long Good Friday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36322/long.good.friday>. Nearly two 
decades of redevelopment later, Pierce Brosnan's Bond took a tour of the area 
by speedboat in 1999'sThe World Is Not Enough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77522/world.is.not.enough>; five years 
on, and a pre-007 Daniel Craig was dangled off an unfinished1 West India Quay 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1_West_India_Quay> in Layer Cake 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102302/layer.cake>, all the better to add 
vertiginous texture to the story, in which the property-dealing and investment 
world intersected with the drugs trade.

Welcome to the Punch and Trance are movies for the post-credit crunch 
comedown, fully immersed in the capitalist nightmare. They peer at the glass 
facades, and a leering expression looks back. With the Duracell-bunny energy 
that produced the optimistic outpouring of theOlympics opening ceremony  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/dec/05/olympic-opening-ceremony-2012-highlight>
 for London, Danny Boyle careers around after the money that propels the town 
in Trance: to Knightsbridge as £27.5m is splashed out on a rare painting at 
auction; then east, to the hinterlands of global money, for a blur of 
interrogations, fugues and sweaty trysts in upscale apartments and nightclubs 
as the big boys hunt the vanished goods – with a little help from Rosario 
Dawson's hypnotherapist. The work? Goya'sWitches in the Air 
<http://www.wikipaintings.org/en/francisco-goya/witches-in-the-air-1798>, in 
which a man cowers under a sheet beneath a circle of levitating she-witches. Is 
Boyle passing comment on the testosterone stampede after wealth, and the 
unconscious motivations, in the new London?

Creevy's film, meanwhile, is halfway to signing on the dotted line for the 
dream. Welcome to the Punch is in love with the immaculate surfaces and 
aluminium detailing of finance-land; it has bought into all the haughty 
grandeur and hubris of the Michael Mann andHong Kong films 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/98554/infernal.affairs> that inspired it. 
If London – like most aspirational global cities – is telling itself that 
America's oversize architectural togs fit, then Welcome to the Punch is also 
desperate to live up to its models. Its characters seem, unconvincingly, 
weighed by attitudes from grander movies, such as McAvoy's cop's obsession with 
netting the one that got away, andMark Strong 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0835016/>'s soulful armed robber. Answering most 
questions in the film with a burst of automatic-weapon fire, Creevy patently 
has a bad case of US-style gun love. It comes very close to endorsing the 
argument that we need more firearms in police hands to combat urban threat. 
It's drowning in the paranoid capitalist logic of the age – don't solve 
problems, make money out of them – that gave us gated developments and 
subprime. It never breaks free of the gleaming secured spaces to find its own 
perspective on the remade capital city.

So these two new surveys of the mentality behind London's growth spurt aren't 
exactly positive. But it's a sign of the times that the imposing face of the 
global capital-hyped metropolis is now starting to strut its stuff in 
widescreen. One of the City's traditional historical strengths was that it 
operated discreetly, avoiding scrutiny; perhaps one reason why it has appeared 
so infrequently on film. I reckon that policy will go out of the window in the 
global era, and the Shard and other skyscraping strongholds will see more and 
more PR cameos on the big screen. If that means showcasing the murky dealings 
behind the glass, then it never hurt business in America when Hollywood amped 
up its myth from the 50th floor viewing gallery. Being frightened of the fall 
is part of the game.

• Welcome to the Punch is out now; Trance is out on 27 March; Star Trek Into 
Darkness is out on 9 May.

• Next week's After Hollywood will focus on how Lusophone 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lusophone> cinema is going back to the colonies. 
What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let 
us know in the comments below.
 