
Has pop music finally gone truly conservative ? What’s happened to the daring, 
the dressing-up, the teenage rebellion, the sheer drama and theatre of our 
musical subculture ?

My musical adolescence was dominated by regular doses of Top of the Pops or 
Old Grey Whistle Test complete with wigs and makeup, costumes and props.Alice 
Cooper’s snakes 
<http://jamesfortunephotography.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/alicecooper-snake.jpg>
,Arthur Brown’s flaming headgear 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/b7/Arthur_Brown_Fire.png>, 
Parliament/Funkadelic’s mothership <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CiTh8BQ4oVU>
, thesurrealist ventures of Peter Gabriel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o79eWwmMa5U>, Sparks’ pantomime pop 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QAzESJ62irI>, Devo’s art-theatre 
<http://thehelplessdancer.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/devo1.jpg>, the Sex 
Pistols’ nihilistic posing <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dtUH2YSFlVU> … 
These were the extreme end of a performance-dictated aesthetic, whereDavid Bowie
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G8sdsW93ThQ> and Bryan Ferry 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0n3OepDn5GU> ruled, assuming an old-fashioned 
air of glamour, pose and performance. Bowie even changed his entire persona for 
six albums in a row.

Where have they all gone ? Today’s music scene seems to be all about being 
“real”, wearing your heart on your sleeve – Adele, Frank Ocean, Plan B, Drake, 
Elbow, Emeli Sandé et al would all rather “be themselves” on stage. “I’m like 
you,” they seem to say, “so buy my records.” But this overly cautious stance is 
akin to Prince Harry’s efforts to be “one of the lads”. Where’s the drama? The 
style? Have we lost the art of pretentious performance?

Previous generations expected their singers to project something more, 
something other: Sinatra, Piaf, Sammy Davis Jr, Nina Simone, Nat King Cole and 
Bing Crosby all had characters they put on for a show; call it cabaret, showbiz 
or theatre, it was a professional duty. Part of the drama of Nina Simone’s 
later years was watching the mask slip and the true wounded diva emerge, raging 
at the audience. Sure, all the “real” artists above have onstage personae, but 
that extra level of artifice is totally absent.

Very few artists appear to see themselves as character entertainers these 
days. Stromae, the Belgian superstar, uses his persona as an escape from 
himself; Beyoncé dons non-Christian alter-ego Sasha Fierce to pound around the 
stage, and Daft Punk andMF Doom 
<http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-4XxjqjV_e_s/UBf_IgJHEXI/AAAAAAAABsY/JfIKxEjpcE0/s1600/MF_DOOM_by_Richiiee.jpeg>
 simply wear huge helmets to hide in (I call it shy theatre). Metrosexual men 
Rufus Wainwright, Kanye West, Mika & Robbie Williams, and art-vixens Lady Gaga, 
Nicky Minaj, and Björk all theatricalise their shows, and themselves. But these 
people are exceptions – which is precisely the reason they stand out.

To find true theatre in music for the last 30 years, the only reliable place 
to go has been metal. Ever sinceAlice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper>, metal acts have thrived on a 
theatrical style and presentation that the fans demand – from Kiss to Gwar, 
Black Sabbath to Maynard James Keenan, Iron Maiden to Marilyn Manson and 
Slipknot, spectacle is expected and provided. Relished indeed. It seems that in 
the world of performance rock, metal rules.

Pop stars would do well to start taking lessons from their metal counterparts. 
I miss my pop heroes being truly daring – there’s just not much of it about 
these days. One of my more memorable live gigs was seeingthe Tubes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kP8nGNbk7oQ> at Hammersmith Odeon, complete 
with gameshow scenario, 24-inch platform boots, chainsaws, a one-legged 
ballerina and fire-eaters. Truly uncommon entertainment.

We need more pop superheroes. Larger-than-life. Daring. Extravagant. 
Irritating. Before we all die of boredom.

 