
From business strategy, to photo editing, to coding, there are lots of skills 
you can pick up from the comfort of your desk thanks to the expansion of online 
learning. Videos, podcasts and digital courses all provide ways to develop your 
talents and improve your understanding of new topics. For businesses, this is a 
fantastic way to provide you and your team with access to new ways of working, 
and has a myriad of other benefits.

Self improvement

Although it feels awkward to listen to yourself talk or watch yourself on 
film, it is a fantastic way to understand how others perceive you. Try setting 
up a video recorder during a meeting (with everyone’s consent, of course) and 
then watch it back. You’ll be able to see whether you touch your hair too much, 
say um between every word or talk in a monotone. Such insight will help you 
identify actionable changes you can make. You will become aware of your 
strengths, learn how to bring them to the fore, and how to compensate for your 
weaknesses.

Access to experts 

When you look at the most popular Ted Talks 
<https://www.ted.com/playlists/171/the_most_popular_talks_of_all> of all time, 
business insights are top of the leader’s board. Talks such as aYour body 
language shapes who you are, How great leaders inspire action and How to speak 
so that people want to listen, have been given by experts and researchers in 
their field.

In How to speak so that people want to listen for example, Julian Treasure 
goes through some of the sins of talking, such as negativity, gossip, 
complaining, exaggeration and dogmatism (the confusion of facts with opinions). 
He advises speaking from the chest to add weight to your voice, because we 
associate depth with power. Tips like this are invaluable and can be applied to 
both your work and your personal life.

The power of podcasts

Audio learning tools, such as podcasts, are an increasingly popular resource. 
A recentPrinceton study 
<http://blog.ted.com/what-happens-in-the-brain-when-we-hear-stories-uri-hasson-at-ted2016/>
 found that a certain kind of storytelling – that which podcasts use – 
stimulates activity across the brain, and recommends people do even more of 
this type of learning. Head to theFreakonomics <http://freakonomics.com/> 
website for example, for useful lessons such as How to make a bad decision, Why 
haven’t we found a better way to get what we want?, and How to be more 
productive. Other useful sites for business skills include99% Invisible 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/>, EconTalk <http://www.econtalk.org/>, The 
Allusionist <http://www.theallusionist.org/> and No Such Thing as a Fish 
<http://qi.com/podcast>. 

Motivating staff

Continuously improving your skills and knowledge is a crucial part of any 
career path. Offering online courses can help workers remain competitive and 
motivated, and make them feel valued at your company. There is a wide numberof 
online resources available, so you will be able to offer a variety of topics 
without it being a logistical nightmare.

Tutorials on YouTube, career development videos and sites such as Lynda.com 
can be just as effective as face-to face education and are a great deal 
cheaper. If, for example, your marketing team need more help with search engine 
optimisation, allow them time each week to take a course and have regular catch 
ups about how they’re getting on.

Keeping track

There are some disadvantages to introducing online learning to your business. 
It’s harder to keep tabs on the progress of your team and not everyone will 
respond well to online learning styles. Make sure your employees know that it 
is a resource open to them and talk to them about setting learning goals – ask 
whether they can learn independently, how organised they are with their time, 
whether they are comfortable with a computer, and if they have the time spare 
to do it.

Although there are some drawbacks, online learning opportunities should not be 
ignored. It’s cheaper, it offers more variety, and can be done at an individual 
pace. In a broader sense, employees will feel they work in an ambitious 
environment and that you want your team to remain informed and prepared for new 
challenges. It will also show staff that you are serious about their career 
development and help you retain your workforce. Once you find the right method 
and course, online learning is the perfect fit for any business.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 