
Come December, festive lights, music and adverts make us all suitably 
emotional about Christmas before the actual day, when the reality often 
involves getting annoyed with everyone after just an hour in the same room. 
This year there is an unexpected hit making millions of people teary: a
commercial about – wait for it – the experience of migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/dec/07/how-a-polish-ad-out-christmased-john-lewiss-bouncing-badger>
.

How a Polish ad out-Christmased John Lewis's bouncing badger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/dec/07/how-a-polish-ad-out-christmased-john-lewiss-bouncing-badger>
The three-minute-long film, entitled Angielski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/dec/07/how-a-polish-ad-out-christmased-john-lewiss-bouncing-badger>
, was made for Allegro, an online auction website in Poland, and tells the 
story of an elderly Polish man named Robert who is beginning to learn English. 
The camera accompanies him taking his first steps, trying to painfully learn 
the basics – “I am; you are; he/she is” – and peppering his house with Post-it 
notes to expand vocabulary beyond the rather unparliamentary phrases he learned 
from a TV action movie.

The unexpected plot twist comes when we finally learn the reason behind his 
determination to learn English. Spoiler alert: in the final scene, he flies off 
to Britain to spend Christmas with his son’s family, where in a truly 
tear-inducing moment he meets his granddaughter for the first time, telling 
her: “Hi. I am your grandpa.” By this point, we – the viewers – are all in 
tears, sobbing quietly, and cursing the scriptwriter for taking us on this 
unexpected emotional rollercoaster ride.

However, there is yet another plot twist: unlike the sweetest, fictional 
stories ofanimals indulging themselves in Christmas trampoline jumping 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sr6lr_VRsEo>, or cartoon characters cloning 
themselves <https://www.youtube.com/user/Sainsburys> to deal with festive 
preparations, Robert’s story reflects the real experience of many migrant 
families living in Britain.

In the migrant community I know best, it is estimated that every year about 
20,000 children are born in the UK to Polish mothers 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2038948/50-babies-day-born-Polish-mothers-UK.html>
, often with partners of other nationalities or ethnicities. Since they enter 
the world here, for many Britain will forever be their home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Lewis%202016%20Christmas%20advert%3A%20meet%20Buster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Lewis%202016%20Christmas%20advert%3A%20meet%20Buster%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmeet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video&media=>
John Lewis 2016 Christmas advert: meet Buster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/10/meet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
Polish parents usually go to considerable effort to introduce offspring to 
their heritage, so that they identify not only as British but British-Polish – 
or Polish-British. It is common for children to be sent to Polish Saturday 
schools, on top of their Monday-to-Friday compulsory education, to develop a 
sense of belonging to their second homeland overseas. But visit one of the more 
than 160 Polish Saturday schools and you will see that when the pupils talk 
among themselves, between classes, they do not necessarily use Polish but often 
perfect English, with no trace of a foreign accent.

Their grandparents usually live overseas and get to see their family on the 
rare occasions when they pop over for a couple of days, be it a short holiday 
trip or a Christmas visit. Other than that, they rely on phone calls or Skype, 
trying to overcome the language barriers to express their love. Often, just 
like Robert, they decide to learn English to make it a real two-way effort.

We are seldom reminded that migration is a story of separation and personal 
sacrifices

What we are seldom reminded of is that migration is a story of separation and 
personal sacrifices. When you miss important moments in the lives of other 
members of your family, or your contact with friends weakens, you see the 
hidden cost of migration. No higher salary or standard of living can compensate.

By saying that, I am not asking for pity – in the end, migrants themselves 
make this decision – but for an understanding of the lengths that people go to 
in order to assimilate into British culture, and of their long-lasting 
attachment to their other home. The latter does not in any way weaken their 
relationship with Britain.

This Christmas I will go home to Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, but pack in my luggage some 
typically British items: crackers, mince pies, a jar of cranberry sauce, and 
mincemeat to use as a filling for what would otherwise be a traditional Polish 
cake. I want to have this bit of Britain with me on Christmas Day.

If you joined me on my trip to the airport in the runup to Christmas, you 
would find more stories like Robert’s, showing migrants simply as humans and 
people with emotions. With a bit of luck you might even hear, over the carols, 
a simple utterance: “Hi. I am your grandpa.”
 