
ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> has suffered its worst 
performance in the runup to Christmas in almost a decade, as advertisers become 
increasingly cautious about the economy.

“In recent weeks the political and economic uncertainty has increased and we 
are currently seeing more cautious behaviour by advertisers,” said the ITV 
chief executive, Adam Crozier.

The broadcaster said TV ad revenues across the first nine months of 2016 were 
down by 1%. But for the final quarter they fell 7% after adrastic softening in 
the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/19/tv-advertising-market-worst-year-2009-brexit-fears>
 as jittery advertisers held back spending after the uncertainty caused by the 
Brexit vote.

ITV cuts 120 jobs as Brexit uncertainty slows UK TV ad market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
The 7% decline in the final months of the year is the worst year-on-year fall 
ITV has reported since recording a 9% drop in the fourth quarter of 2008.

The underlying performance is even worse given that ITV is now adding in 
revenue from UTV, the Northern Ireland ITV franchiseit acquired for £100m last 
year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/19/itv-takeover-utv-media-television-channels>
 which analysts say adds 1.5% to 2%.

Crozier has already announced £25m in cost savings for 2017 and last month cut 
120 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
, citing the political and economic uncertainty of a potential Brexit slowdown.

He now expects TV ad revenue for the full year to be down 3% but expects the 
group to still outperform the UK TV ad market as whole.

“Our strong on-screen performance and continued ability to deliver mass 
audiences gives us the confidence that based upon the deals we have done we 
will also outperform our estimate of the TV ad market in 2017,” he said.

Crozier said that ITV’s £1bn-plus programme budget will be £25m lower next 
year as the broadcaster will not have to pay the rights cost for a major sports 
event; this year it aired Euro 2016 matches and in 2015 the Rugby World Cup.

In a call with analysts ITV said that the combined £50m in cost savings will 
be enough for it to offset a fall of up to 3% in TV ad revenue next year.

ITV’s total revenues grew 5% to £2.15bn in the nine months to the end of 
September.


Crozier said that despite the TV ad slump he expected ITV’s full year earnings 
to remain resilient, citing the growth in its online, pay and interactive 
business and ITV Studios production arm.


“Even against the current uncertain economic backdrop we expect 2016 earnings 
to be broadly in line with last year,” he said. “ITV is now a much more 
balanced and resilient business.”


Despite this claim ITV still relies on TV advertising and sponsorship for more 
than half its total annual £3bn revenues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
, and85% of revenues come from the UK market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/itv-cuts-120-jobs-brexit-uncertainty-uk-television-advertising-market>
.


ITV Studios, which makes shows from Coronation Street and Come Dine With Me to 
Victoria and Poldark, boosted its revenues by 18% to £923m in the nine months.


The broadcaster said it received a £33m boost from ITV Studiosn the US thanks 
to the drop in the value of the pound.


It also admitted that the growth was driven by revenue from new acquisitions, 
which last year includedThe Voice maker Talpa Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/12/itv-the-voice-producer-talpa-media-john-de-mol>
 andPoldark and Parade’s End maker Mammoth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/poldark-producer-bought-by-itv>. 


Stripping this out, ITV Studios saw revenues decline 9% on an organic basis in 
the first nine months. Analysts at Jefferies said this was a “disappointing” 
performance.


ITV put this down to factors including there being no series of £50m global 
franchise Hell’s Kitchen this year – two are scheduled to air in 2017 – and 
cancelled dramas including Texas RIsing and Best Time Ever.


“We remain committed to our strategy of rebalancing and strengthening ITV and 
building a global content business of scale and we see clear opportunities to 
continue to invest for further growth across the business both organically and 
through acquisitions,” said Crozier.


Online, pay and interactive revenues rose 22% in the nine-month period.


Total viewing of ITV content online, including clips from shows such as I’m a 
Celebrity… Get Me Out Of Here!, rose by 22% to 746m year on year.


Within this, long-form video requests for TV shows grew 49% year on year to 
173m.

 