
My girlfriend and I have been dating for eight months and enjoy a good 
emotional, intellectual and physical connection. She is 40 and I am 38, and we 
are keen to marry and start a family. We have started IVF after failing to 
conceive the natural way. The early medical signs are not encouraging, though, 
and we may not be able to have children of our own. It is possible that having 
my own biological children is non-negotiable for me. My girlfriend feels very 
upset when I express these fears, and feels that I am making a commitment 
conditional on her bearing my children when it should be about us wanting to be 
together. I don’t know whether to move ahead or whether to save us both time 
and take a chance that I could have my “perfect fantasy” family with someone 
else.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 