
On 29 November 1963, a Life magazine journalist named Theodore White sat down 
to interview thenewly widowed Jackie Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/jfk-assassination-timeline>. 
Inside the family compound at Hyannis, she spun him a tale of beauty and 
horror, contrasting grisly details of her husband’s murder (“I could see a 
piece of his skull coming off; it was flesh-coloured, not white”) with the 
golden years that went before. Jack Kennedy, she recalled, had loved the 
Broadway musicalCamelot <http://broadwaymusicalhome.com/shows/camelot.htm>. He 
had a habit of playing the title song on the Victrola at night. “There will be 
great presidents again,” she said by way of conclusion. “But there will never 
be another Camelot.”

Life magazine had a circulation of 7m; a readership of more than 30m. The 
image of Camelot immediately took hold, back-filling and defining the public’s 
sense of the Kennedy White House as a place of noble acts and youthful 
idealism, all destroyed in one senseless stroke. One week after Dallas, the 
former first lady stole a march on the historians. She helped write the script 
that Hollywood has followed ever since.


Jackie review – Natalie Portman astonishes in remarkably intimate portrait
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
Now along comes Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
, a biopic of sorts starring Natalie Portman, which uses the magazine interview 
as the peg on which to drape an elegant drama of the assassination and its 
aftermath. Here the focus is not on the man who was killed but the woman who 
was not. The interest, tellingly, is not in unpicking the crime but unpicking 
the way it was then sold to the masses. Jackie amounts to a fractured, 
fascinating character study. It sets out to deconstruct the myth-maker at the 
very moment she sits down to start constructing the myth.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%20trailer%3A%20Natalie%20Portman%20stars%20in%20intimate%20portrait%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%20trailer%3A%20Natalie%20Portman%20stars%20in%20intimate%20portrait%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video&media=>
Jackie trailer: Natalie Portman stars in intimate portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/07/jackie-trailer-natalie-portman-stars-intimate-portrait-jfk-video>
This is not to suggest that Jackie was the first person to cast JFK as a 
legend. That dubious honour falls to his father, Joe Kennedy Sr, who had made 
his fortune as a Hollywood deal-maker in the 1920s and then set out to (in his 
words) “sell Jack like soap flakes” to the American people. It was Joe – no 
surprise – who served as behind-the-scenes fixer on the inauguralJFK biopic, PT 
109 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l5Ncfw_7n4A>. Released in June 1963, five 
months before its subject’s death, PT-109 provided a dogged, unquestioning 
account of JFK’s wartime heroics aboard a torpedo boat. The film was made with 
full White House approval. The president personally chose the actor Cliff 
Robertson (who would later appear as Uncle Ben in the Spider-Man franchise) to 
portray his younger self. Jackie, for her part, reportedly favoured Warren 
Beatty.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01a83d51e6d5234ea1fcdca50dab8064adbe06d%2F0_178_2649_1589%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America's%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America%27s%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01a83d51e6d5234ea1fcdca50dab8064adbe06d%2F0_178_2649_1589%2F2649.jpg>
 Wartime hero … Cliff Robertson as Lt John F Kennedy in PT 109. Photograph: 
Allstar/Warner 
Since then, there’s been no shortage of actors lining up to impersonate 
America’s once and future king. Martin Sheen memorably played him in a 1983 
miniseries (a dress rehearsal for his later turn as Jed Bartlet); Greg Kinnear 
in 2011’s The Kennedys. On the big screen, James Marsden depicted JFK as a 
handsome prince just finding his social conscience inThe Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/14/the-butler-review>. Bruce 
Greenwood showed him earning his spurs against the backdrop of the Cuban 
missile crisis in the underratedThirteen Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/nov/26/thirteen-days>. Brett Stimely may 
barely be a household name in his own household, but the actor has played John 
F Kennedy no fewer than four times. There he is riding the motorcade through 
Dallas in 2013’s Parkland and cropping up in a Dominican film called Kill the 
Dictator. There he is again, in Transformers: Dark of the Moon, and shaking Dr 
Manhattan’s hand on the White House lawn in the adaptation of DC Comics’ 
Watchmen.


The definitive screen Kennedy? I’m not sure that we’ve seen it. In fact, 
what’s notable about the key Kennedy-themed pictures is that these are the ones 
that elect to leave the president in the background, or off-camera altogether. 
Shot back in the early 70s, Executive Action kicked off a vibrant sub-genre of 
films that probed the conspiracy theories behind Dallas, effectively reframing 
the president as the body in the library, a mystery to be solved. Riding on its 
heels came the likes of The Parallax View (which was only implicitly about 
Kennedy), Winter Kills (ditto) and Ruby (a biopic of the man who shot the man 
who shot the president). The gold standard, of course, remainsOliver Stone’s 
1991 epic JFK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/28/jfk-oliver-stone-john-f-kennedy>, 
an expertly managed piece of historical hogwash; the equivalent of a paranoiac 
screaming about the government inside a shopping mall. “The achievement of 
[JFK] is not that it answers the mystery of the Kennedy assassination, because 
it does not,” wrote Roger Ebert at the time. “Its achievement is that it tries 
to marshal the anger which ever since 1963 has been gnawing away on some dark 
shelf of the national psyche.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f09ee74698d912e3f7fe0425f8774a9445ab6f6%2F0_287_4456_2673%2F4456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America's%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America%27s%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f09ee74698d912e3f7fe0425f8774a9445ab6f6%2F0_287_4456_2673%2F4456.jpg>
 Memorable … Martin Sheen as John F Kennedy and Blair Brown as Jacqueline 
Kennedy in TV miniseries Kennedy. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
But the cultural response has taken less clamorous forms, too. The late 1980s, 
for instance, saw a rash of coming-of-age dramas that used Dallas as their 
touchstone (presumably the result of baby boomers who had now grown up and were 
keen to either produce or consume films about their own adolescence). This was 
the era which gave us Mermaids, Shag, Coupe de Ville and Dirty Dancing. All of 
them set in the summer of 1963; a period of innocence, before the fall.


How to explain the absence of JFK in the best JFK movies? Maybe it’s because 
the man himself was such a consummate performer – so dashing, so telegenic, so 
at ease on the screen – that any paid actor risks coming across as a cheap 
impressionist; some melting waxwork or malfunctioning robot. Maybe it’s because 
no Kennedy movie, however potent, can match the sheer horrific wattage of that
Super-8 footage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iYWm26OLve8> from Dealey 
Plaza. The novelist Don DeLillo was perhaps only half-joking when he nominated
Abraham Zapruder <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abraham_Zapruder> as the single 
most important film-maker of the 20th-century.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa53f00593a52d1e621b49e99f76b9324521dd651%2F0_135_2331_2911%2F2331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America's%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jackie%3A%20behind%20the%20creation%20of%20JFK%2C%20America%27s%20once%20and%20future%20king&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fjackie-natalie-portman-behind-the-creation-of-jfk-camelot-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa53f00593a52d1e621b49e99f76b9324521dd651%2F0_135_2331_2911%2F2331.jpg>
 Handsome prince … Minka Kelly as Jackie Kennedy and James Marsden as JFK in 
The Butler. Photograph: Allstar/The Weinstein Company 
Alternatively, the answer might have something to do with Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jackie> Kennedy’s analogy to King Arthur and 
Camelot. The legend, in other words, is more powerful than the man. Or to put 
it more crudely, JFK (at least in cultural terms) is worth more dead than alive.


Which brings us back to Jackie, brilliantly directed by the Chilean film-maker 
Pablo Larraín, where the former first lady is shown reeling through the drama 
in blood-stained pink Chanel, almost radioactive with fury and grief. It was 
Jackie, we learn, who devised every stage-managed detail of her husband’s 
funeral; Jackie who took control of the message to safeguard his legacy. “I’m 
just trying to get the truth,” Theodore White (Billy Crudup) tells her at one 
stage. “But I’ll settle for a story that’s believable.” This, by and large, is 
what she gave him.


In her youth, Jackie Kennedy once said that her great ambition was to be “the 
art director of the 20th century”. Before her marriage, she worked as a 
photojournalist for the Washington Times-Herald, interviewing the likes of 
Richard Nixon and reporting on the coronation of Elizabeth II. In later life, 
she took jobs at Viking Press and Doubleday, where she helped edit Michael 
Jackson’s 1988 autobiography, Moonwalk. But her greatest achievement came in 
those days after Dallas, when the queen of the White House abruptly made 
herself over as its architect and myth-maker, the equivalent of Guinevere 
sitting down to write Le Morte d’Arthur. “She wanted to take control of 
history,” presidential historian Stephen E Ambrose would later reflect. “And in 
many ways she managed to do so.”


Jackie trailer: Oscar-tipped Natalie Portman as the former first lady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/jackie-trailer-natalie-portman-oscars>
Looking back on the Life magazine interview, White would seek to downplay his 
own contribution. “I was her instrument in labelling the myth,” he admitted. 
“So the epitaph of the Kennedy administration became Camelot – a magic moment 
in American history when gallant men danced with beautiful women, when great 
deeds were done, when artists, writers and poets met at the White House and the 
barbarians beyond the walls were held back.”

This, then, is the image that persists to this day. It is the standard by 
which all other presidencies continue to be judged (henceTina Brown’s recent 
description of the Trump family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/11/tina-brown-the-trumps-look-like-a-kardashian-camelot]>
 as “a Kardashian Camelot”). It almost doesn’t matter that the actual 
administration promised more than it delivered; that the president was a sickly 
playboy with a dotted line to organised crime; that historians typically rank 
Lyndon Johnson (Kennedy’s unglamorous successor) as a more effective chief 
executive. The Camelot myth has become part of the national consciousness, the 
means by which Americans make sense of themselves and the world they live in. 
Or as Mrs Kennedy ruefully puts it near the end of the film: “People like to 
believe in fairytales.”


• Jackie is out in the UK on 20 January. 

 