
The director of the FBI – whose high-profile interventions in the 2016 
election are widely seen to have helped tip the balance of against Hillary 
Clinton – has refused to say if the bureau is investigating possible 
connections between associates of President-elect Donald Trump andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

Testifying before the Senate intelligence committee on Tuesday, James Comey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/james-comey> said he could not comment in 
public on a possible investigation into allegations of links between Russia and 
the Trump campaign.

“I would never comment on investigations – whether we have one or not – in an 
open forum like this, so I really can’t answer one way or another,” said Comey, 
at a hearing into the US intelligence agencies’conclusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 that Russia intervened in the election to benefit Trump.

James Comey: Hillary Clinton email inquiry is FBI chief's latest controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/james-comey-fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email>
Comey’s reticence stunned several senators who pointed to his repeated public 
discussions ofFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> inquiries into 
Clinton during the campaign.

It was his first public appearance since an election that saw his reputation 
for integrityseriously tarnished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-james-comey-clinton-emails-trump>
, after his repeated public statements on the bureau’s inquiry into Clinton’s 
private email server. Clintonreportedly blames Comey 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/us/politics/hillary-clinton-james-comey.html>
 for her unexpected loss to Trump.

Asked by the Oregon Democrat Ron Wyden if he would provide an unclassified 
answer about any FBI inquiry into Trump-Russia connections before Trump’s 
inauguration on 20 January, Comey said: “I will answer any question you ask but 
the answer will likely be the same as I just gave you. I can’t talk about it.”

Wyden said he was troubled by Comey’s silence. “I think the American people 
have a right to know this,” he said.

Other senators went further. Democrat Kamala Harris of California suggested 
that a “new standard” for discussing FBI investigations publicly had been 
created in the months before the election.

Angus King, a Maine independent, told Comey: “The irony of your making that 
statement here – I cannot avoid.”


Responding to King, Comey suggested “sometimes we think differently about 
[discussing] closed investigations”.

But the FBI had not technically closed its inquiry 
<https://www.lawfareblog.com/memo-press-what-comeys-letter-does-and-doesnt-mean>
 into the email server when Comeywrote to Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 on 28 October – just 11 days before the general election – to say that the 
agency was reviewing newly discovered electronic communications for potential 
relevance to the Clinton case.

Those materials arose from another active FBI investigation, into disgraced 
former Democratic congressman Anthony Weiner. Comey eventually announced that 
the new materialwas ultimately irrelevant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 to Clinton, on the day before the election.

Comey’s intervention into the presidential election contravened justice 
department protocols and earnedrebuke 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/eric-holder-james-comey-is-a-good-man-but-he-made-a-serious-mistake/2016/10/30/08e7208e-9f07-11e6-8832-23a007c77bb4_story.html?utm_term=.96ad7c5dcfc4>
 from the former attorney general Eric Holder.

James Comey has been abusing his power for years | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/james-comey-fbi-director-clinton-emails>
Trump has not publicly committed to retaining Comey, whose term extends to 
2023, and Comey has receded from public view following the election. At one 
point in the hearing he attempted to joke: “I hope I’ve demonstrated by now I’m 
tone deaf when it comes to politics and that’s the way it should be.”

The hearing was the intelligence committee’s first since the FBI, National 
Security Agency and Central Intelligence Agency released a declassified 
assessment finding that Russia orchestrated a wide-ranging influence operation 
during the US election, to include digitally breaking into Democratic National 
Committee servers and Clinton aide John Podesta’s email and providing the 
materials to outlets that published the information online.

James Clapper, the outgoing director of national intelligence, placed Russian 
interference in the US election in the context of Moscow’s attempted subversion 
of elections in what he estimated was “a couple dozen” foreign countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjames-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d7e715e4825b7cf6b2be34eb3fa29020d46c30%2F0_257_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Comey%20refuses%20to%20tell%20Senate%20if%20FBI%20is%20investigating%20Trump-Russia%20links&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjames-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Comey%20refuses%20to%20tell%20Senate%20if%20FBI%20is%20investigating%20Trump-Russia%20links&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fjames-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d7e715e4825b7cf6b2be34eb3fa29020d46c30%2F0_257_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
 FBI director James Comey (left), and National Intelligence Director James 
Clapper, testify before the Senate hearing on Russian intelligence activities. 
Photograph: Cliff Owen/AP 
Clapper reiterated that he had no evidence that Russia had manipulated the 
voting process itself. But he said there was evidence of Russian 
“reconnoitering, intrusion on certain voter rolls” in unnamed American states.

Comey also said that there was evidence that Russia had penetrated an outdated 
Republican National Committee data hoard and harvested “old stuff” but not that 
it had accessed any current RNC material or the national Trump campaign.

“There was evidence that there was hacking directed at state-level 
organizations, state-level campaigns, and the RNC, but old domains of the RNC, 
that is, email domains they were no longer using,” Comey said.

The FBI director added that it was “potentially” possible that a hacker could 
access and manipulate voter information contained in county databases, possibly 
without election officials knowing about the manipulation.

Richard Burr, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the committee, pledged 
a thorough and bipartisan staff review into the finding, which Trump has yet to 
publicly accept and which has led him todenigrate the intelligence agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
 he is set to inherit.

Burr said he had “no reason to doubt the findings” and promised to “follow the 
intel wherever it leads”. His Democratic counterpart, Virginia’s Mark Warner, 
said he believed the committee inquiry ought to include a focus on “contact 
between the Russian government and its agents, and associates of any campaign 
and candidate”.

Democrat Martin Heinrich of New Mexico added: “Russia didn’t do this to help 
the Republican candidate. Russia did this to help Russia and to weaken America 
and therein lies the heart of why this is so important. In the next election 
the shoe could easily be on the other foot, and a foreign power could easily 
decide it wants the Democrat to win this time.”
 