
James Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> was personally 
involved in authorising the deletion of emails at News International in early 
2010 when the phone-hacking scandal was taking off, it has been alleged in the 
high court.

Acting on behalf of 17 people suing the publisher of the now-defunct News of 
the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> and the Sun over 
alleged phone hacking, David Sherborne claimed on Monday there were documents, 
emails and meeting agendas that showed senior executives including Murdoch and 
Rebekah Brooks pursued an email deletion policy that removed “emails that could 
be unhelpful in future litigation in which News International could be a 
defendant”.

Email deletion, which News International has always maintained was part of 
legitimate housekeeping, was on the “agenda of and/or discussed and approved 
by” Murdoch on at least six occasions between January and April 2010, according 
to written arguments submitted to the court by the claimants.

The policy referred to by Sherborne aimed “to eliminate in a consistent manner 
across NI (subject to compliance with legal and regulatory requirements as to 
retention) emails that could be unhelpful in the context of future litigation 
in which an NI company is a defendant.”

 Murdoch was executive chairman of News International between 2007 and 2012. 
He is now chairman of the UK broadcaster Sky.

Brooks’s involvement in ordering a general deletion of emails while chief 
executive of News Internationalwas revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/27/rebekah-brooks-news-international-emails>
 during the criminal phone-hacking trial in 2013 in which she was acquitted of 
all charges. Last year, she was made chief executive of News UK, the successor 
to News International, which owns the Sun, the Times and the Sunday Times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fjames-murdoch-involved-news-international-email-deletion-high-court-phone-hacking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b7ad0101ae02b5c6615bb36f864b5609f32c3b%2F340_0_2642_1585%2F2642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Murdoch%20involved%20in%20News%20International%20email%20deletion%2C%20court%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fjames-murdoch-involved-news-international-email-deletion-high-court-phone-hacking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Murdoch%20involved%20in%20News%20International%20email%20deletion%2C%20court%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fjames-murdoch-involved-news-international-email-deletion-high-court-phone-hacking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b7ad0101ae02b5c6615bb36f864b5609f32c3b%2F340_0_2642_1585%2F2642.jpg>
 Rebekah Brooks. Photograph: Arthur Edwards/News UK/PA 
Part of the evidence presented includes an email sent in August 2010 by Andrew 
Hickey, who was the CIO of News International, to Jon Chapman, an in-house 
lawyer at the company, which references both Brooks and Murdoch, saying Murdoch 
wanted to “draw a line” under the organisation’s time in its Wapping HQ prior 
to 2010.

“Fyi also spoke with her [Brooks] on this and fine with what we are doing but 
adamant on Jan 2010 and has discussed it with JRM who wants to draw a line 
under Wapping and pre-2010. Can you pop round to discuss implications with me 
thanks andy,” it read.

Andrew Green QC, acting for News Group Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, a News UK subsidiary, said it 
had previously provided a “non-admission” concerning the email deletion 
programme, but would be prepared to set out the position again given the extent 
of the allegations, in particular their relation to the Sun.

Mr Justice Mann told Green that “there should be a proper pleading ... even if 
it turns out to be a blanket denial” and gave them 21 days to respond.

When the Crown Prosecution Service announced in December 2015 that there would 
be no further criminal action on phone hacking, it said it had considered 
evidence of email deletion and decided that there were “legitimate reasons for 
companies to have an email deletion policy … In this case, there is no evidence 
to suggest that email deletion was undertaken in order to pervert the course of 
justice.”

The allegations about email deletion were made during a case management 
hearing in the civil case, during which lawyers from NGN tried to limit the 
disclosure of documents and emails that the claimants say show phone hacking 
took place over a longer period than previously thought, and was not confined 
to the News of the World. NGN says the extent of disclosure asked for by the 
claimants is not proportionate.

News UK <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> did not 
immediately return a request for comment.

A full trial is expected to take place in the new year. 

 