
Jamie T <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jamie-t> is back. Again. Following 
a five-year silence so profound that fans began to question whether he was even 
still alive, Jamie Treays made his return in 2014 with an album, Carry on the 
Grudge. Now, apparently, the floodgates have opened: after a follow-up EP in 
2015, he’s got another album on the way, Trick. “I was listening to the album 
last night thinking: ‘What am I going to say?’” he says, grinning, on a sunny 
afternoon in east London. “You’ve always got to have something to say, haven’t 
you?”

Well, if he can’t think of anything, how about this: if Carry on the Grudge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/25/jamie-t-carry-on-the-grudge-review-melodic-and-potent>
 was Jamie T’s return, then Trick is his return to form. The former was a solid 
album, but it was bereft of the bristling rap and crunchily layered sampling 
that characterised his first two fiercely beloved records – instead it turned 
to more traditional indie rock. That, though, was “all an exercise”, Treays 
explains now. “It was hard to write different songs and I was definitely 
trying. I explained it once as like tying my hand behind my back, and trying to 
write with my left hand. But now, over this album, I’m loosening my hand and 
letting a bit more stuff from the past come in.”

Trick is the sound of a musician really, really enjoying himself. Usually, 
that prospect will set alarm bells ringing, bringing to mind 25-minute noodling 
guitar jams or aeons of mind-numbing atmospherics. Thankfully, Treays’s idea of 
a good time seems to be bouncy, amusing, narrative-driven pop charged with an 
infectious and un-self-conscious energy. A few tracks on Trick also happen to 
channel one of the most directly gratifying songwriters of all time, Mick Jones 
of the Clash and Big Audio Dynamite. “I think everyone’s lucky that three 
quarters of the album doesn’t sound like Mick Jones, because at one point it 
fucking did,” says Treays when I lightly broach the song Robin Hood, which 
might as well have been put out on CBS in 1978. “I was just so chuffed that I 
could write something similar that sounded half-good”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc99aff038c1500401b4192a30122d50beda1e7f%2F0_0_2250_3000%2F2250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20T%3A%20'People%20were%20weirded%20out%20by%20me%20talking%20about%20anxiety'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20T%3A%20%27People%20were%20weirded%20out%20by%20me%20talking%20about%20anxiety%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc99aff038c1500401b4192a30122d50beda1e7f%2F0_0_2250_3000%2F2250.jpg>
 Jamie T on stage in 2007. Photograph: Chiaki Nozu/FilmMagic 
Another particularly Jonesian track, Tescoland, talks about Treays’s travels 
to America, where Trick was recorded. On the surface, it traces the archetypal 
story of the man who has made it returning to little England – but, Treays 
admits, it’s really about the opposite. “We can’t get arrested in the US,” he 
says, explaining that the song was inspired by his manager’s lame justification 
of his lack of attention there. “He told me it was because my music had 
subtleties that the Americans don’t get, like irony. Or sarcasm. Which made me 
laugh, because that’s just such a bullshit comment. Anyone who’s watched 
Seinfeld knows that’s a completely ridiculous thing.”

His manager’s attempts to comfort his charge were probably misguided anyway – 
Treays seems genuinely delighted at his relative obscurity on the world stage. 
One of the reasons he disappeared from the public eye in the first place was 
because the attention his popularity brought caused him so much distress. 
“After shows, people grab you and want to take photos with you, and my anxiety 
goes through the roof. People are looking at you funny. To this day, I find 
crowds of people quite difficult.”

Treays has been writing about anxiety from the get-go – something that in 
retrospect seems remarkable. Looking back on the reviews of his 2007 debutPanic 
Prevention <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jan/26/urban.popandrock>, 
little attention was paid to the overlying theme of panic disorder (So Lonely 
Was the Ballad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8MmO44cxbMg> even samples an 
anxiety disorder tape) – perhaps unsurprisingly, considering Britain then was 
yet to open up and talk about mental health.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTElBPcFIk0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTElBPcFIk0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTElBPcFIk0E&media=>
 Jamie T’s single from the album Trick. 
“It wasn’t in the public sphere,” Treays says. “It’s more acceptable to talk 
about it now than it was then. People were a bit iffy about it. I continued to 
speak about it on other records and things and people tended to be like: ‘What, 
you still going through that?’ People get weirded out by it. But it seemed 
natural to me to talk about it.” Treays says he received a lot of letters from 
people suffering from anxiety who found solace in a shared experience. “It’s 
hard when you’re afflicted with a disorder of some type, and it can be kind of 
debilitating. I’m glad that it made some people feel a bit better.”

It’s clear Treays is very proud of the legacy of his first two albums, and in 
no way keen to escape their resounding influence. “It made me laugh,” he says 
of his 2014 concerts. “We printed up some merch for the tour, and the shirt 
that sold the most, which didn’t surprise me at all, was the Panic Prevention 
shirt, because all the kids really wanted that thing.” And “kids” is accurate. 
At his Alexandra Palace comeback gigs, the crowd was full of teenagers – who 
would have been about 10 the first time round – bellowing along toSheila 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4-L7Cadb-c0> and Sticks N Stones 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9APEZMeH0o>: it suggests Treays’s material 
will have a very long shelf-life. “I kept seeing that in crowds: it was really 
weird for me,” he agrees. “Kids these days, the way things move, you wonder if 
anyone remembers more than a minute.”

His own juvenile tastes have been lasting, however. Treays started playing 
drums in a punk band when he was 11. “We were called Byelaw 20, which is the 
byelaw for dogs shitting in public – there was a £200 fine for it.” Pretty punk 
name. “That’s what we thought, yeah.” He got heavily into Hellcat Records (run 
by Rancid’s Tim Armstrong, with whom Treays has collaborated), and soon after, 
the Clash.

The inspiration for the fast, dense rapping style that he returns to on Trick 
came from the north London hip-hop groupTask Force 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFutFijjWbs>. “They changed my perspective on 
what hip-hop was. I identified with it,” he says. “It was hard to get into the 
mainstream stuff.” The way he tells it, though, he simply became a conduit for 
the genius of his favourite acts: “I was putting things in front of people’s 
ears that they hadn’t heard before, influences that were not really in the 
forefront of mainstream music at the time. My lyrics don’t compete on the same 
level as some of the people I listen to. But I can understand to a fresh ear, 
people are like: ‘Ah, this is amazing.’ But that’s music for you, isn’t it? 
You’re trying to introduce people to something that’s better than you. I didn’t 
think it was all that.” He allows himself a single moment of ego. “Then again, 
I listen back, like, fuck that’s a good lyric! Occasionally.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8110896c5932524bfc851900be5bbf0c3a666e09%2F0_312_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20T%3A%20'People%20were%20weirded%20out%20by%20me%20talking%20about%20anxiety'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20T%3A%20%27People%20were%20weirded%20out%20by%20me%20talking%20about%20anxiety%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjamie-t-treays-people-weirded-out-by-me-talking-about-anxiety-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8110896c5932524bfc851900be5bbf0c3a666e09%2F0_312_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Jamie T: ‘I was putting things in front of people’s ears that they hadn’t 
heard before.’ Photograph: Simon Sarin/Redferns 
The British pop talent crash: where have all the new acts gone?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/the-british-pop-talent-crash-where-have-all-the-new-acts-gone>
Painting himself as some kind of a tribute act is patently ridiculous – even 
if Treays has never worn his influences lightly, he is also the author of two 
records that are almost peerless in their evocation of the last years of the 
previous decade, and Trick matches them for brilliant, idiosyncratic 
songwriting. But I also wonder if this modesty is a mechanism for coping with 
the uninhibited nature of his music. Even though in many ways it is highly 
sophisticated, there is also something very brash and adolescent about most 
Jamie T songs – partly a result of his loose, shouty vocal style, partly the 
gratifyingly direct storytelling and jokes in his lyrics. He is clearly not an 
egotist, and while other modest but in-yer-face musicians such asGrimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grimes> have a popstar persona to hide 
behind, Treays would clearly like there to be an arm’s length between him and 
his work.

It is something that comes into sharp focus at the end of our conversation, 
when I ask whether his lyrics are personal. He tells me – with completely 
disarming affability – that the one thing that will stop him making music “is 
having to sit, and talk about it and have someone pick that apart in some way”. 
It’s pretty tempting to dissect what makes Jamie T such an original, relatable 
and resoundingly appealing artist, but I’ll desist for now – just in case he 
keeps his word.

 * The single Power Over Men is out now on Virgin EMI. Trick is released on 2 
September
 