
A facsimile of Charlotte Brontë’s 1847 manuscript of Jane Eyre, written in the 
author’s flowing hand, will be published for the first time in December.

This edition of the earliest surviving copy of Brontë’s classic joins a roster 
of facsimiles published by the French pressÉditions des Saints Pères 
<https://www.editionsdessaintsperes.co.uk/manuscrits/en/>, including Madame 
Bovary, Les fleurs du mal and The Hunchback of Notre-Dame. The reproduction is 
accompanied with etchings by Edmund Garrett from an edition published in 1897. 
According to the publisher, the fair copy is “neat, with most notable revisions 
and corrections centred around her portrayal of Jane’s encounters with Mr 
Rochester”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjane-eyre-facsimile-manuscript-to-be-published-for-bronte-bibliophiles-edmund-garrett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837e7ea3e30e8a4ad4bbda427e8268a563299ba2%2F2242_451_1368_1709%2F1368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Eyre%20facsimile%20manuscript%20to%20be%20published%20for%20'Bront%C3%AB%20bibliophiles'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjane-eyre-facsimile-manuscript-to-be-published-for-bronte-bibliophiles-edmund-garrett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Eyre%20facsimile%20manuscript%20to%20be%20published%20for%20%27Bront%C3%AB%20bibliophiles%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjane-eyre-facsimile-manuscript-to-be-published-for-bronte-bibliophiles-edmund-garrett%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837e7ea3e30e8a4ad4bbda427e8268a563299ba2%2F2242_451_1368_1709%2F1368.jpg>
 One of Edmund Garett’s illustrations to Jane Eyre. Illustration: Courtesy of 
the British Library and Éditions des Saints Pères 
Brontë had received a letter from the publisher Smith and Elder in August 
1847, rejecting her first novel, The Professor, but suggesting that “a work in 
three volumes would [be met] with careful attention”. She replied with the 
824-page manuscript of Jane Eyre, which they published that October. Written 
under Brontë’s pen name of Currer Bell, the manuscript is held by the British 
Library and is the only copy in existence.

Claire Harman, author of Charlotte Brontë: A Life, welcomed the publication of 
a manuscript that she felt would appeal to the Brontë bibliophile.

“What we see is the end of a long process for Charlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte>,” Harman said, “the last 
edits and adjustments to a story that had been with her for several years and 
that she wanted to present in an almost perfect condition to bowl over the 
publishers who had been intrigued but ultimately dissatisfied with The 
Professor. The manuscript shows justifiable pride in her work and control of it 
– and carefully hides the hard graft she had gone through to get there.”

The Parisian publishing house said that “due to the technical challenges of 
reproducing it, to date the manuscript has never before been published”, adding 
that “Brontë’s elegant handwriting and thoughtful edits showcase the author’s 
genius and determination”.

Éditions des Saints Pères co-founder Nicholas Tretiakow hailed the novel as “a 
compelling gem of English literature, a novel so many of us hold close to our 
hearts”.

“We wanted to rise to the challenge and offer this beautiful and rich 
manuscript to the public for the very first time,” he said.

Tretiakow’s co-founder Jessica Nelson said that the pair were inspired to set 
up the press after attending an exhibition of manuscripts and first drafts in 
Paris 10 years ago. “We were totally moved and astounded by what we saw. We 
already had a passion for literature but we were astonished,” she said. 
“Nicholas said that in 10 years’ time we would create our own publishing house 
and specialise in the production of manuscripts, and that’s what we’ve done.”

According to Nelson, print runs are limited to 1,000 or 2,000 copies per book, 
with reproductions aimed at bibliophiles, collectors and those passionate about 
a particular author. The Jane Eyre copies will be priced at more than £200, and 
Éditions des Saints Pères plans to follow the novel’s release with further 
titles in English next year.

“There is a sense in this ever increasingly digital world that the value of 
handwriting and handwritten craft has never been so precious,” Nelson said. 
“It’s another reading experience – you really feel something very intimate, you 
create an intimacy with the writer, even a writer who has been gone for 
centuries. A particular bond is created when you discover a manuscript.”

Nelson said she had felt the bond in particular when working on the 
publisher’s edition of Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu. “He had terrible 
handwriting, and it was really difficult to read him, and when I was first 
working on the manuscript I was quite angry, because it was so difficult,” she 
said. “But after a few weeks I realised I could understand him, and I felt 
close to him.”
 