
The screen legend and activist Jane Fonda said she’s prepared to do “whatever 
I need to do” to counter a DonaldTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>, and called the 
president-elect a sexist “boy in a bully pulpit” who is missing an opportunity 
to be an eco-hero.

The actor let loose on Trump’s choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
 to head the Environmental Protection Agency, the global-warming skeptic Scott 
Pruitt, and called the pick her “greatest fear” about the incoming 
administration.

Gloria Steinem: 'Fewer people will say we live in a post-racist, post-feminist 
world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/11/gloria-steinem-feminism-womens-rights-donald-trump>
A self-confessed late bloomer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/10/jane-fonda-feminism-womens-rights>
 as a feminist, Fonda also predicted that women’s rights “are going to come 
under incredible attack” at the federal and state level in the aftermath of the 
Trump electionvictory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
.

But she chose the environment when asked to name her biggest worry about a 
Trump White House in an interview with the Guardian.

“We are confronted by someone who is against the very existence of the agency 
he’s being put in charge of. There are many dangers with Trump but the 
difference here is that we have no time. The tipping point for climate change 
is looming,” Fonda said.

Experts are warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
 that Pruitt will be an “unprecedented disaster” for the environment, not just 
in the US but the world if he leads the charge to unwind Barack Obama’s push 
against carbon emissions and pollution and his commitment to the globalagreement
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
 signed in Paris to combat soaring atmospheric and ocean temperatures.

“That’s what scares me the most. I will not be around to see the ultimate 
fallout from climate change, but it’s coming. I hoped the fact that he was 
meeting with Al Gore meant that he was open to seeing the light, but then he 
appointed Pruitt,” she said.

Gore, a Nobel prize-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/oct/12/climatechange.internationalnews>
 environment campaigner and Bill Clinton’s vice-president,met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/dec/05/al-gore-ascends-trumps-tower>
 with Donald Trump in New York last Monday and declared afterward that it was a 
“productive session” and they expected to talk further.

Three days later Trump announced his new head of the EPA would be Pruitt, the 
attorney general of Oklahoma who has been one of the chief architects of 
state-led legalchallenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
 to Obama’s environmental agenda.

Unlike Gore and his fellow eco-campaigner Leonardo DiCaprio, who met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/leonardo-dicaprio-donald-trump-green-jobs>
 Trump last Wednesday, Fonda has failed in apparent attempts to connect with 
the president-elect to argue the case for action on climate change.

Her voice heavy with sarcastic humor, Fonda described her unorthodox efforts 
to win an audience with Trump prior to his naming Pruitt.

“I was hoping there was some way I could reach Trump. He knows my favorite 
ex-husband, Ted Turner, who’s a staunch environmentalist; he knows me. I 
thought if I come with Ted and some gorgeous women and explain to him that he 
is in a position where he can save the world ... but it’s too late now because 
of his appointment of Pruitt,” she said.

Fonda said she had hoped to visit the president-elect’s Trump Tower residence 
and offices in New York with the actorsPamela Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/02/pamela-anderson-rabbi-pornography-shumley-boteach>
 andRachel McAdams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/24/rachel-mcadams-five-best-moments>
, who had agreed to lobby with her, she said.

“I wanted to have beautiful celebrities who are very smart and passionate – to 
get his attention - and I would have said: ‘You can turn the rust belt into the 
green belt and save the environment and jobs,’” she said.

Fonda indicated that she wanted Trump to develop an economic strategy that 
would create jobs developing clean energy equipment in areas where traditional 
industry is in decline and frustrated voters had turned to the real estate 
magnate as a savior.

“The people who voted him in in the rust belt, most are not gloating, they are 
not thrilled with him, and they are going to be hurt and disappointed under his 
administration,” she said.

Fonda, 78, is currently starring in the TV series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/08/grace-and-frankie-jane-fonda-lily-tomlin>
 Grace and Frankie, with Lily Tomlin, and remains a vigorous political activist.

In 1972, the year she won her first best actress Oscar, she also became known 
worldwide for her activism when she traveled to Hanoi to protest US bombing 
damage during the Vietnam war.

Jane Fonda at 78: ‘I’ve had tragedies. It’s nice to know you can survive’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/29/my-family-values-jane-fonda-actress-henry-fonda>
She spoke to the Guardian last Thursday at an event for Donor Direct Action, a 
New York-based non-profit she is involved with that supports women’s causes 
around the world and is campaigning with the Nigerian women’s organization 
WRAPA to rescue almost 200 girls still beingheld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/nigerian-families-celebrate-after-release-of-21-girls-kidnapped-by-boko-haram>
 by the extremist rebel group Boko Haram after amass abduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/28/obiageli-ezekwesili-bring-back-our-girls-boko-haram-school-kidnapping>
 in 2014.

Fonda called the women standing up for feminist rights in countries like 
Nigeria “fierce” and said that women and other activists in the US must be 
ready to counterattack expected threats to their freedom in a Trump 
administration.

“In Trump we have a boy in the bully pulpit. He is sexist and his whole sense 
of self is based around dominating women,” said Fonda.

“He does not like a free press and wants to shrink government, and people are 
going to be really badly hurt by that, so they will start protesting and there 
will be a further militarization of the police in response.”

She intends to continue with her activism and said she would do “whatever it 
takes” to make her voice heard in resistance to Trump.

She declined to be specific about what that could include but hinted at direct 
action.

“I’m old now – what have I got to lose?”
 