



Sarah Waters

I first read Jane Eyre as a teenager, but have returned to it many times 
since; it is one of those novels that, with each rereading, only seems to grow 
richer. My favourite lines come just over halfway through, when Jane is engaged 
in one of her many wrangles with the teasing Mr Rochester. “Do you think,” she 
asks him, “because I am poor, obscure, plain, and little, I am soulless and 
heartless? You think wrong!” The lines capture part of the appeal that the book 
has always had for me: the small, unglamorous, passionate figure staking her 
claim to equality, insisting on her right to feel, to act, to matter. 
Meanwhile, however, up on “the fateful third storey” of Thornfield Hall, the 
inconvenient first wife gives her “goblin ha! ha!” … What I love most aboutJane 
Eyre is the way it combines vastly different narrative registers, with mad 
Bertha Rochester prowling just below the realist surface and occasionally 
erupting though it to start a fire, bite a shoulder or rend a wedding veil. 
With her, Brontë created the sort of gothic icon – like Dracula or Mr Hyde – 
that it is now hard to imagine the world ever having been without. Just like 
Jane herself, Bertha lives on in many forms – and gets her own story, of 
course, in another inspiring novel,Jean Rhys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/22/jean-rhys-novelist-yearning-rage-desire>
’s prequel toJane Eyre, a brilliant bit of post-colonial revisionism Wide 
Sargasso Sea <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wide-sargasso-sea-4.html>.

Tessa Hadley

Jane Eyre is so built into the shape of my imagination that I can hardly think 
about it critically; I’m always in among its trees – the sturdy, northern, 
low-growing hawthorn and hazel bushes of its terrain – and can’t 
dispassionately estimate the size of the wood. The novel touches not one 
responsive note in me, but a whole sequence of them, each quite distinct. 
There’s the little girl Jane, reading and dreaming in her window seat behind 
the drawn curtain, looking through the glass at the dreary November afternoon 
outside. There’s Jane the governess at Thornfield, knowing she ought to be 
grateful because she is employed and fed and sheltered, yet still divinely 
discontented.“Anybody may blame me who likes … I longed for a power of vision 
which might overpass that limit.” There’s Jane after she has inherited her 
fortune, joyously and fervidly domestic, cleaning down Moor House from chamber 
to cellar, getting ready for Christmas. And then there’s the dreamlike 
reconciliation with Rochester at the end of the novel, dark with the “small, 
penetrating rain” of overgrown Ferndean.

I do have my reservations; I’ve never been able to believe in Mr Rochester and 
his ponderous teasing courtship, no matter how hard I try. I don’t think
Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> had met 
enough worldly men – he sounds like an unworldly woman’s idea of one. But the 
novel entrances me, literally – there are any number of passages that induce a 
submission in me that goes beyond critical appreciation: they have a dream-like 
power. Its symbolism, woven into the textures of its realism, transports me 
each time to the familiar ritual place, with its secret life that doesn’t fail. 
The morning after Jane’s coming together with Rochester in the orchard at 
Thornfield, “the great horse chestnut at the bottom of the orchard had been 
struck by lightning in the night, and half of it split away”.

Jeanette Winterson

We didn’t have books at home except for the Bible and books about the Bible. 
But Mrs Winterson, my mother, must have been well read at one time because she 
decided to readJane Eyre to me when I was seven. Jane Eyre was deemed suitable 
because it has a minister in it, St John Rivers, who is keen on missionary 
work. There is the terrible fire at Thornfield Hall and poor Mr Rochester goes 
blind, but Jane doesn’t bother about her now sightless paramour; she marries St 
John Rivers and they go off together to the mission field. My mother read out 
loud, turning the pages and inventing the text extempore in the style of 
Brontë. Only years later, reading it for myself, did I discover what she had 
done. It was an invaluable lesson for a writer; no story is the final one.

Margaret Drabble

I remember being gripped by two aspects when I first read Jane Eyre at the age 
of 10 or 11 – the horrible school at Lowood and the mad woman in the attic. The 
Lowood episode is the most frightening boarding school story ever written, and, 
of course, all children, me included, think they are friendless, persecuted and 
despised, and identify with the poor orphan. The meals of burned porridge were 
nearly as bad as the processed peas and gristle stew of Sheffield girls’ high. 
I don’t know why the fate of Bertha Mason simultaneously attracted and 
terrified me so much, but it did. I don’t think it was for protofeminist 
reasons: it was more a fear of fire and madness, though its subliminal power 
was obvious even to a child. As an adolescent, I suppose I became more 
interested in the love affair, though by then I had readWuthering Heights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights.html> and much preferred 
Heathcliff to Rochester, and the fairytale wish-fulfilment elements inJane Eyre 
I already found annoying and disturbing. On rereading in old age, I now find 
the arch, self-righteous and implausible dialogues between Jane and Rochester 
boring: they serve to remind one thatVillette 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/villette-7.html> is a much greater work. 
Maybe I prefer tragedy to romance. But I do now find the St John theme of 
temptation-to-virtue more resonant than I did, and Brontë’s dreams of red room 
wombs and lost babies are very powerful. Also, I do now see more clearly why 
she shocked her contemporaries so much:Matthew Arnold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/matthew-arnold> was right when he said she 
was full of “hunger, rebellion and rage”. Jane does not even attempt to hide 
her greed and need for love. It is painful to read of her longings, and even 
more painful to know they were never to be satisfied.

Esther Freud

I was 14 or 15 and living on the top floor of a communal house in a small 
village in Sussex when I first readJane Eyre. It was the most romantic book I’d 
come across, and it ignited in me the idea – surely already smouldering – that 
there was someone out there who would see the grand heroine that was really me, 
and not the “small, plain” person I presented. I had a bedroom with a balcony 
that looked out over a large terraced garden, and I used to lean over it and 
see if I could catch sight of the current object of my affections, a married 
man who lived on the ground floor, with whom I was carrying on a romance of 
epic proportions, fuelled only by an occasional glance in my direction, the 
offer of a lift to the next village and, once, the soulful handing over of a 
flower. I found out later that he was in fact having an affair with the woman 
who rented two rooms on either side of the front door, and although in that 
instance – and, sadly, in many others – my intuition was out, it was Jane 
Eyre’s psychic ability to know when she was being called to that has stayed 
with me most profoundly. When I next read the book, and recently, while 
listening toRachel Joyce’s luminous adaptation on the radio 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b071skpc>, I was struck by the extraordinary 
directness with which Rochester and Jane communicate. It thrills me, as it must 
have thrilled readers in 1847, how their talk transcends convention – cutting 
through politeness, forcing an intimacy that leaves them reeling, altered.

“Your smile did not strike my heart for nothing,” Rochester tells Jane when 
she saves him from the fire, and then, noticing she is shivering with cold and 
shock, he tells her she must go. But she can’t go. He still has hold of her 
hand. It is this yearning, this connection, this idea that there is something 
out there bigger than us, that makes so many readers – me among them – respond 
to Brontë’s masterpiece so powerfully.

Andrew Motion

I knew about Jane Eyre for a long time before I read it. Handsome Mr Rochester 
with his gothic dash and flair, plain Jane with her habit of lurking in window 
seats; it was an archetype of one kind of love affair, and in its way more 
sympathetic than the more glamorous coupling of Heathcliff and Cathy. More 
sympathetic because more encouraging to an adolescent (regardless of their 
gender) with low self-esteem. Then there was the mad woman in the attic. Didn’t 
all homes have such a creature – even when there was no attic and no lunatic – 
in the sense that the attic was a head space as well as a room space, in which 
invisible injustices and wildness were stored, ready to burst into the world 
and create havoc at any moment?

I expect I saw a film version too, which would have reinforced all these 
impressions. But the book itself … I didn’t read it until I went to work at the 
University of Hull in 1976 when I was 23 and found that I had to teach it. 
Although I still feel embarrassed to have arrived at the table too late, I 
comfort myself by thinking that at least I was more or less ready for it.

Ready, in particular, for something I’d not previously known about. Which is 
Brontë’s very clever meshing of a plausibly rendered world (and I could easily 
see how well rendered by visiting Haworth from Hull), with a world that is 
pretty much pure fantasy. I don’t just mean fantasy in terms of those gothic 
elements, but in the bending of hard facts (the contemporary laws of the land) 
to bring Jane to her eventual reward. In this respect, the book is truthful 
about cruelty (Bertha’s fate, especially), but it is also life-affirming. The 
central tension between actualities and make-believe anticipates the tragic 
plea at the end ofVillette: “leave sunny imaginations hope”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F218d89a731d11c096631957fea606a1c8694c4a2%2F0_155_1633_980%2F1633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Eyre%20by%20Sarah%20Waters%2C%20Margaret%20Drabble%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Eyre%20by%20Sarah%20Waters%2C%20Margaret%20Drabble%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F218d89a731d11c096631957fea606a1c8694c4a2%2F0_155_1633_980%2F1633.jpg>
Bertha by Paula Rego. Illustration: Copyright Paula Rego. Courtesy of 
Marlborough Fine Art 


Maggie O’Farrell

Like many people, I first read Jane Eyre in my early teens, in the first flush 
of excitement at swapping my children’s library card for an adult one. The back 
cover promised a thrilling love story between a poor, plain girl and a 
brooding, troubled landowner. Later that night, I found myself wrong-footed. 
What, I wondered, was this neglect and abuse of an orphan child? Whose was this 
frank, unwavering voice? By the time Jane was locked by her heartless aunt into 
the terrifying red room, I had forgotten all about the promised love story. I 
pressed on, late into the night, straight into Lowood and the deprivations at 
the hands of religious fanatics.

I had, in short, never read anything like it. The shock and thrill of 
discovering this book, aged 13, continues to run in my veins. I read it without 
a single preconception; I knew nothing about it. I was as unprepared as those 
first Victorian readers for Rochester, for the fire, for the stalled marriage, 
for the lunatic locked away in the attic.

If Jane Eyre taught me anything as an astonished 13-year-old, it was to 
strive, to push my reach beyond my grasp, not to settle for compromise. When we 
studied the book at university, Brontë’s words were filtered for me through 
various frameworks of academic theory.Jane Eyre is a feminist novel, I was 
told. Or it is the link between the epistolary and the gothic novel. It is the 
precursor to all stream-of-consciousness writing. It is a psychological tract 
about doubles and doppelgangers, addressing levels of human consciousness. It 
is all these things and yet none of them. One of the reasonsJane Eyre continues 
to provoke so much discussion and theorising is that, like Jane herself, it 
eludes definition. It does one thing with its right hand while doing quite 
another with its left.

Thirty years on, I still haven’t read anything like it. Jane Eyre remains the 
book I return to the most. I read it every couple of years. Parts I know off by 
heart, yet each time I come away with something different. It is my datum, my 
pole star, the novel by which all others shall be measured.

Polly Samson

I read Wide Sargasso Sea 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wide-sargasso-sea-4.html> before I ever got to
Jane Eyre. It wasn’t until my youngest son was set Jane Eyre for A-level that I 
finally read it (I thought I had but it turned out I’d only osmosed it from the 
air and screen).Wide Sargasso Sea, I’d read several times. Reading them the 
wrong way round, which happens to be chronologically the right way round, does 
rather spoil the romance: leaving you alert to a morally derelict rather than a 
Byronic Rochester. Jane falls for a man whose degeneracy and sadism drove his 
first wife mad. Lushly erotic and deeply disturbing, Rhys’s book bleeds very 
darkly into Brontë’s.

Throughout the exquisite suffering and withholding dance of Jane and 
Rochester’s courtship, you are thinking, ‘Please no, Jane, not after all we’ve 
been through so intimately together, the beatings and privations, the 
humiliations and near-starvations. Did love deafen you when he told you of 
roaming Europe and setting up home with three separate courtesans? What of his 
STDs?’

And what of poor little Adèle, the abandoned child of his Parisian mistress? 
There he is, pampering her withcadeaux while referring to her repeatedly and 
within her hearing as “it”, and remarking on her stupidity. Why did he take her 
in if he despises her so? And then, Rhys whispers in your ear and you shudder 
to remember that inWide Sargasso Sea Rochester has sex with a servant girl, who 
can’t have been more than a child.

And on to the spectacle of the mad woman in his attic: unkempt and ugly, 
raving and knifing and biting. Rhys won’t allow you to dismiss her as some sort 
of mythical vampyre, or even Jane’s rebellious alter ego. InWide Sargasso Sea, 
she is a beautiful but fragile Creole heiress whom Rochester marries for her 
fortune, and on his honeymoon is already resenting for her “disconcertingly 
non-European” eyes.

It is never made clear in Jane Eyre from what form of madness the first Mrs 
Rochester is suffering. Something must have turned her from a beautiful bride 
into this swollen, purple monster. Given what Brontë tells us of his 
decade-long lost weekend, does it seem unlikely that Rochester has given her 
syphilis?

And then, up on the roof, among the flames of Thornfield Hall, Rochester loses 
his hand, his left hand, the one he gave in marriage. According toJane Eyre, 
the woman he gave it to jumps, thus freeing him to marry Jane. Oh dear. Reader, 
I can’t help but think he pushed her.

Helen Dunmore

What I love most about Jane Eyre is the ferocity of her radicalism. She 
refuses to see the world as it tells her it should be seen. She will speak out, 
although she is a friendless nobody: small, pale, plain and female. From the 
first page there are hints of the fire that burns in her. Jane is out of 
favour, banished from the family hearth. She hides away in her own no man’s 
land, a window seat where she sits “cross-legged, like a Turk”, revelling in 
the pages ofBewick’s History of British Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/25/book-inspired-charlotte-bronte-bewick-history-british-birds>
. A drawn red curtain conceals her from the room, while the glass protects her 
from “ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly from a long and lamentable blast”.

Jane Eyre is between two worlds and belongs in neither, although she will have 
to live in both during the course of the novel. She will be a beggar-maid, 
exposed on the moors, and a princess wooed by the King of Thornfield Hall, Mr 
Rochester. Neither will satisfy her. Jane’s quest is long and solitary, and she 
is protected only by her fiery spirit and incisive intelligence. But if Jane 
Eyre has fairytale and mythic qualities, she is also an intensely political 
creation. Jane genuinely does not believe that morality has anything to do with 
wealth, power or social standing. She repudiates the idea that women’s mental 
capacities are less than those of men. She would rather live alone than accept 
a relationship that compromises her independence. Strong stuff even in our 
times, but revolutionary in 1847. At 10 years old she castigates rich, powerful 
Mrs Reed for her hypocrisy and cruelty. At 18 she sets out into the world to 
support herself, having done everything possible to secure an education.

Her relationship with Mr Rochester is, to put it mildly, challenging. She will 
not be flattered: she must be an equal. Is Jane Eyre lovable? Perhaps not. She 
is intensely critical, and quick to scorn. There is no warmth of humour in her. 
She is elemental, with “rather a look of another world” as Rochester says, and 
yet at times extraordinarily prosaic. But if not lovable, she is utterly 
compelling. There was no one like Jane Eyre before she blazed on to the page, 
and into a million imaginations.

Blake Morrison

I grew up not many miles from Haworth, in a vicarage at the top of a village; 
my mother, likePatrick Brontë 
<http://haworth-village.org.uk/brontes/patrick/patrick.asp>, had come from 
Ireland; the landscape we looked out on resembled the one Jane Eyre wanders 
through after fleeing Thornfield Hall: “[the roads] are all cut in the moor, 
and the heather grows wild and deep.” The novel wasn’t on the syllabus at my 
grammar school; no self-respecting teenage boy would have wanted to be seen 
with it. But the sense of recognition I felt when I read it was immense. All 
adolescents feel like victims, and the mistreatment of Jane in the early 
chapters, first by Mrs Reed then by Mr Brocklehurst, put me firmly on her side. 
I too knew what it was like to be humiliated in class (the slate-dropping 
episode) and to lose a close friend (as she does Helen Burns). I too distrusted 
wealth and finery. Never mind Jane’s gender: it was the two of us against the 
world! Whether Mr Rochester would prove worthy seemed doubtful. The romantic 
denouement engaged me less than the impediments along the way: Miss Ingram; mad 
Bertha (we too had a scary attic); the halting of the wedding ceremony. But I 
liked the teasing and banter, and there were ideas to grapple with, too, about 
class and work and beauty. Above all, there was Jane’s denunciation of female 
servitude. Women, she says, “need exercise for their faculties … they suffer 
from too rigid a restraint, too absolute a stagnation, precisely as men would 
suffer; and it is narrow-minded … to say they ought to confine themselves to 
making puddings”.A hundred and twenty years after the book came out, that idea 
still met occasional resistance, especially in laddish rural outposts. But Jane 
Eyre showed it was plain common sense. Soon we’d all be readingThe Female Eunuch
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/female-eunuch.html>. But Charlotte Brontë 
led the way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37f5f01e094ac9366a56aaf7916c5615d955e00%2F0_0_2284_1511%2F2284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Eyre%20by%20Sarah%20Waters%2C%20Margaret%20Drabble%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Eyre%20by%20Sarah%20Waters%2C%20Margaret%20Drabble%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fcharlotte-bronte-bicentenary-birth-jane-eyre-by-sarah-waters-margaret-drabble-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37f5f01e094ac9366a56aaf7916c5615d955e00%2F0_0_2284_1511%2F2284.jpg>
Jane and Helen by Paula Rego. Illustration: Copyright Paula Rego. Courtesy of 
Marlborough Fine Art 
Julie Myerson

I first read Jane Eyre propped up in my little single bed with a shawl around 
my shoulders in a cold and creaking attic room at the top of a house in the 
middle of the starless Nottinghamshire countryside. The room, my old and once 
beloved bedroom, was badly lit, unheated, dusty and forlorn. It hadn’t always 
been so. But that summer our mother had left our father in a most spectacular 
fashion – at dead of night, taking half the furniture, all our pets and all 
three of us children with her. And my father vented his rage in the only way he 
knew how: by replacing nothing, leaving the house – and especially our bedrooms 
– to grow sad and dusty and unloved, a reminder each time we visited 
(fortnightly as the court decreed) of how our terrible mother had ruined our 
once “happy” family life.

I could not have wished for a better setting in which to get to know the 
Brontës. Charlotte, Emily, Anne – all of them kept me company in that cold and 
sad little room. I was 13 and I knew very little about anything, but suddenly 
here it all was: injustice and illness, death, shame, fear and secrecy – not to 
mention the possibility of love in unexpected or even inconvenient places.

I have read the novel since and always found something new to love. But my 
abiding sense of it then, as well as now, is of Jane herself – her sheer, 
steady-hearted goodness. Throughout the novel, from start to finish, she 
unwaveringly tells the truth. Such clarity and, in an odd way, such calm. It 
felt like something worth aspiring to. It still does.

Cornelia Parker

I identified strongly with Jane and her painful childhood when I first read 
Jane Eyre as a teenager as I was having quite a painful one myself (though 
perhaps not as bad as hers). So later in the book when she overcame her 
shyness, threw off her childhood problems and then became this incredibly 
strong woman, it was emotional and cathartic. I reread it in 2006 when on a 
residency at Haworth Parsonage. Back in London in the British Library I 
actually got to leaf through the original text, neatly written in three musty 
notebooks. She had obviously copied out the manuscript many times but this was 
her final draft, so seeing where she had deleted a single word here and there 
made the hairs on the back of my neck stand up. There were about 50 corrections 
in all, which I recorded through photographs: “crimson” was crossed out and 
replaced by “purple”; “soul” was changed to “spirit”, “glimpse” became “idea”. 
I also took images through an electron microscope of tiny punctures in 
Charlotte’s pincushion, holes that she made unconsciously when sewing, and of 
split ends in the little plait of Emily’s hair that had been kept after she 
died. The Brontës and their characters have attracted so much literary 
attention, been the subject of so many Hollywood films, it seemed appropriate 
to work with the seemingly inconsequential traces, the tiny little frictions of 
everyday life.

When my daughter read it at school a couple of years ago, it was touching to 
read out passages to one another. The book has stayed with me all my life and I 
was pleased that she loved it too.

John Mullan

I did not read Jane Eyre until I was in my 20s and fancied I was an educated 
judge of the means by which novels achieved their effects – but I still found 
it simply overpowering. The novel’s first readers, either appalled or 
enraptured, thought that they had never heard a narrative voice like Jane 
Eyre’s, so truculent and dissatisfied. And that voice is still the thing. 
Jane’s dissatisfaction is magnificent – a deep hunger for warmth and love, but 
even more for truth and freedom.

I love the book for refusing to trick you into loving it. Jane Eyre takes the 
reader into her confidence like no narrator before in English fiction, yet does 
so in order to correct you, or wrangle with you, or even admonish you. “Oh 
romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!” What daring! To 
invent a narrator who demands our intimacy but remains so intelligently 
suspicious of our sympathy. She will not charm us: so, though often sardonic, 
she is almost never humorous (“Do you never laugh, Miss Eyre?” asks Mr 
Rochester).

Above all, she is weirdly eloquent. I love her strange, elevated language, 
distilled from religious texts and literary romance – the Bible and Byron 
stirred together: “Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as 
aromatic wine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy.” This is Jane recalling 
how, at 10 years old, she defeats her cruel Aunt Reed in dispute. As everywhere 
else inJane Eyre, her highly wrought words make experience fresh and intense 
once again.

Helen Simpson

I was 10 when first I read Jane Eyre, thrilled that this heroine of a grown-up 
book was the same age as me, for the first 100 pages at least. The book itself 
was small, crimson, second-hand, its print fascinatingly spidery on very thin 
paper. I asked for another one like that when my 11th birthday came round and 
received a Brontë bargain bumper-pack. More than three inches thick and almost 
3lbs in weight (I’ve just checked), three sisters for the price of one, it 
lumped Emily and Anne in with Charlotte.

Having said thank you, I returned discreetly to the little second-hand 
edition. The child heroine’s first-person centrality, her super-sensitivity to 
injustice and her impassioned yet powerless state all commanded my readerly 
identification. Jane and I were one as we defied Aunt Reed, rubbed our 
chilblains, reveredRasselas 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/history-of-rasselas-prince-of-abissinia.html>
-reading Helen Burns, raged at the headband marked “Slattern”. Ah, the solace 
of Miss Temple’s seed cake! And how rousing were Jane’s regular Miltonic blasts 
against tyranny; though I find on recent rereading that she was not quite the 
revolutionary I took her for (domestic endearment and household joys are “the 
best things the world has”, she declares to refrigerator suitor St John Rivers 
somewhere inJane Eyre’s remaining four-fifths). Even so, who could resist a 
novel where the heroine sets her course by the moral compass of Bunyan’s 
pilgrim while her passions blaze with Byronic ardour from beginning to end? I 
took it to heart when I was 10, and there it has stayed.

Polly Teale

When I reread Jane Eyre as an adult it was not the horror story I remembered, 
but a psychological drama of the most potent kind. Everyone and everything 
seemed larger than life, as if seen through the magnifying glass of Jane’s 
psyche, a reflection of her inner world. Like many others I was curious as to 
why Brontë had invented a madwoman locked in an attic to torment her heroine? I 
was intrigued by the mythic power of Bertha Mason, by Brontë’s repulsion and 
attraction to her own creation. Her danger and eroticism. Her terrifying rage. 
Why was Jane, a seemingly rational young woman, haunted by a vengeful she 
devil? (I was inspired to write my playAfter Mrs Rochester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/jul/25/theatre.artsfeatures>, about 
Jean Rhys, while adaptingJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/aug/13/theatre.classics> for the 
theatre.)

Of course, the novel begins with another image of incarceration: another 
female locked up for breaking the rules. Jane Eyre is shut in the red room 
when, for the first time in her life, she allows her temper to erupt. Jane is 
told “God will strike you dead in the midst of one of your tantrums”. She is so 
terrified she loses consciousness. The message is clear: for a girl to express 
her passionate nature is to invite the severest of punishments. Jane must keep 
her fiery spirit locked away if she is to survive. Like Jane (and Brontë 
herself), I understood this fear of one’s own nature. A large part of the 
novel’s power lies in our knowledge of the passionate forbidden self that lurks 
beneath the controlled exterior of our heroine.

Although Brontë spent most of her life in a remote Yorkshire village, she 
longed to travel beyond the horizon of her restricted existence. She and her 
siblings read the travelogues at the back of their father’s newspaper, 
recycling them into fantastical stories. It is significant that Bertha is a 
foreigner. She comes from the world of Brontë’s imagination, from a land of 
tropical storms and hurricanes. She is both dangerous and exciting. She is 
passionate and sexual. She is angry and violent. The embodiment of everything 
that Jane, a Victorian woman, could never be. Is she, I wonder, everything that 
Brontë feared in herself and longed to express?

Samantha Ellis

The trouble is that I read Wuthering Heights first. I lost my heart to Cathy 
Earnshaw (and, to be truthful, to Heathcliff), and next to her passion, her 
wildness, her rage, Jane seemed dull. Why would I read about her stoically 
suffering at school, plodding through her teaching jobs and marrying her boss 
when I could rock out with my hairbrush microphone, pretending I wasKate Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kate-bush>? I was banging on about this when 
we made the pilgrimage to the moors for my bookHow to Be a Heroine 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-be-a-heroine-2.html>, and my best 
friend Emma made me reconsider. She argued that Jane was independent and 
principled, a woman who stayed true to herself, didn’t suffer fools and fought 
her way to a hard-won happy ending.

Reading Jane Eyre again as an adult was a revelation. I loved how Jane 
addressed me boldly from the first page, how she challenged the injustices of 
her aunt’s household (a place where books were used as weapons), how she raged 
at Rochester that “women feel just as men feel” and how she rejected her 
cousin’s passionless proposal, because she wanted love and she didn’t see why 
she shouldn’t get it. Plus, withJane Eyre, you get two heroines in one: angry, 
misunderstood Bertha is much, much more than just a madwoman in the attic, and 
nothing in the novel is as powerful as her final moment, standing on the 
battlements of the house she has set fire to, “black hair … streaming against 
the flames”.

I am still grateful to Wuthering Heights for encouraging a shy and awkward 
teenager to be a little wild. I still find Rochester bullying and creepy. And I 
have started to see how much Charlotte owes to her little sister Anne, who got 
there first with her portrayal of a plain, poor governess, inAgnes Grey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/agnes-grey-4.html>. I think I’ll be reading 
(and arguing about)Jane Eyre for the rest of my life.

Mick Jackson

I grew up not far from Haworth so we would spend the occasional day over 
there, trooping up and down the high street and creeping round the parsonage. 
When I was about 10 my parents took me to see an adaptation ofJane Eyre at the 
local cinema. I remember watching Jane breaking the ice on the water to wash in 
the morning and being made to stand on a stool with a sign around her neck, 
thinking, “What on earth are we doing watching this poor girl suffer? There’s a 
Bond movie on next door.” We had a Penguin edition ofJane Eyre around the house 
and by the time I finally picked it up, both the story and the author seemed 
quite familiar – along with the landscape, which was pretty much the one I saw 
when I stepped out of my front door.

It must have planted a seed of some sort. About 15 years ago I read an article 
about Haworth being such a popular destination for Japanese tourists that the 
signposts around the moors are in English and Japanese. On talking to some 
Japanese visitors I found out thatJane Eyre had been a set text at school and 
that theJoan Fontaine/Orson Welles adaptation 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0036969/> had been on TV when they were growing 
up. Something about the gothic, romantic elements ofJane Eyre and Wuthering 
Heights seemed to appeal to them and had come to represent a certain idea of 
England/Englishness.

My novel, Yuki Chan in Brontë Country 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368727/>, grew out of 
those initial conversations: the idea of Haworth as a shrine town; of 
Charlotte’s shoes and locks of hair as sacred relics; and how the Brontës 
themselves have become characters in a mythology that is quite beyond their 
realm.

Joanna Briscoe

As a child given to reading on window seats, I was supremely lucky to come 
acrossJane Eyre at the age of the protagonist: 10 when the novel begins. The 
heroine and inspiration for all of us who were also “obscure, plain and 
little”, Jane was my bookish soulmate with infinitely worse outsider status, 
providing fuel to every orphan fantasy that would explain my lot.Jane Eyre 
taught the young reader so much about suffering, about true friendship and 
love, and about courage. It demanded to be reread many times. To this day, I 
see Jane as one of the great heroines: she is utterly determined, while not 
given to flouncy foot stamping in theScarlett O’Hara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-with-the-wind>, Holly Golightly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/sep/15/holly-golightly-great-gatsby>
 orBecky Sharp <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/vanity-fair-7.html> vein, yet 
more spirited in her integrity thanDorothea Brooke 
<http://www.shmoop.com/middlemarch/dorothea-brooke.html> or Esther Summerson 
<https://blogs.baylor.edu/britlit/2015/04/23/who-is-esther-summerson/>.

As a young adult, I deliberately used the novel to initiate weeping sessions 
in order to siphon off other griefs, and somehow, I now realise, absorbed the 
desire to marry complex protagonists with dark and twisted storytelling, the 
novel influencing me as both a writer and reader. Now that it is all less 
personal and I don’t find myself dreaming about my baronial hall catching fire, 
I regard it as a masterpiece of both entertainment and literature. As withDu 
Maurier <https://www.theguardian.com/books/daphnedumaurier>’s Rebecca 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rebecca.html>, it is clear why some critics 
regard it as overblown, but I interpret its more gothic elements as intensity 
rather than excess.

Linda Grant

My Everyman Library copy of Jane Eyre was awarded to me in 1965 when I was 14, 
and has a bookplate inside announcing that I was the winner of the Rosa 
Chambers prize for reading aloud (junior). The cover is stamped in gold with 
the school crest, a young helmeted woman in profile encircled by the motto 
Knowledge Is No More A Fountain Sealed. The edition dates from 1908 and had 
been last reprinted in 1963. This is the only copy ofJane Eyre that I have ever 
owned and the print size is now almost too small to read. The next time I read 
the novel will be on a Kindle.

My teenage understanding of it – that Reader, she married him – was based on 
that happy ending, that the heroine had landed the Byronic figure of Rochester. 
Yet I retained a sense of discomfort, that compared withElizabeth Bennet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jan/12/advancement-women-literature-novelist>
 orEmma Woodhouse <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/emma-43.html> I could not 
help but feel that she had been landed with damaged goods. Perhaps the note of 
quiet triumph in Jane’s voice as she announces that she has sealed the deal of 
marriage has a freight of darkness: Rochester recovers some of his sight but 
cannot read or write; he can just about make out the face of his son. Rereading 
many years later, I was extremely curious, as I hadn’t been then, about the 
figure of the mad first wife, the animal-like Bertha, all hair and grunts. In 
Rhys’sWide Sargasso Sea I found the answer to Jane Eyre, that the pale figure 
glimpsed by Grace Poole had no idea what she was getting into. How perfect was 
her happiness really and how many couples tell the whole truth about their 
marriage? I can no longer read Brontë without Rhys.

Sarah Perry

I first read Jane Eyre when I was eight, having mistaken it for a children’s 
book. I had found it on my sister’s shelves: a small hardback I recall 
perfectly, though I last saw it 20 years ago. The covers were glossy white, the 
paper thin, and there were illustrations throughout. The print was alarmingly 
small, but it appeared to be about a poor orphan packed off to boarding school 
before having adventures in a haunted house: all very appealing.

It is rare to be so affected by a book that one remembers exactly where and 
when one first read it, but I know that I knelt to read and from the first line 
– “There was no possibility of taking a walk that day” – was enthralled. Of 
course much of it passed me by - but I’d been raised on a rich and frequently 
indigestible diet of the King James Bible, and was used to breaking my teeth on 
hard sentences. What I understood, I understood with awe, amazement and 
absolute belief. I am certain it has formed my idea of all that is desirable in 
literature and life: the indomitable heroine concealing the heart of an eagle 
in the body of a sparrow; the tenderness of friends; the anguished tussle 
between love and honour; the strangeness and power of religion; the potency of 
the natural world; the danger of madness and deceit; the irresistible 
compulsion between a man and a woman who ought, really, to want nothing to do 
with each other.

It is years since I last read it, but certain phrases are as familiar and dear 
to me as holy writ; not least when I feel – as Jane so often felt – diminished, 
uncertain, torn between irreconcilable imperatives: “I am no bird; and no net 
ensnares me: I am a free human being with an independent will.”

• Reader, I Married Him: Stories Inspired by Jane Eyre 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385524//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, edited by Tracy Chevalier, is published by HarperCollins. Jane Eyre 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jane-eyre-70.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is reissued this month as a Vintage Classic.
 