
Already the most-anticipated TV show of next year, Newsroom was garnering buzz 
and dividing internet talkboards when it was still known as UntitledAaron Sorkin
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin> Project For HBO.

Now, the drama set behind the scenes of a nightly news bulletin not dissmilar 
to Keith Olbermann's Countdownhas secured the services of one Jane Fonda 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/jane-fonda-aaron-sorkin-hbo-drama-273823>
 in her first TV role. Fonda, pleasingly, will play a character not a million 
miles from her ex-husband, the father of cable news Ted Turner."Leona Lansing, 
the CEO of the cable news network's parent company whose ideals often clash 
with the news outlet". 
<http://www.tvline.com/2011/12/jane-fonda-aaron-sorkin-hbo-newsroom/>

As if the idea of an HBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> series 
scripted by Sorkin wasn't exciting enough, the combination of arch knowingness, 
a TV first and a feminine icon is too delightful not to celebrate.

Though the internet has largely been purged of the (inevitably) leaked pilot 
script which made the rounds recently,some fragments remain dotted around Tumblr
 <http://www.tumblr.com/tagged/more-as-this-story-develops>. (If you can find 
the whole thing, do post in the comments. This whole blog post is one longSOPA 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/piracy> nightmare, so I don't know why 
we'd stop above the line.)

For the Sorkin fan, you see, the anticipation might be the safest bit. We've 
been here before and we got Studio 60 â€“ which I never accepted was 
irredeemable. Flawed, but never irredeemable.

We know Sorkin likes to reuse and recycle. So there may be some clues in the 
back catalogue as to how this series may work out. So, as an excuse for a romp 
round the best bits of Sorkin's work is, let's take a look at whatThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing> in a newsroom might 
look like.

A heightened sense of responsibility and duty to truth telling from key 
characters who know their job is not just fun it's important:

You know what sir, don't talk to me like I'm other people. The four of us are 
news directors and there isn't a day that one of us isn't begging the person we 
work for to let us for the love of Jesus Christ do the news.

"Is the Republican nominee Rob Ritchie? Yes. Is his running mate Jeff Hesten? 
Yes. And that question, as impossible as it may be to believe becomes even less 
suspenseful when talking about the Democratic ticket.

"And will there be anything of any force or consequence in the
platform? No. Will there be a floor fight over it? What does it matter? And 
you're getting huffed because the four of us are questioning the wisdom of 
presenting a four-day infomercial, in primetime, under network news, simulcast?

"We'll show the acceptance speeches. And the balloons. The balloons aren't 
news but it's nice television.

A clannish group of work-obsessed preternaturally smart main characters who 
have no lives outside of the office.This is a certainty. No character in any 
Sorkin drama ever goes to the shops unless they're being followed by a stalker. 
It is a sign of weakness to have food in your fridge.

Very fast articulation of sometimes complex policy issues 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7U7QJu_Wsbk> using rhetoric threes, iambic 
pentameter and occasionally Latin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U7QJu_Wsbk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U7QJu_Wsbk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7U7QJu_Wsbk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Socialising between preternaturally smart main characters who have no lives 
outside of the office 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JW7CNba_dFI&feature=related>.

Solemn discussion of duty, civic responsibility and, above all, service 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZ9-3NxTzQ8> in terms that make it seem 
impossibly uncynical, desirable and above all likely.

"There isn't going to be a horse race to cover, either in New York or San 
Diego, but we gave you the air waves for free 70 years ago and 357 days a year, 
you can say who's up and who's down, who won the West and who lost the South.

"But what's wrong with 8 days, not every year but every 4 years, showing our 
leaders talking to us. Not a fraction of what they said but what they said?"

Savage mockery of lunacy of right wing evangelicals 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>. (Watch out Fox News!)
< Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrWuXpfXSl5Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrWuXpfXSl5Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrWuXpfXSl5Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 p>Insider-y battles between the press and politicians in which no one really 
wins <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aP3pl8MEEEc&feature=related>, but a good 
time is had by all <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>. 
Move over Jon Stewart. There will be some satirising of the pundit class 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FD93295KpIZw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FD93295KpIZw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FD93295KpIZw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 >Speeches <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TKIu0tjaL78>... Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTKIu0tjaL78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTKIu0tjaL78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTKIu0tjaL78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 >...thatsometimes seem familiar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iA_n0GxOzbc&feature=related>: Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiA_n0GxOzbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiA_n0GxOzbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiA_n0GxOzbc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 >Oh, all right. You can't handle the truth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5j2F4VcBmeo>.  