
Actor Jane Fonda has said that people should not be fooled by “good-looking 
liberals” such as the Canadian prime minister,Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, who “disappointed” her by 
approving pipelines from the Alberta oil sands.

Fonda said after touring the oil sands area that environmentalists everywhere 
were impressed by Trudeau at the Paris climate conference in late 2015.

Related: Environmentalists 'expected better' of Trudeau as Canada backs gas 
project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/canada-pacific-northwest-lng-natural-gas-pipeline-british-columbia>

“We all thought, well, cool guy,” Fonda said. “What a disappointment.”

“He talked so beautifully of needing to meet the requirements of the climate 
treaty and to respect and hold to the treaties with indigenous people. Such a 
heroic stance he took there, and yet he has betrayed every one of the things he 
committed to in Paris.”

Fonda, on a trip organized by Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, is calling for a stop to 
pipelines and oil sands development.

“I guess the lesson is we shouldn’t be fooled by good-looking liberals no 
matter how well-spoken they are,” Fonda said.

Last year, Trudeau approved Kinder Morgan’s plans to triple the capacity of 
the Trans Mountain pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/canada-approves-kinder-morgan-oil-pipeline-justin-trudeau>
 from Alberta to the Pacific coast, and he approved replacing Enbridge’s Line 3 
to Wisconsin.

But he also pushed ahead with a national carbon price and he rejected 
Enbridge’s Northern Gateway project to north-west British Columbia, which would 
pass through the Great Bear rainforest as his Liberal party government tries to 
balance the oil industry’s desire to tap new markets in Asia against the 
concerns of environmentalists.

Fonda, a 79-year-old political activist and two-time Oscar winner for best 
actress, is the latest celebrity to visit and express concerns about the 
Alberta oil sands. Actor Leonardo DiCaprio and Hollywood film director James 
Cameron have also visited.

Alberta’s premier, Rachel Notley, said Fonda is using her celebrity to promote 
ill-informed generalizations.

Notley said Fonda should not lecture oil workers about getting jobs elsewhere 
and added that it was “super tone deaf” for the actor to visit Fort McMurray, 
Alberta,so soon after devastating wildfires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/alberta-wildfire-fort-mcmurray-canada-cause-human-activity>
 that destroyed 2,400 homes and buildings.

Notley, who leads the left-leaning New Democratic party, also said Alberta has 
a plan that makes the province a climate leader in North America. Notley said 
provincial officials were to have met with Fonda to explain the government’s 
plans but it didn’t happen.

“Dining out on your celebrity is something that someone ought to pair with 
knowledge and research, and she failed to do that,” Notley said.

Related: Justin Trudeau: 'Globalisation isn't working for ordinary people' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump>

“It’s very clear she didn’t know what she was talking about.”

A Trudeau spokeswoman referred comment to the office of Canada’s natural 
resource minister.

“Our government believes that the environment and the economy go hand in hand. 
The oil sands are an important source of jobs and economic prosperity for 
Canadians,” spokesman Alexandre Deslongchamps said in an email. “We believe we 
can only develop our natural resources when we can do so sustainably. That’s 
why we are putting a price on carbon pollution, strengthening environmental and 
safety standards, and making real investments in clean technology.”

Alberta, which has the world’s third largest oil reserves, needs 
infrastructure in place to export its growing oil production. Approving Trans 
Mountain helps diversify Canada’s oil exports to Asia. About 97% of Canadian 
oil exports now go to the US.
 