
The actor and activist Jane Fonda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-fonda>
 has admitted that she was “a late bloomer” when it came to feminism, and it 
was not until she was in her 60s that she really understood the movement.

Writing in Lenny 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/politics/news/a311/my-convoluted-journey-to-feminism/>
, Lena Dunham and Jenni Konner’s online newsletter, Fonda – who is a prominent 
women’s rights campaigner – said she had gone from viewing women’s issues as a 
distraction from more important problems to the realisation that “women are the 
issue, the core issue”.

“It took me 30 years to get it, but it’s OK to be a late bloomer, as long as 
you don’t miss the flower show,” she said.

Jane Fonda: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/jane-fonda-five-best-moments-youth>
Fonda wrote: “In 1970, when I was 33, I learned that 5,000 women in New York 
City were demonstrating for legalised abortion. I wrote in my journal: ‘Don’t 
understand the Women’s Liberation Movement. There are more important things to 
have a movement for, it seems to me.’”

The actor, who is a two-time Academy Award winner, was a prominent opponent to 
the Vietnam war and civil rights activist before becoming a supporter of 
feminist causes. “I began to identify myself publicly as a feminist, although 
it would be many years before I would look within myself and locate the 
multiple ways in which I had internalised sexism and the profound damage that 
it had done to me,” she wrote.


Fonda said that although she supported female candidates, brought gender 
issues into her film roles, produced women-centred films, and made exercise 
videos to help women get strong physically, her feminism was theoretical: “in 
my head, not my blood and bones”.

“For me to really confront sexism would have required doing something about my 
relationships with men, and I couldn’t. That was too scary,” she said. Fonda 
revealed that her father, actor Henry Fonda, would send her stepmother to 
instruct her to lose weight and wear longer skirts. “One of my stepmothers told 
me all the ways I’d have to change physically if I wanted a boyfriend,” she 
said.

Fonda has been heavily involved in the V-Day movement, which works to stop 
violence against women and girls and was inspired by the Broadway show The 
Vagina Monologues. In 2001, she established theJane Fonda Center for Adolescent 
Reproductive Health <http://janefondacenter.emory.edu/> at Emory University in 
Atlanta, which aims to help prevent adolescent pregnancy.

“When I turned 60 and entered my third and final act, I decided that I needed 
to heal the wounds patriarchy had dealt me,” she wrote. “I didn’t want to come 
to the end of my life without doing all I could to become a whole, full-voiced 
woman.”
 