
My mother killed herself when she was 42 and I was 12. She suffered from 
mental illness, what would today be called bipolar. But the difficulties began 
before that because she was frequently institutionalised and she wasn’t really 
present. When a parent isn’t around, the child assumes it’s her fault and 
that’s what I did. The child assumes she isn’t lovable. Then you have a choice: 
you can go through life believing you’re unlovable and feeling guilty about 
what’s happened, or you can try to understand that your parent was suffering 
from something and didn’t know how to heal.

Dealing with what happened to my mother isn’t over – it’s still going on 
because life is a journey towards wholeness. Living a whole, good life doesn’t 
just happen – it requires intention. You have to decide: this thing has 
happened to me, am I going to be a victim of it? Because it’s not what happens 
to you, it’s what you do with it. If you can look back and see it with 
understanding and with an open heart, then you can forgive and you can 
understand.

Culture flash: courtroom dramas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/07/culture-flash-courtroom-dramas> 
The best way to understand my relationship with my father [Henry Fonda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/07/screen-legends-henry-fonda-french>
] is to remember the movie On Golden Pond. The character he played was just 
like him in life, someone who had a hard time expressing his feelings and his 
emotions. That was true, I think, for many people of that generation. He used 
acting as a mask behind which to hide his emotions; he abhorred anything that 
showed his vulnerability. I adored him. He was a good man with wonderful 
integrity.

My father was the reason I became an activist. As I was growing up he was 
making films like12 Angry Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/07/culture-flash-courtroom-dramas> 
and The Grapes of Wrath, playing characters who spoke up for justice, who 
fought for the underdog. I knew he loved these characters and I wanted him to 
love me. In the end, he was proud of me but it took a long time, and for a 
while he thought I was a foolish, frivolous person. He never said anything to 
me, but some time ago someone sent me an interview he did on British TV and he 
said the most wonderful things about me. I cried so hard watching it, because 
he never said those things when we were together.

No one in my family was into fitness, but my stepmother did take part in some 
of my fitness videos. And my son and his wife work out every day – they 
understand the value of it. He’s an actor and he has that to motivate him.

Catch-up TV and radio guide: from Grace And Frankie to Penny Dreadful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/02/catch-up-tv-and-radio-guide>
At the centre of Grace and Frankie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/02/catch-up-tv-and-radio-guide>
 [her series withLily Tomlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/22/lily-tomlin-grandma-interview-sexism-ageism-isis>
, in which they play two wives whose husbands confess to being in a gay 
relationship] is a recognition that the rug can always be pulled out from under 
us in family life. We think everything is moving along and we are not 100% 
happy, but we accept it: and then everything changes. How one survives, that is 
the big question. I’ve had some tragedies and unexpected things happen in my 
life, and it’s always nice to know you can survive – and more than survive, you 
can go on to thrive. Looking back over my 78 years, it was the difficult things 
that could have broken me that went on to teach me the most – and that made me 
more empathetic and understanding of others.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyx_Mp6kSiUQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyx_Mp6kSiUQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyx_Mp6kSiUQ&media=>
I love being a grandmother, though I live further away from my grandchildren 
now and don’t see them as much as I used to. What I hope for them is that they 
discover their passion, because the most wonderful thing in life is finding out 
what you want to do. I want them to learn that you don’t always get your way in 
life, but that the important thing is not falling apart. You hope as you get 
older that you’ll gain wisdom, but wisdom doesn’t just come from having lots of 
experiences. If I’ve got any wisdom it’s because I’ve looked at my experiences 
and tried to understand their meaning: that’s what matters.

• Season 1 of Grace and Frankie <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80017537> is 
out now on DVD
 