
The biggest asset management deal since the Brexit vote, bringing together 
Anglo-Australian group Henderson and Janus Capital of Denver, is to have its 
headquarters in London in a signal that the City remains at the heart of the 
world’s financial system.

The combined group will have $320bn (£249bn) of total assets under management, 
with the chief executive of Janus, Dick Weil, relocating from Denver to London 
to co-manage the merged group with Henderson’s Andrew Formica.

Formica said: “London still acts as the heart of the global financial system 
and as a pivot between the US and Asia ... over a 10 to 15-year view, the 
Brexit debate will be seen as a drop in the ocean in the timeline of our 
business.”

But the merger is a blow for the London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>, with the 
primary listing for the merged group moving to New York, with a secondary 
listing in Sydney.

The deal brings controversial billionaire bond investor Bill Gross under the 
roof of the combined group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fjanus-henderson-to-have-headquarters-in-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ec6cb676929e8b3bb9b74ad6cf5adba081d8a86%2F0_106_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Janus%20Henderson%20to%20have%20headquarters%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fjanus-henderson-to-have-headquarters-in-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Janus%20Henderson%20to%20have%20headquarters%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fjanus-henderson-to-have-headquarters-in-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ec6cb676929e8b3bb9b74ad6cf5adba081d8a86%2F0_106_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Bill Gross, bond investor and former co-founder of Pimco, joined Janus in 
2014. Photograph: Jim Young/Reuters 
Gross shot to fame in 2010 when he warned that the UK was a “must to avoid” 
for his investors as its debt was “resting on a bed of nitroglycerine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/26/uk-economy-debt-bob-gross>”. 
At the time he was acting for Pimco in California, running the world’s biggest 
bond fund, but left for Janus in 2014 and subsequently issued a$200m lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/billionaire-bill-gross-sues-firm-he-founded-40-years-ago-for-200m>
 against his former employers.

Formica said there were no new lock-in arrangements for individual fund 
managers but it is expected that Gross will stay.

After the EU referendum, Henderson was hit by outflows from its property fund, 
prompting its suspension, along with many others in the industry. But Formica 
said there has since been a “reduced pattern of retail outflows, offset by 
institutional inflows”.

The newly merged group promises “synergy” savings of $110m a year, although it 
is not clear where the cuts will come from. Janus is largely a US-facing group 
with tiny operations in London, while Henderson, which acquired New Star in 
2009 and Gartmore in 2011, is largely UK and European, but with a significant 
presence in Australia.

Both Janus and Henderson face the challenge of a shift away from expensive 
“active” fund management towards low-cost index management, where funds track 
market indices but are much less profitable for fund groups.

Formica said the combined group, to be called Janus Henderson, will keep 
active management “at the heart of what we do”.

The deal is likely to have only a minor impact on small savers with 
investments in Henderson funds. Darius McDermott of Chelsea Financial Services 
said: “Not much will change for those who already invest with Henderson and all 
the funds we rate will continue to be rated. What we should gain from the 
merged companies is even more choice: Janus are particularly good in Japanese 
and US equities, which are gaps in the Henderson range.”
 