
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has chosen a scaled-down 
design for the main stadium for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, five months after 
scrapping the initial design and construction plan for being too costly.

The new model, by Japanese architect Kengo Kuma, will still cost 153bn yen 
(£825m) to design, build and maintain. The initial stadium proposal would have 
cost 252bn yen, making it the most expensive stadium ever built.

Kuma’s combined steel and wood structure, with a relatively flat roof and 
shrubbery along its outer concourses, echoes traditional temple designs. It 
stands 50 metres (164ft) tall, with the track and field below ground level.

“This is a wonderful plan which meets the basic vision in the new construction 
plan and requirements for construction period and the budget,” said the prime 
minister, Shinzo Abe, announcing the choice.

Zaha Hadid hits back over scrapped stadium for 2020 Tokyo Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/zaha-hadid-hits-back-scrapped-national-stadium-2020-tokyo-olympics>
Tuesday’s announcement was a major step for organisers, who were forced to 
start again on a new design less than five years before the 2020 Games. The 
scrapping of the initial stadium plan forced the2019 Rugby World Cup to change 
venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/28/japan-yokohama-stadium-rugby-world-cup-2019>
, and the late change had raised concerns about whether it could even be 
completed in time for the Olympics.

Organisers also had to deal with a plagiarism scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/01/tokyo-2020-olympics-logo-scrapped-after-allegations-of-plagiarism>
 over the logo for the event, and an investigation last month found backroom 
dealings in the selection process.

The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, told reporters that the design 
selection process was more transparent than the one for the previous stadium 
plan, and also addressed the main problems: cost and post-Olympic use.

The winning project will be led by major construction company Taisei Corp. 
Kuma, known for his Japanese aesthetic, also designed Tokyo’s Kabuki theatre, 
which was renewed in 2013.

Officials said the design won by a small margin over the alternative plan led 
by architect Toyo Ito and three construction companies, Takenaka, Shimizu and 
Obayashi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftokyo-replaces-zaha-hadid-design-for-2020-olympic-games-stadium-with-cheaper-alternative%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4851ad7aff247d0cbb42bc2996f600eaef7fdca%2F525_0_3077_1848%2F3077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20picks%20Olympic%20stadium%20design%20to%20replace%20Zaha%20Hadid%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftokyo-replaces-zaha-hadid-design-for-2020-olympic-games-stadium-with-cheaper-alternative%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20picks%20Olympic%20stadium%20design%20to%20replace%20Zaha%20Hadid%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftokyo-replaces-zaha-hadid-design-for-2020-olympic-games-stadium-with-cheaper-alternative%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4851ad7aff247d0cbb42bc2996f600eaef7fdca%2F525_0_3077_1848%2F3077.jpg>
 The original design by British-Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid was scrapped due to 
controversy over its cost and scale. Photograph: AP 
Suga said Kuma’s plan was superior because of its ample environmental 
consideration and the capacity to be built quicker.The original plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/japan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design>
 by the British-Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid was criticised for its massive cost 
and scale.

Hadid said Japan’s scrapping of her plan was “shocking” and was not about 
design or budget. “In fact much of our two years of detailed design work and 
the cost savings we recommended have been validated by the remarkable 
similarities of our original detailed stadium layout and our seating bowl 
configuration with those of the design announced today,” she said.

 