
Jennifer Lawrence has come out hard against the gender pay inequality in 
Hollywood, in an impassionedessay 
<http://us11.campaign-archive1.com/?u=a5b04a26aae05a24bc4efb63e&id=64e6f35176&e=1ba99d671e#wage>
 she wrote for her friend Lena Dunham’s Lenny Letter newsletter.

The Hunger Games actor for the first time addresses revelations from the Sony 
hack thatshe earned considerably less than her male co-stars in American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
, despite her major role in the film and bankable status as a Hollywood 
A-lister and Oscar winner.

The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
“When the Sony hack happened and I found out how much less I was being paid 
than the lucky people with dicks, I didn’t get mad at Sony,” she writes. “I got 
mad at myself. I failed as a negotiator because I gave up early. I didn’t want 
to keep fighting over millions of dollars that, frankly, due to two franchises, 
I don’t need.”

She writes that a need “to be liked” and the fear of seeming “difficult” or 
“spoiled” kept her from demanding more money.

“This could be a young-person thing,” she writes. “It could be a personality 
thing. I’m sure it’s both. But this is an element of my personality that I’ve 
been working against for years, and based on the statistics, I don’t think I’m 
the only woman with this issue … Could there still be a lingering habit of 
trying to express our opinions in a certain way that doesn’t ‘offend’ or 
‘scare’ men?”

Lawrence peppers her essay with her trademark self-deprecating tone: “It’s 
hard for me to speak about my experience as a working woman because I can 
safely say my problems aren’t exactly relatable.”

She writes that she has kept mostly quiet until now on the subject of feminism 
because she tends to veer away from topics that she fears are “trending”. “I’m 
even the asshole who didn’t do anything about the ice-bucket challenge – which 
was saving lives – because it started to feel more like a ‘trend’ than a 
cause,” she writes. “I should have written a check, but I fucking forgot, OK? 
I’m not perfect.”

Meryl Streep in Telluride: 'There isn’t a man here who could out-lift Serena 
Williams'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/meryl-streep-in-telluride-there-isnt-a-man-here-who-could-out-lift-serena-williams>
Lawrence’s essay is notable for its anger, something the actor rarely 
expresses during interviews.


“I’m over trying to find the ‘adorable’ way to state my opinion and still be 
likable,” she writes. “Fuck that.”

Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2015/08/20/the-worlds-highest-paid-actresses-2015-jennifer-lawrence-leads-with-52-million/>
 recently ranked Lawrence as the highest-paid female actor of 2015. Since the 
Sony leak, Lawrence made headlines for negotiating a higher salary than Chris 
Pratt, her co-star in the upcoming blockbusterPassengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/jennifer-lawrence-to-be-paid-8m-more-than-chris-pratt-for-passengers>
. Pratt will earn $12m for the film, while Lawrence will net $20m upfront or 
30% of the film’s profits.

Lawrence joins a long list of actors including Meryl Streep, Emma Thompson, 
Patricia Arquette, Cate Blanchett and Rose McGowan who in recent months have 
spoken up about misogyny in the entertainment industry. Last week,Ashley Judd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/06/ashley-judd-sexually-harassed-film-executive>
 alleged for the first time publicly that she was sexually harassed in the 90s 
by a mogul for a major film studio.
 