
Under-18s should be prevented by social media companies from texting sexually 
explicit images, the health secretary has said. Giving evidence to the Commons 
health committee on suicide prevention efforts,Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> also called for a crackdown 
on cyberbullying by the technology industry via the introduction of software 
that can detect when it is happening.

Hunt said social media firms needed to do more to combat the culture of online 
intimidation and sexual imagery, which is having a negative impact on the 
mental health of young people.

“I think social media companies need to step up to the plate and show us how 
they can be the solution to the issue of mental ill health amongst teenagers, 
and not the cause of the problem,” he said. “There is a lot of evidence that 
the technology industry, if they put their mind to it, can do really smart 
things.

A normalization of violence: how cyberbullying began and how to fight it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/emotional-violence-cyberbullying-trolling-bullying-racism-misogyny>
“For example, I just ask myself the simple question as to why it is that you 
can’t prevent the texting of sexually explicit images by people under the age 
of 18, if that’s a lock that parents choose to put on a mobile phone contract. 
Because there is technology that can identify sexually explicit pictures and 
prevent it being transmitted.


“I ask myself why we can’t identify cyberbullying when it happens on social 
media platforms by word pattern recognition, and then prevent it happening. I 
think there are a lot of things where social media companies could put options 
in their software that could reduce the risks associated with social media, and 
I do think that is something which they should actively pursue in a way that 
hasn’t happened to date.”

Members of the health committee urged Hunt to put more resources into suicide 
prevention.
 