
The Outsider. Perhaps Jeremy Corbyn does, as the title of the new Vice film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=94ptAcbfKP0> about him flatteringly suggests, 
have something in common with the hero of Albert Camus’sL’étranger.

Not the murdering part, obviously. Nor the current outsider’s eye-catching 
hat. Rather, Corbyn, in his way, is the man who refuses to cry at his mother’s 
funeral. Camus once clarified his meaning: “The hero of my book is condemned 
because he does not play the game.”

For fans of the absurdist novel, there may never have been a more congenial 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader.

For instance, as illustrated in the film, Corbyn will have no truck with the 
ridiculous convention among party leaders of trying to win elections. He 
concentrates, instead, on enhancing his power base. “I am not a traditional 
kind of party leader, I do things in a rather different way.” Again, at prime 
minister’s questions, Mr Corbyn repeatedly rejects tradition, such that the 
opposition seizes this chance to flay the enemy. Like another hero of the 
absurd,Bartleby, the Scrivener <http://www.bartleby.com/129/>, Corbyn would 
prefer not to.

Filmed the week after Iain Duncan Smith resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
 over his own party’s benefit cuts, Corbyn elaborated on the alienated approach 
to doing PMQs: “It’s not up to me to throw in other than a couple of lines 
about the government’s in a mess.” He will not play the game. Rather, he 
demonstrates, he will again confound vulgar expectations with an unexpected 
critique, existence being in any case, random. From the little huddle of 
advisers, there comes no objection to the Tory-pleasing perversity of this 
plan. “OK guys,” he says, possibly in the contemporary, gender-free manner.

In their defence, Corbyn’s men are no more culpable than ones who recently 
assured Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/03/undoing-of-ed-miliband-and-how-labour-lost-election>
 that his Stone, his “hell yeah” appearance, and a pilgrimage to Russell 
Brand’s flat were the very things to beguile waverers. In many respects, the 
Vice film demonstrates, Corbyn the outsider’s is a supremely traditional 
operation.

Like Ed Miliband and Gordon Brown before him, he shows a firm preference for a 
male-dominated team, its mission to sustain the fantasy that the chosen oddball 
can prevail: a skilled operation that would evidently be jeopardised if any 
woman were allowed a speaking role. Women’s freedom to sit silently, even to 
clap, is, however, one of the key respects in which life inside Corbyn’s office 
can be seen to differ from arrangements on all-male Mount Athos.

As with the tolerance of cats on the Greek peninsula, its occupants have 
presumably accepted the impossibility of excluding females entirely. Also, Mr 
Corbyn tells Vice: “My leadership is one that tries to include people and work 
together”, the key word being “tries”. Indeed, although she is never 
identified, a woman is heard saying to a man, when the PMQs team needs someone 
to role-play David Cameron: “Why don’t you?” Accepting is Corbyn’s policy 
director,Andrew Fisher, previously suspended  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/06/andrew-fisher-labour-suspends-corbyn-policy-chief>
after, among other things, telling Labour supporters not to vote for the 
party’s candidate Emily Benn at the general election and calling Rachel Reeves 
a wanker who had “defected to Ukip”.

Lest there be any hint here of the “utterly subliminal nastiness” that 
occasionally upsets Mr Corbyn, I cannot emphasise too liminally that women are 
visible inThe Outsider.

Scores of them appear at his rallies, offering hosannas, hugs, and an obvious 
willingness to wash his feet, should the opportunity arise. One kneels before 
him. Another shouts: “We loveJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>.”

Then there is Mr Corbyn’s wife, Laura Alvarez. As a Labour supporter, the Vice 
journalist Ben Ferguson knows that the correct thing to say to her is: “You 
must be very proud of Jeremy.”

It is not, perhaps, the first question you might put to the partner of a 
successful person, who may even have interests of her or his own. But following 
in the footsteps ofCherie Booth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/05/cherie-blair-bad-week-tony-portrayal-media>
,Sarah Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/feb/27/pass-notes-sarah-brown-memoirs>
 andJustine Thornton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/23/justine-thornton-ed-miliband-wife-political-strategy>
, Mrs Corbyn plays the game. “Yes, I think he’s a good politician,” she says. 
“He’s not very good in housework, but he’s a good politician.” So the female 
word count, in this half-hour film, definitely exceeds 100 or so. And the fact 
that no women members of his team are introduced, still less interviewed, may 
not indicate any lack of respect on Mr Corbyn’s part, any more than his 
decision, after he was elected, to award all the biggest jobs in the shadow 
cabinet to men.

It was mansplained, to disappointed observers, that only the silliest woman 
would think that chancellor, or foreign secretary, is a more prestigious role 
than, say, international development, the job given to Diane Abbott.

So the impression here of determined marginalisation may not, to those in the 
Labour know, reveal anything more worrying about Mr Corbyn’s attitude to women 
than, say,his proposal for women-only carriages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/26/jeremy-corbyn-backlash-women-only-train-carriages-cooper-kendall>
 andhis response to reports from “oppressed” Muslim women, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/06/activist-condemns-labour-response-to-jeremy-corbyn-letter-charges-of-bias-against-muslim-women>
 his enthusiasm forlegalised prostitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/04/jeremy-corbyn-decriminalise-sex-industry-prostitution>
 andlast week’s smirk 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3623003/Corbyn-just-smirks-hard-Left-hate-mob-taunts-BBC-s-Laura-tries-ask-Labour-leader-question-speech-Europe.html>
 when his followers jeered at the journalist, Laura Kuenssberg.

Then again, it could mean that equality is an issue of such utter 
inconsequence to Mr Corbyn and his team, as they focus on sniffing out 
ideological disobedience, andautographing apples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/jeremy-corbyn-bbc-obsessed-damaging-leadership-vice-documentary>
, that it never occurred to pretend otherwise. For all his “I’m not a 
personality” business, this film is designed to sell us the man. Until it 
cracks, under questions about his leadership, Corbyn’s look is one of humble 
geniality, while his parliamentary team manages not to weep when he rehearses 
PMQs. When things go wrong, the Vice journalists are dismissed, though not 
quickly enough to stop the scales falling from Ferguson’s eyes.

Meanwhile, no one in this PR effort noticed they’d forgotten to feature any 
women politicians. Neither as policy advisers nor as MPs. Not even mute, at the 
powerful end of the table, as Brown-style “window dressing”. Nor on a visit to 
a woman MP’s constituency. It has been suggested by progressive loyalists, in 
an echo of the Tory excuses over the years, that this might be a commentary on 
current female talent. Especially now thatSadiq Khan has used 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36366753> up at least three 
possible contenders.

Leave aside the case for positive discrimination, in a context as damning as 
Westminster’s, and let the film answer that question. From start to finish, the 
behaviour of Corbyn’s cabal is hilariously, almost lovably, in the hapless 
tradition of the Ed Stone. Although, would even Miliband’s most incompetent 
aide have confirmed, on camera, that an addiction to rallies might be just what 
it appears? Corbyn’s “events organiser” tells Vice: “He’s an attention seeker, 
he loves the attention.” Another, his PPS, reminds viewers that the task at 
PMQs, albeit one to which Corbyn is catastrophically unequal, is to “put the 
prime minister to the sword”. It’s as if the shout of “the emperor has no 
clothes” came not from a child, but, repeatedly, from within the court itself.

So it would, in short, be impossible for female colleagues to do any worse. 
And asAngela Eagle demonstrated recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/25/eu-referendum-vote-leave-calls-ifs-biased-after-it-warns-brexit-would-prolong-austerity-politics-live>
, deputising for Corbyn at PMQs, they might do infinitely better. No 
wonder Labour’s guardians of fairness prefer them out of sight.
 