
Labour MPs supporting Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> are urgently seeking ways 
to avoid a historic split after their leader’s refusal to resign set the party 
on track for a ferocious leadership battle.

The leader of Unite, Len McCluskey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, described the coup 
attempt as a “political lynching” as he urged MPs to allow trade unions to 
broker a peace deal. However, he did not suggest that Corbyn should give in to 
demands to resign, calling the Labour leader a “man of steel”.

Other supporters of the leader said they were considering what type of deal 
might satisfy the party’s MPs, with more than three quarters supporting a vote 
of no confidence in Corbyn last week.


Party grandees including Lord Kinnock and at least one potential challenger to 
Corbyn,Angela Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, have 
continued to claim that support from the party’s members is ebbing away from 
the leader.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reporter%20to%20Corbyn%3A%20'It%20feels%20like%20you're%20running%20away%20from%20the%20media'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reporter%20to%20Corbyn%3A%20%27It%20feels%20like%20you%27re%20running%20away%20from%20the%20media%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video&media=>
Reporter to Corbyn: ‘It feels like you’re running away from the media’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/03/reporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video>
On Monday, Corbyn will be questioned by the home affairs select committee over 
allegations of antisemitism within the Labour party. Committee member Naz Shah 
and former London mayorKen Livingstone were suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/timeline-events-leading-to-ken-livingstone-suspension-labour>
 from the Labour party in April for comments made regarding Zionism and the 
Holocaust.

Poll does not represent members of Unite | Letter from Len McCluskey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/poll-does-not-represent-members-of-unite>
On Sunday, there were some initial signs of a cooling off between Corbyn 
supporters and his opponents.Tom Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, widely seen as a go-between 
from the parliamentary party (PLP) and the Corbyn-backing unions, is understood 
to have welcomed McCluskey’s comments, which are seen as a sign that a 
“negotiated settlement” of some sort may still be possible.

Some of Corbyn’s allies have discussed plans to win over MPs who have lost 
faith in the leadership and want to see a resignation.

One politician close to the leader told the Guardian it is “50-50” whether 
Corbyn would win again, but said that if he did then one option could be a 
collective leadership with a “kitchen cabinet” representing different wings of 
the party.


The phrase has been used in American and British politics to refer to a 
leader, such as David Cameron, being supported by an inner-circle of advisers, 
although in this case it would not necessarily be allies of Corbyn at the top 
table.

Under such a plan being discussed by some left-leaning MPs, Corbyn could 
become chairman rather than “supreme leader”.


Aides hold Jeremy Corbyn back after reporter asks if he was 'running away'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/jeremy-corbin-labour-leader-confrontation-with-journalist-running-away>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-jeremy-corbyn-labour-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McDonnell%20defends%20Corbyn%20against%20Labour%20'nastiness'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-jeremy-corbyn-labour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McDonnell%20defends%20Corbyn%20against%20Labour%20%27nastiness%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-jeremy-corbyn-labour-video&media=>
McDonnell defends Corbyn against Labour ‘nastiness’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/29/john-mcdonnell-jeremy-corbyn-labour-video>
Another alternative is for him to assume a more presidential role, with a 
consensual leader of the PLP being appointed who would satisfy MPs.

A Corbyn-supporting MP said that would only work if the party accepted the 
leader’s “broad anti-austerity political and economic programme”. “This would 
be difficult for all sides but preferable to an historic split,” the source 
said.

A source close to Corbyn denied that the ideas were being considered but said 
there was effort being put into finding a peaceful solution, with a focus on 
whether new structures could be built around policymaking and the shadow 
cabinet that would appease MPs.


McCluskey, a prominent supporter of Corbyn, said the leader had been the 
victim of a “political lynching” and said it was “outrageous” that political 
grandees such as Kinnock were being dragged out to be part of this “unedifying 
coup”.


But, speaking to BBC One’s Andrew Marr Show, he said trade unions could broker 
a peace, as he urged potential challengers Eagle andOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith> to step back. “The 
alternative if Angela goes ahead with this, and I hope she doesn’t, or Owen, is 
that we are plunged into a civil war that will be bitter and ugly and may never 
allow the Labour party to reunite again,” he said.


Emily Thornberry, the new defence minister and a close ally of Corbyn, urged 
MPs to “take a step back”. The new shadow foreign secretary told ITV’s Peston 
on Sunday: “I think the future of the country is at stake here.”

Others felt that Corbyn ought to stand down, but argued that if he didn’t 
there was still a chance that he would be defeated in a leadership contest. 
Although there appears to be new people registering to support leader, Kinnock 
said there had been a “significant shift” away from Corbyn among party members. 
“Members across the country have got deep residual doubts about the possibility 
of him leading the party to election victory,” he said.


Kinnock also argued that if Corbyn is challenged, he ought to have to collect 
nominations from MPs, as he had to in the late 1980s when Tony Benn took him on 
with the support of Labour’s current leader.

Corbyn’s team believe he will automatically be able to stand again, but his 
opponent’s strongly disagree. It seems unlikely that he would attract the 
backing of enough MPs if he has to seek their support.

Labour leadership: Tom Watson calls on MPs to step back from brink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/tom-watson-calls-on-labour-mps-to-prevent-leadership-contest>
Talking about the large numbers of people who paid £3 to become registered 
supporters ofLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to back 
Corbyn in last year’s election, Kinnock said they were “very welcome in the 
party” arguing that they brought energy and vibrancy.

“They’ve got to decide whether they are serious about putting their principles 
into power by democratic election under a leader that is credible in a party 
that is united, or whether they actually joined up to a social protest movement 
that is content to complain and to turn up at the funerals of communities and 
industries while the Conservatives have yet more decades of power,” Kinnock 
told the Andrew Marr show.

MPs involved in the attempted coup against Corbyn have suggested that the only 
solution is for him to step down as leader.


“If not, and if he wins again, then this no confidence show will simply happen 
again and again,” said one MP.

A source close to Eagle said she is still ready to stand and hopes Corbyn will 
step down this week.

Corbyn has also hit back, telling his party’s MPs that they should “respect 
democracy”, stressing that he was elected by 60% of Labour members and 
supporters just nine months ago.


Writing in the Sunday Mirror, he added: “I am ready to reach out to Labour MPs 
who didn’t accept my election and oppose my leadership – and work with the 
whole party to provide the alternative the country needs.”

However, aides were unable to add details to how Corbyn might be able to reach 
a consensus, while MPs opposing him said there was no substance in the Sunday 
Mirror article, and called on him to show leadership and respond to the 
overwhelming vote of no confidence among MPs last week.




Rumours surrounding Corbyn’s leadership this weekend have continued. His 
spokesman has been forced to deny claims that Corbyn had a “Wednesday wobble” 
over his position after prime minister’s questions last week, and that a senior 
aide had drawn up a five-point extraction plan for the beleaguered leader.
 