
Jeremy Corbyn’s aides are refusing to let the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> deputy leader, Tom Watson, hold a 
one-to-one meeting with him, claiming that Watson will try to “bully” the 
leader into resigning.

A senior Labour source, close to the embattled leader, said they had blocked 
Watson from talking privately to Corbyn because they have a “duty of care”. 
“They [Watson’s aides] want Watson to be on his own with Corbyn so that he can 
jab his finger at him,” the source said.

“We are not letting that happen. He’s a 70-year-old [sic] man. We have a duty 
of care … This is not a one-off. There is a culture of bullying. Maybe it’s a 
Blairite/Brownite thing.”

A spokesman for Watson – who has been seeking to reach a negotiated settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/tom-watson-calls-on-labour-mps-to-prevent-leadership-contest>
 with Corbyn over the leader’s future – said: “Tom has always had a very good 
working and personal relationship with Jeremy.”

A delegation of shadow cabinet ministers, led by the shadow home secretary, 
Andy Burnham, also failed to secure a meeting with Corbyn last Thursday to try 
to negotiate a resolution.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reporter%20to%20Corbyn%3A%20'It%20feels%20like%20you're%20running%20away%20from%20the%20media'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reporter%20to%20Corbyn%3A%20%27It%20feels%20like%20you%27re%20running%20away%20from%20the%20media%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Freporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video&media=>
Reporter to Corbyn: ‘It feels like you’re running away from the media’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/03/reporter-to-corbyn-it-feels-like-youre-running-away-from-the-media-video>
The extraordinary developments come as the Labour leader’s spokesman denied 
claims made to this newspaper that an emotional Corbyn, 67, had had a 
“Wednesday wobble” over his position after prime minister’s questions last 
week, and that a senior aide had drawn up a five-point extraction plan for the 
beleaguered leader.

On Saturday the Labour leader was held back by aides after appearing to lose 
his temper at a “Say No to Hate Crime” rally on Highbury Fields in north 
London, after a reporter asked if he was running away from questions about his 
leadership.

Aides hold Jeremy Corbyn back after reporter asks if he was 'running away'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/jeremy-corbin-labour-leader-confrontation-with-journalist-running-away>
Under the supposed extraction deal – allegedly sketched out last Wednesday by 
Corbyn’s director of policy, Andrew Fisher – Corbyn would have stood down as 
leader in return for staying in the shadow cabinet, senior Labour sources 
claimed.

His close ally, John McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, would have remained as 
shadow chancellor and both men’s staff would have been retained. A place in a 
future leadership election would have been secured for a candidate on the left, 
such as the shadow defence secretary, Clive Lewis.

There would also have been a commitment to Labour retaining an anti-austerity 
policy platform.

Sources said that the plan was swiftly dropped by Corbyn on Wednesday evening, 
with one claiming that McDonnell was “keeping Corbyn hostage”.

On Saturday night the leader’s spokesman said the claims were “100% untrue” 
and that Corbyn was resolved to stay in position.

Meanwhile, a leaked internal analysis of Labour’s performance in May’s local 
elections, obtained by theObserver, offers a grim forecast of the party’s 
future under Corbyn.

The analysis concludes that the party has piled up votes in parts of the 
country where it would make little difference in a general election, while 
losing support in key marginal seats.

“Outside the areas with new ward boundaries, we made 91 losses and 68 gains 
compared to when these seats were last contested in 2012,” officials write.

“We can look into the specific areas changing hands to better understand how 
and if the structure of Labour support is changing. In England, in those areas 
that would be considered key seats for a future general election, we made nine 
gains and 44 losses.

“The strategic problem is that only 14% of our gains were in areas we need in 
order to win general elections – while just under 50% of our losses were in 
those areas.”

There have been more than 60 frontbench resignations, and an overwhelming vote 
of no confidence in Corbyn, since this newspaper’s revelation thatHilary Benn 
was orchestrating a plot to remove the leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/hilary-benn-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-eu-referendum-brexit>
. The shadow foreign secretary was sacked in the early hours of last Sunday.

Corbyn has publicly shown little indication that he is ready to stand aside, 
while McDonnell has urged those plotting against the leader to spark a formal 
leadership contest.

It is understood that the former shadow work and pensions secretary, Owen 
Smith, is now in pole position to be the “unity candidate” to challenge Corbyn, 
should he not stand down.

However, one of the shadow cabinet ministers who resigned last week said the 
rebels were willing to play a “long game”. “Every day that this goes on, the 
worse it is for him,” she said. “Members are realising that this is an 
untenable position.”

On Saturday night, Corbyn’s allies accused the parliamentary party of 
sabotaging Labour’s ability to hold the government to account.

One Labour source said those at the top of the party were livid when it 
emerged that files on a shared Labour party hard drive relating to the finance 
bill going through parliament had been deleted as the shadow finance secretary 
Rob Marris resigned.

An internal email seen by this newspaper said: “Unfortunately, it looks like 
someone from Rob Marris’s office has deleted the vast majority of the finance 
bill records and notes on each clause from the shared drive.”

A Labour source raised the spectre of deselection, adding that it fitted in 
with a campaign of sabotage. He said: “The finance bill is a hugely important 
bit of legislation. Under normal times the party’s severest punishment to my 
knowledge for such transgression could go as high as deselection.

“This is because such a bill normally includes important measures involving 
things like tax avoidance and pensioners and working families.

“For example, in this case his actions could have led to undermining things 
such as our opposition to the tampon tax, which – if he had his way – would 
have prevented us from ending it sooner.”

Responding to the criticism, Marris said that the material he removed did not 
belong to the Labour party but had been funded through his own parliamentary 
staff allowance.

He said: “I have not removed Labour party material from a shared computer 
drive.

“The material removed did not belong to the Labour party. It was created by my 
own office to help me as a shadow Treasury minister. I paid for this material 
using my parliamentary staff allowance to help fulfil my role as a shadow 
minister. The Labour party did not pay a penny for it, and it had not been 
stored on a Labour party drive.

“After I resigned from it, no one from the shadow Treasury team contacted me 
to ask to borrow my material. Instead an anonymous ‘Labour source’ has launched 
a vicious attack on me, and threatens me with deselection. Not a great way to 
ask for the material.

“I am dismayed that someone who hides their own identity seems to be trying to 
damage my reputation for their own political ends. I am sure that the shadow 
chancellor and his office will be keen to decry this sad attempt to smear me.

“The Labour party gets hundreds of thousands of pounds of ‘Short money’ each 
year.

“This is taxpayers’ money to help the official opposition fulfil its role in 
our democracy, holding the government to account.

“None of that money was offered to me for research in the shadow Treasury 
team. So the interesting question is this: what has happened to all the Short 
money?”


A shadow Treasury spokesperson said: “We don’t comment on internal matters. It 
has been a busy week but Rebecca Long-Bailey has stepped forward and done a 
magnificent job. The shadow Treasury team will continue holding the Tories to 
account at this crucial time.”

In an article for the Sunday Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-corbyn-exclusively-reveals-hes-8335834>
, Corbyn said he was “ready to reach out” to his enemies in the party but 
warned he would stand for re-election if they staged a challenge for the top 
job.

The Labour leader said MPs who had set their face against his tenure must 
respect the views of the members who elected him.

Top priority must be opposing the Conservatives and giving voters a real 
alternative, he said.

In the article, he wrote: “I am ready to reach out to Labour MPs who didn’t 
accept my election and oppose my leadership - and work with the whole party to 
provide the alternative the country needs.

“But they also need to respect the democracy of our party and the views of 
Labour’s membership, which has increased by more than 60,000 in the past week 
alone.

“Our priority must be to mobilise this incredible force to oppose the Tories, 
and ensure people in Britain have a real political alternative.

“That is my priority and always will be as leader of our party. Those who want 
to challenge my leadership are free to do so in a democratic contest, in which 
I will be a candidate.”
 