
Here she is, Jessie Burton, <http://www.jessieburton.co.uk/index.html> at the 
door of what she describes as her “burrow” in Forest Hill, south-east London. 
First glimpse of her flat: colourful, perky, tidy. “Come in,” she says. She 
shows me what she calls her “she shed” – a literary wendy house at the end of 
the garden – built on the proceeds of her first novelThe Miniaturist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/29/the-miniaturist-jessie-burton-review>
 and in which she has finished her second,The Muse 
<https://www.panmacmillan.com/authors/jessie-burton/the-muse>, which is out 
this week. Jessie matches these upbeat surroundings. Dark, vivid and 
forthcoming, she wears a skirt that is just asking to be twirled and has a 
musical, ever-so-slightly panicky laugh. She looks Spanish but is not – she 
grew up in Wimbledon. If you did not know otherwise (as I already do), you 
would say this was someone who would never let anything get out of hand. But 
life has a way of testing even the most flourishing individuals and, in 
Jessie’s case, the challenge came wrapped up in success.

The Miniaturist, set in 17th-century Amsterdam and inspired by Petronella 
Oortman’s doll’s house in the Rijksmuseum 
<https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/collection/BK-NM-1010>, was a bestseller 
published in 34 countries – nothing miniature about its success. To promote the 
book, Jessie did “over 200 events” (she has had reason to count them) in 18 
months. She wrote: “It was the fullest, most confusing and amazing time of my 
life. Over a million people bought my first novel, the TV rights were optioned, 
Martin Scorsese put it on to his Kindle, a Spice Girl tweeted about loving it,
Vogue asked me to pose for a portrait.” She was delighted, naturally – but what 
no one, including Jessie herself, could have predicted was that, at 31, and 
during this period when she was expected to feel exultantly invincible, she 
would break down. She knows full well that daring to confess that success was 
an ordeal is unlikely to secure her many sympathy votes but she has none the 
less written about this period in abrave and fascinating blogpost 
<http://www.jessieburton.co.uk/research--thoughts.html> .

Everyone knows about failure and its side effects. Failure can be a spur 
(think of Beckett’s imperative: “Fail better”). It is harder to grasp that 
success is not necessarily easy either. For obvious reasons, people are less 
likely to talk about it. Her discovery was that: “Success can be as fracturing 
to your sense of self as failure: it just traumatises in a less qualified way.” 
She was meant to be having the time of her life but felt paralysed, slumped, 
tormented by feelings of worthlessness. Since childhood, she has intermittently 
suffered from what her family dubbed a “Who am I?” feeling – an out-of-body 
experience, “an anxiety disorder called depersonalisation”. This feeling was 
amplified in 2015. “When something you have made in private is mass-consumed, 
the irony is that the magnifying glass burns even brighter on you as an 
individual.” The praise she was receiving felt unsafe. And if she did not know 
who she was, there was no chance that she would, reading profiles or reviews 
about herself, feel anything other than alienated.

I’m glad my acting career was second-class; if I’d had more success I might 
still be hanging in there, feeling miserable

The extraordinary thing was that, at the same time, she was going through the 
motions of writing a second novel. The result ought to be a flop, a lacklustre, 
conscientious non-event, but theThe Muse betrays no sign of having been a 
struggle to write. Her first novel was written as a student of theCurtis Brown 
writing course <http://www.curtisbrowncreative.co.uk/>. Her second, written in 
trouble and without support, flows mysteriously in a wayThe Miniaturist, for 
all its jewelled precision, does not. Only the subject matter ofThe Muse 
reveals what was going on in Jessie’s head. It investigates what happens when a 
work of art is detached from the artist who made it (she is too smart to allow 
that detachment to be a triumph).

Part of the novel is set in Spain, in the 30s, where Olive Schloss, the 
daughter of an art dealer, works in secret. Her paintings are fraudulently sold 
in London as the creation of a handsome young Spaniard named Isaac with whom 
Olive is in love. A parallel narrative belongs to Odelle, a West Indian writer 
in 60s London whose stories are submitted anonymously for publication. “I 
became interested in how ego, personality and identity are tied into not only 
the creation of a work but its commodification – the cult of the artist – and 
how people will attach extra value to a work because a particular person has 
painted it when, had they no idea who had created it, they would not pay as 
much.”

What emerges as key is that artists must not believe their own publicity. 
Jessie now sees that the aftermath ofThe Miniaturist was a cul-de-sac. It is 
essential in life to feel one is travelling, to have a sense of purpose. 
Arrival can stultify. Shakespeare understood this, pronouncing inThe Merchant 
of Venice: “All things that are, are with more spirit chased than enjoyed,” and 
Picasso, she tells me with pleasure, once said he wished he could leave all his 
paintings unfinished because with completion comes “a sense of death and a coup 
de grace”. WH Auden remarked that his poems were never finished, only 
“abandoned”.

Food in books: marzipan in The Miniaturist by Jessie Burton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/little-library-cafe/2015/dec/03/food-in-books-the-marzipan-in-the-miniaturist>
It took over a year before Jessie was able to express what had happened: “I 
kept attempting the blog but couldn’t put my feelings into words. I was 
nervous. Some people are super-private, it would be anathema to them to do 
something like this. But everything had been so public and outside my control 
that here at least I was able to control the narrative. I am a single-minded, 
steely person when it comes to doing what I want to do. That is what my mum 
says. She recently said to me: ‘Well, Jessie, you have always done what you 
wanted.’ And I thought, ‘Have I?’”

What Jessie used to want was to be an actor. Her father was an architect 
turned ceramic restorer, her mother a teacher in a further education college. 
She is an only child. She attended an all-girls Church of England school, Lady 
Margaret in Fulham, and got the acting bug young, performing in television 
dramas. She got into Oxford to read English and Spanish and, afterwards, into 
the Central School of Speech and Drama. Thereafter, her acting career developed 
only patchily: “Failure was my friend much longer than success had been. I knew 
its rhythms, had adapted my step to its jolting gait,” she has written. “To 
have a pretty low-grade career one minute and then be on billboards the next is 
going to do something weird to you, ripping open old hurts and fears.” She 
remembers her last year as actor-in-waiting: 12 fruitless months before getting 
an inconsequential role at the Salisbury Playhouse. At the same time, she kept 
body – if not soul – together temping, as a City PR.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fjessie-burton-success-failure-miniaturist-muse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5669244976a9403679d79173728900db7e953f11%2F0_63_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessie%20Burton%3A%20%E2%80%98Success%20can%20be%20as%C2%A0fracturing%20to%20your%20self%C2%A0as%20failure%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fjessie-burton-success-failure-miniaturist-muse-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessie%20Burton%3A%20%E2%80%98Success%20can%20be%20as%C2%A0fracturing%20to%20your%20self%C2%A0as%20failure%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fjessie-burton-success-failure-miniaturist-muse-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5669244976a9403679d79173728900db7e953f11%2F0_63_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Success is a mirage’: Jessie Burton. Photograph: Richard Saker for the 
Observer 
I remark that people who dismiss acting as self-indulgent fail to understand 
the courage needed to stick at it. “Acting is playful and actors are childlike 
and there is a kind of disrespect about it,” she observes. “Acting can be 
disenfranchising when waiting for other people. You can make your own work but 
that requires money, which is why rich, posh people get to do it. Acting is a 
complete lottery.” She sees the ideal acting temperament as a contradiction: 
“You need to be Zen and accept there are many things you cannot control. Yet 
the flipside is that you have to be tenacious, ambitious and hard – it’s a 
personality paradox. I’m glad mine was a second-class career because if I’d had 
more success, I might still be hanging on in there and feeling miserable for 
two-thirds of the year.” Yet I can hear how difficult stopping must have been. 
It is in her voice – she sounds effortful as she says: “I didn’t love acting 
any more because it didn’t really love me. You realise that having a desire for 
something does not mean you’re going to get it – it’s an adult realisation.”

The Muse by Jessie Burton review – a solid follow-up to The Miniaturist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/25/the-muse-jessie-burton-review-novel>
Writing was an old – a buried – ambition. “I was clearing away and found a 
journal I’d kept when I was 19 and at Oxford. I’d been thinking my writing 
began when my acting started going tits up but I said in that diary that I 
wanted to write about paintings – which now seems weird.” And now the obvious 
question: does she have a muse of her own? “I laugh at the character of Olive 
Schloss,” she hedges, “because she is so obsessed with Isaac. I enjoyed 
reversing the trope of the male artist with his muses – Picasso’sDora Maar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/07/features.weekend> and others. 
For Olive, the sexual drive is really important.” And then she says: “The muses 
I’ve had in the past have all been boyfriends – now ex-boyfriends. I was dumped 
on the telephone by a boy once. For seven months, I wrote poetry about him and 
ended up winning a London schools poetry prize. I don’t have any abstract 
muses, my muses are all people I have loved. People don’t always want to admit 
it but who you love can recalibrate your atoms, change who you are and those 
relationships – I haven’t had loads – have been reconfigured into fiction. Now 
my ex-boyfriend [actor Pip Carter] is going to be reading the book and going, 
‘Is that me?’” She bursts into peals of laughter.


And might Pip be cast as one of her characters if the books get made into 
films (the TV rights forThe Miniaturist are with Company Pictures, responsible 
forWolf Hall). Could he star as Isaac in The Muse? “Oh God. He is not swarthy 
enough… too pale and English. But it would be surreal if he were to appear in 
an adaptation of one of my books.”

Before we leave the subject of The Miniaturist, I have to ask: what is the 
tiniest object she possesses? She produces a Delft tile upon which is a 
minuscule antique writing desk. And if you look closely, you will see an 
impossibly small book on it: “The Miniaturist by Jessie Burton”. “This was my 
30th birthday present from my two best friends before I sold the novel. In the 
novel, small things appear and become reality. They gave me this and it became 
a reality a year later.”

Novelist Jessie Burton on Amsterdam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/27/jessie-burton-the-miniaturist-amsterdam-the-way-i-see-it>
Today, Jessie seems steady, sunny and clear-minded. But she fears a return to 
the “depleted, gloomy place” of last year. She hopes she has learned that, 
“success is a mirage and you have to do a lot of analysis to understand it is 
impossible to embody it”. She has realised, “The horrible thing is that it is 
only when you get financial security that you understand what is important in 
life – that’s the moral lesson.” What is most important to her is “the facility 
to write”. And success has made her “more grateful for friends and family, if 
that doesn’t sound too mawkish”.

Therapy has helped – and travel. She describes her writing as escapist and 
herself as a fantasist and would one day like to live in Spain or South 
America. She has just returned from a research trip to the Colombian rain 
forest and her face lights up as she describes the unexpected happiness of it: 
“It was a combination of things. I’d handed in a manuscript ofThe Muse and was 
proud of it and the response from the States and the UK was good. I was newly 
single but happily so and good friends with my ex so there was a sense of 
personal peace. And I’ve never had a trip like it. I went in a wooden canoe at 
night into the Amazon with this boatman. And the noise – frogs, toads, bats and 
monkeys and mangoes thwacking on a tin roof…” She felt “utterly in the moment”. 
She adds: “I wasn’t worried about the future, it was strangely blissful. I 
thought: ‘Why do I not act and behave like this all the time?’ It didn’t feel 
trippy, it was just that I realised I felt completely myself – whatever that 
means.”

The Muse is published by Picador, £12.99. Click here to order a copy for £11.04
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407456/> Jessie 
Burton will be in conversation with Alex Clark at Foyle’s, Charing Cross Road, 
London, 21 July 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/jessie-burton-the-muse-25954384262>
 