
These are high times for house-hunters of a literary bent. The three-bedroom 
semi in Shepperton 
<https://www.haart.co.uk/buying/3-bedroom-semi-for-sale/shepperton-middlesex-tw17/hrt019705745/>
, Surrey, where JG Ballard lived for nearly 50 years has just gone on sale for 
a relatively modest £475,000, while those stuck in the rental market can 
console themselves with the Bloomsbury house whereTed Hughes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tedhughes>and Sylvia Plath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sylviaplath> first got together.

Hughes, who rued the “unlit and unlovely lavatory” in the poem “18 Rugby 
Street” 
<http://thisispoetryforthesoul.blogspot.co.uk/2013/12/18-rugby-street.html> 
might be surprised to find a price tag of £5,850 a month on a property which he 
described as a stage-set for “the love struggle in all its acts and scenes”.

Ballard lived in Shepperton from 1960 to 2009 and wrote Crash, Empire of the 
Sun and other 20th-century classics there. Hughes was merely passing through 
the “Victorian torpor and squalor” of multi-tenanted 18 Rugby Street, which he 
recalled inBirthday Letters.

Looking at the recent asking prices of authors’ former homes, it is striking 
how well many of them lived. In September, George Eliot’s sprawling family home 
Adam Bede House, near Ashbourne, was listed at £950,000.

Last year, Enid Blyton’s cottage, Old Thatch in Buckinghamshire, was put on 
the market for £1.85m, and the Devon home ofHenry Williamson  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/29/tarka-the-otter-henry-williamson-cabin-listed-devon>
(he bought the land for it after winning the £100 Hawthornden prize in 1927 for
Tarka the Otter) was offered at £900,000. 

Agatha Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>’s 
double-fronted mews house in Chelsea was expected to make £2,295,000 in 2013, 
and in the same yearRudyard Kipling’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rudyard-kipling>s seaside home, The Elms in 
Rottingdean, Sussex, went on sale for more than £1.5m.

Daphne du Maurier <https://www.theguardian.com/books/daphnedumaurier>’s four 
bedroom cottage near Fowey, with its Cornish sea views, was marketed at close 
to £2m in 2011. In 2003, the house in Oxford whereIan McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianmcewan> wrote Atonement – complete with 
blue and gold wallpaper up the staircase – was for sale at £1.35m.

There are relative bargains to be had, though, for those on a modern author’s 
budget. In 2011, a house in Tutshill with “Joanne Rowling slept here circa 
1982” carved into a wooden windowsill was put up for sale for nearly £400,000. 
In the same year, John Updike’s boyhood home in Shillington, Pennsylvania, was 
sold on eBay for $499,000 (currently about £361,000).
 