
Jim Best is once more facing a period out of racing after a disciplinary panel 
ruled the Lewes trainer had told a jockey to stop two horses last December, a 
finding that was first made against him in February and then quashed in May. 
However, Best still appears likely to have a future in the sport because the 
penalty meted out to him was dramatically shorter than at the original hearing, 
amounting to a six-month suspension rather than a four-year ban.

Jim Best case ends amid bitterness and many questions pointing at BHA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-trainer-bhb-british-horse-racing-authority-bitterness-questions>
“At least we now have a penalty that isn’t, frankly, psychotic,” said Best’s 
solicitor, Harry Stewart-Moore. But he added that he was “very disappointed” 
that Best had been found in breach at all. “We thought we’d done enough to show 
thatPaul John, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/paul-john-jim-best-british-horseracing-authority>
 could not be believed,” he said, in reference to the only witness called by 
the British Horseracing Authority.

Best’s team now have seven days to consider an appeal before the six months 
come into force and it will presumably be part of their considerations that any 
appeal board can opt to increase the sentence as well as reduce it. Best 
himself was not present, Stewart-Moore saying he had a pre-existing engagement.

“I still maintain that I haven’t done anything wrong,” Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/jim-best-bha-rehearing-horse-stopping-case>
 said later by telephone. “It’s disappointing to get any ban. But I just want 
it to be over, it’s been such a strain on my family and everything.”

Remarkably, the BHA could not offer immediate clarity on the full extent of 
the punishment delivered by its own panel. On the face of it, a suspended 
licence would still allow Best to go racing and talk to licensed professionals 
about racing, in contrast to a period of disqualification, when he would be 
effectively banished from the sport. The BHA’s press office believed Best will 
not be disqualified but intends to confer with the panel on Tuesday morning to 
confirm that point.

For his part, John, the jockey who said he stopped two horses on Best’s 
orders, tweeted“The truth AGAIN comes out the wash”. John was himself prevented 
from applying for his licence to ride in races for a five-month period after 
the initial hearing in February. He has since obtained an amateur’s licence but 
has not yet used it.

The panel said in its ruling it had not been convinced by either Best or John 
as witnesses and had reached its decision by considering other pieces of 
evidence. It felt that videos of the two races was a better fit for John’s 
version of events than Best’s and found further confirmation in Best’s 
behaviour at the time.

The panel also ruled that pre-hearing arrangements between John and the BHA 
amounted to a deal, as a result of which the jockey received lenient punishment 
for his part in the offences in exchange for giving evidence against Best. The 
BHA had maintained since February that there had been no deal. It declined to 
comment on any aspect of the outcome, pending a possible appeal.

The February finding against Best was quashed in May after it emerged the 
panel chairmanhad been paid by the BHA for private advice as a solicitor. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/17/timeform-accuses-bha-of-siege-mentality-over-jim-best-case>
 The reasons published by that first panel were also found to be insufficient, 
which an appeal board ruled was a second reason for quashing the decision, 
though it was eventually persuaded to let the BHA havea second go at pursuing 
the case. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/jim-best-verdict-bha-king-george-vi-chase>

Panel insists Jim Best verdict must be revealed at BHA offices on Monday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/jim-best-verdict-bha-king-george-vi-chase> 