
Jim Best has spoken for the first time about the effect of the long-running 
case pursued against him by racing’s ruling body which resulted in a decision 
last week that he mustlose his licence for a six-month period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-guilty-bha-stop-two-horses-non-triers-case-horse-racing>
. The Lewes-based trainer, whose case has exposed the British Horseracing 
Authority’s integrity practicesto unprecedented scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-trainer-bhb-british-horse-racing-authority-bitterness-questions>
, said his health, his business and his family have all suffered during the 
year-long legal battles, which may yet result in the closure of his stable.

“The whole thing has been painful and agonising,” Best told the Guardian. “You 
get up each day and you’ve got the feeling as if someone’s died. I know it’s 
not that dramatic, it’s just how you feel. You just feel absolutely choked up 
and torn to pieces.”

Jim Best: ‘All the fun I’ve had over the years has been taken out of me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/22/jim-best-bha-verdict> 
The trainer, who said he has long felt the BHA was “against” him, denies 
telling a jockey to ensure two horses were well beaten in races last year. A 
disciplinary panel found, on the balance of probabilities, that he had done so, 
even while also ruling that the sole BHA witness “can be shown not to have told 
the truth and/or to be unreliable”.

Best said he did not accept the verdict and would have appealed if the case 
could be presented to the high court. But he would first have to go through the 
appeal process at the ruling body and isnot inclined to risk further BHA 
procedure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/jim-best-bha-disciplinary-committee-harry-stewart-moore>
, having been banned for four years after a first hearing in February that was 
subsequently quashed.

The panel suggested in last week’s decision that the penalty for such offences 
could be more stringent and a revision now appears on the cards, following 
comments on Thursday by the BHA’s chief executive, Nick Rust. “This gives me a 
mandate now to make sure that the toughest penalties can be put in place within 
our sport and I don’t expect any push-back from representatives of trainers, 
jockeys and horsemen,” Rust said. “We will be taking into account, very 
seriously, what this panel says and looking at our penalty structure as a 
result.

“Speaking personally, we would like to have seen a tougher sentence coming 
down for this. Within the penalty guidelines, there was the scope to hand down 
a longer sentence but look, we can’t be held to account both ways. We’ve been 
asked to put in place an independent judiciary system, a panel is put in place 
that’s of unquestionable independence and it’s made its decision.”

Jim Best case ends amid bitterness and many questions pointing at BHA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-trainer-bhb-british-horse-racing-authority-bitterness-questions>
Rust accepted it had been a mistake not to disclose that the solicitor Matthew 
Lohn, who chaired the first panel in Best’s case, had carried out private work 
for the BHA for which he was paid more than £50,000 over three years. That led 
to Lohn’s verdict being quashed on the grounds of an appearance of bias. 
However, Rust insisted the ruling body had acted “in good faith”.

He maintained the BHA’s denial that there had been a pre-hearing deal between 
the regulator and its witness, the jockey Paul John, despite the panel having 
concluded that there was such a deal and that John had received lenient 
treatment for his part in riding the ‘stopped’ horses. Rust said: “There was an 
assurance given that the BHA’s prosecution function would seek a certain 
outcome, given that he had come forward and blown the whistle. That cannot be 
binding with the panel. The panel has to make its own decision separately. I’m 
not denying there was an arrangement made where we’ve said that if Mr John came 
forward, that we would be prepared to argue for a particular outcome.”
 