
John Bercow is prepared to climb down over the appointment of a new chief 
executive and clerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/24/john-bercow-letter-commons-clerk-appointment>
 of the House of Commons after senior MPs from the principal parties warned of 
a serious threat to his position.

As the former Labour home secretary David Blunkett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett> moved to calm tensions, 
the Speaker let it be known at Westminster that he was willing to split the two 
roles and effectively hand the senior position to the clerk.

The move means that Carol Mills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/22/carol-mills-breaks-silence-on-row-over-house-of-commons-post>
, a senior official in the Australian parliament who has been approved by a 
six-strong panel to succeed Sir Robert Rogers as chief executive and clerk, 
would have a more limited position. Mills would be chief executive but she 
would not be clerk.

The new clerk, who would probably be the current clerk assistant David 
Natzler, to be appointed by "letters patent" – the formal appointment by the 
Queen. This would mean that the new clerk would, on paper, be senior to the 
chief executive.

The "letters patent" guarantees the independence of the clerk, who can only 
can be dismissed after an address of both Houses of Parliament to the monarch.

But the Speaker would be keen to ensure that the two office holders would be 
equals, suggesting that the chief executive would report to the Speaker and to 
the House of Commons. The chief executive would also be responsible for 85% of 
theHouse of Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> 
budget.

The signals from the speaker came after MPs warned Bercow that he must meet 
their demands by the time parliament returns from its summer recess on Monday 
afternoon – when the speaker is expected to make a statement on interim 
arrangements for the clerk. "If the speaker does not give ground by the time we 
return on Monday this could be fatal for him," one MP said.

Opponents of the Speaker have been given some space after Downing Street 
decided to delay sending Mills's name to Buckingham Palace for approval. 
Critics say that Mills, secretary of the department of parliamentary services 
in Canberra, has a strong record in management that would qualify her to be 
chief executive in normal circumstances. But they say she has little experience 
for the second part of the office as clerk, a key role where she would oversee 
all the procedures and privileges of parliament.

Bercow moved ground over the weekend when he suggested to the Tory MP Sir Alan 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> that he would be 
prepared to split the two sides of the role before Mills takes up her post in 
what would become the more limited position of chief executive. But Duncan said 
that Bercow must go further and make clear that the separate position of clerk 
would not be subservient to Mills.

The move by the Speaker came after Blunkett's attempt at calming tensions. He 
told the Guardian: "My appeal to those who are already declared on this matter 
[is] to try and cool it down so that we can avoid damage to the office of the 
speaker and damage to the reputation of the House of Commons. To do that we 
could all rally round a separation of the two functions and a process which is 
going to be difficult in reaching that solution."

The moves came amid signs that as many as 60 MPs are prepared to support a 
commons early day motion, expected to be tabled by the Tory backbencher Jesse 
Norman, which says that MPs should have a veto over the appointment of Mills.
 