
Johnny Depp has formed a supergroup with Alice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> and Aerosmith guitarist Joe 
Perry, called Hollywood Vampires – just weeks after he expressed his revulsion 
at the way actors dabble in music.

“That whole idea for me is a sickening thing, it’s always just made me sick,” 
he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/21/johnny-depp-labels-actor-musicians-sickening-mortdecai>
 last month during the press tour for his comedy caperMortdecai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/22/mortdecai-review>. “I hate the 
idea, ‘Come see me play the guitar because you’ve seen me in 12 movies.’ It 
shouldn’t be [that way]. You want the people who are listening to the music to 
only be interested in the music … I’ve been very lucky to play on friends’ 
records, and it’s still going. Music is still part of my life. But you won’t be 
hearing the Johnny Depp Band. That won’t ever exist.”

Johnny Depp labels actor-musicians 'sickening – I hate the idea'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/21/johnny-depp-labels-actor-musicians-sickening-mortdecai>
Taking a co-headline role however seems to be fine, with Cooper announcing the 
bandon Instagram <http://instagram.com/p/zEFvuFtJ8k/> on 14 February. One live 
date is confirmed so far, at the Rock in Rio festival in September, playing on 
the same night as System of a Down and Queens of the Stone Age.

Hollywood Vampires resurrects a name Cooper has used before for a superstar 
group of musical drinking buddies that included Keith Moon, Harry Nilsson, John 
Lennon and Ringo Starr.

Another Beatle, Paul McCartney, has already done a spot of recording with the 
new group.Last year, Perry told 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/showbiz/491443/Paul-McCartney-recording-with-Alice-Cooper-Johnny-Depp-and-Joe-Perry>
 the Chicago Sun-Times: “I was in the studio with Alice Cooper and Johnny Depp, 
playing guitar, and the three of us are looking at each other like, ‘hey, we’re 
sitting here with Paul McCartney!’ And we’re all looking at each other like 
open-mouthed kids … It’s the great ego leveller.”

Cooper and Depp played together  
<http://www.alicecooper.com/alice-cooper-joins-johnny-depp-anaheim-duesenberg-namm-party/>
in December at a charity benefit in California, playing Brown Sugar, My 
Generation and School’s Out. They’ve also jammed at London’s 100 Club in 2011 
and at a charity gig in Arizona in 2012. Cooper had a cameo role as himself in 
Depp’s 2012 vampire comedy Dark Shadows. “He’s become a close friend and 
collaborator,” Cooper said of Depp ina recent issue of Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/alice-cooper-on-playing-with-johnny-depp-he-never-makes-it-about-him-20150205>
. “We’ve done a lot of recording together recently. He is really a very 
talented and cool guy. Johnny is a guy who doesn’t have to do anything; he does 
things because he wants to do them. It’s not about his ego.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fmortdecai-film-review-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422018363946%2Fcrop_KP_75743_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mortdecai%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fmortdecai-film-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mortdecai%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fmortdecai-film-review-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422018363946%2Fcrop_KP_75743_640x360.jpeg>
Depp, meanwhile, provided backing vocals for Aerosmith’s 2012 song Freedom 
Fighter, penned by Perry, and performed Train Kept a Rollin’ with them live 
last year. He has also played withMarilyn Manson, Willie Nelson and the Black 
Keys.

Depp also just married 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/05/johnny-depp-and-amber-heard-marry>
 Amber Heard in a private ceremony in Los Angeles, followed by one in the 
Bahamas. His latest film, Mortdecai, underperformed at the box office; the $60m 
(£39m) film made just $7.6m at the US box office and $16m elsewhere.
 