
I picked up John Fowles’s The French Lieutenant’s Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/04/french-lieutenant-s-woman-john-fowles>
 in a bargain bin last summer. It was so brilliant that I quickly read three 
more of his books, which absolutely never happens. Combining titanic commercial 
heft with highbrow complexity, Fowles’s novels are daring, funny and 
unpredictable; so unpredictable, in fact, that they sometimes seemed to 
wrongfoot themselves. “The Magus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jul/31/summer-readings-the-magus-john-fowles>
 has more surprising plot twists than almost any book I’ve ever read,”writes 
the critic Ted Gioia <http://fractiousfiction.com/John_Fowles.html>. “Every 30 
pages, more or less, something transpires that forces the reader to reassess 
everything they have learned in previous chapters.” This ingenuity did for the 
ill-fated film version, with star Michael Caine admitting that even the cast 
didn’t have a clue what was going on.

The Tree, Fowles’s 90-page meditation on nature and creativity – which he 
calls “siblings, branches of the one tree” – gives a hint as to why this might 
be. It’s a blissful fusion of memoir, social history, art criticism and nature 
writing. Beginning with the fanatically over-pruned fruit trees in his father’s 
suburban garden, Fowles takes us on a journey through western humanity’s 
relationship with the natural world. There’s a basic error in the way we relate 
to nature, he says: we have been duped by Victorian science and its “obsession 
with the machine” into seeing it as either potential for commercial yield or a 
kind of intellectual puzzle. Both are subtle species of control that ultimately 
alienate us from the richness of being in nature and our own “greener, more 
mysterious processes of mind”:

We shall never understand nature (or ourselves) until we dissociate the wild 
from the notion of usability – however innocent and harmless the use. For it is 
the general uselessness of so much of nature that lies at the root of our 
ancient hostility and indifference to it.

Fowles himself was gleefully hands-off in his attitude to gardening, letting 
nature run wild – which horrified his father, but made for magical moments such 
as the “two tawny owlets, fresh out of the nest, sitting on a sycamore branch 
like a pair of badly knitted stockings and staring down at this intruder into 
their garden”. As a teenager, he “secretly craved everything our own 
environment did not possess: space, wildness, woods”. When the family was 
evacuated to Devon, he roamed freely and learned to fish, trap and shoot. “I 
was really addicting myself,” he writes, “to the pleasures of discovery.”

Fowles sees his writing process as an extension of these boyhood adventures. 
He calls this book “a wander through the trees” and, in words that will comfort 
idlers everywhere, confesses the “disgracefully haphazard” nature of his 
creative approach:

I do not plan my fiction any more than I usually plan woodland walks; I follow 
the path that seems most promising at any given point, not some itinerary 
decided before entry … I have method in nothing, and powers of concentration … 
that would disgrace a child.

Those who have read The French Lieutenant’s Woman may recall the moment when 
the narrator admits he has no real control over his characters; giving the 
reader three possible endings to spell out Fowles’s utter refusal to rein in 
his own imagination.

The Tree is a book that renounces self-importance and defies defiance. In his 
determination to champion uselessness and a creative indirection, Fowles 
challenges the prevailing orthodoxies of industrial culture. We live in an era 
where everything froma theatre show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/the-arts-boost-our-culture-and-our-economy-its-time-to-stop-the-cuts>
 to a child’s playtime is measured, maximised, made use of. “This addiction to 
finding a reason, a function, a quantifiable yield, has now infiltrated all 
aspects of our lives – and become effectively synonymous with pleasure,” he 
says. “The modern version of hell is purposelessness.” His stance in 1979 
anticipates the rise of integrative nature philosophies, such aspermaculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/09/how-we-made-a-garden-of-edible-delights-monoculture-to-permaculture>
 andrewilding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/16/britain-wild-nature-rewilding-ecosystems-heal-lives>
, and echoesthe ancient anti-rational wisdom of Zen 
<https://tricycle.org/magazine/wash-your-bowl/>, with its call for a 
“don’t-know mind” and an end to egotism. This is a work of great profundity but 
also humility, finally confronting its own uselessness: “The deepest value of 
nature lies in the fact that it cannot be directly described by any words.”

From John Fowles with love: how the author’s first true romance and lost poem 
came to light
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/01/john-fowles-love-affair-poem> 
In the last chapter, Fowles relates a trip to Wistman’s Wood 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wistman's_Wood>, an ancient scrap of oak forest 
on Dartmoor. He finds himself struck dumb: “Fairy-like, self-involved, rich in 
secrets … such inturned peace, such profound harmlessness, otherness, such 
unusing … all words miss, I know I cannot describe it.” It’s both moving and 
humbling to watch so great a writer labour at the outer reaches of language. I 
went there myself this September, even locating what I thought might be the 
same “patriarchal gnome-oak” that had sheltered Fowles as he racked his brains. 
I sat down, too, wondering if I was feeling what he had felt. Only now do I 
realise my mistake. Next time, I’ll put the book away and listen for what no 
human voice – not even John Fowles’s – can tell me.

• The Tree is available in a new edition from Little Toller 
<https://www.littletoller.co.uk/shop/books/little-toller/the-tree/>.
 