
War paint, quotes from Disney films and staff playing table tennis are not 
what you expect to see at the headquarters of a retailer on Black Friday, but 
that was the scene at AO World’s base in Bolton on Friday.

According to John Roberts, the chief executive of the online electrical 
retailer and one of the most outspoken figures in the industry, it is all part 
of the unique culture that has made AO one of the fastest-growing companies in 
the UK and shaken up how washing machines, televisions and laptops are sold.

The relaxed – even jovial – atmosphere among the 750 staff at AO Park as they 
take calls from customers and oversee IT systems is certainly not because the 
company is having a quiet day. Roberts says he cannot provide details of AO’s 
sales for Black Friday, but his smile gives it away. “Mega,” is all he says 
about the performance, meaning forecasts that Black Friday will be AO’s 
biggest-ever day of sales are almost certain to be accurate.

The war paint is on the faces of some staff who have tried to find a 
light-hearted way to motivate themselves on a crucial day for British 
retailers, and there are inspirational quotes all over the walls of the 
building, including “Just keep swimming” from Disney’s Finding Nemo. Staff play 
table tennis during their breaks in the staff cafeteria, which includes a pool 
table and its own Starbucks.

Roberts says AO’s treatment of employees and its high standards of customer 
service are down to common sense. “Offer a good service then work out how to 
make money on it,” says the 43-year-old, who founded AO 16 years ago. “There is 
an incorrect belief in this country that you can build something amazing for 
free. It is not going to happen, and it doesn’t happen in five minutes.”

On Black Friday, this approach means ensuring the website does not crash, 
shoppers aren’t forced to wait to access it, and orders are delivered on time – 
all common problems for the online operations of traditional high-street 
retailers.

“It is incomprehensible how that [websites breaking] could happen,” Roberts 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fao-worlds-john-roberts-businesses-not-awake-to-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf9383b7528c8710bb94cee32d2b21c282c5267c%2F0_192_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Roberts%20of%20AO%20World%3A%20'Businesses%20aren%E2%80%99t%20awake%20to%20online%20shopping'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fao-worlds-john-roberts-businesses-not-awake-to-online-shopping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Roberts%20of%20AO%20World%3A%20%27Businesses%20aren%E2%80%99t%20awake%20to%20online%20shopping%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fao-worlds-john-roberts-businesses-not-awake-to-online-shopping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf9383b7528c8710bb94cee32d2b21c282c5267c%2F0_192_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 John Roberts: ‘We have got to be thinking what’s next, what’s next, what’s 
next.’ Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The AO boss insists the deals available on Black Friday are “fantastic” – 
despite claims from consumer groups that retailers are exaggerating discounts – 
and that Brexit has made the shopping event even more attractive for shoppers 
this year due to the looming threat of inflation.

“Inflation is going to kick in in the new year. Nobody knows to quite what 
level yet, but you don’t have a 15% change that has stuck in currency and it 
not translate into pricing,” he says. “Everyone is working very hard to 
minimise the impact for customers for very obvious reasons, but it is coming. 
So if you want something, the next few days is a great time to buy a 
high-ticket product.”

However, Roberts criticises claims by other retailers that they are matching 
the prices of their rivals, particularly John Lewis’s “never knowingly 
undersold” campaign, which does not apply to online-only retailers such as AO 
or Amazon.

“So my principle is, let’s just be honest. Our price match is very simple, 
which is we match anyone, anywhere, anytime on anything. I don’t think it can 
get much more simple than that. I can’t understand how some retailers would 
exclude certain things. So over 50% of all orders placed today will be placed 
online. How can you [John Lewis] exclude that channel?

“They [never knowingly undersold] are three very definitive words in my view. 
I don’t care what the short-term cost is, because I am building a long-term 
relationship with you. You think about it and you think: are they not trying to 
build a long-term relationship? I don’t understand it.

AO World shares fall as European investment hits profits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/jun/08/ao-world-shares-fall-as-european-investment-hits-profits>
“Our view is very much to focus on our own business. If they are undermining 
long-term value with their customers, that has got to be good for us. I think 
the consumer is ever more educated – the internet is the most price-transparent 
place to shop.


“I mean, go and look at their [John Lewis] service reviews on Trust Pilot. You 
look at all those metrics and the reality will catch the rhetoric, it always 
does. Whether it is hubris or whatever it is, it catches up. Look at 
BlackBerry: not long ago they had 50% of the global smartphone market, now they 
have got less than 1%. They weren’t paranoid about all the fundamentals of 
their business. We sometimes use examples like Kodak didn’t invent the digital 
camera, or Blockbuster didn’t invent Netflix, or Tesco didn’t invent Ocado, or 
Walmart didn’t invent Amazon.”

Roberts says the dramatic changes in technology and how we shop are still 
being underestimated. AO believes 50% of electrical sales in Europe will be 
online within 10 years, and it wants 40% of that market.

“Businesses aren’t awake to it,” he says. “If you look at the last three 
years, mobile shopping has gone from virtually nowhere to over 50% of our 
traffic. Fortunately, we did see that coming and we did invest in it. But if we 
didn’t, we would have been massively damaged. So we have got to be thinking, 
what’s next, what’s next, what’s next?”
 