
John Carson, who has died aged 89, was a busy actor whose velvet voice and 
distinguished looks could flit easily between cold villainy or testy 
eccentricity. This made him much in demand on screen in many popular television 
series and during his cinematic association withHammer Films 
<http://www.hammerfilms.com>.

Having secured his big break (two shows a week for £40 per week) as Dr Donald 
Latimer in the popular hospital soap opera Emergency Ward 10 (1959), he was 
unable to use London Underground due to constant recognition by the public. In 
the final series of the long-running oil industry drama The Troubleshooters 
(1971), he played James Langley, the liberal deputy chairman of Mogul Oil who 
knocked heads withGeoffrey Keen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/nov/10/broadcasting.guardianobituaries>
’s scheming and hard-nosed autocrat Brian Stead.

His aptitude for snarling villains made him perfect casting as the evil squire 
in Hammer’s The Plague of the Zombies (1966) and he also appeared in Taste the 
Blood of Dracula (1970), and in Captain Kronos – Vampire Hunter (1974), 
achieving second billing for his turn as the tragic Dr Marcus (enduring an 
unsuccessful staking and hanging in order to prevent his metamorphosis into one 
of the undead).

Although he had a memorably saturnine face with deep blue eyes which could 
burn with malevolence or twinkle on demand, his voice was just as recognisable. 
Described by the Guardian as having “the languid opulence of a falling £10 
note” it was put into good service on a number of television advertisements, 
notably when his seductive tones – which often found him mistaken for the 
similar soundingJames Mason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/james-mason> – accompanied John 
Barry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/31/john-barry-obituary>’s 
score on the advertising campaign for Sunsilk shampoo.

Son of British parents, Elizabeth and Cyril Carson-Parker, he was born in 
Colombo, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), where his father worked on tea and rubber 
plantations. Educated in Australia during the second world war, John went to 
Britain to do national service as an artillery officer in an anti-aircraft 
regiment in 1944-45. After a period as a pianist’s page turner at Covent Garden 
(where he got his first taste for the theatre), he studied law at Queen’s 
College, Oxford, and then left for New Zealand.

While there he performed in amateur theatre before working in professional 
radio drama, learning all facets of the business from acting to music 
selection. He then joined the theatre company the New Zealand Players before 
working his way back to the UK.

Having established himself with seasons at Sheffield in the late 1950s he then 
limited his stage work, though it included playing Will Roper in the original 
production of A Man For All Seasons at the Globe theatre in London (1960), with
Paul Scofield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/20/2> as Sir Thomas 
More. One of his favourite roles was the well-meaning Freddie for Michael 
Blakemore in the premiere of Peter Nichols’s A Day in the Death of Joe Egg 
(Comedy theatre, 1967, transferring to Broadway in 1968).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxSeKnzIfyPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxSeKnzIfyPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxSeKnzIfyPY&media=>
 John Carson played Mr Knightley in the TV version of Jane Austen’s Emma, 1972 
He appeared in the film Quentin Durward in 1955 and then moved on to 
television fare, including Sword of Freedom (1957) and Ivanhoe (playing 
numerous guest roles in 1958 and 1959). After the fame Emergency Ward 10 gave 
him he enjoyed a healthy three decades on TV and was rarely out of work. His 
parts included Monks in a 13-episode Oliver Twist with Max Adrian as Fagin, 
1962, Count von Stauffenberg, Hitler’s would-be assassin, in the Wednesday Play 
The July Plot (1964), Mr Dombey in Dombey and Son (1969), Mr Knightley in a 
six-part version of Emma (1972), Heatherstone in Children of the New Forest 
(1977) and twoDennis Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/dennis-potter> 
plays, Paper Roses (1971) and Shmoedipus (1974). Between his appearances in The 
Avengers (1963-1965) and Poirot (1989-2005) he appeared as the guest lead in 
practically every popular drama on television.

In 1983 he moved to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> for family reasons. Not being 
well known there, he had to build a career again but was soon playing leading 
roles. With no sympathy for apartheid, he found his phone was bugged (his 
second wife, Luanshya Greer, was a writer whose historical novels explored 
themes of racial division) and he was under government surveillance – something 
he found especially pertinent when playing Thomas Becket in a 1992 stage 
production of Murder in the Cathedral, at St George’s Cathedral in Cape Town. 
He was very useful to visiting film and television productions, appearing in 
the TV mini-series Shaka Zulu (1986) and Rhodes (1996, with Martin Shaw).

His last major film roles were as a forgetful old actor in The Deal, with 
William H Macy, and in Neil Marshall’s Doomsday (both 2008). His return to 
Britain in 2007 saw more television appearances – Doctors (2011), Silent 
Witness (2012) and Midsomer Murders (2013) – but he eventually went back to 
South Africa.

He is survived by Luanshya and their two children, Ben and Suzanna, and by 
four children, Richard, Chris, Katie and Harry, from a previous marriage, which 
ended in divorce.

• John Carson (John Derek Carson-Parker), actor, born 28 February 1927; died 5 
November 2016
 