
A BBC Radio 4 show that mocked the Queen’s sex life on her 90th birthday was a 
serious breach of the corporation’s editorial guidelines, theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> has ruled.


During the panel show Don’t Make Me Laugh 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b078dpjn>, which is created and fronted by 
David Baddiel, a contestant is given a subject to discuss.


The pre-recorded programme, which aired at 6.30pm on the day of the Queen’s 
90th birthday, included the subject “the Queen must have had sex at least four 
times”.


Panellists, who included the comic Russell Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/russell-kane>, made sex jokes about the 
Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh that the BBC Trust ruled were “personal, 
intrusive and demeaning”.


Baddiel later apologised for the offensive section of the show.


The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> was bombarded with more than 
100 complaints about the content, day and time of day that the show was aired.


“Trustees found it hard to imagine circumstances in which this broadcast at 
any time or on any day would not have given rise to significant unjustified 
offence,” said the BBC Trust in its ruling on Thursday. “Trustees considered 
this was a serious breach of the editorial guidelines for harm and offence.”

The BBC Trust’s investigation of the incident found a number of concerning 
compliance failures.

It found that the BBC’s editor, editorial standards, had listened to a “rough 
cut” of the programme in advance but had determined that the section about the 
Queen “did not raise an issue in terms of editorial standards”.


The editor had previously requested “significant” changes to other programmes 
in the series.


In addition So Radio, the independent production company that made the 
programme, did not highlight the potential issue when filling in compliance 
forms for the show for the corporation.


The compliance form asks whether output includes “potentially controversial 
references to public figures”.

So Radio, a division of So Television, the production company co-founded by 
Graham Norton and sold to ITV answered “no”.

The BBC said that the incident was a “regrettable failure of editorial 
judgement and compliance processes”.

“While BBC Radio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> comedy is a 
broad church and often pushes boundaries, we would like to apologise for this 
broadcast of Don’t Make Me Laugh,” the BBC said at the time. “We never intended 
for the scheduling of the programme to coincide with the Queen’s birthday and 
are sorry for the offence caused by its timing and content.”

Partly as a result of the broadcast the BBC decided to move the show from 
6.30pm to 11pm.

The BBC cancelled the planned repeat of the programme, removed it from the 
iPlayer catch-up service, and apologised to Buckingham Palace.
 