
On 11 June 2011, a few days before his 69th birthday, Jonathan Raban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-raban> was sitting with his 
daughter Julia at home in Seattle. He’d felt foggy and out of sorts since 
waking. Having reheated a casserole, he looked down to see that, try as he 
might, he couldn’t make the knife in his right hand touch the food on his plate.

His voice lifts in remembered surprise. “It was very strange. I said to Julia: 
‘I think I’m having a stroke.’ ”

Jonathan Raban: Sipping with the Tea Party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/16/tea-party-movement-jonathan-raban>
He was. A few hours later, Raban was in a hospital in the north of the city, 
looking at scans of his brain. The stroke was haemorrhagic, and massive: the 
damage to the right side of his body would be impossible to erase.

Carefully balancing a glass of red wine with his good hand, he gestures down 
at the wheelchair he now uses. “Not quite instantly, but within a very few 
weeks, I was transformed into an old man.” A second later, he concedes gruffly: 
“I did feel pretty happy that I was still alive.”

Appropriately for a man best known for his nautical writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/28/passage-to-juneau-by-jonathan-raban-lifes-choppier-waters>
, Raban’s home feels rather like the upturned hull of a boat, with 
coffee-coloured redwood beams and a clutter of charts, sailing photos, 
engravings and mock-ups of the covers of his books. Every so often there’s the 
drone of a seaplane coming in to land.

As soon as he got home from rehab, Raban did what he has always done: he began 
to write, and to research – accounts of other people’s strokes (“mostly 
unreadable”, he grunts), English social history, his parents’ letters; 
searching for a way to braid the experience with the other skeins of his life.

“I remember a doctor came to the rehabilitation ward, about my age, and said: 
‘Oh, you’re the one who used to be a writer.’ I told him: ‘I’m still a writer, 
and I intend to write about this.’ ”

Raban talks in unhurried, intricately woven sentences, languid vowels barely 
touched by two decades in the US; it feels a little surreal to encounter him 
here in the Pacific Northwest. But Seattle, he goes on to explain, is as close 
to a home as he has found. Born in Norfolk in 1942 and educated at the 
University of Hull – where he became friendly withPhilip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/27/philip-larkin-love-hate-women> – 
he started out as an academic. But as his anthology-cum-memoirFor Love and Money
 (1989) attests, he lasted only a few years, writing fiction and journalism 
during University of East Anglia vacations and “trying to gain a ticket of 
entrance to the city at the end of the line”. He launched himself as a 
freelance writer in London in 1969, lodging with the poet Robert Lowell and 
becoming part of the bibulous in-crowd that centred onIan Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/dec/29/guardianobituaries>’s magazine 
New Review.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaee0f7bd6fb8c07fd0ded9190ef1619a096b906%2F0_0_6600_2753%2F6600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaee0f7bd6fb8c07fd0ded9190ef1619a096b906%2F0_0_6600_2753%2F6600.jpg>
 The Mississippi river, the subject ofOld Glory. Photograph: Macduff 
Everton/Getty Images 
Even the capital seems to have been a temporary halt. Within a few years Raban 
was flitting around the Middle East, as recorded inArabia: Through the Looking 
Glass (1979); then floating down the Mississippi in an open-topped boat (Old 
Glory, 1981). Soon after that adventure, be bought a larger boat and piloted it 
around the British Isles. The project becameCoasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/aug/02/summer-voyages-coastin-jonathan-raban>
 (1986), which is as sui generis as Raban’s other books – part memoir, part 
rite of passage, part discourse on fluid mechanics, part sly satire on British 
islomania during theFalklands campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/09/margaret-thatcher-falklands-gamble>
. In the wake of Brexit, it is a salutary read.

Afloat, Raban writes, he found a “sea-distance” that matched his sense of 
estrangement from Britain, and the grounding stability that eluded him on land. 
But the thing that genuinely fascinates him, and makes his prose leap and 
surge, is water – an eerily still North Sea off East Anglia, “as calm and full 
of mercurial colour as a pool of motor oil”; a corner of the north Pacific off 
British Columbia, “like a bolt of grey silk, lightly undulating”, that seeps 
its way into his brooding traveloguePassage to Juneau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/28/passage-to-juneau-by-jonathan-raban-lifes-choppier-waters>
 (1999).

The love affair began early, Raban recalls. “Water, one way or another, 
has been a means of escape for me from pretty much infancy. When I saw a river 
or a pond or a lake, I saw freedom and solitude. I could be happy in those 
places, in a way that I couldn’t be at home.”

Raban has often written about his tussles with his father, an army 
captain-cum-cleric whose return from the second world war he brusquely resented 
as a child, and whose dog collar and cassock, with its “greasy antique patina 
like the sheen on a blowfly”, represented everything to rebel against. But his 
interest in literature is something he owes to his mother, who once wrote short 
stories for women’s magazines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe987f8760fc3c56b931e5385ae1d970dbd8dd353%2F0_0_9864_3024%2F9864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe987f8760fc3c56b931e5385ae1d970dbd8dd353%2F0_0_9864_3024%2F9864.jpg>
 The thing that fascinates Jonathan Raban is water. Photograph: Alamy 
“She taught me to read, which was my one proficiency. My father gets all the 
attention, but partly that’s because he intruded on this relationship with my 
mother.” There is a curt laugh. “I harboured the usual fantasy.”

It seems not insignificant that his first published work, printed in John 
London’s Weekly when he was 17, concerned a child whose father is presented 
with a shattered china dog as a gift after returning from the war. Raban’s 
writing has grown infinitely more sophisticated since then, but its leitmotifs 
– struggles with overbearing authority, a search for refuge in a world that 
seems aslant – have remained.

He insists his arrival in the US wasn’t intended to be permanent

He insists his arrival in the US, tracked with droll self-scrutiny in Hunting 
Mister Heartbreak (1990), wasn’t intended to be permanent – he retains British 
citizenship – but it seems appropriate that he alighted on the West Coast, the 
favoured destination for people wanting to slough off old lives and try on new 
ones for size. One of that book’s most moving chapters chronicles the time 
Raban spent with Korean immigrants to Seattle, whose travel-shocked 
recalibration to “wide – wide – wide” America is partly, one senses, his own. 
The section closes with Raban setting himself up downtown in a former luxury 
hotel; in his room is a gold-painted desk that had once been used by Elvis, and 
a name label reading “Rainbird” on the door.

Marriage to Jean, a dance critic and journalist in the city, swiftly followed; 
Julia was born not long after that, and is now in her mid-20s. Among the 
cavalcade of identities Raban has tried out during his 74 years, the one that 
really seems to fit him is fatherhood, which came late. It’s a role he still 
seems enjoyably astonished by, and which has provided some much-needed 
anchorage. Though the relationship with Jean came to an end, Julia now lives 
nearby and the two see each other nearly every day.

I’m interested in his thoughts on genre; though his books are filed in the 
travel sections of bookshops, does he feel himself to be a travel writer? He 
snorts. “I see a travel writer as someone who’s sampling other people’s 
holidays and writing a bright little piece about the glories of 
Weston-super-Mare or something.Bruce Chatwin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/04/bruce-chatwin-letters-nicholas-shakespeare>
bridled at being called a travel writer; whenSonglines was shortlisted for the 
Thomas Cook award, he wrote a stiff letter saying that it was impossible for it 
to be entered because it was most certainly an invented journey. I feel 
sympathetic to that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8cc5fd78070764753192573fc4d5fdfc4e1f661%2F0_129_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8cc5fd78070764753192573fc4d5fdfc4e1f661%2F0_129_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 A protest march against President-elect Donald Trump in Seattle, Washington, 
14 November 2016. Photograph: Jason Redmond/AFP/Getty Images 
Wait – didn’t Raban himself win the Thomas Cook? His grin is lizardish. 
“Twice. But I was hungry for prizes.”

Though travel often features in his non-fiction and the three novels Raban has 
so far written, he most often uses the verb intransitively, with no obvious 
destination in mind. “I always thought of it as escaping from genre together, 
the mixture of memoir and travelling – not going to get anywhere, but going for 
the going’s sake. Perhaps the notion is pretentious, but it’s of what a journey 
could really be: a miniature scale-model life, which you would survive 
miraculously at the end.”

Though he talks with wit and candour, there is a reserve about him – that 
Englishness, perhaps – that seems at odds with the intimate scrutiny of his 
prose. I ask if he’s ever regretted committing something to the page. The grin 
reappears. “I want to say,je ne regrette rien. Not much.”

I want to say je ne regrette rien. Not much

Even in Passage to Juneau, which chronicles in agonising detail the death of 
his father and the collapse of his marriage to Jean? “Even that.”

The books only begin to make sense in long recollection, he adds: “Writing 
about journeys, I have to forget the memory in its too-precise form and dive 
into the experience as if it were happening almost fictionally. It’s a getting 
away from the experience in order to be able to write about it.”

I’m curious about what happened to the boat. “Oh, it was sold, even before the 
stroke. I’d written as much as I could about sailing. Also, my appetite for it 
diminished sharply after 2001. Want to meet Republicans in this part of the 
world? They all have boats.”

It is impossible to avoid the subject of Donald Trump, whose victory Raban had 
been dreading for months, and which still plainly nauseates him. He’s been 
rereadingIan Kershaw’s biography of Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2007/nov/14/research.highereducation>, 
an unlikely but nevertheless effective source of consolation: “The consolation 
comes in the very different state of Weimar Germany and the contemporary US. 
For all Trump’s blustering authoritarianism, he would run straight into the 
checks and balances of America’s state and city governments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26867d610f6ef27f697fd462e621508605ae8a1f%2F0_211_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Raban%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20felt%20pretty%20happy%20that%20I%20was%20still%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjonathan-raban-author-recovery-stroke-fears-dis-united-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26867d610f6ef27f697fd462e621508605ae8a1f%2F0_211_2200_2750%2F2200.jpg>
 Jonathan Raban is best known for hs nautical writing. Photograph: Ulf 
Andersen/Getty Images 
“Soon after the election, Seattle’s mayor, Ed Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/homelessness-is-a-national-emergency-the-crisis-demands-federal-leadership>
, held a press conference to say that the city would remain a ‘sanctuary city’ 
for undocumented immigrants, and similar statements have been made in New York, 
Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles and elsewhere.”

So he’s optimistic, in a way?

“Trump may well turn out to be more of a danger for the rest of the world than 
for the dis-United States. But whatever happens is going to be a bloody, bloody 
mess.”

These days his journeys may be more imaginative than real, but he fights shy 
of the idea that I’ve encountered Raban at rest. His thinking is as restless 
and ambulatory as ever; the wheelchair is another kind of narrative vehicle, a 
fine place in which to write and read. When we meet he’s halfway through the 
proofs of a biography ofJan Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/02/jan-morris-life-in-motion>, whom 
he encountered in Cairo: “A proper traveller,” he writes inArabia, 
a touch ruefully.

Most of all, though, he’s mapping out the territory of the new book, and the 
connections he wants to draw between his early life and the lightning bolt that 
hit him in 2011. Progress is slower than he’d like; more meandering. There are 
far too many threads.

He sighs faintly, and reaches for the bottle of red. “But then, a friend 
reminded me over email, there always are.”
 