
The first time my father looked at me was on a screen, using technology 
developed to detect flaws in the hulls of ships. His father, my grandfather, 
could only rest his hand on my grandmother’s belly and imagine his infant in 
his mind. But by the time I was conceived, my father’s imagination was guided 
by technology that gave shape to sound waves rippling off my body.

The Glasgow-based Anglican obstetrician Ian Donald, who in the 1950s helped 
bring ultrasound technology from shipyard to doctor’s office, had devoted 
himself to the task out of a belief that the images would increase empathy for 
the unborn, and make women less likely to choose abortions. The technology has 
also been used, though, to make the decision to terminate a pregnancy – because 
of deformity, because the parent wants a child of a certain sex. Whatever the 
intended and actual effects, it is clear that the now iconic black and white 
images of our bodies before we are born mediate life and death. But what 
prepares us to make life-and-death decisions?

My wife and I debated learning the sex of our first child before birth. I 
raised the issue with my uncle, a gynaecologist who had delivered more than 
5,000 babies. He was prone neither to giving advice nor anything whiffing of 
spirituality, but he urged me, strongly, not to find out. He said, “If a doctor 
looks at a screen and tells you, you will have information. If you find out in 
the moment of birth, you will have a miracle.”

I don’t believe in miracles, but I followed his advice, and he was right. One 
needn’t believe in miracles to experience them. But one must be present for 
them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjonathan-safran-foer-technology-diminishing-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c79591739c245b304b8c5fe16bbb2e971652e6%2F0_250_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Safran%20Foer%3A%20technology%20is%20diminishing%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjonathan-safran-foer-technology-diminishing-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Safran%20Foer%3A%20technology%20is%20diminishing%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fjonathan-safran-foer-technology-diminishing-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3c79591739c245b304b8c5fe16bbb2e971652e6%2F0_250_3750_2250%2F3750.jpg>
 ‘One needn’t believe in miracles to experience them. But one must be present 
for them’ … Jonathan Safran Foer Photograph: Emily Berl/Getty Images Portrait 
Psychologists who study empathy and compassion are finding that, unlike our 
almost instantaneous responses to physical pain, it takes time for the brain to 
comprehend “the psychological and moral dimensions of a situation”. Simply put, 
the more distracted we become, and the more emphasis we place on speed at the 
expense of depth – redefining “text” from what fills the hundreds of pages of a 
novel, to a line of words and emoticons on a phone’s screen – the less likely 
and able we are to care. That’s not even a statement about the relative worth 
of the contents of a novel and a text, only about the time we spend with each.

We know that texting while driving is more dangerous than driving drunk. You 
won’t risk killing anyone if you use your phone while eating a meal, or having 
a conversation, or waiting on a bench, which means you will allow yourself to 
be distracted. Everyone wants his parent’s, or friend’s, or partner’s undivided 
attention – even if many of us, especially children, are getting used to far 
less. Simone Weil wrote that “attention is the rarest and purest form of 
generosity”. By this definition, our relationships to the world, and to one 
another, and to ourselves, are becoming increasingly miserly.

Novels demand many things of readers, but the most obvious is attention. I can 
do any number of other activities while watching a TV show or listening to 
music, and I can carry on a conversation with a friend while at an art gallery, 
but reading a novel demands putting everything else aside. To read a book is to 
devote oneself to the book. Novels always traffic in empathy, always bring “the 
other” closer, always ask us to transcend our perspectives, but isn’t that 
attention, itself, a generous act? Generous toward ourselves?

*

My father was not present for his children’s births – it was customary, then, 
for men to be in the waiting room. I witnessed my sons being born. My 
experience was richer, deeper, more memorable and fulfilling than my father’s. 
Being physically present allowed me to be emotionally present.

I can do any number of other activities while watching TV, but reading demands 
devotion

We think of technologies as wielders of information and manipulators of 
matter. Google, we all know, is in the business – as they put it – of 
organising and making accessible “the world’s information”. Other technologies 
are more earthy – the car propels us over land at speeds our legs cannot 
attain, and the bomb allows us to kill many enemies in ways our bare hands 
cannot.

But technologies are not only effective at achieving or thwarting the aims of 
those who encounter them, but are affective. Technology is not strictly 
technical. “I love you” – the same “I love you” issuing from the same person 
with the same sincerity and depth – will resonate differently over the phone 
than in a handwritten letter, than in a text message. The tone and rhythm of 
voice craft the words, as does the texture and colour of stationery, as does 
the glowing font of the text chosen by our mobile phone manufacturer. We love 
our Macs more than our PCs because Apple was more interested in harnessing and 
inflecting the affective resonances of its technology and in restricting a 
smaller coterie of elites to guard and guide these affects so as to create a 
distinctive ecosystem. We find ourselves “playing” with smartphones in a way we 
never did with the functional handle of a traditional landline phone because, 
whereas the first phone was designed by engineers thinking in functional terms, 
the phones in our pockets nowadays are always built in dialogue with marketers 
who have carefully noted how colour and curve, brightness and texture, heft and 
size make us feel.

We consumers forget that technology always plugs into and produces certain 
affects, the building blocks of emotions, as well as full-blown emotional 
experiences. We forget this, but successful companies do not. They remember and 
profit enormously. We forget at the expense of who we are.

Most of our communication technologies began as substitutes for an impossible 
activity. We couldn’t always see one another face to face, so the telephone 
made it possible to keep in touch at a distance. One is not always home, so the 
answering machine made a message possible without the person being near their 
phone. Online communication originated as a substitute for telephonic 
communication, which was considered, for whatever reasons, too burdensome or 
inconvenient. And then texting, which facilitated yet faster and more mobile 
messaging. These inventions were not created to be improvements on face-to-face 
communication, but a declension of acceptable, if diminished, substitutes for 
it.

Each step ‘forward’ has made it easier to avoid the emotional work of being 
present information rather than humanity

But then a funny thing happened: we began to prefer the diminished 
substitutes. It’s easier to make a phone call than to make the effort to see 
someone in person. Leaving a message on someone’s machine is easier than having 
a phone conversation – you can say what you need to say without a response; 
it’s easier to check in without becoming entangled. So we began calling when we 
knew no one would pick up. Shooting off an email is easier still, because one 
can further hide behind the absence of vocal inflection, and of course there’s 
no chance of accidentally catching someone. With texting, the expectation for 
articulateness is further reduced, and another shell is offered to hide in. 
Each step “forward” has made it easier – just a little – to avoid the emotional 
work of being present, to convey information rather than humanity.

The problem with accepting – with preferring – diminished substitutes is that, 
over time, we too become diminished substitutes. People who become used to 
saying little become used to feeling little. Or just feeling what’s been 
designed and sold to us to feel.

The novel has never stood in such stark opposition to the culture that 
surrounds it. A book is the opposite of Facebook: it requires us to be less 
connected. It is the opposite of Google: not only inefficient, but at its best, 
useless. Screens offer a seemingly endless supply of information, but the true 
value of the page is not what it allows us to know, but how it allows us to be 
known.

*

Like so many people I know, I’ve been concerned that phones and the internet 
have, in subtle ways, made life less rich, provided bright pleasures at the 
expense of deep ones, have distracted me, made concentration more difficult, 
led me to be elsewhere far too often. I’ve found myself checking email while 
giving my kids a bath, jumping over to the internet when a sentence or idea 
doesn’t come effortlessly in my writing, searching for shade on a beautiful 
spring day so I can see the screen of my phone. Have you?

Have you found yourself putting loved ones on hold so you could click over to 
a call from an unidentified number? Have you found yourself conflating 
aloneness with loneliness? Have you found your relationship to distraction 
reversing: what was once a frustration is now sought?

Do you want to click over to the other call, want to have an email to have to 
respond to, want – even crave –the ping of an incoming, inconsequential message?

Isn’t it possible that technology, in the forms in which it has entered our 
everyday lives, has diminished us? And isn’t it possible that it’s getting 
worse? Almost all new technology causes alarm in its early days, and humans 
generally adapt to it. So perhaps no resistance is necessary. But if it were, 
where would it come from, and what would it look like?

With each generation, it becomes harder to imagine a future that resembles the 
present. My grandparents hoped I would have a better life than they did: free 
of war and hunger, comfortably situated in a place that felt like home. But 
what futures would I dismiss out of hand for my grandchildren? That their 
clothes will be fabricated every morning on 3D printers? That they will 
communicate without speaking or moving? Only someone with no imagination, and 
no grounding in reality, would deny the possibility that they will live 
forever. It’s possible that many reading these words will never die.

Let’s assume, though, that we all have a set number of days to indent the 
world with our beliefs, to find and create the beauty that only a finite 
existence allows for, to wrestle with the question of purpose and wrestle with 
our answers. We often use technology to save time, but increasingly, it either 
takes the saved time along with it, or makes the saved time less present, 
intimate and rich. I worry that the closer the world gets to our fingertips, 
the further it gets from our hearts. It’s not an either/or situation – being 
“anti-technology” is perhaps the only thing more foolish than being 
unquestioningly “pro-technology” – but a question of balance that our lives 
hang upon.

One day, nanomachines will detect weaknesses in our hearts long before any 
symptoms would bring us to a doctor. And other nanomachines will repair our 
hearts without our feeling any pain, losing any time or spending any money. But 
it will only feel like a miracle if we are still capable of feeling miracles – 
which is to say, if our hearts are worth saving.

• Here I Am by Jonathan Safran Foer is published by Hamish Hamilton. To order 
a copy for £16 (RRP £20) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/here-i-am-426650.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 