
The annual Anatoly Karpov <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov> 
tournament took place in Poikovsky in Siberia from 15-24 March. Held in honour 
of the ex-world champion (who has visited numerous times and given various 
exhibitions but never played in the tournament itself) this was the eighth 
edition of an event which, while it isn't in the absolute elite class, is 
nevertheless one of the very strongest in the calendar.

In contrast to the completely cosmopolitan supergrandmaster tournaments, 
Poikovsky does retain its own very Russian flavour and this year's field of ten 
was no exception with four actual Russians - Dmitry Jakovenko and Evgeny 
Alekseev, who were first equal at the last Russian Championship, the 2005 
champion Sergei Rublevsky and Alexei Dreev; four foreigners of 'ex-Soviet' 
origin: Viktor Bologan (Moldavia), Alexander Onischuk (USA), Emil Sutovsky 
(Israel) and Vladislav Tkachiev (France); an Eastern European - Andrei 
Istratescu (Romania) and just a single 'real' foreigner, Zhang Pengxiang 
(China).

Being the outsider at a tournament isn't much fun and while Chinese players 
must be more used to this than others, Zhang had a fairly miserable event, 
losing two games and drawing seven without a single win. Meanwhile the battle 
at the top was extremely cagey and it took a long time for the pack to fracture 
but after five rounds a sole leader did finally emerge in the shape of the top 
seed Jakovenko; and he maintained his lead thereafter, increasing the gap to a 
full point after seven rounds and having the luxury of a fairly quick draw with 
Zhang in the final round to cement victory.

The final scores were Jakovenko 6/9; Onischuk, Alekseev and Bologan 5; 
Istratescu and Rublevsky 4.5; Dreev and Sutovsky 4; and Zhang Pengxiang and 
Tkachiev 3.5.

Jakovenko won three and drew six without loss. I was perhaps most impressed 
with the way he defended himself against Dreev when hit with a serious novelty 
in the Queen's Indian but am opting here for one of the wins: an impressively 
clean effort against the former European Champion.

Dmitry Jakovenko v Emil Sutovsky

Poikovsky 2007 (round 5)

Ruy Lopez Open Variation

1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 0-0 Nxe4 6 d4 b5 7 Bb3 d5 8 dxe5 Be6 
The Open Variation (starting 5...Nxe4) is appealing for Black since he gets 
active play for his pieces. However there is, as always, a downside - in this 
case some weakening of the queenside; and since the position admits of long 
fairly forced variations White players have spent a great deal of energy trying 
to prove an advantage.

9 Be3 Be7 10 c3 0-0 11 Nbd2 Qd7 12 Re1 Nxd2 13 Qxd2 Na5 14 Bg5 c5 This 
particular sequence had been seen just a couple of times previously with Black 
doing fine on both occasions.

15 Bc2 Nc4 16 Qd3 A novelty. Gata Kamsky apparently got nothing much against 
Magnus Carlsen in the Turin Olympiad after trying 16 Qf4.

16...g6 17 b3 Na3 18 Bd1 The bishop has to retreat temporarily but Black must 
now work to bring the play back to his knight.

18...a5 19 Rc1 Rfe8 20 Qd2 b4!? I'm not sure about this. Black improves the 
queenside but leaves something of a target on c5.

21 Bxe7 Qxe7 22 cxb4 axb4 23 Qh6 Bf5 24 Be2 Closing the e file and so creating 
the threat of 25 Ng5 which wasn't a good idea this move because of ...f6

Emil Sutovsky (Black to play)

Dmitry Jakovenko (White)

24...Qf8!? This slightly panicky move offers the c pawn to free the knight. 
Black is then able to regain his pawn but suffers from a clear positional 
disadvantage. Instead if 24...f6 25 Qd2! Rad8 26 exf6 Qd6 (26...Qxf6 27 Rxc5) 
is much less clear but also probably worse for Black who while he has a good 
centre. has yet to regain the pawn.

25 Qxf8+ Kxf8 26 Rxc5 Nc2 27 Rc1 Rxa2 28 Bd1 Rea8 It would be nice to retain 
the knight but after either retreat - to a3 or a1 - White can capture on d5 and 
should emerge with a good extra pawn.

29 Bxc2 Rxc2 30 R5xc2 Bxc2 31 Nd4 Bf5 32 f3 Nevertheless either knight retreat 
looks preferable to me than this very passive position in which Black is 
suffering 'for nothing'.

32...Ra2 This pseudo active move achieves nothing.

33 Rc5 Ra1+ 34 Kf2 Ra2+ 35 Kg3! Bd3 36 h4 Bf1 37 Rc2 Ra3 If 37...Rxc2 38 Nxc2 
Be2 39 Kf2! Bd1 40 Nd4 traps the bishop.

38 Rc8+ Kg7 39 Rc7 Kg8 40 h5! gxh5 If 40...Ra2 41 h6 Rxg2+ 42 Kf4 Kf8 43 e6 
wins easily.

41 Rc8+ Kg7 42 Nf5+ Kg6 43 Ne7+ Here Sutovsky resigned. If 43...Kg5/Kg7 44 
Rg8+ Kh6 45 Nf5 is mate. He might have tried 43...Kh6 but after 44 Rc6+ f6 
(44...Kg7 45 Nf5+ Kmoves 46 Rc8 mate) 45 Rxf6+ Kg7 46 Nf5+ Kg8 47 e6 White is 
winning easily enough.

Jakovenko has moved up from 22nd to 18th in the world in the latest quarterly 
April 2007 rating list which appeared at the end of last week. An event of 
importance for those involved, it this time also created considerable 
controversy when it appeared without the Morelia/Linares tournament being taken 
into consideration.

This was in stark contrast to the position in previous years, when Linares was 
always included. And while FIDE quoted a recently introduced rule that 'only 
tournaments which finished a month before the rating list should be included' 
it had a considerable effect on the very top of the list and in particular 
meant that Veselin Topalov remained on top ahead of Viswanathan Anand.

While you can understand that FIDE don't want to have to rush to work on big 
Open tournaments at the last moment, an elite all-play-all is completely 
different - there are much fewer games, no difficult names to reconcile and 
above all the results are well known and not subject to error. After an appeal 
by the IndianChess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> Federation common 
sense prevailed and Morelia/Linares was included as a result of which Anand 
becomes just the sixth player to head the list since its inception in 1970, 
following Bobby Fischer, Karpov, Gary Kasparov, Vladimir Kramnik (one list 
where he had an equal rating with Kasparov but had played more games) and 
Topalov. The top ten now read Anand 2786, Topalov and Kramnik 2772 - in that 
order because Topalov played more games, Alexander Morozevich 2762, Lev Aronian 
2759, Shakhriyar Mamedyarov 2757, Teimour Radjabov 2747, Peter Leko 2738, Peter 
Svidler 2736 and Michael Adams 2734.
 