
The look of this year’s King George VI Chase changed radically on Sunday and 
may do so again on Monday following the news that Coneygree will miss the race. 
The hero of last year’s Cheltenham Gold Cup has disappointed in his recent work 
and will be saved for another day, it was announced, a decision that caused at 
least one other horse,Josses Hill, 
<http://www.sportinglife.com/racing/report/754914/peterborough-joy-for-josses-hill>
 to become an intended runner, with the chance of more to follow.

Ar Mad could yet be ruled back into the King George, having been ruled out a 
week ago by his trainer, Gary Moore, whose fear was that the horse would face 
so much competition for the early lead. With Coneygree out, that concern is 
reduced, though Moore indicated on Sunday night that he was still not keen. 
Moore is due to discuss plans with Ar Mad’s owner on Monday morning.

“It’s very doubtful, to be quite honest,” Moore said. “I don’t really want to 
go over three miles for the first time in such a high-class race. IfThistlecrack
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> doesn’t run, it might look 
like a no-brainer [to run Ar Mad] but I’ve half got other plans for him.”

After the Coneygree news broke, the King George favourite, Cue Card, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-colin-tizzard-paddy-brennan-king-george-vi-chase-kempton>
 was cut from 6-4 to a best price of 10-11 by bookmakers.Thistlecrack, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/colin-tizzard-king-george-vi-chase-options-thistlecrack-horse-racing>
 his stablemate at Colin Tizzard’s yard, is second-favourite at 3-1 and, again, 
the absence of Coneygree must make him a more likely runner.

Tizzard declined to reveal his plans when contacted on Sunday night but it is 
believed that a decision will be revealed on Monday. Last week the trainer said 
he was worried about the likely strong pace of the King George for Thistlecrack 
but the race must seem much more tempting without Coneygree in the line-up.

It appears that Valseur Lido, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/valseur-lido-henry-de-bromhead-down-royal-willie-mullins-jnwine-horse-racing>
 the leading Irish contender according to the betting, will skip the King 
George in favour of the Lexus Chase at Leopardstown two days later. “The Lexus 
is our priority,” said Eddie O’Leary, racing manager to Gigginstown, owners of 
Valseur Lido. O’Leary indicated that Outlander, Road To Riches and Roi Des 
Francs were possible runners.

Nicky Henderson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicky-henderson> used 
Twitter to announce on Sunday night that Josses Hill would be supplemented for 
the Boxing Day race on Monday at a cost of £10,000. Alan Spence, the horse’s 
owner, said connections had been “in two minds” until the Coneygree disclosure. 
Bookmakers cut Josses Hill to a best price of 11-1 from the 20-1 that had been 
available on Sunday morning.

As a novice chaser two seasons ago Josses Hill was memorably compared to a 
snooker table by one TV pundit unimpressed by his stiff-backed jumping 
technique. But he has looked a much more accomplished performer this season and 
turned in a career best effort at Huntingdon last time, winning the 
Peterborough Chase by six lengths, carrying more weight than all four rivals. 
That race, over a flat and right-handed track, has sometimes been used as a 
prep-race for King George contenders.

Henderson’s immediate reaction that day was to pour cold water on the idea of 
a King George tilt and he named the Ryanair at the Cheltenham Festival as 
Josses Hill’s long-term target. But the horse has won twice at Kempton this 
year and course officials expect the going will be no worse than good to soft, 
another point in Josses Hill’s favour.

“The reason he looked so good at Huntingdon was he was beating a lot of 
stayers over two and a half miles,” Henderson told the Guardian while mulling 
over the decision early on Sunday. “That’s his distance and every other horse 
in that race wanted three miles, except Dodging Bullets. If you step up in 
distance, you risk it going the other way.”

Coneygree is “just not right” according to Sara Bradstock, half of the husband 
and wife team that trains him near Lambourn. “I just know he’s not himself. 
We’re not taking any risks. He is fragile and we want him to be completely on 
song when he runs. We’ll obviously take veterinary advice and then I’m sure the 
horse will tell us when he’s right again.

“I know every breath he takes, I know every step he takes, I know exactly how 
he is and he’s just not feeling good. We’re still hopefully on for the Gold Cup 
and maybe something before that.”

Coneygree was the first novice chaser for 40 years to win the Gold Cup but 
lost his aura of invincibility last month when soundly beaten by Cue Card in 
the Betfair Chase. However, that was his first race after a year-long absence 
caused by a hind leg injury and the expectation had been that he would run to a 
higher level in the King George, for which he was 5-1 third-favourite.

Unowhatimeanharry cut for Festival after Long Walk success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/17/unowhatimeanharry-cheltenham-ascot-long-walk-nicky-henderson-yorkhill-horse-racing> 