
The End Violence Against Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>
 Coalition (EVAW) has revealed the winners of its inaugural awards.

The announcement of its “Ending Violence against Women and Girls Media Awards” 
has been timed to coincide with theInternational Day for the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Day_for_the_Elimination_of_Violence_against_Women>
.

The awards seek to recognise and celebrate exemplary reporting about the issue 
across every publishing platform. Winners were chosen for highlighting how and 
why abuse happens, for showing respect for victims and survivors, and for 
making an impact on public debate.

More than 150 entries were considered across seven categories. Chair of the 
judging panel, Joan Smith, said the awards “demonstrate the breadth of 
contemporary journalism in this field.”

The winners by category were:

Opinion: Lola Okolosie, in the Guardian, for an article revealing the systemic 
problem of sexual harassment in UK schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/sexual-violence-schools-harassment>
.


Broadcast: BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour for exploring the storyline in The 
Archersconcerning coercive control and domestic violence 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b074vtgp>. 

Features:  Salma Haidrani, writing on The Debrief site about so-called 
‘honour-based’ killings in the UK 
<http://www.thedebrief.co.uk/news/politics/uk-honour-killings-20160964920>.


News: Radhika Sanghani, in the Daily Telegraph, for examining the impact of 
current UKabortion law on women seeking abortions 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/womens-charities-call-to-end-cruel-abortion-laws-in-the-uk/>
.


New journalist: Samara Linton , who wrote for Black Ballad about women 
detained in Yarl’s Wood detention centre 
<http://www.blackballad.co.uk/meet-the-woman-detained-in-yarls-wood-centre-after-living-in-the-uk-for-18-years/>
, and aboutthree black women’s experiences of mental health 
<http://www.blackballad.co.uk/three-black-women-discuss-their-first-time-experiences-with-mental-health/>
. Described by judges as a “versatile and gifted writer.”

Documentary: ITV’s Exposure (Simon Egan and Esella Hawkey) for Abused and 
betrayed – a life sentence 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-06-14/late-politician-sir-clement-freud-accused-of-child-sexual-abuse/>
, which revealed the child sexual abuse committed by Clement Freud.


Wooden Spoon: This was awarded to the Daily Mail for a full-page article 
headlined “The real revenge porn scandal: Why on earth do so many young women 
send intimate photos to their partners? 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3778546/Why-earth-young-women-send-intimate-photos-partners.html>
”

It argued that the “only fail-safe way to avoid these pictures getting out is 
not to pose for them in the first place.”

The judges lamented the “staggering hypocrisy” of an article telling women not 
to pose for nude photos and videos when the Mail’s online outlet trades in 
semi-nude images of women, many of which are taken without the women’s 
knowledge or consent.


Joan Smith said: “Sadly, there is still a tendency in some quarters to recycle 
myths about rape and domestic violence, including ideas about how victims 
‘should’ behave.”

On a more positive note, she said: “There is some first-class journalism out 
there and it has the power to expose under-reported forms of abuse such as 
trafficking and so-called ‘honour’-based violence.

 “I am delighted that these awards have been created to recognise journalists 
and editors who, despite the prejudice that still exists towards victims, 
report on violence against women in a sensitive, constructive and informative 
way.”

 Journalists back call for action against gender-based violence

*The International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) is marking the UN’s Day for 
the Elimination of Violence Against Women bydemanding action over the 
increasing number of attacks on women journalists. 
<http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-view/backpid/1/article/ifj-stands-in-solidarity-with-the-un-day-to-eliminate-violence-against-women-and-girls/>

From Kathmandu to Buenos Aires, it says, journalists’ unions are taking part 
in meetings, protests, training sessions and marches to highlight the problem.

The IFJ cites a recent study by the International News Safety Institute which 
shows thatalmost 65% of women media workers have experienced intimidation, 
threats or abuse in relation to their work 
<http://www.iwmf.org/our-research/journalist-safety/violence-and-harassment-against-women-in-the-news-media-a-global-picture/>
. Nearly a quarter have experienced acts of physical violence at work.

IFJ president, Philippe Leruth, said: “Violence against women remains one of 
the most widespread and tolerated violations of human rights and its 
perpetrators continue to enjoy impunity while its victims face losing their 
job, having their careers ruined, being silenced or worst of all killed.”

He said the IFJ will back affiliates “who seek to take legal action against 
perpetrators, and support those who seek to negotiate safety and security 
policies and campaign for the rights of women media workers to be respected.”
 