
Here comes Wall Street, answering David Cameron’s call for the voice of 
business to be “heard in Britain and across the whole continent”. Jamie Dimon, 
the chairman and chief executive of JP Morgan,suggests his bank would quit the 
UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/jpmorgan-backs-campaign-to-keep-britain-in-the-eu>
 if Britain exits the European Union. “Britain’s been a great home for 
financial companies and it’s benefited London quite a bit. We’d like to stay 
there but if we can’t, we can’t,” he said.

“Can we have that in writing?” some UK voters may respond. Overpaid investment 
bankers, especially Wall Street types, are not held in high general esteem in 
the UK. Vague threats to leave the country will be viewed in many quarters as 
arrogant and may well be counterproductive for the Remain camp.

If Dimon really wants to contribute to the debate – as opposed to throwing out 
one-liners – he should study how UK financial institutions behaved during the 
Scottish referendum. The likes of Standard Life and Royal Bank of Scotland 
avoided ambiguity and instead described the changes they would make to their 
businesses if voters chose independence. In RBS’s case, its actions would have 
amounted to little more than taking the registered office south of the border 
without moving jobs and operations.

Is Dimon saying JP Morgan’s departure from the UK would be automatic, with 
19,000 jobs moving to Paris, Frankfurt or wherever? Would the bank make its 
decision only after seeing the terms of a negotiated exit? Or would it hedge 
its bets in case, as some argue, the Cityovercomes any short-term loss of 
business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/brexit-may-benefit-city-of-london-in-the-long-run-says-top-consultancy>
 with the EU by expanding trade with emerging markets? There are big 
differences between the three positions. If JP Morgan has conducted a proper 
analysis of its options, let’s hear the details rather than airy soundbites.

The same applies to other companies. Chief executives are entitled to give 
their personal opinions on EU membership, but the interesting material – and 
the stuff that may sway opinions – is what Brexit would mean for how companies 
are managed and where they would invest. That needs to be supported by robust 
analysis.

Shareholders, too, deserve more than glib remarks. If the EU referendum poses 
the most important question the UK will answer for a generation, it would be 
useful to know which boards have plans to deal with the potential direct 
consequences for their companies. “We’re off, maybe,” doesn’t do the job.

Grim reading for Pearson

Two years ago, John Fallon, Pearson’s chief executive, said the educational 
publisher was in the middle of “a short but difficult transition”. Short has 
become long and difficult has become very difficult. About 4,000 jobs,10% of 
the workforce, will be axed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/21/pearson-cut-jobs-profit-warning>
, creating a £320m restructuring bill.

Was Fallon just too timid the first time? The way he tells it, certain 
“cyclical” factors have lasted longer than expected and thus more is required. 
But don’t worry, this timePearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson>
 really is confident that its markets will come good. Fifty years of data, 
apparently, show that when US employment stabilises, enrolments in colleges 
rise at 1%-1.5% a year, which in theory will generate extra demand for 
Pearson’s textbooks and learning materials.

Throw in the restructuring savings of £350m and Pearson will be making £800m 
of operating profits by 2018, versus £600m-ish expected for this year, Fallon 
says. While shareholders await those sunny uplands, they can enjoy a steady 
dividend of 52p even though it would barely be covered by pre-restructuring 
earnings this year, even if things go well. The cushion is theproceeds from 
selling the Financial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/23/financial-times-sale-pearson> 
and the 50% stake in the Economist. That’s the theory, and the markets lapped 
it up – shares rose by 17%.

The celebration looks highly premature. When managements grumble that cycles 
are taking longer to turn than they expected, it often means their markets have 
changed permanently for the worse. Maybe US states are finding ways to squeeze 
their education budgets harder; maybe, in the digital age, students prefer to 
rent vital textbooks and won’t pay the old prices.

You can’t blame Fallon for adopting a one-last-heave approach, but the 
evidence of the past two years suggests Pearson’s markets can change faster 
than the company. That dividend, offering a 6.7% yield, doesn’t look safe yet.

Another look at HBOS

“This is not before time,” said Andrew Tyrie, the chair of the Treasury select 
committee, dryly. You bet. Seven years after the collapse of HBOS, the 
Financial Reporting Councilwill take a look at KPMG’s audit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/accounting-watchdog-frc-kpmg-audit-hbos>
 of the failed bank’s accounts for 2007, specifically the use of “going 
concern” provisions.


This is only a preliminary investigation, but thank heavens something is 
happening. The FRC resents suggestions of foot-dragging, arguing that new 
material in the official regulatory report onHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, published in November, has 
prompted the fresh look. Well, OK, but November was two months ago, and Tyrie 
and others have been screaming for the FRC to wake up ever since. Get a move 
on, chaps.
 