
If reading is one of the pleasures – and necessities – of youth, rereading is 
one of the pleasures – and necessities – of age. You know more, you understand 
both life and literature better, and you have the additional interest of 
checking your younger self against your older self. Occasionally I will reread 
a book in exactly the same copy as I first did decades previously: and there, 
in, say, a student text of a Flaubert novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/28/madame-bovery-flaubert-lydia-davis-review>
, I will find all those annotations which now, initially, embarrass. Key 
passages underlined, exclamations in the margin of “Irony!” or “Metaphor!” or 
“Repeated image!” and so on. And yet often, naive and excited as they seem, 
these comments are pretty much ones I might be making – if not so explicitly – 
several decades on. That younger reader wasn’t wrong: itwas ironic, it was 
metaphorical, it was a repeated image. I don’t think you are a more intelligent 
reader at 65 than at 25; just a more subtle one, and better able to make 
comparisons with other books and other writers.

Zadie Smith on EM Forster
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/01/classics.zadiesmith>
Sometimes you change your mind about a writer. Perhaps, when you first read 
them you were only pretending to admire what you’d been told to admire. But 
also your tastes change. For instance, at 25 I was more open to writers telling 
me how to live and how to think; by 65 I had come to dislike didacticism. I 
don’t want to be told how to think and how to live by, say,Bernard Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/jul/26/gbsat150>, or D H 
Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/14/germaine-greer-d-h-lawrence> or 
the laterTolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/21/tolstoy-count-leo-death-1910>. I 
don’t like art – especially theatrical art – whose function seems to be to 
reassure us that we are on the right side. Sitting there complacently agreeing 
with a playwright that war is bad, that capitalism is bad, that bad people are 
bad. “You don’t make art out of good intentions,” is one of Flaubert’s wiser 
pronouncements.

Sometimes, when our tastes become more defined, they become narrower. But this 
doesn’t have to be the case. I want to address a rarer changing of the mind, 
which is altogether more enriching: when a writer you had previously been 
indifferent to, indeed actively despised, suddenly makes sense to you, and you 
realise – with, yes, a kind of joy – that at last you see the point of them.

I first read EM Forster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/05/rereading-maurice-e-m-forster> 
when an English master handed out a list of Great Books to be read one summer 
holiday.A Passage to India  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/08/em-forster-passage-to-india-rereading>
was on that list. I still have the Penguin edition – a reprint of 1960, costing 
three shillings and sixpence – in which I read the novel. There are no notes in 
the margin, not a single cry of “Irony!” It clearly made little impression on 
me. Later, of my own volition, when I was about 20, I readA Room With a View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/07/a-room-with-a-view-review-felicity-kendal-em-forster-theatre-royal-bath>
, and actively began to take against Forster. It seemed to me a fusty, musty, 
dusty read, with rather antique prose and a storyline and characters which 
failed to engage me. The English novelists of the next generation –Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/22/aldous-huxley-prophet-dystopia-cs-lewis>
,Waugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/10/100-best-novels-scoop-evelyn-waugh-robert-mccrum>
,Greene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/29/greeneland-sweden-when-graham-greene-let-himself-go>
 – spoke to me with much more clarity.

What often happens, when you decide against a writer, is that everything 
thereafter tends to confirm that prejudice. I read parts of Forster’sAspects of 
the Novel and discovered his famous dictum that “Yes – oh dear yes – the novel 
tells a story ... and I wish that it was not so.” This struck as me as 
exceedingly ... feeble. Of course the novel tells a story, I thought, and if 
you aren’t up to telling a story, why write a novel? And indeed Forster had 
stopped writing fiction at 45, then lived on for another 46 years, in the 
process becoming a grander and grander old man. Nowadays, I would admire a 
writer who falls silent because he or she has nothing more to say; in my youth, 
I was less forgiving.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b8c6cabd7b43270d0843f7efa4c1c65c38781d1%2F0_50_2376_2375%2F2376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b8c6cabd7b43270d0843f7efa4c1c65c38781d1%2F0_50_2376_2375%2F2376.jpg>
 EM Forster, photographed in 1960. Photograph: Evening Standard/Getty Images 
And then there was that other Forsterian dictum: “If I had to choose between 
betraying my country and betraying my friend, I hope I should have the guts to 
betray my country.” This may sound fine in theoretical, high-minded 
Bloomsburyite discussions, in which the personal life is held of greater value 
than the public life. But try telling that to, for instance, the families of 
those betrayed by Kim Philby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/04/kim-philbys-stasi-tape-reveals-secrets-of-his-success-as-cold-war-spy>
. How many deaths was he responsible for? Forty or 50, perhaps. Rather more 
consequential than just doing the dirty on a chum.

But there was a final, and barely sensible – but to me very powerful – reason 
for cold-shouldering Forster. I was and remain a great admirer of Ford Madox 
Ford. He was a rare English fictional modernist, with two masterpieces –The 
Good Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/07/fiction.julianbarnes> and 
Parade’s End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/24/julian-barnes-parades-end-ford-madox-ford>
 – to his credit, and at least a dozen more very interesting books; 
underappreciated when he was writing, and only a little less so nowadays. 
Forster and Ford met at a country-house weekend in the summer of 1914, at which 
Ford seems to have been the only person present to see clearly that war was 
inevitable. Afterwards Forster snootily noted in his diary that Ford was 
“rather a fly-blown man of letters”. That was a bad call. And then there was 
the fact that, every time I went into a bookshop, new or secondhand, and looked 
to see what they had by Ford Madox Ford, he would be crowded out by the 
alphabetical proximity of shelf-yards of EM Bloody Forster. And, just to show 
that I wasn’t merely mad, I had another go atA Room With a View in my 40s. No, 
it still didn’t cut the mustard. And that, seemingly, was that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F141869f929bc5ed9c22f19233d0618e4d38f595e%2F0_22_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F141869f929bc5ed9c22f19233d0618e4d38f595e%2F0_22_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Judi Dench (Miss Lavish), Maggie Smith (Charlotte Bartlett) and Helena Bonham 
Carter (Lucy Honeychurch) in the 1985 film of A Room With a View. Photograph: 
Channel 4/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
So what made me change my mind? It began from a quite unexpected source, an 
anthology of food writing. There I came across Forster’s description of the 
breakfast he was served on an early-morning boat train to London in the 1930s:

“Porridge or prunes, sir?” That cry still rings in my memory. It is an epitome 
– not, indeed, of English food, but of the forces that drag it into the dirt. 
It voices the true spirit of gastronomic joylessness. Porridge fills the 
Englishman up, prunes clear him out, so their functions are opposed. But their 
spirit is the same: they eschew pleasure and consider delicacy immoral ... 
Everything was grey. The porridge was in grey lumps, the prunes swam in grey 
sauce ... Then I had a haddock. It was covered in a sort of hard, yellow 
oilskin, as if it had been in a lifeboat, and its inside gushed salt water when 
pricked. Sausages and bacon followed this disgusting fish. They, too, had been 
up all night. Toast like steel: marmalade a scented jelly. I paid the bill 
dumbly, wondering again why some things have to be. They have to be because 
this is England, and we are English.

This wasn’t at all like my long-formed picture of the novelist: it was funny, 
subversive, delightfully unpatriotic, and all too true by the sound of it. But 
this might just have been a moment of aberration, I assumed. What finally did 
the trick was just as left-field: a conversation I had a few years later with a 
friend about opera. In my 60s I belatedly fell in love with opera, and we were 
discussing its representation in fiction. “Oh,” she said, “and there’s that 
scene in a provincial Italian opera house inWhere Angels Fear to Tread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/13/fromthearchives.classics>.” It 
was Forster’s first novel, published in 1905. Not one I’d tried and failed with 
before. It looked agreeably short.

And then it surprised me from the very first chapter: it was swift, witty and 
satirical, with a fine eye for English manners and English snobbery. Here are a 
couple of lines conveying the essence of the starchy, stuck-up Harriet: 
“Harriet, though she did not care for music, knew how to listen to it;” and 
“‘Everyone to his taste!’ said Harriet, who always delivered a platitude as if 
it was an epigram.”

It could have been just coarsely satirical; instead, the tone is perfectly 
pitched

The opera-house scene, when I got to it, was brilliant. The work being 
performed isLucia di Lammermoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/10/lucia-di-lammermoor-review-royal-opera-katie-mitchell-diana-damrau>
, a knowing nod to the same opera’s famous appearance inMadame Bovary. This in 
itself showed spirit, if not recklessness: a first novelist, five years into 
the 20th century, taking on one of the great scenes of the greatest 
19th-century novel. And yet Forster emerges unharmed by the comparison. His 
opera scene is his own. The production ofLucia is camply bad; the local 
audience riotously over-relaxed; the English visitors embarrassed and stuffily 
disapproving. It could have been just coarsely satirical and humanly 
disparaging; instead, the tone - of ironical amusement at the cheerful follies 
of the world – is perfectly pitched. And the scene also contains the following 
lines, which had me reaching for my annotating pencil:

There is something majestic in the bad taste of Italy; it is not the bad taste 
of a country which knows no better; it has not the nervous vulgarity of 
England, or the blinded vulgarity of Germany. It observes beauty, and chooses 
to pass it by. But it attains to beauty’s confidence.

Where was that fusty, musty, dusty writer I had imagined Forster to be? 
Nowhere at all in this first novel of his. Next I readHowards End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/18/howards-end-em-forster-classic>
, and finally realised what a grown-up novelist Forster is; how serious his 
concerns; how good he is on marriage, friendship, love and hopeless desire; how 
well he writes about women; on the choice between art and life, art and money, 
taste and vulgarity; how well he understands the power of convention and the 
unheroic but necessary journeys a life entails; how wry and sly he can be, and 
yet how powerfully reflective. Perhaps I had mistaken his manner, or been 
expecting something he wasn’t offering; or maybe, previously, I hadn’t known 
enough about life to appreciate him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc31f5adbc242b3477f3d218afba4eb0fd4ecf9%2F0_437_2646_1587%2F2646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%3A%20I%20was%20wrong%20about%20EM%20Forster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjulian-barnes-i-was-wrong-about-em-forster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc31f5adbc242b3477f3d218afba4eb0fd4ecf9%2F0_437_2646_1587%2F2646.jpg>
 Victor Banerjee and Judy Davis in the David Lean film of A Passage to India 
(1984). 
I read on, with The Longest Journey – publicly, his least successful novel, 
and yet his own favourite. There I discovered a writer who was also formally 
audacious in a way I would never have anticipated: in his handling of time; in 
the way he gives us a protagonist’s backstory late in the day; and in his 
killing-off of characters just as we assume they are about to become important. 
One reviewer calculated that – infants excepted – more than 44% of the adult 
population of the novel fall beneath the author’s capricious sword.

I don’t regret my decades of failing to appreciate Forster. Rereading would be 
a dull and complacent business if it always resulted in a simple confirmation 
of what you had previously thought. And the pleasure of being proved wrong can 
be a genuine pleasure. But as you may imagine, this experience has made me 
reconsider some other speedy judgments of my youth. Who else might I have to 
change my mind about? Hmm. Anthony Powell? Saul Bellow? Iris Murdoch? Actually, 
despite what I said earlier, I’ve recently been reading some of DH Lawrence’s 
short fiction, and I’m beginning to think I might – just possibly – be wrong 
about him too.

• Julian Barnes’s series The Essay: Changing My Mind, can be heard on Radio 3 
at 10.45pm, from 5 to 9 December.
 