
I’d been living in Amsterdam for eight years, working on the lighting for film 
sets.Photography <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> was 
always around – I’d studied film-making in London – though it was never in the 
foreground. But when you reach your 30s you have a realisation: what do I 
really want to do? In my case, I bought a ticket to Cape Town. I’d never been 
to Africa. I just wanted to get far away.

I got a job at a production company, and it was there that I met Ruthy Jones, 
who did the cooking and cleaning, commuting from Manenberg township. We became 
very good friends. She’s an adorable woman who loves her family. When she was 
14, she was raped at the local swimming pool by one of the employees. She 
wasn’t even that aware of what was happening, because sex education was so 
poor. She only found out what had gone on when she became pregnant.

The day I met her, I found out about her love for Jesus and religious music. 
After the rape, church became the most constant, steady thing in her life. Most 
churches there have a brigade, a band that parades around the area. Ruthy’s 
Anglican brigade is the most professional: they have uniforms and all the kids 
play an instrument – there are so many boys on triangle! Ruthy plays 
everything, but she likes the flute the most. It gives them a bond, a group 
dynamic, and tells children there’s more to life than the violence they see on 
the streets of Manenberg.

Taylor Wessing photographic portrait prize 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/nov/16/taylor-wessing-photographic-portrait-prize-2016-in-pictures>
Although it’s not how she looks every day, this picture captures how Ruthy 
sees herself. During the week, she is the main breadwinner of the family: her 
son, her daughter, their children, an uncle. It’s a full house. The weekends, 
meanwhile, are about cooking, going to church and doing community work. Her 
schedule is full, there’s little time for pleasure, though we did once find 
time for a foot massage and a trip to the botanical gardens.

It’s so easy to get caught up in the drugs, gangs and violence in Manenberg. I 
had to hire equipment to shoot Ruthy and the Anglican brigade. When I said 
where I was going, the suppliers weren’t too pleased. But they’d never been to 
Manenberg and seen it for themselves. I’m not denying its negative side, but 
there are also people like Ruthy living there.

After this, I covered a lesbian beauty pageant in the township of Khayelitsha

I followed this project with Rainbow Girls 
<https://www.lensculture.com/julia-gunther?modal=project-5259>, a series about 
lesbian women in Khayelitsha township, which is infamous for “corrective rape”. 
But there is another side to Khayelitsha. A lesbian beauty pageant is held 
there, with 10 women dressing in various outfits – school uniform, beachwear, 
night out. The doors are open, everyone is invited. While everyone I photograph 
is a victim, I don’t portray them that way, and it’s not how they see 
themselves.

This portrait won a prize – my first ever – and I spent the money making a 
book for Ruthy to sell in her church. She used the proceeds to fix instruments 
and buy new uniforms. I get a kick out of that. It seems only fair. If I’d been 
in her shoes, I’m not sure I would have made it to the age of 45 as she has – 
and still been so kind and devoted and open.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjulia-gunther-best-photograph-south-african-churchgoer-in-band-uniform-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F473aee42380c76a635f4e770bec1ea3c1a809213%2F0_501_2076_1245%2F2076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julia%20Gunther's%20best%20photograph%3A%20The%20church%20brigade%20leader%20giving%20Cape%20Town%20kids%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjulia-gunther-best-photograph-south-african-churchgoer-in-band-uniform-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julia%20Gunther%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20The%20church%20brigade%20leader%20giving%20Cape%20Town%20kids%20hope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fjulia-gunther-best-photograph-south-african-churchgoer-in-band-uniform-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F473aee42380c76a635f4e770bec1ea3c1a809213%2F0_501_2076_1245%2F2076.jpg>
 Photographer Julia Gunther 
Julia Gunther <http://juliagunther.com/>’s CV

Born: Berlin, 1979.


Trained: London College of Printing.

Influences: Pieter Hugo <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pieter-hugo>,
Brent Stirton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/22/brent-stirton-best-photograph-dead-silverback-gorilla-congo-virunga>
,Ami Vitale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/apr/23/inside-the-giant-panda-research-centre-in-pictures>
,Otto Dix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/may/14/art-apocalypse-otto-dix-first-world-war-der-krieg-in-pictures>
,Max Beckmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/05/max-beckmann-painter-tate-gallery-1965>
.

High point: “My first solo exhibition, Ruthy Goes to Church.”

Low point: “When my friend Phillipa died of breast cancer. I really wanted her 
to see that exhibition. She always kicked my butt.”

Top tip: “Go out and shoot. It’s more rewarding to look at a picture than to 
wonder about what work you might make.”

• Julia Gunther’s work is in the Taylor Wessing photographic portrait prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/nov/16/taylor-wessing-photographic-portrait-prize-2016-in-pictures>
 show at the National Portrait Gallery, London, until 26 February.

 