
First excursions on to eBay often tend toward the modest. A pair of shoes, a 
coffee table. A bicycle, at a push. Not so forJuliet Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/juliet-stevenson>. “It’s surprisingly easy 
to buy a double-decker bus, you know, once you start looking,” says the 
59-year-old actor, picking over a chicken salad in a London restaurant. “I 
immediately discovered that a red one costs twice as much. And older ones are 
better, if they’re working well, because the parts aren’t as complicated. 
There’s less to go wrong.” All this is said in a helpful manner, as though she 
has heard I might be in the market for a bus myself and is determined I make an 
informed purchase.


Celebrities are permitted their indulgences. Johnny Depp has an island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/interactive/2012/jun/22/larry-ellison-private-island-rich>
.Rupert Grint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/19/rupert-grint-interview> owns an 
ice-cream van. Juliet Stevenson’s bus, however, cannot be written off as an 
eccentricity. After visiting the Calais refugee camp in February, she asked one 
of the volunteers what was needed. The surprising answer was that a 
double-decker would go down a treat. “There are hundreds of kids in the camp,” 
she explains. “You can take the seats out of the upper deck, turn it into a 
dormitory, and it can also be a day centre. It’s warm, dry, safe. No one can 
knock it down and, if necessary, it can be driven away.” Within a few weeks of 
returning, she and a friend had snapped up a blue bus for £5,500 and driven it 
to the camp.


‘As you get older, the roles narrow. It’s like being on the up escalator 
waving to my actress self going down: Bye!’

She is keenly aware that the tabloid press never knowingly gives a break to 
posh liberal celebrities. Has she come in for any luvvie-bashing? “‘Luvvie’,” 
she shudders. “Now there’s a word I’d like to ban. Generally the press hates 
people like Emma [Thompson] and Jude [Law] and myself for doing these things. 
It’s the very same media desperately craving stories about well-known people 
who are then the ones to slag us off for wanting to help.” As if on cue, the 
director Stephen Daldry pops over to our table to give Stevenson the latest 
update on his own efforts to get a theatre going at the camps. Were a tabloid 
photographer in the vicinity, this snapshot of two luvvies saving the world 
over lunch might be worth a pretty penny. Still, Stevenson is fairly sure that 
“even the Mail would have a hard time saying there’s anything wrong with 
rescuing children living in mud and shit”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886fad24d3c69a12f884a36d997860abbb76d586%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886fad24d3c69a12f884a36d997860abbb76d586%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Stevenson in her new film, Departure. 
Word is that the bus has been a big success. “I’ve got a young film-maker out 
there filming what’s going on for fundraising purposes. He sent back footage at 
the weekend of children on the top deck watching Mary Poppins.” She sounds 
genuinely moved – not easy given she has to practically holler to be heard over 
the boisterous lunchtime trade.


But then Stevenson has always been able to embody apparently contradictory 
qualities. She is tall and, at times, indomitable-looking. (“I do think tall 
women have to work harder to get sympathy. I often joke about this with some of 
my smaller friends.”) And yet her best work has involved devastating displays 
of vulnerability. Her screen breakthrough was the bittersweet 1990 romcom 
Truly, Madly, Deeply, in which she alternated authentically messy tears and 
radiant laughter as a grieving woman whose partner returns as a ghost. She was 
offered a part in Schindler’s List on the strength of it. “I was in the bath 
and my mum called through the door: ‘Darling, there’s a Steven Spielberg on the 
phone.’ ‘God that’s hilarious mum!’ ‘No I really think that’s his name.’” Only 
she’d already committed to do a play in Los Angeles. “The tragedy of life is 
mistiming. I’ve turned down wonderful stuff. But is there even a right or 
wrong? It’s more like, ‘That’s what I did. I can’t do anything about it.’”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82711fcfea43502c220eb18ba0ef463fc0ac33af%2F0_287_6566_3939%2F6566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82711fcfea43502c220eb18ba0ef463fc0ac33af%2F0_287_6566_3939%2F6566.jpg>
 ‘Tall women have to work harder to get sympathy’ Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Guardian 
The LA trip had been at the insistence of her agent. “I went a bit 
reluctantly. I’m not very good at self-promotion. So I did a play out there 
because I wanted to be working rather than hanging out by swimming pools trying 
to look nice.” Then she received an offer to come home for what transpired to 
be her second great signature role: Paulina, the torture victim who turns the 
tables on her former tormentor, in Ariel Dorfman’s Death and the Maiden at the 
Royal Court. Bang went any more LA meetings (“Much to my agent’s dismay”). But 
she did get the 1992 Olivier award for best actress. “I loved doing it. A 
philosophical proposition that was also a thriller.” It was Stevenson’s idea to 
have Paulina shove her knickers in her torturer’s mouth. “It came up in 
rehearsal. I think it’s made its way into the stage directions now.”


Did she feel her Hollywood moment was over? “No. I’ve done American films: 
Being Julia, Mona Lisa Smile. It’s ticked over. And that’s fine. Being flavour 
of the moment is not a good place to be. If you’re flavour of the moment, by 
definition you’ll be the bad taste of the moment in five years’ time.”


Her career – a model of longevity – bears this out. In 2014 she brought 
formidable pluck and cheer to the partially entombed Winnie in Beckett’s Happy 
Days. The Guardian’s Michael Billington called her interpretation “brilliantly 
intelligent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/31/happy-days-review-beckett-stevenson>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60d8fefad643ae7fa9d858bc188ad919d6d2d6c2%2F0_58_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60d8fefad643ae7fa9d858bc188ad919d6d2d6c2%2F0_58_3944_2366%2F3944.jpg>
 Up to her hips … as Winnie in Happy Days by Samuel Beckett in 2014. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Her range is exploited well in the new British drama Departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/departure>, in which she plays a newly single 
woman clearing out her French holiday home, with her teenage son. With her 
husband gone and her son on the cusp of leaving home, she has to face her own 
incompleteness. “Everything has been motivated by and structured around their 
child. He reaches adolescence, and then … well, they leave you. They don’t 
leave you for good. I’ve got children myself [Rosalind, 22, and Gabriel, 15, 
with her husband, the anthropologist Hugh Brody] so I’ve been through this. 
There’s a necessary and painful letting go.”


The film is striking for giving a middle-aged woman unpredictable notes to 
play. “Female roles are often not complex because they’re adjuncts,” Stevenson 
sighs. “Very often the interesting things happen to the man. The woman is there 
as wife, mother, daughter, PA. A lot of writers won’t give you your own 
narrative because it isn’t deemed necessary. So much in our culture about 
women’s identities relates to their sexual value. When that is no longer of 
interest they, as individuals, are past the point of being of any interest 
either. It’s a source of frustration. As you get older, you get more 
experience, you have more to say, more layers. And at exactly the same time 
that’s happening in your life, the roles are narrowing down. It’s like you’re 
on the up escalator but the parts are on the down escalator. You’re waving to 
your actress self: ‘Byeee!’”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe019bd3e240d90f28e17a1a25bbf83e3fe02777a%2F0_250_5011_3007%2F5011.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe019bd3e240d90f28e17a1a25bbf83e3fe02777a%2F0_250_5011_3007%2F5011.jpg>
 ‘Female roles are often not complex because they’re adjuncts’ … with Michael 
Byrne in Death and the Maiden by Ariel Dorfman. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
As a young performer, the pickings weren’t as slim. “I got offered a wide 
range in my 20s and 30s. My only hand on the rudder through all that was to to 
try not to get pinned down as one thing. After Truly, Madly, Deeply, I got many 
wacky, daffy, quirky single women, trying to cope in their daft, loveable way. 
But I’d done that. I need the insecurity of not knowing where I’m going.”


Born in Essex, Stevenson had an itinerant childhood. Her father’s job in the 
army uprooted the family every few years; there were spells in Germany, and at 
boarding school in Berkshire. She studied at Rada and got roped into the RSC in 
1978, when she was 22. “I was an unhatched egg that had just rolled out of 
drama school. But someone fell sick in The Tempest and they needed a 
replacement quickly. They grabbed my coat and suitcase off me when I arrived in 
Stratford, rushed me into the wings and said, ‘Do whatever she does!’” ‘She’ 
turned out to be Ruby Wax. “If she barked, I barked.”
Departure: watch an exclusive trailer for the new British drama – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/02/departure-watch-an-exclusive-trailer-for-the-new-british-drama-video?CMP=embed_video>
The production had its shortcomings. “It had all been designed around laser 
beams. Only they never worked.” But it was invaluable for another reason: it 
introduced her to Alan Rickman,with whom she later starred in Truly, Madly, 
Deeply <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aj1BlyOcmBs> and on stage in the 
legendary 1986 RSC production of Les Liaisons Dangereuses.


‘Many hundreds of people in this profession owe their careers to Alan Rickman’

“I’d seen Alan playing King Rat in Dick Whittington at Bristol rep and I 
thought, ‘That is one sexy, charismatic actor’. He befriended Ruby and me, 
little sprogs that we were. Ruby was so funny, and he told her: ‘Write it 
down.’ They stayed best friends. She wouldn’t brush her teeth without ringing 
Alan first.”


To Stevenson, he was like a big brother. “That’s why I wasn’t happy in 
Truly:‘I can’t snog my brother!’ I’d sometimes drive him mad, occasionally vice 
versa. But it was an unconditionally loving friendship. He came to see 
everything I ever did, right up to Happy Days. If you wanted notes, there’d be 
a whole list after and they’d be brilliant. I can hear his voice in my head: 
‘Get off the front foot, on to the back foot. Jules, less is more’.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132ec2c981c79120cca26e3adc0213ead2294a26%2F0_111_1823_1094%2F1823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juliet%20Stevenson%3A%20why%20I%20bought%20a%20double%20decker%20bus%20on%20eBay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fjuliet-stevenson-interview-departure-alan-rickman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132ec2c981c79120cca26e3adc0213ead2294a26%2F0_111_1823_1094%2F1823.jpg>
 With Alan Rickman in Truly, Madly, Deeply. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
She doesn’t need to say she misses Rickman. The loss resonates every time she 
mentions him. “Nobody scared me more in the audience because I minded so much 
what he thought. I’m a mother of grown-up children but it was like I was 20 
years old needing his approval.” About his legacy, she is clear. “He collected 
talent around him, nurturing it, giving people opportunities. You would come 
into your own working with him. ‘What you need is this script editor’ or ‘What 
you need is this director’. He’d hook you up. Many hundreds of people probably 
owe their careers to Alan. There was no one else like him.”

 * Departure is released 20 May.  