
I don’t know what Netflix’s algorithm knows about me, but it’s mostly offering 
whatever twee indie made its way to New Releases. It was my mother’s account – 
she’s into Downton Abbey and anything that she refers to “a Julia” – that led 
me, on a visit home, toGrace and Frankie 
<https://www.netflix.com/title/80017537>, a dramatic comedy starring Jane Fonda 
as a Wasp retiree and Lily Tomlin as a woo-woo creative, who are thrust 
together when their law-partner husbands Robert and Sol, played byMartin Sheen  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-sheen>and Sam Waterston 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001832/reference>, reveal that they are in love 
with each other, and leave them.

TV has been great for 10 years if you’re using the 30 Rock  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/feb/07/30rockisthebestshowonte>
metric, and 15 if you’re usingThe Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/series/the-wire-re-up>. Still, a sitcom 
about older women feeling their freedom after divorces that would be truly 
humiliating for some, felt so urgent and unusual in content, and so familiar in 
form, that I was compelled to watch. Closely parsed, Grace and Frankie bends 
the story away from the obviousness of late-life loneliness and divorce, 
Grace’s repressed tics and Frankie’s hippie quirks, and towards the 
complications of friendship, aging, invisibility, death, alienation and class. 
Somehow the show – the second season of which premiers on Netflix on Friday 6 
May (there will also be a third) – remains reassuring.

Jane Fonda at 78: ‘I’ve had tragedies. It’s nice to know you can survive’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/29/my-family-values-jane-fonda-actress-henry-fonda>
June Diane Raphael <http://junedianeraphael.tumblr.com/>, who plays Grace and 
Robert’s daughter Brianna Hanson, points out to me that counter to some recent 
sitcoms that skew mean, Grace and Frankie comes from a place of comfort. 
“There’s a warmth to the show, and I think that’s definitelyMarta Kauffman 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/marta-kauffman-grace-frankie-friends-793968>
’s style” – co-creator Kauffman also co-created Friends – “and I think that’s 
why people respond to her writing so much; there really is a warmth to the way 
these people feel about each other, even within the conflict.” At the same 
time, she says, “it’s actually a really revolutionary idea that we could come 
together later in life outside of our own family structures”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F356c3a1c19cb976bbf083a1cc0cb0a6815c33cae%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=June%20Diane%20Raphael%3A%20'So%20many%20women%20are%20kicking%20ass%20as%20they%20get%20older'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=June%20Diane%20Raphael%3A%20%27So%20many%20women%20are%20kicking%20ass%20as%20they%20get%20older%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F356c3a1c19cb976bbf083a1cc0cb0a6815c33cae%2F0_0_6144_4096%2F6144.jpg>
 Season two of Grace and Frankie: ‘There’s a warmth to the show.’ Photograph: 
Melissa Moseley/Netflix 
The show works, according to Raphael, because “it’s essentially, at the core 
of it, a very hopeful show about women entering a chapter of their lives where 
I think most women in society are kind of discarded”. Grace and Frankie, she 
says, are able to be “funny and sexy, and really functioning at the height of 
their intelligence, and it’s sort of when we’re at our best”.

As played by Raphael, Brianna is a sharp, sly, elegant weirdo: competent and 
focused as an executive now running Grace’s company, an emotionally mature 
guiding member of the ultra-blended family, but also the kind of girl who wants 
to escape them so she can get high on her own. “It never feels like there’s a 
commentary on these characters, as much as they’re being embodied,” says 
Raphael. “People don’t really have an appetite for that ‘one type’ of woman. We 
saw it in movies for a long time: the girl who had a plan to get married by 25, 
and have kids by 27, and then it wasn’t working … I don’t really know who that 
person is; I don’t really know those women.”

Raphael’s own identity is, it seems, similarly complex. She’s guested on shows 
such asHappy Endings <http://www.hulu.com/happy-endings> as a babe, New Girl  
<http://www.fox.com/new-girl>as a lesbian gynecologist, and Parks and Recreation
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation> as a dummy, 
and co-wrote and co-starred in the movieAss Backwards  
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/ass-backwards-2013>with her writing partner 
Casey Wilson 
<https://twitter.com/caseyrosewilson?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
(they also co-wroteBride Wars <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/bride_wars/>, 
with Greg DePaul). She might be best known for the high-concept comedy podcast
How Did This Get Made? <http://www.earwolf.com/show/how-did-this-get-made/> 
that she hosts with her husband,Paul Scheer <http://paulscheer.com/>, and Jason 
Mantzoukas 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/01/22/jason-mantzoukas-scumbag-ranking>. “It 
goes back to the virgin-whore complex, the idea that we can be one or the 
other: either we were married and had kids, or we were working and selfish and 
bitter,” she says. “I love the show so much because I think these characters 
are a lot more complex, as are most women you meet. As am I.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46fad9135d09fc81a68e60ba2b697a4e76b659f9%2F142_214_2648_1589%2F2648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=June%20Diane%20Raphael%3A%20'So%20many%20women%20are%20kicking%20ass%20as%20they%20get%20older'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=June%20Diane%20Raphael%3A%20%27So%20many%20women%20are%20kicking%20ass%20as%20they%20get%20older%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fjune-diane-raphael-grace-and-frankie-older-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46fad9135d09fc81a68e60ba2b697a4e76b659f9%2F142_214_2648_1589%2F2648.jpg>
 Lily Tomlin, Jane Fonda, June Diane Raphael and friend. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Jane Fonda’s Grace is, Raphael says, “the woman who has done all the right 
things and married the right guy and had a family, and then it sort of all fell 
apart”. Instead of the show insisting on the uptight, abandoned Grace being a 
remote island of a character, she has fun with Frankie, misses her friends, is 
anxious about new romance and struggles as a grandmother. Working with Fonda, 
says Raphael, has shown her that “she’s really open and malleable as an 
actress. I’m really learning from her. She just wants it to be great.”

In March, Fonda contributed a personal and revealing piece to Lena Dunham’s 
Lenny Letter calledMy Convoluted Journey to Feminism 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/politics/news/a311/my-convoluted-journey-to-feminism/>
, in which she charted the disconnect between her own life and the feminist 
movement. Fonda writes: “For me to really confront sexism would have required 
doing something about my relationships with men, and I couldn’t.”

“One thing I really admire about her is just how honest she is about her own 
faults and weaknesses and vulnerabilities, and how she puts it out there,” says 
Raphael. “I think there’s so much strength in that, so I’m learning that, too.”

So has the show given Raphael a different view of getting older? “I don’t 
think about it that much,” she says. “Maybe I should. I’ve never been someone 
who’s been scared of [aging]; I feel like when I look around me I see so many 
women kicking ass as they’re getting older … I’m not someone who is freaking 
out about the lack of roles. Maybe I’m naive, but I feel very hopeful about 
where things are going, and I look around and see the Tina Feys and the Amy 
Poehlers and the Amy Schumers. I see more opportunities also right now in TV 
and film, and our show is a perfect example.”

Besides, she concludes, getting older means fewer of the anxieties of youth. 
“I certainly think I’ve gotten my shit together a lot more than when I was in 
my 20s, and I don’t want to return to that. If that means the alternative is 
getting older, then I’ll take it.”
 