
Superman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/superman> lives, Wonder Woman 
charms and two Batmen are on the way. The film studio Warner Bros debuted a 
preview from 2017’s Justice League and the first trailer for its Wonder Woman 
film on Saturday morning.

The San Diego Comic-Con 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jul/22/comic-con-2016-san-diego-cosplay-pictures>
 releases also managed to tease two very different takes on Batman:Ben 
Affleck’s forthcoming film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/ben-affleck-batman-movie-original-story-comics>
, which he will direct and star in, and theLego Batman movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-lego-batman-movie-trailer> 
starring Will Arnett.

Affleck compared the character’s story to history’s great dramas. “It’s like a 
great play that has been done a number of times before,” he said. “So you have 
all these great artists who’ve done it before and the expectations of the fans 
who’ve seen it over and over again. There’s a tremendous amount of pressure but 
it’s also inspiring.”


Game of Thrones cast pressed for season seven spoilers at Comic-Con event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/22/game-of-thrones-cast-comic-con-2016-season-seven>
In a panel partially performed by Lego CGI characters on a giant screen – with 
a Lego Conan O’Brien to match the real one on the stage – Arnett said the 
version ofBatman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> in the Lego films 
was probably overcompensating for something. “When you have somebody who’s that 
confident, they’re oftentimes making up for deficiencies in other parts of 
their character,” Arnett said.

“I don’t think anybody in the business does false bravado better than you,” 
O’Brien told Arnett. “You do ‘I got this, and then don’t have it,’ better than 
anyone I know.”

“Thank you, Conan, I know,” said Arnett. “I don’t know why you’re wasting 
everyone’s time with that.”

The Wonder Woman footage debuted complete with battle scenes from the first 
world war-set movie, and a Q&A with the director, Patty Jenkins, and the stars 
Gal Gadot, Chris Pine and Connie Nielsen.

Jenkins said she found herself disturbed by the seemingly endless stream of 
tragedies in the headlines, and hoped that the movie would promote a kind of 
heroism that involved mutual understanding rather than grandstanding.

“It’s so hard to be making a movie while these horrible things are happening 
in the world,” she said. “The world needs love and forgiveness in such a huge 
way. It’s not about who’s right anymore – it’s about stopping. Be a hero, but 
be a beautiful, kind, loving hero who has the ability to be forgiving and move 
forward because you’re a loving character.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomic-con-san-diego-justice-league-batman-wonder-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72059032c3f4d736e2e5cf1e72c418ac010575df%2F0_153_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Justice%20League%2C%20Wonder%20Woman%20and%20a%20pair%20of%20Batmen%20storm%20Comic-Con&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomic-con-san-diego-justice-league-batman-wonder-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Justice%20League%2C%20Wonder%20Woman%20and%20a%20pair%20of%20Batmen%20storm%20Comic-Con&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomic-con-san-diego-justice-league-batman-wonder-woman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72059032c3f4d736e2e5cf1e72c418ac010575df%2F0_153_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Gal Gadot offers a Wonder Woman pose at Comic-Con. Photograph: Chris 
Pizzello/Invision/AP 
Gadot said she watched a documentary on the real-world Princess Diana to 
prepare to play superheroic royalty and struck a pose for a girl in the 
audience who asked her to. She came onstage flustered and told the audience she 
was pleased to be there. Then she asked O’Brien to repeat a question about the 
role.

“What was the question?” she asked, smiling. 

“I forgot,” O’Brien said.

The Justice League film footage was an unexpected highlight, showing off what 
appeared to be a more lighthearted script than the director Zack Snyder’s most 
recent film, Batman v Superman, and featuring the Flash actor Ezra Miller in a 
role not too dissimilar from the part Tom Holland played as Spider-Man in the 
most recent Captain America film, Civil War.

The director also revealed that Henry Cavill would return in Justice League as 
Superman, even though he met his demise at the end of Batman v Superman.

The panel was especially brief – the lineup was large enough that introducing 
its members took up much of the time – but it was well received by the people 
who had slept outside in leather, formalwear, PVC armor, or mostly naked in 
order to get a seat in the hall and look interesting doing it. Most of them 
stayed happy throughout, even as they squabbled over seats.

For the Suicide Squad panel, cast members told further tales of the Joker 
actor Jared Leto’s disturbingly in-character on-set behavior.

Comic-Con International: costumed fans invade San Diego – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jul/22/comic-con-2016-san-diego-cosplay-pictures>
Will Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith> told the audience a 
messenger had brought a box to Margot Robbie warning, “This is a message from 
Mr J”. Robbie plays the Joker’s erstwhile love interest, Harley Quinn, in the 
film.

“I was like, ‘Oh, cool, Jared’s taking it serious,’” Smith said. “And in the 
box was a live rat. Margot jumped, and I’m playing Deadshot, but if I’d had 
pearls, I would have clutched them.”

The apparent good humor of the new DC stories extended into cheerful rapport 
between the cast and fans. As is customary, people yelled out “I love you” at 
several of the actors, Smith included. “I love you, too, call me!” he said back.

But O’Brien scolded one of the well-wishers: “Don’t rub your nipples, sir. 
It’s disturbing.”

 