
While prime minister Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> flogged our public assets 
last week, he had a soothing message: rest assured, we’ll be well-served by the 
private sector. Bankers and billionaires lined up to sound a note of 
confidence. “I think it’s unprecedented,” exclaimed Canada’s top business 
lobbyist John Manley. “A once-in-a-generation opportunity,” enthused Trudeau’s 
economic advisory council.

These corporate figures are rubbing their hands because Trudeau is about to 
put one of our great crises in their hands: the need for historic investment in 
the country’s infrastructure, for so long the domain of the state.

No one will deny the urgency. Roads and bridges are crumbling and congested 
with traffic. Subways and buses overcrowded and underfunded. We need a roll-out 
of emissions-reducing initiatives to avert catastrophic climate change, and a 
build-up of defences to protect ourselves from floods and fires already locked 
in.

But many will question the Liberals plan to deal with it: selling off existing 
public assets to raise money, and having private investors fund, build and 
operate new infrastructure. If they get their way, expect a wave of 
privatizations—targeting public services and goods like roads, ports,airports 
<https://www.thestar.com/opinion/commentary/2016/10/27/privatizing-airports-a-flight-risk-mcquaig.html>
, utilities, the post office, and more. According to Adam Vaughan, one of its 
Liberal architects, there simplyisn’t 
<http://www.ctvnews.ca/business/opposition-to-private-sector-cash-in-infrastructure-is-stupid-liberal-mp-says-1.3164699?hootPostID=46b8e2197807bdff38e1bdf6f367459b>
 an alternative: “to be afraid of the private sector when you’re trying to fix 
this country’s infrastructure is shortsighted…stupid, irresponsible.”

By responsible and far-sighted, does Vaughan mean the result 
<https://www.policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/Saskatchewan%20Office/2015/11/Privatization%20Nation%20%2811-05-15%29.pdf>
 of past Canadian experiments in privatization? Unsafely constructed schools. 
Packed, dangerous prisons. Water treatment systems flooded with sewage. Super 
hospitals built with faulty wiring in emergency rooms. Senior care homes 
over-run with inedible food and filth.

The politicians prattle about the private sector covering the risk of 
projects: the enabling lie that cannot for its life find evidence. Time and 
again, the costs of these public-private partnerships have instead been borne 
by the public. In Ontario over the last decade alone, their cost-overruns
burdened 
<https://www.policyalternatives.ca/publications/monitor/ontario-audit-throws-cold-water-federal-provincial-love-affair-p3s>
 citizens with an extra $8bn and racked up $30bn in public liabilities—the 
equivalent of $6000 per household. But perhaps Canadians are just too stupid to 
understand their merits. Stupid enough that 75 percent of them surveyed now
oppose 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2016/11/14/public-support-for-public-private-partnerships-plummets-poll?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=recommend-button&utm_campaign=Public+support+for+public-private+partnerships+plummets%3A+Poll>
 such privatization schemes. So stupid, indeed, that in many cases they have 
clamoured successfully for these services to be returned to public control.

Trudeau’s plan for a privatization bank would expand these local disasters to 
a national scale. Corporate and pension-fund backers have alreadyannounced 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2016/11/18/tom-parkin-without-any-mandate-trudeau-pushes-privatization>
 they expect returns of 7 to 9 percent on their investments. How do you think 
that will happen? The only way that skimping ever does: higher bills, user 
fees, and hidden government subsidies. Diminishment in quality of service. Cuts 
in jobs and pay. No wonder some of Trudeau’s corporate advisors are offering 
their helpful advice free of charge: it’s regular people who will end up 
carrying the cost.

These costs are not an oversight of privatization but their objective: the 
inevitable result of opening up the public sphere to private profit-making. For 
more than thirty years in Canada, such measures have been a tool of an elite 
agenda promoted by successive Liberal and Tory governments: the transfer of 
wealth from the poorer to the wealthy, from the public trust to the private 
clutch. Is it any wonder why most people’s incomes and standard of living have
stagnated 
<https://www.policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/National%20Office/2010/12/Richest%201%20Percent.pdf>
, while those of millionaires has skyrocketed?

So it’s not surprise that Trudeau doesn’t dare call privatization by its name. 
Instead his Ministers have invented hip, ambiguous names like “asset recycling” 
and the “flywheel of reinvestment” to describe their proposed schemes. And the 
public opposition might explain how the Liberals’ proclivity for consultations 
hasn’t extended to this matter.

Because privatization serves the elite, it always spawns contempt for 
democracy. Take this revelatory example from a decade ago: a slide-showused 
<https://cupe.ca/sites/cupe/files/rptbr_Secretive_Risky_Unaccountable_P3_Bad_for_Democracy_1.26.05.pdf>
 by a Canadian legal firm as they promoted privatization projects in British 
Columbia. One slide describing the obstacles to privatization is entitled 
“Inherent diseases.” The obstacles? “Stakeholders,” “transparency,” and “public 
justification.” For corporations chasing endless profits, the basic value of 
democracy are not essential to a healthy, thriving society. They are a scourge 
to be avoided.

All this secrecy, euphemism and dismissive rhetoric is meant to obscure a 
single, glaring fact: the arguments in favour of privatization are rubbish. 
There is no need to privatize public assets: with government borrowing rates at 
historic lows, the Liberals could simply take out loans and build 
infrastructure at a fraction of the cost. And forget the notion that we’re 
broke. This line is regularly peddled by the political and corporate class to 
distract from the cash, much of it accumulated through tax cuts,hoarded 
<https://www.pressprogress.ca/corporate_canada_is_sitting_on_680_billion_85_canadians_say_raise_corporate_taxes>
 by Canadian corporations: at the end of 2015, a stunning $600bn.

You’d think that Trudeau’s anti-austerity pledge, so crucial to his election, 
would have meant putting our hands on some of these obscene corporate profits. 
It has taken scarcely a year for the facade to fall away. He has barely shifted 
Canada’s taxation structure—meaning government revenue, which could be the 
engine of a bold economic transformation, remains at thelowest 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/03/10/alternative-federal-budget-2016-ccpa_n_9429866.html>
 since the post-WW2 period. And now, none other than Donald Trump has 
introduced a privatization infrastructure bank proposal strikinglysimilar 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com//report-on-business/international-business/us-business/trump-transition-team-reportedly-considering-infrastructure-bank/article32878301/>
 to Trudeau’s. Will even that not make the Liberals blush?

Those of us who anticipated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2015/oct/22/trudeaus-bold-change-pledge-was-a-ruse-but-canada-now-has-a-fighting-chance>
 and warned that Justin Trudeau would continue such policies were shouted down. 
But privatization, deregulation and downsizing in the scope and spending of the 
state: this is theneoliberal consensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 that continues to grip politics across the continent. Donald Trump has become 
only its most racist and authoritarian expression; Trudeau its most glossy and
beguiling 
<http://rozworski.org/political-eh-conomy/2016/11/07/trudeau-economic-model-not-good/>
.

The transition that Canadians want will require enormous levels of 
spending—and need to be public and paid for. By strengthening and reinventing 
the public sphere, the government could unleash a program of mass transit, 
building renovations, storm barriers, urban redesign and green jobs that 
reduces emissions, racism and inequality all at once. But pretending the 
private sector can lead this is a recipe for disaster: their hunger for profits 
will prevent this transformation from being either ambitious, accessible or 
fair.

Clear-thinking economists call it privatization. Liberal spin-doctors will 
call it by some fanciful name. I call it the legalized fleecing of Canadians, a 
giant corporate giveaway.

Twitter: @Martin_Lukacs <http://www.twitter.com/Martin_Lukacs>
 