
Justin Young of the Vaccines on Hope by the Descendents

 * Listen to the Vaccines cover  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kn3cLipFUDo>
of the track 
I think every band I have ever been in has covered Hope and it’s still one of 
my favourite songs of all time.Growing up listening to punk rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/15/pop-punk-green-day-blink-182-descendents>
 was so empowering and cathartic because of its raw power and anger. Often 
though, as a young boy, it was hard to relate to lyrically, but this song (and 
the album it came from, Milo Goes to College) spoke to me so deeply. I was 12 
or 13 when my friend first played it for me, and I listened to nothing else for 
months. Obviously a lot of men find opening up and talking about their 
struggles and their feelings very difficult. I myself have been told to shut 
the fuck up by friends when trying to open up, and I thinkit’s a real problem 
we face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/18/professor-green-calm-alpha-prevent-suicide-young-men-photography-exhibition>
. My relationship with songs like this one has helped me immeasurably through 
the years to get through tough times and I sometimes wonder what I’d do without 
them. The lyrics are pretty on the nose, but few things feel as good as 
shouting “I know some day, my day will come”, which I’ve been doing since I 
first heard it, dancing around my teenage bedroom pining for all my first 
crushes. I think I’m a bit of a heartbreak kid, and it still resonates in the 
same way today. I guess there’s nothing in the world quite like hope.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwHd-PLgKlbs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwHd-PLgKlbs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwHd-PLgKlbs&media=>






Frank Turner on This Year by the Mountain Goats

 * Listen to Frank Turner’s cover <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QW0VJla8hVc>
 of the track  Frank Turner. Photograph: Andy Earl/Campaign Against Living 
Miserably 
I first came across Calm (Campaign Against Living Miserably) 
<https://www.thecalmzone.net/> and the work they do a few years ago, when my 
friend Dan wrote a moving piece about his struggles with mental health. It was 
all the more affecting for me because, despite being pretty good friends with 
Dan, I was not aware that he’d had issues to deal with. It was an eye-opener 
for me, a perfect introduction to the importance of the work Calm does. My 
choice of song was easy: This Year, by Mountain Goats. I had a rough time of it 
in 2014 and 2015, for various reasons, both personal and professional. That 
song arrived in my life during that time and quickly became mybattle anthem for 
surviving the slings and arrows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/08/men-depression-opening-up-kid-cudi-springsteen-fury>
. The refrain “I am going to make it through this year if it kills me” is 
perfect for shouting out loudly, to yourself or to others, during the darker 
times. Music has always been a sanctuary for me, as it is for many people.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii6kJaGiRaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii6kJaGiRaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dii6kJaGiRaI&media=>



Olly Alexander of Years & Years on Both Sides Now by Joni Mitchell

 * Listen to Years & Years cover of the track  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uWek0fRN2P8>
 Olly Alexander. Photograph: Andy Earl/Campaign Against Living Miserably 
At 13 I taught myself piano from an old song book, and Joni Mitchell’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/26/joni-mitchell-blue-hissing-summer-lawns-court-spark-hejira-dylan>
s Both Sides Now was the first song I learned. That’s the reason I chose to 
cover the song for Calm’s Torch Songs. It made me into a huge Joni Mitchell 
fan. I have so many favourites of hers, but this song seemed special as it was 
the first. It’s so simple and heartbreaking. She re-recorded an orchestral 
version much later in her career and my mum would sometimes play it in the car. 
I always loved those car journeys and feeling like I was sharing a connection 
with my mum and with Joni. I like watching her perform itlive on the Mama Cass 
show in 1969 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4NdsnFZm0X4&app=desktop> – she’s 
so commanding and graceful. I love how she’s so vulnerable, she sounds so wise 
and poetic and exposed. I really believe that she’s lived, been hurt and is 
still figuring it all out. I take a lot of comfort from that. It always feels 
like a thump in the chest at the end of the song when she sings: “I really 
don’t know life at all.” It’s a brave line, it’s sad but it also feels hopeful 
to me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCnf46boC3I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCnf46boC3I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCnf46boC3I&media=>
Blaenavon’s Ben Gregory on Everything Reminds Me of Her by Elliott Smith


 * Listen to Blaenavon’s cover of the track 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aY7nrtbWYtU&feature=youtu.be>  Blaenavon. 
Photograph: Andy Earl/Campaign Against Living Miserably 
I was always going to choose Elliott Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/05/elliott-smith-ed-sheeran-acoustic-introverts-george-ezra-singer-songwriters>
. Because he’s my No 1 artist of all time, selecting one of his dozens of 
perfect songs was a trickier prospect. Everything Reminds Me of Her brings me 
back to autumn 2014, spending all of my time with someone I was very in love 
with and although things came to a bit of a sad end, I’ll listen to this song 
and remember the good old times and feel content in my nostalgia. Obviously the 
main message of the song hits home pretty hard, but it’s some of the other 
imagery that affects me the most. I don’t know how he got some of the most 
beautiful, abstract lines to fit so sweetly in this kind of rhythm: “The spin 
of the earth impaled the silhouette of the sun on the steeple.” Also the 
instrumental breaks hold some of the most touching guitar playing I’ve heard. 
It’s funny to choose such a sad song as my torch song but it just cheers you up 
when you realise someone has felt exactly the same way as you do now. It helps 
knowing that what’s happened to you isn’t the end of the world – someone else 
has been through it – and whileElliott’s tale ended so sadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/oct/24/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, I think his music has saved a lot of people from a similar fate.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeL6-ZIgSms&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeL6-ZIgSms>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeL6-ZIgSms&media=> 