
Justin Trudeau on how Canada is bucking the populist trend

Globalization “doesn’t seem to be working for the middle class, for ordinary 
people”,Justin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> told 
the Guardian, as he sought to explain a turbulent year marked by the election 
of Donald Trump, Brexit and the rise of anti-establishment, nation-first 
parties around the world. Elected last year, the Canadian prime minister is 
under pressure to show the world that his government has found an alternative 
means of tackling the concerns of those who feel they have been left behind.

Justin Trudeau: ‘Globalisation isn’t working for ordinary people’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Justin%20Trudeau%20on%20climate%20change%2C%20the%20economy%20and%20Canada's%20future%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Justin%20Trudeau%20on%20climate%20change%2C%20the%20economy%20and%20Canada%27s%20future%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-video&media=>
Justin Trudeau on climate change, the economy and Canada’s future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-video>
Evacuation begins in Aleppo

Wounded civilians in east Aleppo are being loaded on to ambulances as a 
long-awaited evacuation of the besieged districts of the city gets under way. 
The movement came almost five hours after the evacuation was due to begin, when 
the process appeared stalled while medical teams waited amid reports of 
gunfire. The evacuation is being overseen by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 
the International Committee of the Red Cross, which said it would include the 
wounded and all civilians. The first convoy of 10 vehicles is expected to 
transport 200-250 wounded people in its first rotation and there will be 
multiple crossings throughout the day. The evacuation deal was agreed late on 
Wednesday, and under its terms, a ceasefire went into effect at 2.30am local 
time on Thursday, two rebel officials confirmed.


Syria: ambulances on the move as Aleppo evacuation operation begins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/syria-ambulances-on-the-move-as-aleppo-evacuation-operation-begins>

Follow live updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/15/aleppo-tense-as-evacuations-set-to-begin-live-updates>

Breitbart’s ‘fake news’ attack on Guardian refuted

Breitbart News has “accused the Guardian of disseminating false information 
for reporting a fundamental and demonstrably provable fact: that the number of 
undocumented border crossers is near a historic low”, Rory Carroll writes, 
after the rightwing site claimed to have “fact-checked” aGuardian profile of a 
Border Patrol agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/mexican-american-border-patrol-agent-vincente-paco>
, which they blasted as “fake news”. We set out the facts and refute 
Breitbart’s claims.

How Breitbart and the conservative right opened a new front in the war over 
fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/breitbart-fake-news-right-trump>

Trump could put intelligence agencies in peril, says former CIA chief


Trump’s public disparagement of US intelligence agencies would undermine the 
moral authority of their leaders to send them “into harm’s way”, Michael 
Hayden, who served as director of the NSA and then the CIA during the George W 
Bush administration, said. It would be “discouraging” if Trump were to reject 
or not use information from the agencies. “That information is sometimes bought 
at great price,” Hayden said.

Donald Trump risks damaging intelligence agencies, warns former CIA chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-risks-damaging-intelligence-agencies-warns-former-cia-chief>

Chinese state media call for taking Taiwan by force

Following Trump’s breaking of diplomatic protocol by speaking with the 
president of Taiwan, the Global Times, a Communist party-controlled newspaper, 
has said that China should plan to take Taiwan by force and make swift 
preparations for a military incursion. The president-elect has called into 
question the longstanding US foreign policy of maintaining formal relations 
with Beijing instead of Taiwan, which China considers a breakaway province. The 
tabloid said on Thursday that China should rebalance its stance towards Taiwan 
to “make the use of force as a main option and carefully prepare for it”.

China should plan to take Taiwan by force after Trump call, state media say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/china-plan-taiwan-force-trump-call-state-media>

One billion Yahoo accounts compromised in hack

Yahoo said on Wednesday it had discovered another major cyber-attack, saying 
data from more than 1bn user accounts was compromised in August 2013, making it 
the largest such breach in history. “An unauthorised party” broke into the 
accounts, a statement on Yahoo’s website said. The number of users affected in 
this hack was double the number implicated in a 2014 breach which the company 
disclosed in September.

Yahoo hack: 1bn accounts compromised by biggest data breach in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>



Impeach Duterte over killing confession, say Philippine senators

The admission of Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte that he used to 
personally kill suspected criminals when mayor of Davao city is grounds for 
impeachment, two of the nation’s senators said. A move to impeach Duterte is 
unlikely to succeed, as he has allies in congress and domestic support for his 
bloody war on drugs, in which police have reported killing 2,086 people. The 
justice minister, Vitaliano Aguirre, dismissed Duterte’s comments as 
“hyperbole”.

Philippine senators call for Duterte to be impeached over killing confession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/philippines-senators-duterte-impeached-killing-confession>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

And finally … kids pitch their film ideas


A four-year-old came up with the idea for a new film called Monster Trucks, 
which looks set to be a financial disaster. Inspired by this, the Guardian 
assembled its own team of kids to try to pitch some ideas – like The Laser 
Monster from Not Space – with feedback from an Oscar-nominated producer.

Casting creche: meet the four-year-olds pitching ideas for blockbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/four-year-old-movie-blockbuster-ideas-monster-trucks>
 