
Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, who was widely criticized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 for fondly remembering Fidel Castro without mention of his human rights 
record, has defended his comments but said the late Cuban leader was a dictator.

Fidel Castro: Justin Trudeau ridiculed over praise of 'remarkable leader'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 Trudeau sparked fury and online mockery after he referred to Castro as a 
“remarkable leader” and expressed his sorrow at the death of “Cuba’s 
longest-serving president”.

A Twitter hashtag, #trudeaueulogies 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/trudeaueulogies?src=hash>, sprung up, prompting 
users to share unlikely tributes to the organizational and leadership abilities 
of figures such as Adolf Eichmann, Pablo Escobar and the Nightmare on Elm 
Street horror character Freddy Krueger.

 Many critics were quick to point out that Castro suppressed dissent and there 
was no option for other leadership on the island under his regime.

On Sunday, Trudeau said his statement was simply meant “to recognize the 
passing of a former head of state” of a country thatCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> had longstanding ties with, and not 
to gloss over unflattering history.

“The fact is Fidel Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> had 
a deep and lasting impact on the Cuban people,” Trudeau told reporters in a 
televised news conference at a Madagascar Francophonie summit.

 “He certainly was a polarizing figure and there certainly were significant 
concerns around human rights. That’s something I’m open about and that I’ve 
highlighted.”

Asked if he thought Castro was a dictator, Trudeau said: “Yes.” He also said 
he raised the issue of human rights during an official visit toCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> earlier this month.

Some Conservative opposition lawmakers on Sunday urged Trudeau to boycott 
Castro’s funeral while contenders for the Conservative leadership criticized 
his comments.

The prime minister’s office said no decision had yet been made on who would be 
representing Canada at the funeral.

Castro was an honorary pallbearer at the 2000 funeral of Trudeau’s father, the 
former Canadian prime minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau, who in 1976 was the first 
Nato leader to visit Cuba.

Trudeau’s initial statement, which was markedly more positive than those from 
most western leaders, sparked a backlash on Saturday, especially among 
Republicans and Cuban exiles in the US.


“You wouldn’t go to Pol Pot’s funeral,” Texas senator Ted Cruz told ABC’s This 
Week on Sunday. “You shouldn’t be doing what Obama andTrudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-ridiculed-over-praise-of-remarkable-fidel-castro>
 are doing, celebrating Castro.”

 Canada has long been one of Cuba’s closest western allies, maintaining ties 
after its 1959 revolution.

During his visit this month, Trudeau said Canada would maintain its 
relationship with Cuba even if that put it at odds with President-elect Donald 
Trump, who has threatened toreverse the US-Cuban detente 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/trump-cuba-ted-cruz-marco-rubio-fidel-castro>
.
 