
It is a tantalising mystery that has fascinated historians and fans alike for 
decades, but a biographer who gained access to one of the author’s closest 
friends’ diaries has revealed a new theory about Franz Kafka’s sexuality.

Kafka’s intense attraction to women but clear aversion to physical contact and 
sex has been a subject for discussion for years. Theories on his possible 
asexuality or repressed homosexuality contributed to the mythology around the 
author. Max Brod, writer and eventual inheritor of Kafka’s estate, once 
described his close friend as being “tortured by his sexual desires”. Kafka 
himself described his fear of intimacy in a letter to Brod in January 1921:

“Like a person who cannot resist the temptation to swim out into the sea, and 
is blissful to be carried away – ‘now you are a man, you are a great swimmer’ – 
and suddenly, with little reason, he raises himself up and sees only the sky 
and the sea, and on the waves is only his own little head and he is seized by a 
horrible fear and nothing else matters, he must get back to the shore, even if 
his lungs burst. That is how it is.”

But Reiner Stach, a Kafka academic and author of a three-volume biography, has 
developed a new theory on Kafka’s seemingly contradictory views on sex: that 
the author, like most people of the time, had an intense phobia of STDs and 
pregnancy.

Franz Kafka's virtual romance: a love affair by letters as unreal as online 
dating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/12/franz-kafkas-virtual-world-romance-felice-bauer>
While researching for his third volume, titled Kafka: The Early Years 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10818.html> (published in October in an 
English translation by Shelley Frisch), Stach obtained copies of Brod’s diaries 
between 1909 and 1911, when Kafka was in his mid-20s. In these hitherto 
unpublished diaries, Stach discovered a new side to the man often credited as 
being more rambunctious and sexually active than his friend Kafka: Brod himself 
was constantly and deeply worried about the consequences of sex.

“It was really astonishing. Max Brod was a real womaniser. He’d often talk 
about his ideal woman, the idea of women being the saviour of men – but when 
you read his diaries, there is nothing but fear: fear of unwanted pregnancies, 
syphilis, venereal diseases, on every page. It almost overwhelmed all his other 
interests,” Stach says.

“It is an outdated idea that Kafka was neurotic and Brod was healthy. I think 
Brod was just able to repress all of this in the couple of hours he spent with 
his lovers, and Kafka was not able to because his mind never slept.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fkafkas-sexual-terrors-were-absolutely-normal-says-biographer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eabe0292696ac5bb497705a2cc346c48d24dfe4%2F332_1133_3547_4433%2F3547.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kafka's%20sexual%20terrors%20were%20'absolutely%20normal'%2C%20says%20biographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fkafkas-sexual-terrors-were-absolutely-normal-says-biographer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kafka%27s%20sexual%20terrors%20were%20%27absolutely%20normal%27%2C%20says%20biographer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fkafkas-sexual-terrors-were-absolutely-normal-says-biographer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eabe0292696ac5bb497705a2cc346c48d24dfe4%2F332_1133_3547_4433%2F3547.jpg>
 ‘When you read his diaries, there is nothing but fear’ … Max Brod, 
photographed circa 1940. Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
But, Stach says, this was “absolutely normal” for the bourgeois in early 
20th-century Bohemia, where people were more interested in maintaining sexual 
hygiene than chasing sexual pleasure.

“I read a lot of books on sexuality published in the 1900s, books usually 
intended for young girls and men. They are just focused on risks, never about 
sexuality as a source of happiness. It is not about morality or religion - just 
medical risks,” Stach says. “But look at the historical and psychological 
context – men and women were really separated at the time … they were educated 
in completely different ways. So when they met for the first time, often in 
their early 20s, this was often very embarrassing and very frightening.”

Stach, who also read newspaper reports and memoirs of Kafka’s classmates and 
contemporaries to build a new portrait of the author, writes in the latest 
volume of the biography that Kafka was “unable to integrate his own sexuality 
into his self-image because he regarded it as something both physically and 
ethically impure, and therefore incapable of developing human intimacy with 
women who actively drew him into this filth – this anti-sensual and misogynist 
syndrome was shared by millions of middle-class men, whose upbringing simply 
did not allow for erotic happiness.”

Stach is not sure why the terms asexual and homosexual have so frequently been 
applied to an author who had such well-documented affairs with women. “I don’t 
know why it persists. Kafka had homosexual fantasies, but everyone does. He had 
a really intense access to his own subconscious, more than we might have, and 
this is why he is such a great writer. So, he had homosexual, bisexual, 
sadistic, masochistic and voyeuristic fantasies and all of these appeared in 
his works, which is typical for writers like Kafka. But you can’t conclude that 
he was any one of those things himself.”

The research brings new life to Kafka’s The Castle, Stach says. On Kafka’s 
manuscript for the novel, published posthumously in 1926, it is visible that 
Kafka originally wrote in the first person until he reached the first sex scene 
– at which point he changed it to be in the third person.

“He is always describing sex as a kind of self-alienation, as if you could 
lose yourself in sexual encounters,” Stach says. “He found it impossible to 
describe it from his point of view, as a subjective experience. So he distanced 
himself.”

While many have come before with theories to explain Kafka’s seemingly 
contradictory views on sex and women, none have identified Kafka as simply 
being a product of the sexual education system absorbed by most of his peers. 
This, Stach says, is partly due to the mythology around Kafka: other 
biographers, and parties such as the Brod estate, have been more preoccupied 
with finding new manuscripts and letters than examining what was already known.


“They’re always looking for new material, but they forget the masses of 
material we already have – and we can do so much with it if you put the puzzle 
pieces together,” he says.

Any further research may be stymied by ongoing legal wranglings with the Brod 
estate. Brod, who was entrusted with thousands of pages of Kafka’s writings on 
the promise he would burn them after Kafka’s death in 1924, in turn left the 
papers to his lover Esther Hoffe when he died in 1968. Hoffe’s elderly 
daughters have since kept all of the documents – estimated to be around 20,000 
– in a small flat in Tel Aviv, stacking them in piles among their belonging and 
numerous cats. The situation has long been a source of frustration and 
amusement;the Israeli writer Etgar Keret once said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/26/magazine/26kafka-t.html?ref=magazine>: “The 
next best thing to having your stuff burned, if you’re ambivalent, is giving it 
to some guy who gives it to some lady who gives it to her daughters who keep it 
in an apartment full of cats, right?”

Franz Kafka literary legal battle ends as Israel's high court rules in favor 
of library
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/08/franz-kafka-papers-israel-court-ruling>
In August, a legal battle between the Hoffe family and the National Library of 
Israelwas resolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/08/franz-kafka-papers-israel-court-ruling>
, with Israel winning the right to claim the papers because Brod had 
ambiguously promised to donate them. However, Israel has not yet attempted to 
remove and sort through the papers. Stach believes this will begin in early 
2017.

In addition to the Hoffes’ archive, Stach says around 17 letters from Kafka to 
his last lover, Dora Diamant, and around 20 of the author’s notebooks are 
believed to have been lost after Diamant’s flat was raided by the Gestapo in 
1933. “Perhaps someone will find them in an archive someday, in Berlin, Krakow 
or Moscow. There are still tons of papers, so there is still some hope.”
 