
Karpov and Kasparov's epic 1984-1985 battle for world chess supremacy is 
fondly celebrated as a chess classic, and it was even seen as a harbinger of 
the collapse of communism. It's now being celebrated in ananniversary rematch 
in the Spanish city of Valencia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/sep/21/karpov-kasparov-chess-rematch-valencia>
.

But 25 years ago, the match, which included a record 40 drawn games, was often 
regarded as tedious and was even jeered and booed by frustrated spectators.

When the Guardian's chess correspondent Leonard Barden reviewed the 
longest-running world championship chess match, the headline was"The bored game 
to end them all" 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/getFiles.asp?Style=OliveXLib:LowLevelEntityToSaveGifMSIE_DIGITALARCHIVE&Type=text/html&Locale=english-skin-custom&Path=GUA/1985/02/16&ChunkNum=-1&ID=Ar01902&PageLabel=19>
.

Sounding almost as exhausted as Karpov, who lost 8kg during the match, Barden 
wrote: "Proclaimed the chess match of the year, it was a bore for long periods 
...Anatoly Karpov <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov>, classical 
stylist, and Garry Kasparov, young dynamic risk-taker, just didn't gel at the 
board."

The Moscow crowd took out their frustration on the grand masters. When 
Kasparov and Karpov agreed to one of their many draws after only 17 moves there 
wereboos and whistles from the crowd 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/getFiles.asp?Style=OliveXLib:LowLevelEntityToSaveGifMSIE_DIGITALARCHIVE&Type=text/html&Locale=english-skin-custom&Path=GUA/1984/11/17&ChunkNum=-1&ID=Ar00208&PageLabel=2>
, and accusations they were playing "anti-chess".

Chess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chess> audiences had grown used to 
more drama. The fireworks of the cold war match between Fischer and Spassky and 
the intrigue of Karpov versus Korchnoi - coded yoghurt pots and all - were 
still fresh in the memory.

But the marathon Karpov/Kasparov match ended with an episode to equal anything 
that had gone before. The game was abandoned after officials were told that 
Karpov, the Soviet favourite, was on the verge of nervous breakdown.

Kasparov was furious. "Why they staging this show?" he pointedly asked in 
English at a press conference."Then a Soviet foreign ministry official 
intervened to say that the press conference was over," 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/getFiles.asp?Style=OliveXLib:LowLevelEntityToSaveGifMSIE_DIGITALARCHIVE&Type=text/html&Locale=english-skin-custom&Path=GUA/1985/02/16&ChunkNum=-1&ID=Ar00104&PageLabel=1>
 the Guardian's Moscow correspondent, Martin Walker, drily noted.

In a preview of the match written in September 1984 Barden had warned it it 
would not be a "cosily anondyne all-Soviet affair" and that it could be a"very 
long and close series" 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/getFiles.asp?Style=OliveXLib:LowLevelEntityToSaveGifMSIE_DIGITALARCHIVE&Type=text/html&Locale=english-skin-custom&Path=GUA/1984/09/11&ChunkNum=-1&ID=Ar02109&PageLabel=21>
. At first he appeared to have got it wrong, as Karpov reached a virtually 
unassailable 5-0 lead. Barden's "Soviet sources" were questioning"Kasparov's 
bravado approach 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/ml.asp?Ref=R1VBLzE5ODQvMTAvMDEjQXIwMDIwOA==&Mode=Gif&Locale=english-skin-custom>
". There wereaccusations of a fix 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/ml.asp?Ref=R1VBLzE5ODQvMTAvMTgjQXIwMDIwNw==&Mode=Gif&Locale=english-skin-custom>
.

But then the 21-year-old Kasparov began his remarkable comeback, scoring his 
first win after 93 days of chess 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/ml.asp?Ref=R1VBLzE5ODQvMTIvMTQjQXIwMDIwOQ==&Mode=Gif&Locale=english-skin-custom>
.

Barden praised Kasparov's confident play for his second win, but by then 
Karpov was playing like a tired man. It was one of the"worst defeats of his 
career", 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/ml.asp?Ref=R1VBLzE5ODUvMDEvMzEjQXIwMDIwNw==&Mode=Gif&Locale=english-skin-custom>
 Barden's match report said. Kasparov's "battle of attrition" finally seemed to 
be working.

When Kasparov won a third game there was talk of Karpov cracking up and of a 
deal to halt the game. As Barden wrote: "If any deal that is finally reached 
favours Karpov,the Kasparov camp will surely cry foul 
<http://archive.guardian.co.uk/Repository/getFiles.asp?Style=OliveXLib:LowLevelEntityToSaveGifMSIE_DIGITALARCHIVE&Type=text/html&Locale=english-skin-custom&Path=GUA/1985/02/15&ChunkNum=-1&ID=Ar02106&PageLabel=21>
. Though they have discussed the games amicably, there is an undercurrent of 
tension between Karpov - darling of the Soviet establishment, personal 
decorated by President Brezhnev - and the ambitious youngster from provincial 
Baku."
 