
Karpov-Kasparov, Linares 1991. How does Black to play save himself?

DK: A cartoon once depicted the arch-rivals Garry Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov> as wizened elderly men 
sitting on a park bench, still animatedly discussing chess variations, and it 
is this image that comes to mind while reading Kasparov vs Karpov 1988-2009 
(Everyman Chess £30), the latest volume in Kasparov's increasingly grandiose 
series, and my final nomination for our book of the year.

This is the third tome Kasparov has devoted to their games, and reflects how 
much thought the former world champion still gives to hisbitter rivalry with 
Karpov <http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/blog/2009/sep/22/kasparov-karpov-rematch>
. The two Ks played a total of 167 serious games against each other, locked in 
combat for hours and hours and devoting even more time in preparation for these 
encounters. Perhaps it is no surprise that, in spite of their differences, this 
stressful intimacy created a curious symbiosis, evident from Kasparov's 
descriptions of their sometimes lengthy postmortems: who else can they turn to 
if they want to work through these games?

This is a serious book and it deserves serious attention. Every one of their 
encounters between 1988 and 2009 is documented in detail, practically every 
move and thought analysed, not just in terms of the game itself, but with 
reference to their past meetings, so that following the annotations is 
sometimes like looking into a hall of mirrors. In previous volumes the analysis 
has been offset by a compelling narrative away from the chessboard, with the 
shadow of Soviet politics above their every move. This time Kasparov mainly 
focuses on his struggle with Fide, and at times my eyes glazed over. There is 
too much self-justification. Kasparov is at his strongest describing the twists 
in fortune and psychological nuances of the games – and that I found 
fascinating.

The game is from the Ks' longest encounter. Black draws with 1...Rf6+ as 2 
Kxf6 is stalemate and after 2 Ke8 Rxf5 it is impossible to force checkmate with 
two knights. chess@guardian.co.uk 
<http://browse.guardian.co.uk/search/Sport?search=chess&sitesearch-radio=Sport&go-guardian=Search>
 