
The co-founder of a cult music magazine of the early 80s has stood by the 
authenticity of an article first published 35 years ago, in whichKate Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kate-bush>, now revered worldwide as a 
singer and songwriter, recalled her days as a bullied schoolgirl “with hooligan 
instincts”.


The article, first published in Flexipop! 
<http://www.flexipop.com/testofyouth04.html> in 1982, and now reproduced in a 
book of highlights of the magazine’s three-year lifespan, quotes Bush recalling 
the miseries of being a shy outsider at St Joseph’s Convent grammar school in 
Bexley, south-east London, bullied psychologically and occasionally physically.

The article had been reproduced on some fan sites over the last 30 years, with 
caveats about its authenticity given that Bush, who returned to live 
performance in 2014, 35 years after her last tour, is famously protective of 
her private life.

It quoted her saying: “I was too shy to be a hooligan but inside I had many 
hooligan instincts. I became very shy at school. There were people who picked 
on me and gave me a very hard time. It was a very cruel environment and I was a 
loner.

“My friends used to play this game whereby they’d ‘send you to Coventry’. My 
friends sometimes used to ignore me completely and that would really upset me 
badly. I still tend to be vulnerable, but I’m much better at fighting back if 
people are nasty to me today.

“I used to get the most terrible crushes on boys, always much older than me. 
And it was terrible. I used to think they were so beautiful. But I’d never get 
anywhere with them. Just the old fantasy trip of getting off on someone, was 
what it was about.


“My life as a teenager was interesting and difficult. And it was important, 
because it stirred up all sorts of things in me. But I was very lonely. And 
even after I left school, there were times when the loneliness became 
desperate.”

A spokesman for Bush said, when doubts about the authenticity of the piece 
resurfaced: “We have no further comment at this point.”


 Barry Cain, a music writer and publisher, was a co-founder in 1980 of 
Flexipop! which often extracted far more startling revelations than Bush’s from 
a string of pop stars. He insisted the piece was genuine, written in the first 
person but based on an interview.

“All the artists featured in Testament Of Youth were interviewed at the time 
and the articles were all written in the first person. The piece in the book is 
a straight reproduction from the magazine and when it originally appeared there 
were no complaints whatsoever. In fact, we were even provided with a photo of 
Kate at her school. The Testament Of Youth series included highly personal 
interviews with the likes of Paul Weller, Simon Le Bon, Boy George, Kim Wilde, 
Siouxsie, Adam Ant etc.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fkate-bush-article-1982-flexipop-hooligan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ffb6ead512fcee297772b36c4db7377dd65b2c%2F0_208_5437_3264%2F5437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kate%20Bush%20had%20'hooligan%20instincts'%20in%20her%20youth%2C%201982%20article%20reveals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fkate-bush-article-1982-flexipop-hooligan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kate%20Bush%20had%20%27hooligan%20instincts%27%20in%20her%20youth%2C%201982%20article%20reveals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fkate-bush-article-1982-flexipop-hooligan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ffb6ead512fcee297772b36c4db7377dd65b2c%2F0_208_5437_3264%2F5437.jpg>
 Flexipop! magazines from the 80s. Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 
Cain said he had been racking his brain to remember who carried out the 
interview: “It could have been any one of a number of people who were around in 
the office. But there were no problems at all with it, and we even got the 
photograph from her record company of the time, EMI.

“The thing is people forget what they said 34 years ago – and then it comes 
back and bites them in the bum.”

The only change he made in reproducing the article for the book was to correct 
Bush’s birthday, which they originally got wrong - “fact checking wasn’t our 
strong point,” he said.

 The book, complete with a new version of one of the magazine’s famous 
flexies, floppy plastic records that had to be weighed down with a coin to lie 
flat on the turntable, was first published 18 months ago, in a limited edition 
sold onlythrough the website <http://www.flexipop.com/bookhome.html>, which 
sold out. Reprinted a month ago, it is now selling across the world: Cain said 
he took orders on Tuesday from New Zealand and the United States.

The Kate Bush piece appeared four years after her first No 1 chart hit, 
Wuthering Heights. Her homemade demo tape was turned down by numerous record 
labels before EMI signed her, and she released her first album, The Kick 
Inside, in 1978, at the age of 19. She went on to win Brit, Grammy and Ivor 
Novello awards for her writing and performing, and was awarded a CBE in the 
2013 New Year honours list.

Cain said he was surprised at the controversy over what he regarded as an 
innocuous piece compared with some of their other work.


Flexipop! was banned by WH Smith for three issues after a photoshoot with a 
rockabilly band in the grime of the old King’s Cross railway land used animal 
carcasses from an abattoir. Cain said he had to give an assurance that there 
would be no more scenes of “gratuitous violence and cannibalism” to get it back 
on the shelves.

 * This article was first launched on 2 January 2016. It was updated and 
relaunched on 3 January 2016.  