
May-to-December, cross-genre collaborations maybe aren't the surprise they 
once were. When, in 1977, David Bowie dropped in to Bing Crosby's Christmas TV 
special to record a version ofLittle Drummer Boy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DiXjbI3kRus>, it was enough of a shock that the 
song appeared on bootlegs for several years before being officially released as 
a single in 1982. Now, though, thanks to the raft of duets albums bringing us 
pairings such asFrank Sinatra and Bono 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M8Yr_NE6R_g>, and Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cvjGe_j6yR8>, there is perhaps less of a 
frisson.

Nevertheless, there are still some combinations that can raise an eyebrow. If, 
for example, Alice Cooper were to record a follow-up to his 1975 album Welcome 
to My Nightmare, and was seeking someone to play the role of the devil, you 
might expect him to summon one his shock-rock heirs –Rob Zombie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EqQuihD0hoI>, perhaps, or someone from Slipknot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/slipknot>. You might not expect his 
collaborator to be trash-pop princessKe$ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kesha>. However, that's her on What Baby 
Wants, Baby Gets <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZD0tdIh8frM>, on Cooper's new 
album, Welcome 2 My Nightmare. That Iggy Pop/Miley Cyrus team-up is only a 
matter of time.

"I'd love that," says Cooper when I moot the idea of the Stooge duetting with 
Hannah Montana at the start of my conversation with him and Ke$ha.

"Who fucking knows, man?" Ke$ha says, sounding less bratlike and more 
businesslike than you might imagine. "You really can't stereotype people or put 
them in boxes, it's unfair. You never know what an artist is going to create 
next."

There's actually quite a lot of common ground here. There is the idea of them 
both as stage creations – Cooper was once the clergyman's son Vincent Furnier, 
while Ke$ha used to be Nashville country girl Kesha Rose Sebert. There is the 
way they both talk about themselves in the third person. There is a shared 
propensity for the gory (he does on-stage garroting, she's intodismemberment 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/music/interviews/a326631/keha-interview-i-want-to-be-fking-perfect.html>
 – she drank blood from a heart on her Get $leazy tour) and mildly 
transgressive (his shock tactics, her song C U Next Tuesday and tendency to 
have dancing transsexuals on-stage). They even have links to The Simpsons: 
Cooper supplied astoryline for a spin-off comic book 
<http://www.snpp.com/news/pr10_06_04.html>, while Ke$ha's multi-million selling 
singleTik Tok <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iP6XpLQM2Cs&ob=av2n> was used as 
a replacement intro theme for the TV cartoon, the only time in its history that 
has happened.

It's almost a wonder it took them so long to join forces.

"A lot of people in the business look at the two types of music we make and 
wonder how they can go together," Cooper says. "But I'm like you, Ke$ha, when 
people tell me no, I immediately want to do it."

So how did you two meet?

Ke$ha: I hunted him down at the Grammys. And then a year later I'm on Welcome 
2 My Nightmare! This is my fantasy. Working with a legend makes me excited to 
bring that rock'n'roll energy to whatever evil dark metal album I decide to 
make in the future.

Cooper: The thing I liked about her is she looked like a rock singer. I think 
she's going to wind up with a band behind her as a sort of female Robert Plant. 
You've got that stature and attitude. And that's why I wanted you to play the 
devil on my album.

Ke$ha: I'm not a submissive, perfect pop princess, that's for damned sure. I 
do think I have a rebellious, metal-loving rock chick inside of me. This song 
is the world's first look at the evolution of that. I've always loved 
rock'n'roll. It's about subversion. I'm talking to millions of people around 
the world about having sex freely, getting hammered, and partying. It's fun for 
me to be riding that line of appropriateness.

Are you playing with what's acceptable? 

Ke$ha: I'm here to level the playing field. Chicks can talk about the same 
shit that guys can, and they can be just as badass.

If Ke$ha had been around in 1969, would she have held her own with Janis 
Joplin?

Cooper: Yeah, I think so. But it would have been different. Janis didn't work 
on image very much. She was this big voice from Texas. Whereas Ke$ha really 
works on the image.

Ke$ha, are you satirising teen America, their voraciousness and bloodlust when 
it comes to consumption and sex?

Ke$ha: Absolutely! And you either get it or you don't.

You've written a song for Britney <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Q6uzuBMImM>
. What do you think she and the other young women of mainstream pop make of you?

Ke$ha: I'm not really concerned with what people think of me and that's what 
I've really built my career upon, so I have no idea.

Cooper: I think, knowing those girls, Ke$ha would get along with Gaga. Because 
they're both more outrageous than the others. Katy Perry is outrageous in a 
Sleeping Beauty kind of way. Ke$ha and Gaga are more arch.

Ke$ha, when you first came along 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/02/new-band-kesha>, did people miss 
the sense of play about what you do?

Ke$ha: They missed the tongue-in-cheek aspect. What I'm doing is art – it's 
low-brow art but there's a magic in that.

So you're not trashy, you're satirising that?

Ke$ha: It's a little bit of a satire.

You're both into ghoulish stuff. Is it to wind people up?

Ke$ha: No. A song like Cannibal where I like to dismember one of my dancers 
and pour his blood in my mouth and spit it at people – that came about because 
I really do devour men at a very rapid speed, and usually – by the time I'm 
done with them, I've literally sucked the blood out of their hearts.

Cooper: When Ke$ha and I sat down to write the lyrics to our song, the more 
disturbing ones were hers. The ones about, "I'll bathe in your blood" and "I'm 
gonna chew through you" – all Ke$ha.

Is it weird, Ke$ha, to have gone so quickly from thinking about fame and 
success to actually living it?

Ke$ha: I've always lived as though I'm a fucking god. It never had to do with 
money, though. I grew up with no money, but I never went without anything, it 
just made me creative and crafty. I used to just steal shit, or sneak into 
places. I would drive around LA in a Mercedes that some dude gave me. When you 
have the mentality that you're going to live a lavish lifestyle, [not having] 
money can't stop you.

Alice, you're a born-again Christian. How does that tally with Ke$ha's naughty 
antics?

Cooper: Everybody has to survive. When we were a young band starving in LA we 
had to steal. A guy would invite his girlfriend over and they'd go in the 
bedroom and we'd go through her purse and get 20 dollars. That would literally 
feed the band for a week.

You've both made cameos at each other's shows 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=guIzVXlAnA0>. Whose audience is scariest?

Cooper: There's metal audiences that are pretty dangerous, that if you fell in 
it would be like falling into a pit of piranhas. But they like Ke$ha because 
she doesn't come off like a pop diva. She comes off like a tough street kid.

Ke$ha: And I have big tits and blond hair – why wouldn't they like me?

Do you find yourself wanting to top the last outrageous thing you did?

Ke$ha: It's not really "topping" the last outrageous thing for me. I just come 
up with more crazy ideas to show the world I'm not scared of looking like a 
freak.

Ke$ha, you've had a tattoo from a crack addict 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=86Kn3d9LV48> and cavorted with transvestites, 
and Alice, yourhistory of outrage <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w3OkEcdOtb0> 
precedes you. Is it more difficult to shock these days?

Cooper: You can't shock an audience any more. When you turn on CNN and you see 
a guy getting his head cut off, the reality is so much more shocking than 
anything any of us can do onstage.

What was the last shocking thing you heard?

Cooper: I was shocked to hear that Ke$ha was on my album.

Ke$ha, did you hold the whip hand in the studio?

Ke$ha: No. But I do like that I grossed Alice  Cooper out with my lyrical 
content. It's an impressive moment in my songwriting career.

What did your friends think when they heard you were working with him?

Ke$ha: I'm friends with a few gutter-punks in LA who were literally blown 
away. Because he's like a god in the circles I run in.

Have you, Alice, ever felt compelled to give her fatherly – or grandfatherly – 
advice or told her to take care?

Cooper: I think the one thing that Ke$ha and I have in common is that we're 
not careful about anything.

Ke$ha, have you ever felt like telling your surrogate dad to get lost?

Ke$ha: Fuck, no! You don't tell Alice Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> to do anything.

Welcome 2 My Nightmare is released on 17 October on Spinefarm 
 