
Sir Christopher Kelly's revised expenses rules  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/28/mps-expenses-second-home-mortgage>
will be accepted by the House of Commons. Members of parliament who wish to 
retain their seats – and the party leaders who compete with them for the title 
of Purest of Them All – have no choice but to kiss the lash. The mood of the 
country allows nothing else. It is the price that the honest and hard-working 
majority have to pay for the excesses of their colleagues who exploited the 
system in a way which was part scandal and part farce.

But that does not require the pretence that all the new proposals are either 
right or reasonable. They are a response to the populist clamour that the 
exposure of previous excesses – right and necessary though it was – created.

Some of Kelly's recommendations have intrinsic merit. It is clearly wrong for 
a member of parliament to acquire a second property with a mortgage subsidised 
by the taxpayer. The prohibition of that practice confirms the arbitrary nature 
of rules which governSir Thomas Legg' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/11/mp-expenses-audit>s 
retrospective revision of what it was acceptable for MPs to charge in previous 
years.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> received 
£1,750 a month to defray the interest on the house he bought in his 
constituency – the bigger the house, the bigger the mortgage and the bigger the 
taxpayers' subsidy. Sir Thomas requires that only £237 in total be repaid. Who 
can object that, in future, Mr Cameron will have to make do with his own 
resources? However, some of Kelly's proposals are less easy to justify.

During my 30 years in the Commons – when expenses increased from literally 
nothing to inadequate secretarial and constituency accommodation allowances – I 
never even considered employing a member of my family. Nor did any of my close 
friends. But to prohibit the practice is absurd.

By all means introduce a system that requires MPs to prove that the employment 
is genuine and the employee properly qualified. But where is the possible 
justification – to take one from many possible examples – in prohibiting the 
formidableLady Campbell  <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4738646.stm>
from running Sir Ming's Edinburgh office? The answer, craven at best, is that 
the prohibition is a response to popular demand. That – not issues of personal 
hardship or legal obligation – is the overwhelming argument against the idea.

MPs are entitled to resent the implication that they all subscribe to the 
standards exhibited byDerek Conway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jan/29/derek-conway-fined>. Kelly's 
reputation for clear and objective thinking is not enhanced by recommendations 
based on the supposition that they do. The new scheme should be a rational 
system of moderate reimbursement, not an exercise in the appeasement of 
populist prejudice.

There is no doubt that the body politic needed an emetic and that – the logic 
of its recommendations aside – the Kelly report, combined with the revelations 
which made it necessary, will provide one. But in the short term the result can 
only be an increase in the conviction that politicians cannot be trusted and 
that draconian regulation is the only way to keep them honest. That is a 
penalty with which the present generation of MPs must live in the hope that 
their successors will benefit from the belief that Kelly's purgative has lanced 
the political boil.

In the meantime we have to consider the effect of the whole process on British 
democracy – a far more important consideration than the propriety of charging 
for gardening in a constituency home or even investing, at public expense, in a 
duck house. The reputation of parliament could not have been protected from the 
damage that the expenses scandal has caused. Attempts to hide the details would 
have been as futile as they would have been wrong.

But it is important to understand that the revelations were not made – nor 
have they been repeated – for motives entirely devoted to achieving political 
purity. The notion that MPs are crooks sells newspapers. And if, for the first 
three days of the sorry story, the crooks are all Labour, the result is a clear 
balance of advantage to the Conservative party.

Sir Christopher will recommend what he thinks right. But he needs to remember 
that the pressures upon him are not exclusively from the heirs to William Ewart 
Gladstone, who burn a postage stamp if, by mistake, they use an official 
envelope for private correspondence. No doubt Alan Duncan was right to say that 
reduced income and increased scrutiny will limit the flow of thrusting young 
candidates for parliament.

In one way that is a pity. In another, it may well be the one good thing to 
come out of the whole ghastly saga. The crisis of confidence in politics and 
politicians is not the result ofDouglas Hogg  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/19/douglas-hogg-mps-expenses>
claiming parliamentary expenses for cleaning out his moat. It is the product of 
politicians failing to debate the merits of a society in which one family lives 
in a moated grange while another survives in a bed and breakfast hostel.

If it becomes only possible to become an MP by making material sacrifices, 
there will be more conviction politicians. It is because theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> has increasingly become a 
career, rather than a vocation, that a proportion (a small proportion) of 
members behave like bankers in search of a bonus.
 