
Kempton's officials are satisfied there is no weather threat to the King 
George VI Chase <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/king-george-vi-chase> on 
Boxing Day, despite the icy blast which has been forecast to bring freezing 
temperatures to Britain this week. Although early-morning inspections will be a 
feature of this week's racing, it is not expected that frost covers will be 
necessary to ensure the staging of jump racing's midwinter highlight.

"The next 10 to 15 days after [Friday] is for unsettled, milder, wetter 
conditions," said Barney Clifford, Kempton's clerk of the course. "That's the 
best forecast I could hear."

Clifford has been told to expect around an inch of rain at his track before 
Christmas, which he believes will lead to going between soft and good to soft, 
suitable for most chasers. Speaking at a media event to promote the race in 
central London on Monday, he predicted an unusually competitive field of around 
14 runners, based on his recent conversations with the trainers involved.

The good news for Kempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton> did not 
end there, as it was revealed that William Hill had signed up to back the race 
for another three years, including the 2015 running. The bookmaker has also 
given up its naming rights to the Feltham Novice Chase on the card, so that it 
can be named after the recently retired Kauto Star, five times a winner of the 
King George.

Hill's are the last firm offering 4-1 about Long Run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/long-run>, winner of the King George two 
years ago and beaten only by Kauto Star in the most recent running. He was 
defeated on his recent reappearance in Haydock's Betfair Chase but connections 
predict a better run on Boxing Day.

"He seems a very different horse this season, in terms of his vitality and 
buzz," said Charlie Morlock, assistant trainer to Nicky Henderson for just over 
a year. Morlock said he had been puzzled by the horse's reputation last winter: 
"He didn't give you that buzz. This year, things are different. He feels and 
looks a healthier, happier individual."

Long Run's owner, Robert Waley-Cohen, said his horse was still receiving 
ministrations from the holistic carer Jerome Poupel, whose work falls somewhere 
between physiotherapy and psychiatry. "You hope he produces the horse tuned, 
mentally and physically, on the day, so that his whole nervous and muscular 
systems are working in conjunction with each other.

"It seems to work, nobody knows how. He [Poupel] has done a huge amount of 
work for Coolmore all through the Flat season. And he's doing a lot of work for 
J P McManus. I put him on the map."

The King George is also the aim for Long Run's stablemates, Finian's Rainbow 
and Riverside Theatre. Morlock reported that the latter had worked well with 
the classy hurdlers Grandouet and Darlan on Kempton's Polytrack last week. But 
he had bad news of last year's Christmas Hurdle winner, Binocular, for whom the 
race "might just come a bit soon" this time.

Paul Nicholls intends to make up for Kauto Star's absence by fielding two in 
the King George. He said Al Ferof would be ridden by Ruby Walsh, and Daryl 
Jacob would appeal against a 10-day suspension in the hope of riding Kauto 
Stone.

The participation of Grands Crus remains uncertain, the grey having had his 
soft palate cauterised since flopping in the Paddy Power Gold Cup. "We don't 
want to run him unless he's 100% there," said his part-owner Roger Stanley.

Hunt Ball is an intended runner in the King George but will first run in this 
weekend's major handicap chase at Cheltenham, because, in the words of his 
owner, Anthony Knott, "he could do with a blowout. If he ran into the frame [on 
Saturday], I'd be well pleased."

Knott said he lost a Â£20,000 bet when Hunt Ball was pulled up in the Paddy 
Power but added that he knew his fate before the race, the testing surface 
being against the horse. The owner even suggested the horse might have been 
withdrawn, but for the fact that the sponsor had organised so much of its 
buildup publicity around Hunt Ball, though he said he had wanted to get a run 
into the horse in any case.
 