
There were shocks and surprises – and even talk of a renegade jury – at the 
closing ceremony for the 69thCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>. Few of the perceived 
favourites picked up prizes, while some movies derided as turkeys triumphed – 
and the one-award-per-movie rule also appeared to have been torn up.

I, Daniel Blake review: Ken Loach's welfare state polemic is blunt, dignified 
and brutally moving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
Ken Loach won his second Palme d’Or – the festival’s highest honour – for I, 
Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
, a social-realist drama about a disabled carpenter struggling with the red 
tape of the benefits system. The director, who turns 80 next month, returned 
from retirement to make the film, and took to the stage at the Palais to 
address the audience in French.

“The festival is very important for the future of cinema,” he said, 
instructing all present to “stay strong.”

Loach continued by saying it was “very strange” to received the award in such 
glamorous surroundings, considering the conditions endured by those people who 
inspired the film.


“When there is despair, the people from the far right take advantage,” said 
Loach. “We must say that another world is possible and necessary.”

Jury member Donald Sutherland praised I, Daniel Blake as “an absolutely 
terrific movie that resonates in your heart and soul,” backstage during a press 
conference.

Loach has a very loyal following in Europe: many of his films have premiered 
at Cannes, whileThe Wind That Shakes the Barley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wind_That_Shakes_the_Barley_(film)>, about 
two brothers who join the IRA in the early 1920s, won thePalme d’Or 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palme_d%27Or> in 2006. Yet few foresaw victory 
for the veteran dramatist on Sunday.

The film-maker called his second win “extraordinary” backstage. “Our breath 
has been taken away,” Loach said. “We weren’t expecting to come back. We are 
quietly stunned.”

Cannes 2016: full list of winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/cannes-2016-full-list-winners-film-festival-palme-dor>
The prize for best director was a tie between Graduation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/graduation-review-cristian-mungiu-romania-cannes-2016>
, Cristian Mungiu’s Romanian drama about a doctor’s daughter struggling with 
her exams and Olivier Assayas’sPersonal Shopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
, a horror starring Kristen Stewart as a recently-bereaved psychic PA in Paris.

The first film was warmly – if soberly – received; the second was greeted with 
boos at its press screening – although not quite as many as metIt’s Only the 
End of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/its-only-the-end-of-the-world-review-xavier-dolans-nightmarish-homecoming-is-a-dream>
, Xavier Dolan’s melodrama about a young man who returns to his family to tell 
them he’s dying.

That film took the Grand Prix – or runner’s up award – marking the second time 
Dolan has triumphed, following 2014’s Mommy. In an emotional speech, the 
27-year-old French Canadian thanked his producer for “feeling the emotion of 
the film”.

It’s Only the End of the World review: Xavier Dolan's nightmarish homecoming 
is a dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/its-only-the-end-of-the-world-review-xavier-dolans-nightmarish-homecoming-is-a-dream>
“Emotion is not always easy to share with others,” he continued. “Violence can 
sound like a scream. All we do in this world, we do to be loved. Me, 
especially. To be accepted. The more I grow, the more I direct, the more 
difficult it is to be understood. I now know who I am.”

Jury member László Nemes, the director who last year won the same prize for 
the Auschwitz-set drama Son of Saul, called Dolan’s film “a very moving 
journey,” backstage. “It had ambition - and much risk was taken.

“When it started, you could feel a very specific voice of director,” he 
continued. “I’m very happy when I see people try to go in very different and 
personal ways. I think that’s the essence of cinema.”

Dolan used his time backstage to address his critics. “I’ll always read what 
people think and say,” he said. “This is how I’ve been building my life - I’ve 
been wondering what people think. If they see black when I see white, there’s a 
problem.”

Meanwhile British film-maker Andrea Arnold won her third Jury Prize (after Red 
Road and Fish Tank) forAmerican Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
, a lyrical road-trip across the US. Many had anticipated a more substantial 
award for the film which, alongside Maren Ade’s Toni Erdmann, was considered 
one of the frontrunners.


“When I’m happy I want to dance,” said Arnold in a speech in which she thanked 
her team.


Asghar Farhadi’s The Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/the-salesman-review-asghar-farhadi-cannes>
 – a quiet thriller about an actor wrestling with his desire for vengeance 
after his wife is assaulted in their flat – took best actor for Shahab Hosseini 
and best screenplay for the writer/director. “I wasn’t expecting a second award 
for the film,” said Fahardi on stage.

Jaclyn Jose won best actress for her role as an impoverished mother fighting 
police corruption in Brilliante Mendoza’s Manilla-set crime thrillerMa Rosa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/18/marosa-review-brillante-mendoza-cannes>
. She took expressed shock. “I am so surprised,” she said on stage. “I just 
walked the red carpet with my daughter.” Jose thanked the festival before 
dedicating her award “to the Philippines”.

“We found her to be a master of her skills,” said jury member Mads Mikkelsen, 
backstage, of their decision to award Jose. “It was a beautiful performance for 
a lead actress. That’s why she got it.”

The jury this year was chaired by Mad Max director George Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/george-miller>, whose Fury Road was one of 
the breakthrough films of last year’s festival.

Cannes 2016: Ken Loach wins Palme d'Or – the Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/may/23/cannes-2016-ken-loach-palme-dor-dailies-podcast>
His fellow jurors included Nemes, as well as actors including Sutherland, 
Kirsten Dunst and Vanessa Paradis. Speaking at the start of the ceremony, 
Miller described the previous fortnight as “exhausting, but one of the best 
experiences of my life”.

“We must commend the festival for this feast of cinema,” he said. “We 
passionately and fiercely debated the films. Nothing was left unsaid.”

Backstage speaking to the press, Miller echoed his sentiments made at the 
ceremony, calling the experience of leading his jury “rigorous and vigorous.”

“Arguably we debated longer than most juries,” he added. “Nothing was left 
unsaid. And we avoided looking at what other people were saying.”

Divines – about a teenage girl in the Paris suburbs, commended as a successor 
to La Haine – won the Camera d’Or for best debut. Its director, Houda 
Benyamina, used her time onstage to ebulliently cheerlead for more female 
directors.

“Cannes is ours,” she said. “We are here! It’s possible. The fact that a woman 
won the prize is a curiosity; things have to change. It’s about time.” 
Benyamina then paid tribute to her female producer, before crying out “Another 
woman!” and “Vive directors!”

The honorary Palme went to Jean-Pierre Léaud, the veteran French actor best 
known for his work with François Truffaut. Léaud, now 71, played the character 
Antoine Doinel in a series of films by the New Wave icon, starting with 1959’s 
The 400 Blows. The juror Arnaud Desplechin made emotional tribute in his 
introduction, which was followed by a prolonged standing ovation.

In his speech, Léaud remarked: “Cinema is the only art the captures death at 
work, like bees we can see dying in a hive.”

Despite the unexpected end, the verdict on this year’s festival was that it 
passed without the cinematic fireworks of some previous editions, with fewer 
films debuting on the Croisette likely to be loom large in the awards 
conversation. Yet the relative peace outside the Palais was a triumph, with 
heightened security and 500 extra policemen apparently fending off any 
terrorist threat.
 