
“It was a lovely life. I had a big family and there was always a lot of 
laughter,” says 16-year-old Nihad Alawsi, speaking about her Yazidi community 
in northernIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. “I’m one of 18 
siblings, but I was always my dad’s favourite.” She remembers the weddings, 
when the girls would get their hair and make-up done, and the days spent as a 
little girl drawing pictures of the flowers breaking through the Iraqi 
landscape.

Then came the day that cut short her childhood. Speaking via a translator, 
Nihad’s breathing quickens as she describes “that black morning” when 28 
members of her family and others in her village fell into the hands of Isis. At 
15, Nihad became one of the thousands of victims in thelargest single mass 
kidnap of women and girls this century <https://appeal.amarfoundation.org/>. 

“They killed men,” says Nihad. “They didn’t want the older women so they 
either killed them on the spot or chased them out of their homes. They 
kidnapped us girls, raped us, and took our babies.” The Yazidi community has 
been specifically targeted by Isis. In 2014 an estimated 5,000 were taken; 
3,500 are thought to be still missing.

Nihad was sold as a sex slave to an Isis fighter. “I was raped and beaten 
continuously for two weeks,” she says describing the beginning of her 15 months 
in captivity. “They took us first to Syria and then back to Mosul in Iraq.” She 
met many other Yazidi girls along the way who spoke of the relentless forced 
movement, as they were endlessly sold and resold, back and forth between Iraq 
and Syria. Sometimes they were sent as “gifts”: “The men think it is fun to 
exchange women. One girl I met had been resold 15 times.”


Thousands have been abused by Isis and their mental health is shattered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/27/islamic-state-yazidi-refugees-mental-health-treatment>
“They all had their stories,” says Nihad, who has been brought to London from 
Iraq by the Amar International Charitable Foundation to highlight the issue of 
Isis’ treatment of women and girls. Occasionally the girls found brief moments 
to offer support to each other. “But we had no life. Many are too young to take 
the beatings and rape,” says Nihad. Some of the sex slaves arereportedly as 
young as nine 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/isis-iraq-former-yazidi-sex-slave-says-nine-year-olds-are-being-held-raped-by-daesh-1543858>
.


“There is one story I haven’t been able to forget,” says Nihad. “I met a 
12-year-old girl from a village not far from my own. She had been raped so 
badly she was bleeding a lot. They had to take her to hospital.”


After being regularly abused by her Isis “owner”, Nihad became pregnant and 
was taken to live with his wife, four children, and another kidnapped Yazidi 
girl. “I felt like the child I was carrying was a criminal and I tried many 
times to miscarry,” says Nihad. After giving birth to a boy she was moved to 
his cousin’s house. “When I refused to marry the boy’s father he told me that 
he would take the boy from me when he was grown up. It was at that moment that 
I decided to escape without my son.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fkidnapped-by-isis-at-15-i-never-thought-id-see-the-day-when-i-was-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9777c30bc1cf4969b3a61fec78d91944c4cf164d%2F0_0_700_926%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kidnapped%20by%20Isis%20at%2015%3A%20'I%20never%20thought%20I'd%20see%20the%20day%20when%20I%20was%20free'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fkidnapped-by-isis-at-15-i-never-thought-id-see-the-day-when-i-was-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kidnapped%20by%20Isis%20at%2015%3A%20%27I%20never%20thought%20I%27d%20see%20the%20day%20when%20I%20was%20free%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fkidnapped-by-isis-at-15-i-never-thought-id-see-the-day-when-i-was-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9777c30bc1cf4969b3a61fec78d91944c4cf164d%2F0_0_700_926%2F700.jpg>
 Nihad in Zakho, north-west of Dohuk. Photograph: Amar International Charitable 
Foundation 
To Nihad’s amazement, however, at the house she found the sympathy that 
enabled her to escape. The wife and a neighbour helped the 16-year-old make the 
phone call to her family and secure a smuggler. The first thing she wanted to 
do when she arrived home was hug her mum: “I never thought I would see the day 
when I was free again.” She is currently living with her parents in one of the 
refugee camps accommodating the estimated3.2 million internally displaced people
 <http://www.internal-displacement.org/middle-east-and-north-africa/iraq/> in 
northern Iraq.

The Amar foundation, however, is keen to emphasise that these hard won escapes 
to Iraq’s IDP camps is often not the end of the ordeal. Their appeal“Escaping 
Darkness” <https://appeal.amarfoundation.org/> aims to raise funds to train 
mental health care workers to support the girls that come home, and their 
families. PTSD, depression, panic attacks, nightmares and self harm are common. 
Some girls have committed suicide. Many return home pregnant, and others 
struggle with the experience of leaving a child behind. Despite the need, the
total number of psychologists in northern Iraq is just 17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/27/islamic-state-yazidi-refugees-mental-health-treatment>
.


“The experience has changed me completely,” says Nihad. “Even when I’m smiling 
I’m not really happy. I have lost too many members of my family. The life I had 
and the good times are gone.”


Speaking at the launch event of the Amar foundation’s appeal, its founder 
Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne highlighted the need for a holistic approach 
to providing services for Iraq’s internal refugees that included mental health 
support: “It is not just a question of surviving. It is about enabling them to 
live.”


Refugees and mental health: 'These people are stronger than us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/14/refugees-and-mental-health-pyschological-support-msf>
Yet there were also words of caution. “While we need to raise the issue of 
mental health and refugees, we must be careful of our language,” said Professor 
Renos Papadopoulos, director of the Centre for Trauma, Asylum and Refugees at 
Essex University. “Under the emotional pressure of these situations, we tend to 
use ‘trauma’ indiscriminately to simplify complex experiences. We then arrive 
at two polarised narratives: refugees are either resilient ‘survivors’ or 
traumatised ‘victims’. Usually the reality is somewhere in between.”


All Nihad knows is that speaking out about her experience is part therapy, 
part activism: it is a “relief” to talk about it and she is determined to make 
people listen. “I want the world to recognise what is happening and take 
action,” says Nihad. “Girls that are 12 or even younger are being sold, raped 
and attacked everyday. What else needs to happen before the world does 
something about it?”


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 