
Opponents of a contentious Canadian pipeline project are preparing for a 
lengthy, multifaceted battle that will see thousands take to the country’s 
streets, courts and legislatures to contest the government’s recent approval of 
the project.

Prime minister Justin Trudeau announced on Tuesday that the Liberal government 
hadcleared the way for Kinder Morgan’s C$6.8bn Trans Mountain Expansion project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/canada-approves-kinder-morgan-oil-pipeline-justin-trudeau>
. Designed to transport Alberta’s landlocked bitumen to international markets 
via Vancouver’s harbour, the project willexpand an existing pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/canada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan>
 to nearly triple capacity on the artery to 890,000 barrels a day.
map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/11/canada-pipeline-map/> 
But the decision will run into a roar of opposition, said grand chief Stewart 
Phillip of the Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs. “The marches and 
rallies will intensify. It will become more litigious, it will become more 
political and the battle will continue.”

More than 14,000 people have so far signed onto his organisation’s pledge to 
halt the project <http://www.coastprotectors.ca/>, driven by concerns over 
environmental risks, First Nations rights and the fight against climate change.

Other actions are also being planned, from a public interest group that has 
signed up hundreds of volunteers tocanvass signatures for citizen-drafted 
legislation to block the pipeline 
<https://dogwoodinitiative.org/cynical-betrayal-kinder-morgan-galvanizes-b-c-voters/>
 to a group that is working to train itsmembers on how best to physically block 
construction <http://www.bclocalnews.com/news/403850396.html?mobile=true>. 

“Let’s be clear,” said Caitlyn Vernon of the Sierra Club of British Columbia. 
“Prime minister Trudeau has picked a fight with British Columbians by approving 
Kinder Morgan – and it starts now. The Kinder Morgan pipeline will not be 
built. Not on our watch.”

Trudeau said the approval of the project was the best option for all Canadians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/canada-approves-kinder-morgan-oil-pipeline-justin-trudeau>
. “This is a decision based on rigorous debate, on science and evidence. We 
have not been and will not be swayed by political argument, be they local, or 
regional or national,” he said. “We have made this decision because we are 
convinced it is safe for BC, and it is the right one for Canada.”

The announcement was welcomed by the Greater Vancouver Board of Trade and the 
province’s Chamber of Commerce who called it a “big economic win for BC and for 
Canada”. Texas-based energy infrastructure company Kinder Morgansaid in a 
statement 
<http://ir.kindermorgan.com/press-release/kindermorgan/trans-mountain-receives-final-federal-approval-expansion>
 that it was excited to move forward with the project. Construction is expected 
to begin in 2017 and the pipeline could be in service by late 2019.

North Dakota oil pipeline protesters stand their ground: 'This is sacred land'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protest-standing-rock-sioux>
But the government’s approval was swiftly condemned by many others – some of 
who suggested that the Canadian project could see its own version of the 
Standing Rock protests thathave gripped North Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/standing-rock-protest-north-dakota-shutdown-evacuation>
.

“In the event that this gets to a place where Kinder Morgan is attempting to 
do work on the ground, there will be actions on the front line, there’s no 
question about that,” Phillip said. “I, along with a lot of other people, are 
prepared to be arrested again and again in our efforts to stop this.”

Some two years ago, as Kinder Morgan crews began carrying out survey work for 
the proposed expansion, the grand chief was among the more than 100 people 
arrested during a days-long protest. A well-respected First Nation elder and a 
group of retired seniors from number of churches were also among those 
detained, he said. “This is not just an indigenous issue, it’s not a radical 
environmentalist issue. It’s an issue that is of enormous concern to all 
British Columbians from all walks of life.”

Elizabeth May, leader of Canada’s Green party, said she was also prepared to 
go to jail to halt the pipeline project. “And I think I’m not the only one,”she 
told reporters 
<http://globalnews.ca/news/3097401/kinder-morgan-pipeline-approval-opponents-prepared-to-go-to-jail-protest-in-vancouver/>
. “I think I’ll be sharing a cell with the mayor of Vancouver, the mayor of 
Victoria, the mayor of Burnaby [and] First Nations leaders.”

Since the government announced its decision, the team at West Coast 
Environmental Law has fielded a steady stream of phone calls from First Nations 
groups curious about the possibility of legally challenging the project. Of the 
120 aboriginal groups consulted by Kinder Morgan, just 39 have written letters 
of support for the project.

The Kinder Morgan project is already facing seven legal challenges, said 
Jessica Clogg of the organisation, with more expected in the coming weeks. 
“We’re also quite likely to see further legal proceedings from local 
governments, for example the city of Burnaby or the city of Vancouver.”

Big oil v orcas: Canadians fight pipeline that threatens killer whales on the 
brink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/canada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan>
Many of the project’s opponents are taking inspiration from Enbridge Inc’s 
Northern Gateway oil pipeline project. Despite being approved by the previous 
Conservative government in 2014, the proposed northern BC pipeline was the 
target of 18 court cases. In June a Canadian courtoverturned the approval of 
the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/canada-court-overturns-oil-pipeline-northern-gateway>
 after finding the government had failed in its duty to consult with indigenous 
peoples.

On Tuesday the Trudeau government said the Northern Gateway project would not 
be moving forward, offering what Clogg described as a demonstration that 
“lawsuits, steadfast community opposition and indigenous law-based strategies 
can stop a pipeline”.

For those opposing Kinder Morgan, she said, the lesson to be gleaned from the 
decade-long battle against the Northern Gateway project was clear. “This is 
very much not over.”


 