
Ruby Walsh has done his bit for the Thistlecrack bandwagon, using his columns 
with both Racing UK and Paddy Power to say he would like to ride the novice 
chaser inMonday’s King George VI Chase, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/cue-card-thistlecrack-king-george-vi-chase-kempton>
 in which the Irishman has no mount. Thistlecrack was pressing his stablemate, 
Cue Card, for favouritism on Betfair’s exchange on Wednesday night and both 
horses are available at a best price of 11-8 with bookmakers.

“If I had the choice I’d ride Thistlecrack,” Walsh said. “The likely tempo of 
the race and the quality of this King George field is his biggest test yet over 
fences. But I think he’ll prove up to it.”

While acknowledging Thistlecrack’s status as a novice with just three 
small-field successes over fences to his name, Walsh pointed out that the King 
George field would also be small, with a maximum of seven runners. “It won’t 
inconvenience Cue Card but he has all the experience of big fields and 
competitive races and that won’t come out as much on Monday.

“I haven’t seen anything in his jumping suggesting this is a race or two too 
soon for Thistlecrack. He’s looked a great jumper. But, that said, Cue Card is 
possibly 20lb better than any horse he has faced before.” Walsh added that he 
would have chosen Cue Card if there were 12 runners or more.

He also offered some hope that Faugheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/betting-faugheen-cheltenham-champion-hurdle-withdrawal-bha-horse-racing>
 would make a return to action in Leopardstown’s Ryanair Hurdle next week, 10 
months after a ligament injury put him on the sidelines. “I don’t know if he 
will run there but it won’t be too long until you see him,” Walsh said. “I rode 
him yesterday and he’s fresh and well. He looks a million dollars. Does he 
retain all his ability? Oh God, he does.”

The jockey was more cautious about Annie Power, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/annie-power-wins-champion-hurdle-cheltenham-festival>
 the reigning champion hurdler, also trained by Willie Mullins, saying: “I 
doubt she will run in the Ryanair. She seems well and is getting there now. 
When Willie’s happy with her, he will run her.”

Yanworth is the 2-1 favourite for Monday’s Christmas Hurdle, for which six 
entries were revealed on Wednesday. Alan King’s chestnut will step back to two 
miles for the first time in a year and faces possible competition from Vroum 
Vroum Mag, The New One, Ch’Tibello, My Tent Or Yours and Gray Wolf River, who 
is available at 5,000-1 but merely has to complete the course to secure at 
least £1,340 in prize money.

Horse racing tips: Thursday 22 December
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/horse-racing-tips-thursday> 
The British Horseracing Authority will finally offer its view of the 
controversialJim Best case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/jim-best-trainer-bhb-british-horse-racing-authority-bitterness-questions>
 on Thursday, the deadline for appeals against the verdict last week having 
passed. Nick Rust, the chief executive of the ruling body, will speak first in 
an interview with Matt Chapman on At The Races at 10am and will also be grilled 
on Racing UK an hour later.

Later in the day, the BHA will release a statement explaining how it came to 
appoint the solicitor Matthew Lohn as chairman of the disciplinary panel that 
first heard Best’s case in February. After Best was banned for four years, it 
emerged that Lohn had been paid for years to offer private advice to the BHA, 
leading to the verdict of his panel being quashed because of an appearance of 
bias.

When Best’s case was reheard recently, he was still found in breach of the 
rules but received only a six‑month suspension of his trainer’s licence.

Best maintains he did not instruct a jockey to lose two races last December 
but a disciplinary panel ruled that he probably had done so.
 