
More than one man broke the Hollywood anti-communist blacklist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2007/may/18/comment.film>. John Henry 
Faulk <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Henry_Faulk> may well have started the 
ball rolling in 1957 after he sued a company calledAWARE 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AWARE,_Inc.>, one of the many private 
organisations making a fast buck at the time by publicising the names of 
supposed left wing sympathisers in the US film industry. Alfred Hitchcock also 
helped rock the foundations of a way of thinking which held sway in Tinseltown 
for more than a decade when he hired blacklisted actor Norman Lloyd as an 
associate producer for the TV series Alfred Hitchcock Presents, in 1957. And 
then there was director Otto Preminger's public announcement in January 1960 
that prominent member of the Hollywood 10 Dalton Trumbo, who had been working 
under pseudonyms for the past 16 years, was the screenwriter of his film Exodus.

However, it may well have been Kirk Douglas' intervention during his work on 
the same year's Spartacus which played the greatest part in destroying the 
blacklist. Douglas was also executive producer on the project, and he insisted 
to Universal pictures that Trumbo be named as screenwriter of Stanley Kubrick's 
Roman epic.

"Too many people were using false names back then. I was embarrassed," he 
tells the Hollywood Reporter in this interview 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/features/interviews_profiles/e3i05c8198f5eab4cdacbe74bc63d1c5d06?imw=Y>
. "My company produced Spartacus, written by Dalton Trumbo, a blacklisted 
writer, under the name Sam Jackson. I was young enough to be impulsive, so, 
even though I was warned against it, I used his real name on the screen."

Douglas, who will be honoured for his contribution at an Ambassadors for 
Humanity Gala Dinner in LA later this month, says he probably only got away 
with the move because Universal were in the process of being sold and were 
therefore in a weak bargaining position. Whatever the case, the decision to 
name Trumbo started the ball rolling to end the blacklist, although many film 
industry workers never recovered their careers.

A number of those on Senator Joseph McCarthy's list (or the various other 
lists compiled by sympathetic groups like the conservative veterans group The 
American Legion) descended into alcoholism or even committed suicide. Whole 
families were split down the middle over the question of whether to name names 
or plead the Fifth Amendment and risk being placed on the list. Some revealed 
the identities of other supposedly communist sympathisers and were still placed 
on the blacklist. Others left for Europe or central America - Trumbo had been 
living in Mexico for a number of years after serving 11 months in prison for 
contempt when he refused to give evidence before McCarthy's House Committee on 
Un-American Activities.

What's interesting about the Hollywood Reporter feature I've linked to above, 
is that the interviewer feels the need to question Douglas over whether 
left-wing influence is now more rife in the industry than it was in 1947, when 
McCarthy first began his hearings. Clearly the sort of people who were behind 
the recent Michael Moore bashing polemicAn American Carol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126192/american.carol> are taken 
seriously over there. And some of the comments in response from users of the 
Hollywood Reporter website read like the sort of guff which Fox News puts out: 
those hideous "testimonies" from viewers about how wonderful it is to watch a 
news channel which operates outside the influence of the supposed 
liberal-biased US media hegemony.

It's more than 50 years since McCarthy died from acute hepatitis, a condition 
brought on by excessive alcoholism probably stemming from depression following 
his censure by the Senate in 1954. Yet it seems the man still has his 
supporters.
 