
A new Terrence Malick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick> film 
premieres at the forthcoming Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/venice-film-festival-2016-full-line-up>
 with less advance fanfare than in the days when he averaged one film an aeon. 
A latterday bout of relative productivity has made the famously hermetic 
auteur’s films seem less special, but that’s a generous excuse to make for the 
dispiriting vacuity ofKnight of Cups (Studiocanal, 15), the most actively 
esoteric but least soulful of his signature tone poems.

Starring Christian Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> as a 
disaffected comic screenwriter – perhaps a rare glimmer of self-irony on 
Malick’s part – wandering LA and Vegas in search of solace/inspiration/sex, the 
film applies a po-faced, tarot-reading structure to his metaphysical trials and 
personal entanglements.

So far, so Malick; his finest work attains enough aesthetic and spiritual 
grace to justify its affected romanticism. In this case, the film’s awed, 
whispery styling and ornate water lily structure succeed only in scribbling 
surface complications on a protagonist with no distinct inner life. It’s like 
writing a symphony for someone you’ve only met on Tinder.

The Jungle Book's humid, iridescently coloured CGI animal kingdom is a thing 
of lurid beauty

Melding cosmic and human concerns to more moving effect is Chilean 
documentarian Patricio Guzmán’sThe Pearl Button (New Wave, 12). A 
summary-resistant, reach-for-the-sky work, it interweaves, with improbable 
elegance, a naturalist’s study of the country’s shimmering waterscapes, an 
anthropological history of the threatened indigenous peoples who subsisted on 
them and a burning political screed against the human rights abuses of 
Pinochet’s dictatorship, many of whose victims were brutally consigned to the 
water. It’s a film that should seem overwhelmed with material and feeling, yet 
Guzmán conducts it all with quiet assurance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpPnbCuGKohU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpPnbCuGKohU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpPnbCuGKohU&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Pearl Button. 
Also teeming with politics and poetry, Miguel Gomes’s astounding Arabian Nights
 (New Wave, 15) trilogy makes it to DVD followinga streaming spell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/01/ran-citizen-kane-in-the-heart-of-the-sea-review>
on Mubi.com. Its collected six hours reimagine the Scheherazade storybook with 
stunning verve and nerve, addressing Portugal’s dense colonial history and 
desolate economic present via a heady stew of mythic, allegorical and comic 
vignettes. What sounds daunting in concept emerges as a rich, rollicking 
pleasure.

Here’s the paradox of Disney today: while its animators continue to surprise 
with wit and ingenuity, its live-action departmentplods on 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/film/2016/05/why-disney-producing-so-many-live-action-remakes-its-most-popular-animated>
 with far less inspired remakes of past animated favourites. As those go,Jon 
Favreau <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/29/jon-favreau-iron-man-2>’s 
The Jungle Book(Disney, PG) is one of the brighter ones. Using the 1967 cartoon 
as its template more than Kipling’s source tale (down to awkwardly incorporated 
updates of those infectious songs), the film goes all out to trump its 
predecessor for spectacle. Its humid, iridescently coloured CGI animal kingdom 
is a thing of lurid beauty, practically an animated marvel itself; its fairly 
perfunctory narrative and voice work go camouflaged by the foliage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb115a5bba754f6f18955af8f399e332320da1ee0%2F0_0_2048_1080%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knight%20of%20Cups%3B%20The%20Pearl%20Button%3B%20Arabian%20Nights%3B%20The%20Jungle%20Book%3B%20Jane%20Got%20a%20Gun%3B%20Miles%20Ahead%3B%20The%20Get%20Down%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knight%20of%20Cups%3B%20The%20Pearl%20Button%3B%20Arabian%20Nights%3B%20The%20Jungle%20Book%3B%20Jane%20Got%20a%20Gun%3B%20Miles%20Ahead%3B%20The%20Get%20Down%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb115a5bba754f6f18955af8f399e332320da1ee0%2F0_0_2048_1080%2F2048.jpg>
 Neel Sethi as Mowgli, with Baloo, in The Jungle Book. Photograph: 
Allstar/DISNEY 
A stolidly sun-baked western with a female protagonist (played with a 
determinedly set jaw by Natalie Portman) more commendable than she is complex,
Jane Got a Gun(Lionsgate, 15) will for ever be more interesting as a cinematic 
what-if than a what-is. Slated to be directed by singular Scots stylistLynne 
Ramsay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lynne-ramsay> until acrimonious 
preproduction disputes made her walk away, Gavin O’Connor’s proficient film 
little betrays its troubled upbringing. It’s hard, but intriguing, to imagine 
what creases Ramsay might have ironed into it. Surely not as many as 
director-starDon Cheadle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/don-cheadle> has 
into his passion projectMiles Ahead (Icon, 15), an unruly biopic of trumpet 
geniusMiles Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/miles-davis> that 
replicates the frenetic rhythms of free jazz to a slavishly literal degree. As 
an aesthetic tribute, it’s impassioned and alive, but neglects its case for 
Davis himself as a human subject.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F960e4e20933ef6f63fa4e611b0c71f8649b84d6b%2F142_0_4216_2531%2F4216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knight%20of%20Cups%3B%20The%20Pearl%20Button%3B%20Arabian%20Nights%3B%20The%20Jungle%20Book%3B%20Jane%20Got%20a%20Gun%3B%20Miles%20Ahead%3B%20The%20Get%20Down%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knight%20of%20Cups%3B%20The%20Pearl%20Button%3B%20Arabian%20Nights%3B%20The%20Jungle%20Book%3B%20Jane%20Got%20a%20Gun%3B%20Miles%20Ahead%3B%20The%20Get%20Down%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fknight-of-cups-pearl-button-arabian-nights-dvd-reviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F960e4e20933ef6f63fa4e611b0c71f8649b84d6b%2F142_0_4216_2531%2F4216.jpg>
 ‘Lovingly florid vision of 1970s Bronx adolescence: Baz Luhrmann’s The Get 
Down. Photograph: Myles Aronowitz/Netflix 
Meanwhile, I’m not sure how devoted Baz Luhrmann is to the musical movement at 
the heart of his new, expensively glitter-bombed Netflix seriesThe Get Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/07/the-get-down-baz-luhrmann-grandmaster-flash-hip-hop>
, but the Australian showman’s hip-hop history aims to answer any queries about 
its cultural convictions with sheer choreographic attack. I’m an apologist for 
the Luhrmann school of decorative icing;Moulin Rouge!, a sincerely dizzy 
heartburst swathed in tinsel, is among my favourite films. So his lovingly 
florid vision of 1970s Bronx adolescence (never a milieu granted such generous 
spectacle, so hurray for that) has thus far carried me buoyantly through the 
series’ sketchy sociology and sometimes wobbly dramatics. The promise of the 
title notwithstanding,The Get Down is still floating on air.
 