
The Outsider or The Stranger: the right title for the English language 
translation of Albert Camus’s 1942 classic,L’Étranger, isn’t obvious. Choosing 
a title is among the most important decisions a literary translator must make. 
It is hard to sum up a writer’s work in a new language, and once a title is on 
the cover, readers start to know the book by that name. Anétranger can mean a 
foreign national, an alienated outsider or an unfamiliar traveller. So why has 
the novel always been calledThe Stranger in American editions, and The Outsider 
in British ones? The two titles tempt us to fill in the blank with cultural or 
political theories. We could imagine, for example, that in the melting pot of 
New York, the immigrant publishing firm Knopf had a sense of foreignness that 
directed them towardsThe Stranger, whereas the English publisher Hamish 
Hamilton, in class conscious Britain, was more aware of social exclusion – hence
The Outsider. Both theories, however, are wrong.

By 1946, the war in Europe had been over for a year, enough time for English 
language publishers to begin thinking about what literature published in 
Nazi-occupied Europe was worth translating. Blanche Knopf, who founded Knopf 
with her husband Alfred in 1915, considered translations of contemporary 
European literature central to her list. She had been cut off from France 
during the war, but by February 1945 she was back in touch with Jenny Bradley, 
her agent in Paris. Jean-Paul Sartre had lauded a new Camus novel calledThe 
Plague <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/apr/26/classics.albertcamus>in a 
lecture he gave at Harvard in 1945, and word of its young author reached her. 
Blanche Knopf cabled Paris, asking to see the book, which was still in 
manuscript.La Peste, with its link to the suffering and heroism of France 
during the German occupation, was bound to make a splash, and she understood 
that Knopf might also have to buyL’Étranger in order to get La Peste, which she 
considered a more exciting and relevant book. Alfred Knopf cabled Bradley in 
February, but Camus hadn’t yet finishedThe Plague. Knopf hesitated. In March 
1945, he made an offer of $350 for translation rights onThe Stranger, with an 
option to buy rights forThe Plague when it was finished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcamus-letranger-stranger-than-fiction-alice-kaplan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650851a40923295ad181cbf199e4e1ffdf1b3cfb%2F0_0_800_1322%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=L%E2%80%99%C3%89tranger%20%E2%80%93%20stranger%20than%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcamus-letranger-stranger-than-fiction-alice-kaplan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=L%E2%80%99%C3%89tranger%20%E2%80%93%20stranger%20than%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fcamus-letranger-stranger-than-fiction-alice-kaplan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650851a40923295ad181cbf199e4e1ffdf1b3cfb%2F0_0_800_1322%2F800.jpg>
 An American version of the book. 
The British were more enthusiastic than the Americans. Cyril Connolly, the 
magazine editor and influential literary critic, as feisty and eccentric in his 
own way as the irrepressible Knopf, had stated in his 1930s book,The Unquiet 
Grave, that the European novel was a wasteland, consumed by its own formalism. 
He saw a whole new start for fiction in Camus’s stark, violent, Algerian tale, 
which seemed to speak directly to a Britain about to begin the process of 
decolonisation. Connolly broughtThe Stranger immediately to the attention of 
publisher Jamie Hamilton, who purchased British rights from Gallimard in 
February 1945, with an advance of £75. Hamilton asked Connolly to write an 
introduction. Hamilton also chose the translator, Stuart Gilbert, a friend of 
James Joyce who had a good track record translating novels likeMan’s Fate by 
André Malraux. Knopf and Hamilton agreed to share translation costs.

Gilbert worked fast. By September 1945, he’d sent his complete manuscript to 
Knopf and Hamilton with instructions and a title,The Stranger. On 10 January 
1946, Hamilton sent bound, typeset pages of the translation to Blanche Knopf in 
New York.

But there was a bombshell in his letter, the announcement of a fait accompli: 
“I send you herewith a set of corrected galleys of Camus’sL’Étranger, which we 
have decided to callThe Outsider, both because we consider this a more striking 
and appropriate title thanThe Stranger, and because Hutchinson’s recently 
called one of their Russian novelsThe Stranger.”

In 1945, Hutchinson’s, a rival British publisher, released the translation of 
what was actually a Polish novel, Maria Kuncewiczowa’sCudzoziemka, which they 
had unfortunately entitledThe Stranger. At the New York end it was too late to 
change the title of Camus’s book – Knopf had already typeset it for themselves 
so that it could be available for the author’s visit to New York in April.The 
Stranger was printed on the title page, the headers and the spine. They 
couldn’t redo it.

Blanche Knopf responded tersely to Hamilton’s announcement: “I had assumed 
when I received the manuscript, because it had instructions on it from Stuart 
Gilbert, it was setting copy, we read it very carefully and made any necessary 
corrections. Certainly if I had known there was a chance of corrected galleys, 
I would not have set, and wish you might have cabled me the new title, which I 
can well understand your using.”

Hamilton hadn’t cabled; nor had he telephoned. The two publishers may have 
shared the English language but they were separated by a vast ocean and very 
different expectations. In London, it hadn’t occurred to Hamilton that Knopf 
would go to the trouble of producing the book separately. Was Hamilton being 
patronising? Was Knopf being presumptuous? The combination of an assumption for 
control on the British side, and an assumption of independence on the American 
side, make for a fine allegory of British-American relations going back to the 
revolution that separated us.
 A British edition of the book. 
Readers were never informed that the two titles were an accident, and for 
years, no one has been able to explain why Camus’sL’Étranger is sometimes The 
Stranger, sometimes The Outsider. And while political questions were not part 
of the original decision, the titles do resonate differently and lend 
themselves to conflicting political interpretations. An Algerian critic argued 
recently, in a review of Sandra Smith’s 2013 translation ofL’Étranger, that the 
titleThe Outsider is politically scandalous, for it effaces the ambiguity in 
the French word “étranger” and substitutes a more banal idea of someone being 
“excluded”. He thought Smith’s 2013 title was new – not realising that the 
British have used it since 1946.

In the end, I prefer The Stranger to The Outsider. Yet Meursault, the narrator 
of the novel, is not a foreigner; he is a Frenchman in colonial Algiers, a 
“petit colon”, and his strangeness is more like the strangeness of an outsider 
than the strangeness of an alien. So I question my own preference. I wonder if 
I likeThe Stranger simply because it’s the title I’m used to. How many readers 
flinched when Proust’sRemembrance of Things Past became, in a new Viking 
translation,In Search of Lost Time, even though this is a more direct 
translation? Then there’s Dostoevsky –The Possessed, The Devils, The Demons – 
what difference does it make?

Whether the titles of translated works sound familiar or foreign, whether they 
are literal renderings or poetic departures, their fate is unpredictable.
L’Étranger has sold millions of copies in Britain and the US. Kuncewiczowa’s 
The Stranger, the hidden cause of L’Étranger’s two titles, is still considered 
a masterpiece in Poland. But the English translation is no longer in print.

• Alice Kaplan’s Looking for The Outsider: Albert Camus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> and the Life of a Literary 
Classicis published by University of Chicago.
 