
As December draws to its tinselly close, few are looking back fondly at 2016, 
a year that saw the British and American public perform acts of severe 
political self-harm, that brought a violent resurgence of fascism to the 
mainstream, that was blighted by a number of horrifying terrorist attacks 
across the globe, and bade farewell to any number of beloved artists and 
celebrities. Blindly we await 2016’s end in the vague hope that 2017 can’t 
possibly be worse, but comfort has been hard to come by.

Can Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone’s La La Land help us handle the Trump era?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/09/la-la-land-hollywood-film-musical-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
Oddly, the movies haven’t really been holding up their end of the bargain. 
Traditionally, in times of national strife, Hollywood has provided a steady 
supply of cheery escapism: take the all-star musical revues they made 
repeatedly during the second world war, or the breezy screwball comedies that 
saw America through the Great Depression. This year, however, a number of the 
year’s biggest blockbusters have reflected the pessimism of the age: superhero 
stories may be broadly escapist, but it was hard to feel particularly uplifted 
by the brutal nihilism of Suicide Squad andBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/22/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-review-ben-affleck-henry-cavill>
, nor the stern political allegories of Captain America: Civil War or Rogue One.

Over in the arthouses, meanwhile, filmmakers have engaged more literally with 
the pressing social and political issues of the day: Ken Loach landed a Palme 
d’Or and unexpectedly strong UK box office for decrying the injustices of the 
welfare state inI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
, while Gianfranco Rosi took top honours at Berlin for Fire at Sea, his 
sobering documentary study of the European refugee crisis. Today’s moviegoers 
are as likely to see their world – however distorted – reflected back at them 
as they are to be entertained.

Where is the happiness on screen, then? Has pessimism colonised the multiplex? 
Thankfully not, as a number of titles have balanced a social conscience with a 
generally upbeat outlook. Few films this year were as effervescently joyous as
Disney’s creature feature Zootropolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/zootropolis-review-elegance-wit-and-first-rate-animation>
, a freewheeling, colour-saturated riot of zippy multi-genre plotting and 
lightning humour that nonetheless worked as a pointed critique of racial 
segregation and sexism in the workplace. That it ultimately finds a bright 
solution to such ills is merely part of the Disney brand – though there’s no 
harm in its message that we could all stand to be a bit nicer to each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhappy-films-in-2016-la-la-land-zootropolis-absolutely-fabulous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa75b840c0c60692bebdc6b0db14c4b295c46afb0%2F43_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%2C%20Hidden%20Figures%20and%20films%20that%20squeezed%20happiness%20out%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhappy-films-in-2016-la-la-land-zootropolis-absolutely-fabulous%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%2C%20Hidden%20Figures%20and%20films%20that%20squeezed%20happiness%20out%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fhappy-films-in-2016-la-la-land-zootropolis-absolutely-fabulous%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa75b840c0c60692bebdc6b0db14c4b295c46afb0%2F43_0_1793_1076%2F1793.jpg>
 Hidden Figures. Photograph: © 2016 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation 
Meanwhile, Theodore Melfi’s Oscar-buzzed Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/hidden-figures-offers-crowd-pleasing-biopic-of-historic-women-of-colour>
 pulls a similar tonal trick. The little-known true story of three female 
African American mathematicians enlisted to assist NASA in the heated space 
race of the 1960s – quietly smashing the institution’s patriarchy and racial 
segregation in the process – it may revisit a period of great national shame, 
but is determined to accentuate the positive throughout with breezy banter and 
a permanently perky score by Pharrell Williams. As America reels from the rise 
of the alt-right, the film arrives as a hopeful tonic to liberal audiences.

Buoyant optimism is also the order of the day in another Disney title, Queen 
of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/queen-of-katwe-review-mira-nair-chess-phiona-mutesi-lupita-nyong-o>
, also a fact-based tale of a woman of colour succeeding against the odds. 
Telling the story of prodigious Ugandan chess champion Phiona Mutesi, director 
Mira Nair puts a progressive feminist spin on a traditionally rousing 
sports-movie formula; the film positively beams with hard-won happiness. 
(Factor in the sunny girl-power romp Moana, and Disney’s on a roll.) Equally 
plucky in its portrait of a sporting underdog, Dexter Fletcher’s Eddie the 
Eagle, about determined but fundamentally ungifted British ski jumper Eddie 
Edwards, finds a lot to cheer about in its protagonist’s defeat; it’s a 
distinctly uncool celebration of giving life your best shot, and all the more 
endearing for that.

Message movies are all well and good, but some less virtuous cheerfulness is 
also in order – and no 2016 film filled that gap more pleasurably than
Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-review-absolutely-fatuous-thank-god>
. A sitcom spinoff low on cinematic merit but high on breathless, absurd farce, 
this gaudy outing for Jennifer Saunders and Joanna Lumley’s inseparable fashion 
victims plays as a paean to unapologetic hedonism, but also as a more sincere 
hurrah for loyal friendship. “It’s bloody good fun,” Saunders’ Edina offers as 
a catch-all explanation for her misbehaviour; British audiences, in need of a 
lift this summer after the sour fallout of the Brexit referendum, agreed.

The multiplex had other happy hours to offer this year – from the 
heart-soaring surprise of David Lowery’s Pete’s Dragon remake to the 
candyfloss-brained animated karaokefests Trolls and Sing – yet the independent 
sphere had its share of quietly spirit-lifting fare too. I refer not to the 
bait-and-switch of Damien Chazelle’s gorgeousOscar frontrunner La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/15/the-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-2-la-la-land>
, even if its publicity presents it as pure sunny delight: Get past those first 
two ebullient musical numbers, and it’s an increasingly melancholic story of 
romantic regret and mistiming. Instead, it’s John Carney’s youthful Irish 
let’s-start-a-band story Sing Street that stands as the year’s most unabashedly 
joyous musical, down to its beautifully ludicrous, swelling, reality-fleeing 
finale.

Everybody Wants Some: can Richard Linklater's latest help heal America?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/06/everybody-wants-some-richard-linklater-partisan-politics>
Audience mileage varied on Everybody Wants Some!! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/everybody-wants-some-review-richard-linklaters-sports-jock-comedy-is-a-winner>
, Richard Linklater’s loose-limbed, sun-baked reflection on Texan fraternity 
hijinks in the 1980s. Some accused Linklater of being nostalgically complicit 
in his characters’ jockish sexism; others accepted a degree of critical 
distance. For me, it was one of the year’s happiest rambles, an ode to 
youthful, irresponsible, sometimes misguided pleasure.

Linklater’s film couldn’t be more different in tone from the reserved humanism 
ofMike Mills’ autobiographical 20th Century Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/07/20th-century-women-review-mike-mills-annette-bening>
, a wise, tender story of a single mother gradually accepting her teenage son’s 
independence, or Paterson, Jim Jarmusch’s typically deadpan, atypically 
elemental study of several days in the life of a taciturn bus driver-cum-poet 
and his devoted, eccentric wife. Outwardly, these bittersweet character studies 
don’t seem overtly, jubilantly happy. Yet in their mutual, sincere examination 
of the challenges and rewards of finding and maintaining contentment, they 
strike me as two of the year’s most joyous films. We could use more of them in 
2017.
 