
Disney’s Moana continued to sit pretty atop the box office for its third 
consecutive weekend, butDamien Chazelle’s musical La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
 was what really had audiences singing.

La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
Playing in only five theaters, the lively and well-reviewed La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> grossed a staggering $855,000 for 
Lionsgate, according to studio estimates. Its $171,000 a theater average is an 
all-time high for a five-theater release.

According to exit polls, 52% of audiences were female and 53% were over age 30.

“We felt like we were going to have a strong opening, but I don’t think anyone 
would have predicted a result this big,” said David Spitz, Lionsgate president 
of domestic theatrical distribution.

The film cost a reported $30m and has been gaining buzz since it premiered at 
the Venice film festival. It recently picked up the best picture award from the 
New York Film Critics Circle and is expected to be amajor awards contender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/18/la-la-land-tipped-for-oscars-glory-after-win-at-toronto-film-festival>
.

Its first big mainstream boost could come as early as Monday when nominations 
are announced for the Golden Globes.

Starring Emma Stone and Ryan Gosling, La La Land expands to 200 locations next 
week.

Paul Dergarabedian, the senior media analyst for box office tracker comScore, 
called the La La Land showing “astounding”.

“This is the hottest ticket in town and now people want to be able to talk 
about the movie. The availability is quite limited but that will result in a 
crescendo,” he said.

Princess Moana, the Rogue One rebel, the Eagle Huntress: meet film’s female 
heroes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/11/moana-rogue-one-eagle-hunters-film-female-heroes>
“This is a movie that is tailor-made for that platform release ... it is a 
real breath of fresh air and I think it’s going to take off for many reasons.”

It was mostly business as usual among wide releases, with Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana> in first with $18.8m, followed by the 
Jennifer Aniston comedy Office Christmas Party, which debuted to $17.5m in a 
quiet moment before Rogue One: A Star Wars Story opens next weekend.

The rest of the top five looked similar to the past few weeks, with the Harry 
Potter spinoff Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them in third with $10.8m, 
bringing its domestic grosses to $199.3m.

The Amy Adams and Jeremy Renner sci-fi pic Arrival held on in fourth with 
$5.6m, while Disney and Marvel’s Doctor Strange added $4.6m to take fifth place.

The Jessica Chastain lobbying thriller Miss Sloane fizzled in its wide 
expansion, earning $1.9m from 1,648 locations.
 