
It was a film I couldn’t wait to watch again, and when I did, the epiphany I 
should have had the first time presented itself. Is Ryan Gosling the new Debbie 
Reynolds? InSingin’ in the Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/singin-in-the-rain>, Reynolds plays Kathy, 
the would-be stage star who gets a bit hoity-toity with Gene Kelly about 
favouring legitimate theatre over his silly old movies: then she is hugely 
embarrassed, on jumping out of a cake at a Hollywood party as part of the 
entertainment, to see Kelly in the audience grinning cheekily at her.

Fast forward 60-odd years to 2017 and Ryan Gosling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> is Seb, in the comparably 
gorgeous musical romance La La Land, a struggling jazz musician who has just 
boorishly refused to accept congratulations on his performance from smart, 
pretty Mia, played by Emma Stone. Later, at a Hollywood poolside party, she is 
vastly amused to see super-serious Seb humiliatingly earning a buck as part of 
an 80s-style cover band, and mischievously calls out a request for A Flock of 
Seagulls’ I Ran, thus forcing Seb to play the lengthy synth break. Yet the 
humbling of Seb is more akin to Gene Kelly’s sudden aghast sense that he has 
gone too far in mocking Reynolds.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Writer-director Damien Chazelle’s allusion to Singin’ in the Rain is like the 
rest of his film: wonderfully judged, funny, romantic and charming. Chazelle 
plays out the seasons of Seb and Mia’s heartwrenching love affair, beginning 
and ending with winter, and incidentally engages in his own love affair with 
Los Angeles, where in some ways it seems always to be summer – except when it’s 
snowing in your heart. It’s a primary-coloured homage to classic movie 
musicals, an act of ancestor worship, splashing its poster-paint energy and 
dream-chasing optimism all over the screen.

La La Land seeks its own place somewhere on a continuum between Singin’ in the 
Rain and Woody Allen’sEveryone Says I Love You 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116242/>. There’s a tablespoon of Jacques Demy’s 
musicals, and something of the male-female dynamic inA Star Is Born 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0047522/>. The director may also have been 
inspired by Alan Parker’sFame 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0080716/?ref_=nv_sr_2> for the opening sequence, 
in which a bunch of young kids with big dreams, symbolically stuck in a traffic 
jam on the freeway leading to Los Angeles, get out of their cars and stage a 
whopping dance number.

Gosling’s Seb is a lonely guy in LA, a conceited musical purist who has just 
spent his last penny trying and failing to open a jazz club in the city. He 
meets-cute with Stone’s Mia, stuck behind her car in this same traffic jam, 
while she looks through her pages for an audition she’s got later in the day. 
He pulls out to overtake with much male aggression; she gives him a glare. They 
are destined to meet again.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Stone has never been better: superbly smart, witty, vulnerable, her huge doe 
eyes radiating intelligence even, or especially, when they are filling with 
tears. Her audition scenes are 100% joy, especially the montage of her trying 
out for the part of cop, then ER doctor, then inspirational teacher: “No Jamal –
yoube tripping.” Stone is where the audience finds its emotional connection to 
the film; she mediates between them and Seb’s inner life, and with the daunting 
city of LA itself.

Related: Damien Chazelle on La La Land: 'Los Angeles is full of people chasing 
dreams' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>

As for Gosling, he is excellent in his own way, an actor who has deepened a 
great deal since venturing into comedy. He is tough and sardonic, with a way of 
trying to conceal how hurt he is – or how in love he is. Like Stone, he is not 
a natural singer, yet there is something very real and human in the way they 
handle the songs. They are both very accomplished dancers in the shrewdly 
limited choreographed framework laid down for them.

Perhaps it shouldn’t rate a mention, but Seb and Mia aren’t shown having sex; 
there isn’t even a scene in which the camera tactfully absents itself from a 
steamy prelude. There is a kiss. And you see them living together. But, unlike 
any other kind of Hollywood movie,La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> never needs to insist on its 
leads continuing to fancy each other. All its sensuality is projected upwards 
and outwards: into dance, into song, into the complex drama of their life 
choices pulling them apart.
 Gosling is excellent, tough and sardonic, with a way of trying to conceal how 
hurt he is – or how in love he is Photograph: Dale Robinette/AP 
There’s a moment when Seb and Mia are strolling through the Warner Brothers 
back lot when she points out the window from which Ingrid Bergman and Humphrey 
Bogart looked out on to Paris in Casablanca. It’s not too much of a stretch to 
put Stone and Gosling in that league, tough and tender respectively.
 