
Related: Golden Globes 2017: Moonlight wins for best drama as La La Land 
cleans up – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-live-jimmy-fallon-la-la-land-moonlight-stranger-things>

Damien Chazelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/damien-chazelle-la-la-land-interview-toronto-film-festival-tiff-venice-telluride>
’s triumph for his gorgeous musical romance La La Land –winning in every 
category 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-moonlight-meryl-streep>
 for which it was nominated, and picking up seven Golden Globes, either makes 
the film a frontrunner for this awards season, or is the high-water mark of its 
prize success, given that the Globes are the only awards that specifically 
carve out a space for musicals and comedies. It’s a huge haul for this richly 
lovable film about the love affair between a would-be movie star and a tough, 
sardonic jazz musician: best film and acting awards for Emma Stone and Ryan 
Gosling in the musical/comedy category, together with best director, 
screenplay, score and song.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
That second “musical” genre made this lovely film a shoo-in for success last 
night, and maybe it’s worth saying now that La La Land is more musical than 
comedy. You can’t help watching with a beaming smile on your face, never quite 
extinguished, even through the moments of heartbreak. But it’s the music and 
the romance which are paramount, rather than the actual laughs. I’ve seen it 
twice: first at its premiere at last year’sVenice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
 and again this weekend with a paying crowd in a London cinema, and the 
response has been exactly the same – rapture, almost from the very first 
moments, with a special audience connection to Emma Stone, whose lovely 
performance makes her first among equals with her co-star Ryan Gosling. 
Vulnerable, sweet, smart and funny, it’s as if she mediates between the 
audience and Ryan’s life and the tough, beautiful, intimidating city of LA 
itself, which can be so terrifyingly indifferent to the wannabes’ hopes and 
dreams.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Tom Ford on Nocturnal Animals: ‘I’m conflicted about what I do’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/02/tom-ford-amy-adams-aaron-taylor-johnson-nocturnal-animals-video-interview>
At the risk of being churlish or obtuse about a movie that I love so much, I 
have to raise a note of disappointment that La La Land’s landslide win shut out 
a lot of contenders that are now in danger of being forgotten and losing 
momentum. Chazelle beat Tom Ford (creator of the suspense thrillerNocturnal 
Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
) to the director’s prize: Ford was my personal favourite here and I regret 
that his brilliant and spectacular film was largely overlooked – except, a 
little bafflingly, the best supporting actor prize going to Aaron 
Taylor-Johnson. Fan of Taylor-Johnson though I am, his contribution was not the 
very best part of the film, nor the best work that he personally has done. I 
wonder if Nocturnal Animals is going to be seen as too much of a delicious 
guilty pleasure to get anything much in the way of silverware in the coming 
months.

No one could possibly object to the best film (drama) Globe going to 
Moonlight, directed by that deeply intelligent film-makerBarry Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
, whose superbly elegant, eloquent acceptance speeches are incidentally 
becoming a highlight of this awards season. The poetry and humanity of 
Moonlight win this film new admirers everywhere it is shown; its ambition and 
reach combine with subtlety and attention to detail, in creating a personal 
inner epic: the three stages of a man’s life. As a movie which addresses the 
lives of LGBT people of colour, it also takes Hollywood away from the 
white-provincial norm, and raises a bold standard for that much-debased 
concept: independent cinema.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
‘It’s all about perception’: director and cast on Oscar contender Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/19/its-all-about-perception-director-barry-jenkins-and-cast-on-the-oscar-contender-moonlight-video>
Kenneth Lonergan’s tremendous film Manchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
 has been decently rewarded with the best actor prize for Casey Affleck, an 
actor whosecareer has bloomed over the years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/casey-affleck-sexual-harassment-nate-parker-hollywood>
. He has has grown in stature and given a performance of depth and richness as 
the angry, lonely, conflicted janitor who finds himself having to be guardian 
to his nephew. It’s actually rather moving to remember I first saw Affleck as a 
kid in the caper Ocean’s Eleven in 2001. Now he’s playing a tough, careworn 
adult. His character is filled with unresolved and unexpressed pain in this 
film, and yet you can still see something boyish in his face.


On now, to the most extraordinary award: best actress for Isabelle Huppert, 
the heroine of Paul Verhoeven’s challenging, bizarre, uproarious and yet often 
tonally unreadable rape-revenge comedy Elle – which also picked up best foreign 
language film, trouncing the critics’ favourite, Toni Erdmann. This was in the 
“drama” category of course, and yet it is perhaps only as a comedy that Elle 
makes sense. Huppert holds you mesmerised on the screen, and appears also – 
understandably – to have mesmerised the voters of the Foreign Press 
Association. This is an extraordinary performance, one which only Huppert could 
have pulled off. In a way that I can only compare to Christopher Walken, her 
unique star quality and personality are in a sense unchanging, but her charisma 
and hauteur are utterly consistent. WhenIsabelle Huppert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/isabelle-huppert> comes on the screen, you 
sit up straight. You know that you are in for something special – and so it 
proves here, with this magnificent provocation.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Elle trailer: Isabelle Huppert stars in Paul Verhoeven’s noir thriller – 
exclusive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/16/elle-trailer-isabelle-huppert-stars-in-paul-verhoevens-noir-thriller-exclusive-video>
Viola Davis is a brilliant character actor, a jewel of her profession, and it 
is great also to see her pick up best supporting actress in the drama category, 
starring in the screen version of August Wilson’s play Fences, in which she 
plays the wife of ex-baseball star Troy, played by the film’s director-star
Denzel Washington <https://www.theguardian.com/film/denzelwashington>. Her 
angry, passionate, desolate monologue, holding her husband to account, is the 
film’s emotional showstopper and it probably clinched the prize for Davis.

Related: What we learned from the Golden Globes: Meryl Streep always wins and 
Ryan Gosling never fails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/what-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails>

In the animated category, Zootopia was an unexceptional win, a likable movie 
on the entirely admirable theme of peaceful co-existence – which beat the more 
modish contender My Life As a Zucchini, which has had a big fanbase since first 
appearing at Cannes last year.

So La La Land moves into pole position, and will perhaps capture everyone’s 
heart the way Michel Hazanavicius’s The Artist did in 2012: a big, swooning, 
unashamedly joyful movie that indulges in Hollywood ancestor-worship. My 
feeling is that when the Oscars happen, more serious pictures such as 
Manchester by the Sea and Moonlight will overtakeLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>, as more soberly appropriate for 
our political annus horribilis of Donald Trump. But what a great night for this 
lovely film.
 