
In 1880, Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> was living 
through a particularly turbulent political period. Interior provinces – 
resentful of Buenos Aires’s position as both federal capital and capital of the 
wealthy Buenos Aires province – wanted to move the seat of national government 
inland, but powerful interests wouldn’t budge.


Argentina’s political leaders ultimately reached a compromise: leave Buenos 
Aires as the federal capital but separate it from the province as an autonomous 
district. Although the plan sought to put an end to the lengthy conflict, it 
was complicated by the fact that no other city was large enough to become the 
new provincial capital. The solution? Build a new city from scratch.

The task of selecting a site fell to provincial governor Dardo Rocha, who 
recruited engineer Pedro Benoit. They chose a location roughly 30 miles 
south-east of Buenos Aires city, just far enough away to give the new 
metropolis its own identity.

Unlike nearby Buenos Aires, whose crooked street pattern is difficult to 
categorise, Benoit’s city – La Plata – would be a perfect square grid, 
measuring 36 by 36 blocks. Every six blocks, streets were widened into avenues 
for faster moving traffic and, where avenues intersected, squares or 
roundabouts were placed. Splitting the grid pattern were two main “diagonals”, 
originating from the corners of the grid plan and converging at the city’s 
absolute centre. There, a larger public square was placed, intended to become 
the nucleus of civic life. And right at its heart, Benoit planned for a 
touchstone landmark – La Plata’s cathedral, to be crowned with towering Gothic 
spires.
 La Plata’s square grid plan 
The cathedral’s towering Gothic design was chosen by Rocha, who felt it was 
the purest expression of divine will. According to Eduardo Karakachoff, a 
member of preservation societyDefendamos La Plata (Defend La Plata), the 
cathedral was situated in the city’s centre because of the central role of 
religion in public life. “It symbolised the belief that all members of society 
are equally close to God,” Karakachoff says.

La Plata’s masterplan marked a significant turning point in urban planning in 
Argentina. While earlier designs were shaped by the Laws of the Indies enacted 
by the Spanish monarchy, Benoit’s plan reflected a more secular stance toward 
governance. The cathedral was placed on the opposite side of the central plaza 
from the government buildings of the new capital – a recognition of the 
separation of church and state that sought to facilitate the appropriate role 
of both entities.

After ground was broken on the new city in 1882, the street layout and 
government buildings were quickly constructed. But the progress of the 
cathedral was much more gradual. As well as complex designs slowing down 
construction, the project was hampered by recession and political upheaval in 
1884. Eventually opened nearly 50 years later in 1932, one key feature was 
missing from the cathedral: the signature spires. To many, it seemed that 
Benoit’s original vision would never become a reality.

La Plata’s status as the preeminent planned city in South America was eclipsed 
by the construction of Brasilia

Meanwhile, the city itself faced a similar crisis. After La Plata’s 1880s 
optimism wore off, construction hit a slump. Though the inclusion of 
electricity and running water throughout the new town was considered a 
technological marvel, the lack of permanent residents led many to see La Plata 
as an overgrown ghost town. In 1890, French visitor Thèodore Childe remarked: 
“The city has everything except residents, and a reason to exist.”


Despite later efforts to liven up the city, such as a new university campus 
built in 1905, it would take most of the 20th century for La Plata to shake 
this reputation. During the second half of the century, La Plata’s status as 
the preeminent planned city in South America was eclipsed by the construction 
of Brazil’s new capital, Brasilia. Due to its larger scale and faithful 
adherence to the urban planning principles of Le Corbusier and his Brazilian 
protégéOscar Niemeyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2014/jun/12/bend-it-like-niemeyer-10-of-the-best-buildings-in-brazil>
, Brasilia quickly gained international recognition as the future of urban 
design. For all the international attention La Plata had received when it was 
built – including two gold medals at the 1889 Exposition Universelle in Paris – 
its more pedestrian-friendly design now seemed like a relic of some bygone era.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fla-plata-cathedral-argentina-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427910409773%2F46768fe2-a949-4181-8b2c-e3d3d20b44d6-2060x1451.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20Plata%20cathedral%2C%20nucleus%20of%20a%20new%20city%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2011&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fla-plata-cathedral-argentina-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20Plata%20cathedral%2C%20nucleus%20of%20a%20new%20city%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2011&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fla-plata-cathedral-argentina-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427910409773%2F46768fe2-a949-4181-8b2c-e3d3d20b44d6-2060x1451.jpeg>
 The cathedral under construction in 1910. The spires were not completed until 
the 1990s. Photograph: Alinari Archives/Getty Images 
But La Plata was due for a renaissance, and one that would begin dramatically. 
In 1987, a political rally held in front of the La Plata Cathedral was 
interrupted when a large pane of glass broke from the building and shattered on 
a chair where the governor of Buenos Aires had been seated only seconds 
earlier. This generated the political will not only to repair the deteriorating 
cathedral, but to build the two spires that the city’s creator had envisioned 
over 100 years ago. Construction began in 1997, and by 1999 the cathedral was 
finally opened – spires and all – in front of a crowd of 150,000 people.


By then, the city itself had matured, too, transforming into a metropolis with 
its own distinctive culture. Today’sPlatenses (residents of La Plata) pride 
themselves on their identity as respectful, bookish and fun loving, if a bit 
less rowdy than their neighbours in Buenos Aires.

While La Plata once had trouble attracting new residents, now there may be too 
many, and many of the original buildings have been replaced by high-rise 
towers, often built without adequate consideration for drainage. Currently, the 
biggest threat is not to the cathedral but to many of the city’s other historic 
buildings. Additionally, a large portion of the eucalyptus forest, which Dardo 
Rocha insisted on saving during the city’s creation, has now been cleared to 
make way for a privately owned football stadium.

Defendamos La Plata has been particularly vocal about preserving the city’s 
heritage. Karakachoff says that development has been “completely out of 
control” since a new building code was introduced in 2010. In April 2013, three 
years after the new construction-friendly code was approved, La Plata was 
rocked by adevastating flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/05/argentinian-rescuers-search-bodies-floods>
 with a death toll that would ultimately reach 89 people. City officials 
maintain that given the intense rains, the disaster could not have been 
avoided. ButDefendamos La Plata and others feel that untethered development, 
especially in La Plata’s historic core, placed an unnecessary burden on the 
city’s drainage system.

Though the monumental status of the cathedral makes it unlikely to ever face 
the wrecking ball, its positioning and visibility throughout the city may be 
threatened if the smaller residential developments around it are replaced by 
high-rises.

Coricancha, the Incas' temple of the sun: a history of cities in 50 buildings, 
day 3
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/25/cusco-coricancha-temple-history-cities-50-buildings>
Perhaps La Plata’s fight to preserve its past would be easier if it had the 
same international recognition as its rival, Brasilia. Brasil’s modernist 
capital coasted torecognition as a Unesco world heritage site 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/445>, while preservationists have struggled for 
decades to gain such status for La Plata. In March 2015 another bid was placed, 
but this time it has an unlikely adversary: the city itself.

“The city has blocked our efforts to make La Plata a world heritage site at 
every turn,” says Karakachoff. “The city is fighting us particularly hard 
against this one, since it would put real limits on its developer friends.” In 
2012,Defendamos La Plata was successfully able to gain recognition from the 
World Monuments Fund <http://www.wmf.org/project/city-la-plata> and, while this 
helped them to spread the word, it doesn’t offer the same concrete protections 
as Unesco does.

Though its future is uncertain, La Plata remains a charming city. While some 
preplanned cities like Brasilia might only make sense in an architect’s 
sketchbook, La Plata’s streets are filled with pedestrians, cafe tables, and 
stands selling clothes, shoes and books. Perhaps this city is a better place to 
live because it failed at its goal of being the city of the future, whereas 
sterile Brasilia succeeded. Or perhaps it was because Benoit’s vision of the 
future – a modern city layout that nevertheless featured a Gothic cathedral at 
its centre - still left ample room for the past.

• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 