
The amount that people can be charged to take money out of their pension pot 
would be capped under a Labour government,Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> is expected to announce.

The move comes on the same day that research by consumer body Which? found 
some providers charging fees so high that they can result in customers losing 
out on a typical £10,000 in retirement.

FCA to impose rules on pensions advice to avert losses from 'irrational' 
transfers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/04/fca-rules-pensions-advice-avert-losses-irrational-transfers>
There will be more demand for income drawdown – products that allow savers to 
withdraw cash from their retirement pot – from 6 April 2015 when over-55s will 
be able to access all the money in their defined contribution pensions, rather 
than take an annuity.

Launching a campaign called Better Pensions 
<http://www.which.co.uk/campaigns/better-pensions/?utm_source=press&utm_medium=pr&utm_campaign=pensions-pr>
, Which? found that based on the scenario ofa retiree with a typical pension 
pot of £36,000 drawing down £2,000 a year, a 2.75% fee would see that person 
£10,000 worse off than someone paying a 0.5% fee over the course of retirement.

It also calculated that, with the 0.5% fee cap and the retirement fund 
continuing to grow over time, the same £36,000 drawn down at £2,000 a year 
would last someone 20 years, whereas a 2.75% charge would cut the life of that 
fund to 16 years.


According to a report in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ee57fb04-c356-11e4-8fa9-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz3TVp0I239>
, Miliband is expected to say on Friday: “We will act to protect savings by 
capping rip-off fees and charges on new pension products. People who draw money 
out of their hard-earned pension pot should have similar protections to when 
they put money in.”

Which? wants whichever party is in government to work with City watchdog the 
FCA to introduce a charge cap for drawdown products.

Richard Lloyd, Which? executive director, said: “It’s right that the 
government is giving people the freedom to decide how and when they access 
their hard-earned pension savings, but deciding how to use these savings in 
retirement is one of the most complex financial decisions many will have to 
make, and one they cannot afford to get wrong.

“That is why we want the government to take action to secure better pensions, 
so people have just as much protection when they take money out of their 
pension as when they put money in.”

FCA unveils pension fees cap, but criticism remains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/02/fca-pension-fees-charges-cap-criticism>
Ros Altmann, a long-time campaigner on pension reform and the government’s 
Older Workers tsar, said a cap on drawdown charges was important “so that 
customers are not ripped off”.

“If a pension saver just wants to keep their pension fund invested and take 
some money out when they need it, I’m not sure why this should involve huge 
fees,” she said. “A 2% a year charge just to keep your pension invested and 
have access to it would take away much of the investment return and be a 
terrible deal for customers. The pension company would possibly earn far more 
on that pension fund than the actual customer.”

Which? also wants the government to introduce a stakeholder-style drawdown 
product that would provide a “low-cost, high-value” option for consumers. It 
wants the government to consider auto-enrolling “disengaged” consumers into 
such a product in the future if it was found that people were not actively 
planning what to do with their retirement pot, or if the market was not 
providing real choice and value.

 Calls for a tightening up of the rules around pension freedom come as 
criticism mounts that the industry is not ready for the changes. Andrecently 
Huw Evans, director general of the Association of British Insurers, accused the 
government of not being fully prepared for its own reforms 
<http://citywire.co.uk/new-model-adviser/news/providers-warn-govt-not-ready-for-pension-reforms/a800155>
.




The pensions minister, Steve Webb, said on Friday that he would not rule out a 
cap if the government believed there was a risk of consumers “being ripped off”.

However, he said in an interview with the Observer last week: “Clearly, as 
with all financial products, we want and expect products to be transparent, but 
it’s quite hard to regulate products that barely exist. There could be a time 
when you look at charges and cap them or regulate in some way. I dont know what 
the right charge is for a drawdown service at the moment.”
 