
Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, is urging colleagues to step back from the 
brink in challengingJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, warning that a leadership 
election in which the incumbent stands again could cause untold damage to the 
party.
Brexit explained: Labour leadership 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=labour_leadership>
Watson is seeking to organise a meeting with Corbyn’s closest advisers to try 
to agree a negotiated settlement that would see theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader step down voluntarily, 
thus avoiding an acrimonious and drawn-out battle.

Labour MPs remain divided over whether Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the recently resigned 
shadow business secretary, should formally trigger a leadership challenge on 
Monday or if another candidate, such as Owen Smith, would be a better option.

Eagle’s closest allies say that she is a unity candidate who would pull the 
party together. But supporters of Smith, the shadow pensions secretary until he 
stepped down on Monday, have also been collecting nominations, and think he 
would have a better chance than Eagle because his politics are further to the 
left and because he did not vote on the invasion of Iraq in 2003, having not 
been an MP at the time.

Brexit live: Michael Gove promises NHS extra £100m a week by 2020 in 
leadership bid launch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/01/brexit-live-michael-gove-to-set-out-his-vision-for-britain-as-conservatives-reel-from-boris-johnsons-exit>
MPs on all sides of the party were heeding Watson’s call for calm over the 
weekend as they consider how best to launch a challenge.

A poll of Labour members by the Times suggested that while Eagle would have a 
better chance against Corbyn compared with other potential candidates such as 
Watson or Dan Jarvis, the current leader would still win in a one-to-one 
contest.

One Labour MP said there was still hope that Corbyn would go voluntarily, but 
others were less patient. Another said he was not optimistic about Watson’s 
chances: “I don’t think Jeremy will go voluntarily. He has stubbornness in his 
DNA. And he could end up destroying the Labour party.”

Allies of Eagle expect her to trigger a contest as early as Monday if Watson 
is unable to persuade Corbyn to quit.

Under Labour rules, a leadership election is triggered if a challenger wins 
support of 20% of the party’s MPs and MEPs, which means 51 names are required. 
The party’s members, affiliated supporters in trade unions, and registered 
supporters then decide the matter with a vote.


Corbyn lost a confidence vote among Labour MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
 this week by a wide margin and has seen dozens of frontbench resignations, 
with a number of positions still left vacant.

John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor and Corbyn’s chief ally, said on Friday 
he expected that Labour MPs would make their move “over the next few days”. 
Answering questions following a speech in London, McDonnell said Corbyn would 
definitely stand again for the leadership.

A Labour challenger needs a rhino hide – luckily Angela Eagle is battle 
hardened | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/labour-challenger-angela-eagle-john-mdonnell-jeremy-corbyn>
“I’m saying to all Labour MPs now, whatever your views now, calm down,” 
McDonnell said. “If there is to be a Labour leadership election, let’s do that 
in a comradely, amicable fashion, argue the points of difference on policy and 
then come together and unite behind the democratic decision of our members.”

It remains to be seen whether a Labour membership that overwhelmingly elected 
Corbyn nine months ago has changed its mind, particularly with the arrival of 
60,000 new members since last week’s referendum vote to leave the EU.

One example of a possible change came in a poll of members of the Unite union 
carried out by Election Data YouGov over the past three days. While the union 
still officially backs Corbyn – its general secretary, Len McCluskey, hassaid 
rebel MPs are betraying the party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/labour-mutineers-betraying-national-interest>
 – the poll, which was shown exclusively to the Guardian, found that almost 
half of members believe Corbyn should step down immediately.

Of all Unite members polled, 49% said this should happen, with even 48% of 
those who said they voted Labour in 2015 agreeing. If there was a new 
leadership election, 44% of the Labour backers would oppose Corbyn, against 43% 
who would support him, the survey found.

The poll has a relatively low sample of 775, but makes for difficult reading 
for the Corbyn camp. Of Labour voters, 61% think Corbyn is doing badly in the 
job, and only 20% of them think he will ever become prime minister.

John McDonnell: Brexit will end free movement of people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/john-mcdonnell-brexit-will-end-free-movement-of-people>
Amid the confusion, McDonnell used his speech to try and present a coherent 
Labour plan for a post-Brexit future, calling for the UK to remain in the EU 
single market and for the financial services industry to keep its privileged 
“passported” trading status.

However, the shadow chancellor appeared to dismiss the idea of the party 
seeking to block departure from the EU, saying: “The people have spoken and 
their decision must be respected.”

He also predicted that Brexit would end unrestricted travel and employment for 
EU nationals in the UK. “Let’s be absolutely clear on the immigration issue,” 
McDonnell said. “If Britain leaves the European Union, the free movement of 
people, of labour, will then come to an end.”

In the interim, McDonnell said, Labour needed to “consult with the British 
people on the nature of the relationship we have with regard to the free 
movement of people”.
 