
The first ballot papers are being dispatched on Friday in the leadership 
election that will decide Labour’s future. More than 600,000 people are 
eligible to cast a ballot and choose who between Jeremy Corbyn, Andy Burnham,
Yvette Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> and Liz 
Kendall will lead the party.


The leadership election uses an alternative voting (AV) system, which means 
that voters can rank the candidates in order of preference.

How does AV work?

Initially only first preferences are counted. If any candidate gets more than 
50% of these, they win. If no candidate does, then the candidate with the 
fewest votes is eliminated and the second preference of all those who voted for 
that candidate are reallocated.


Who should I vote for in the Labour leadership election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2015/aug/13/labour-leadership-candidates-comparison-burnham-cooper-corbyn-kendall>
If a candidate now reaches 50% of the vote in this second round, they win. If 
not, the candidate with the fewest votes in that round is eliminated and their 
second preferences (or third preferences if the second choice was for an 
already eliminated candidate) are reallocated. And so on until someone has 50% 
of the votes in that round (or there are no more votes to reallocate).

A voter can choose to vote for only one candidate and not rank the others in 
order of preference. In this case, any further preference they could have 
stated will of course not be taken into account if their preferred candidate is 
eliminated.

Tactical voting under AV

During the UK’s 2011 referendum on whether to adopt AV for general elections, 
many proponents of the system claimed that it would eliminate tactical voting.

But this is not the case. No electoral system (at least not one that isn’t 
under the control of a dictator) caneliminate the possibility of tactical voting
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gibbard%E2%80%93Satterthwaite_theorem>.

An example from a paper by Ipsos Mori 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/Assets/Docs/Polls/RM-AVarticle.PDF> (pdf) outlines 
a theoretical scenario where Conservative voters support a Liberal Democrat 
candidate. With the Tory knocked out after the first round, the Lib Dem then 
goes on to defeat the Labour candidate in the successive round of voting.

If all the voters in the example had supported their preferred party, the Lib 
Dem would have been knocked out after the first round, the Conservative would 
have made the runoff, but theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> candidate would have won.

In many cases, the purpose of tactical voting is not about supporting your 
preferred option, but about minimising the chances of a worst-case scenario 
when your preferred outcome is all but impossible.



How could tactical voting apply to the Labour leadership election?

If the polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/11/yougov-poll-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-should-we-trust>
 (andmost of the evidence available 
<http://labourlist.org/2015/08/full-2015-clp-leadership-nominations-list-and-whats-changed-from-2010/>
) are right then Corbyn will win in the first round and no level of tactical 
voting can change that.

However, if the polls are slightly off – and it wouldn’t be the first time – 
then tactical voting could influence the outcome.

Let’s assume that at least the trend in the polling is accurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/11/yougov-poll-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-should-we-trust>
: Corbyn is the frontrunner, and Burnham and Cooper are the main challengers, 
while Kendall stands no chance of winning. It is important to keep in mind that 
AV is designed to convert a contest froma multi-candidate contest into a 
two-candidate race 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2011/04/do-av-votes-count-more-than-once.html>
. So if we accept that Corbyn is the frontrunner, the contest could play out in 
a couple of ways.

As a race between him and all of the others, the following tactics could 
operate. Those who want Corbyn to be the next leader of the Labour party should 
place him as their first choice. As he stands such little chance of being 
eliminated, it does not matter much whether first-choice Corbyn voters state 
alternative preferences. And the number of second preferences transferring to 
him from the anyone-but-Corbyn camp is likely to be low.

The choice is more difficult for those who prefer an anyone-but-Corbyn 
scenario.

The decision is about assigning a probability to the possible outcomes. In 
this case, the two dilemmas are who between Burnham and Cooper stands a greater 
chance against Corbyn? And whose second and third preferences, between Burnham 
and Cooper’s voters, could transfer to Corbyn if either got knocked out, 
ultimately favouring the frontrunner.

These two questions are of particular importance to Kendall voters when 
indicating their second and third preference. All her supporters should though 
indicate second and third preferences.

However, voting behaviour is messy - it will be distributed among all the 
different possible combinations (including invalid and blank ballots), 
uncoordinated and in several cases voters won’t include more than one 
preference. All these factors could influence the outcome as the rounds 
progress.

If we were to simplify the race to two candidates, Corbyn versus 
“anyone-but-Corybn”, a rational voter would choose Cooper or Burnham as their 
top preference, with the other second. They would indicate no third preference.

In this same scenario, those inclined to vote Kendall would also accept that 
she has an extremely low chance of winning, and would abandon her. Instead, 
they would place Cooper and Burnham first and second (the order does not 
matter). It is not necessary to indicate third and fourth choices, but if it 
makes Kendall supporters feel better, they should put her third.




If Kendall’s supporters were to place her first and indicate Burnham or Cooper 
as their second preference, or express no second preference at all, they would 
risk pushing Corbyn over the line. Such an outcome could only be avoided if all 
second preferences were used and transferred to Cooper or Burnham and if none 
of the supporters of the candidates expressed second or third preferences for 
Corybn.

This is of course an extreme example that implies that ultimately there are 
only two choices: Corybn and anyone-but-Corybn, and that everyone that doesn’t 
give a first preference to Corbyn votes for one of the two main challengers, 
and gives a second preference to the other, in order to defeat the frontrunner.

The same outcome outlined in the scenario above could also be achieved if 
Kendall came fourth and all of her voters indicated Cooper or Burnham as their 
second preference, provided there were then no second or third preferences for 
Corbyn among both Cooper and Burnham voters.

But not all voters will view the leadership election as a “Corbyn v 
anyone-but-Corbyn” contest. Supporters of Cooper or Burnham who view the choice 
as between “left” and “right”, and are worried – improbably – that Kendall 
might emerge as the winner of an anyone-but-Corbyn drive, should consider 
giving their second preference to Corbyn. With enough second preferences, he 
would most probably win the leadership.


These of course are all theoretical examples - if the polls are right, the 
election will look like a first-past-the-post contest in a safe constituency 
seat. No amount of tactical voting can change the outcome then.

In the 2013 election to the state parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/21/angela-merkel-election-lower-saxony>
 in Lower Saxony, Germany, the liberal FDP party was polling around the 5% 
threshold needed to enter the legislature. Some supporters of its senior 
coalition partner, the centre-right CDU, voted tactically for the FDP to ensure 
that it would pass the threshold and consequently boost the chances of a 
CDU-FDP coalition continuing in office.

The FDP won nearly 10% of the vote. The CDU, which had been polling at around 
40% before the election, got 36%. The two parties combined fell short of a 
majority by one seat and the centre-left SPD and the Greens went on to form the 
state government.

Update: This article was updated on 15 August 2015 to expand on the choices 
facing voters favouring an ‘anyone-but-Corbyn’ scenario, and to clarify the 
choices facing Kendall supporters.
 