
Zoe Williams returns some much-needed balance to the Labour leadership impasse 
(Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/labour-differences-dont-justify-party-tearing-apart>
, 4 July) by both asserting Jeremy Corbyn’s inestimable contribution in 
returning the party to its principles, “in the language of hope”; and listing 
the wide range of essential policies – from public services to climate change – 
that unite him and his parliamentary party critics. This defines a bridge that 
can and must be crossed before any attempts to tear the indivisible apart.

Labour’s differences don’t justify the party tearing itself apart | Zoe 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/labour-differences-dont-justify-party-tearing-apart>
However, her analysis stops short of a real but widely unacknowledged cause of 
these political and social dysfunctions, shared in differing degrees by “left” 
as well as “right” administrations. This is the assumed superiority of the 
neoliberal socioeconomic model as the preferred route to global success.

This ruinous error is expressed with crystal clarity in moral philosopher 
Michael Sandel’s brilliant little bookWhat Money Can’t Buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/17/what-money-cant-buy-michael-sandel-review>
: “Without quite realising it, without ever deciding to do so, we drifted from 
having a market economy to being a market society” where the market rules 
everything, from health to education and beyond.

The Corbyn activists in the streets have cause, perhaps, to see or intuit this 
more clearly than some of their parliamentary peers and, with it, the need to 
tackle cause as well as effects in future policy.
Ralph Windle
Witney, Oxfordshire

• I canvassed for Labour at the 1983 election on a manifesto that included 
unilateral nuclear disarmament, abolition of the House of Lords, withdrawal 
from the EEC, and nationalisation or renationalisation of key industries. I 
expect thatJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
and his supporters would still endorse these policies. The outcome of the 
election? A Tory majority of 144 on 42.4% of the vote. Labour secured 27.6% of 
the vote, a result described by my constituency chair as the greatest vote for 
socialism since 1945. Over the next 14 years I often wondered what consolation 
this was for the miners and their destroyed communities, patients visiting 
increasingly run-down hospitals, and pupils attending schools with leaking 
roofs and rotting window frames, having to share textbooks and other equipment, 
and worrying about their work prospects.

I did a little work for Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
before last year’s election and saw no sign that there was any demand for a 
socialist manifesto like that presented in 1983; in fact, as the 2015 election 
result showed, the reverse.

If Corbyn’s supporters genuinely want to improve the lot of those who depend 
on public services and want to lead a decent, non-doctrinaire life, they would 
encourage him to step down and allow the party to identify a leader and 
policies more acceptable to the majority of voters at the next election.

Incidentally, the tone of some of the tweets and posts from Corbyn’s 
supporters and the sight of him being pulled around by one of his aides are 
less than edifying (Aides hold Jeremy Corbyn back after reporter asks if he was 
‘running away’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/jeremy-corbin-labour-leader-confrontation-with-journalist-running-away>
, 2 July).
Barbara Kennedy
London

Labour leadership: Tom Watson calls on MPs to step back from brink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/tom-watson-calls-on-labour-mps-to-prevent-leadership-contest>
• I understand that Tom Watson wants to approach Jeremy Corbyn with a proposal 
that he stands down, but with guarantees that potential leadership contenders 
would agree to pursue some of Corbyn’s key policies. Since Corbyn’s key 
policies are in line with party policy, how would this change anything, unless, 
of course, those contenders are not working to pursue those policies. If that 
is the case then I wonder who should be standing down.
Alan Brown
Copmanthorpe, York

• Jacqueline Rose is correct to decry the male politician obsession with 
certainty and the appearance of being in control (A twin curse was at play: 
masculinity and male-dominated politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/02/twin-curse-masculinity-male-dominated-politics-brexit>
, 2 July). There is a party leader who shows many of the personality traits 
Prof Rose would like to see in our political sphere. He is humble and not 
status- and ego-driven. He spoke about the EU in the referendum campaign in 
terms of ambiguity and uncertainty. He acts slowly, giving room to others, 
encourages collective responses and shows none of the macho posturing that Prof 
Rose believes got us into this Brexit mess. This politician was elected to the 
leadership role with the biggest majority of his party members in its history 
but is routinely attacked by the media (including Guardian writers) for his 
perceived lack of leadership qualities. He is not mentioned in Prof Rose’s 
article.
Bob Cannell
Bradford

• If it is true, as many articles suggest, that Corbyn’s team is “keeping him 
hostage” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/corbyn-keeps-watson-arms-length>
, then we seem to be in classic Catch-22 territory. If Corbyn were a strong 
leader, his team could not stop him from resigning, but he then would not need 
to resign. If he is not a strong leader, then he needs to resign but cannot 
because his team will not let him. Yossarian is alive and well!
Daniel Hamm
Thames Ditton, Surrey

• In her leadership qualities, is Eagle too under par?
Akiva Solemani
London
 