
Labor is trying to set up a snap Senate inquiry into federal Liberal 
fundraising foundations at the centre of allegations the New South Wales 
Liberal party has breached electoral disclosure laws and to force Malcolm 
Turnbull’s cabinet secretary,Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, to give evidence.


As Senate opposition firms to the proposed construction industry watchdog and 
the government refuses to countenance substantive changes proposed by the 
Senate crossbench, a 2 July double dissolution appears increasingly likely.

Governor general has 'demeaned his office' with parliament recall, says Labor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/governor-general-has-demeaned-his-office-with-parliament-recall-says-labor>
And the final weeks of the 44th parliament are paving the way for a 
particularly rancorous campaign, with the Turnbull government accusing Labor of 
“reckless crass populism” with its pledge to hold a banking royal commission 
and Labor seeking to set up an inquiry into the powers of the Australian 
Electoral Commission to oversee so-called “associated entities” used for 
fundraising purposes.

In the Senate, Labor asked Sinodinos about his role as NSW finance director  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/arthur-sinodinos-threatens-legal-action-against-nsw-electoral-commission>
during the time that the NSW party is accused by the NSW Electoral Commission 
of “washing” property industry donations – prohibited at state level – through 
the federal “associated entity, the Free Enterprise Foundation”.

In evidence before the Icac, and in public statements, Sinodinos has said he 
did not know about the banned donations.

In the House of Representatives, Labor asked the treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, about donations 
possibly made to another fundraising body, the Millennium Forum, during his 
time as NSW Liberal party director.

Morrison responded furiously, saying there wasn’t “a hole dark enough that the 
NSWLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> hasn’t 
been in it”.

“This is a party in New South Wales that wrote the book on corruption in New 
South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> under 
Labor ... They have the gall to come into this place and throw this sort of 
muck around,” he said.

“Those opposite, the party of Craig Thomson, has the union got their money 
back yet from the brothel? I don’t think they have, Mr Speaker. This, Mr 
Speaker, is a bankrupt party when it comes to these matters, Mr Speaker. 
They’re in no position to lecture anyone.”

Labor has moved a notice of motion in the Senate to set up an inquiry by the 
Senate finance and public administration references committee to report by 4 
May – the day after the federal budget – about “commonwealth legislative 
provisions relating to oversight of associated entities of political parties, 
with particular reference to the adequacy of the funding and disclosure regime 
relating to annual returns; the powers of the Australian Electoral Commission 
with respect to supervision of the conduct of and reporting by associated 
entities of political parties; and … (that) Senator Sinodinos appear before the 
committee to answer questions”.

Malcolm Turnbull urges 'quick decision' on bills as double-dissolution inches 
closer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/17/malcolm-turnbull-urges-quick-decision-on-bills-as-double-dissolution-inches-closer>
The NSW Electoral Commission insists the Liberal party is obliged to declare 
the donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/02/a-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals>
 it directed through the federal party at a state level also and it is 
withholding $4.38m from the NSW Liberal party – money the party needs to fight 
the imminent federal election – to focus the party’s mind on that question. And 
it is standing its ground regarding criticisms against the party and former 
party office holders,including Sinodinos, who has had his lawyers draft an 
angry letter to the commission. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/31/electoral-commission-stands-firm-despite-arthur-sinodinoss-threat-to-sue>

With all major published opinion polls showing the main parties neck and neck, 
or the Labor party slightly ahead of the government, the final weeks of 
parliament are descending into bitter debate about the Australian Building and 
Construction Commission, the banking industry and the claims regarding 
electoral funding.

The government is expected to announce an inquiry by the Australian Securities 
and Investment Commission and more funding for its activities (after the 2014 
budget cuts) in response to Labor’s popular call for a royal commission into 
the string of banking scandals, but has repeatedly called Labor’s proposal 
“rank populism” and claimed it could not compensate victims of the scandals and 
would take a long time to report.

The parliamentary session began with acrimony on Monday when Labor’s deputy 
Senate leader, Stephen Conroy, attacked the governor general, Peter Cosgrove, 
for acceding to the prime minister’s request to prorogue parliament.

“What we saw is a blight on our democracy today,” he said. “We’ve seen a 
democratically elected decision overturned by the Queen’s representative ... 
We’ve seen today a governor general overturn the will of this chamber, a 
democratically elected chamber. That’s what we have seen, a tawdry political 
stunt and the governor general has demeaned his office.

The government says there's no need for a federal corruption body. They would 
| John Madigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/the-government-says-theres-no-need-for-a-federal-corruption-body-they-would>
“Never has the need for a republic been more evident than today.”

Turnbull said Conroy had disgraced himself.

“Well, not for the first time, Senator Conroy has disgraced himself and I look 
forward to the leader of the opposition publicly disassociating himself from 
those appalling remarks reflecting, as Senator Conroy did, on the integrity and 
the office of the governor general,” he told reporters on Monday.
 