
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is to guarantee older 
voters that it will keep benefits such as free TV licences, bus passes and the 
winter fuel allowance as well as the so-called triple lock guarantee on 
pensions following Brexit.

As part of a concerted party effort to boost its support among older voters, 
the shadow chancellor,John McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, and shadow pensions 
secretary, Debbie Abrahams, are to visit an older people’s centre in south 
London on Wednesday to make the announcement.

At the 2015 election, Labour’s support among the over-65s – the demographic 
group most likely to vote – slipped to about 25%. Guaranteeing the triple lock 
is seen as a way to boost its standing with older voters, but is likely to 
prove controversial.

The triple lock, introduced in 2010, sets out that state pensions should 
increase each year by whichever is the highest figure from the increase in 
average earnings, the consumer price index or 2.5%. Labour had previously said 
it would keep the system in place over the next parliament.

The triple lock has been criticised as excessively skewing government spending 
towards an older generation which has, overall, suffered less from economic 
woes in recent years.

Last month’s report from the Commons work and pensions committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/06/triple-lock-pension-should-scrapped-mps-generational-inequalities>
 labelled the triple lock “unfair and unsustainable” and questioned other 
benefits such as the winter fuel allowance.

The triple lock went against the idea of a welfare state “underpinned by an 
implicit intergenerational contract”, said Labour MP Frank Field, who chairs 
the committee.

He said: “Each generation is supported in retirement by their in-work 
successors. But a combination of factors has sent the balance out of kilter. It 
is now the working young and their children who face the daunting challenge of 
getting on in an economy skewed against them.”

McDonnell and Abrahams are due to announce the policy on a visit to Southwark 
Pensioners Centre in Camberwell.

McDonnell said: “After six wasted years of Tory economic failure that has seen 
some have to wait longer to receive their pension, and those in work 
approaching retirement having to work longer with earnings stagnating, Labour 
won’t let them face further uncertainty or reductions in income.”

The imminent departure from the EU meant there was “too much uncertainty for 
those on fixed incomes”, he said.

Abrahams said: “When taken with our plans to defend the NHS and end the Tory 
crisis ofsocial care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care>, it is 
clear that only a Labour government will guarantee a dignified living standard 
for older people.”
 