
Prioritise sleep and put it high on the agenda. There’s more packed into our 
children’s days than ever before, and sleep is simply not recognised with 
adequate importance.

Researchers at King’s College London have just added more evidence to the pile 
showing that irregular bedtimes and insufficient sleep in childhoodmay result 
in increased calorie consumption and obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/11/childhood-obesity-linked-to-irregular-sleep-and-skipping-breakfast>
. And there’s more.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> who aren’t getting 
enough sleep are more likely to experience daytime behavioural problems than 
those who do not. Chronic irritability, attention problems and hyperactivity 
are associated with inadequate sleep. Poor sleep also particularly affects 
higher-level cognitive skills – the organising and regulating of thoughts and 
behaviour, planning and problem-solving. So sleep-deprived children may have 
more trouble managing emotions, have mood swings and seem irritable or anxious, 
as if these issues aren’t bad enough in the teen years already.

More alarmingly, perhaps, there’s a growing body of work linking insufficient 
sleep with children’s learning and academic performance, from infant learning 
through to adolescents at school. Even a loss of one hour per night may have a 
significant impact on cognitive functioning, and the tricky part is that signs 
that children are tired are often overlooked or misinterpreted, but once you 
know what to look for there’s plenty that parents can do.

How much sleep should a child get every night? US experts reveal the answer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/13/how-much-sleep-child-night-experts-reveal-answer>
Lack of quality sleep in childhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/08/bedtime-blues-get-children-to-sleep>
 can be caused by a range of factors, including a number of paediatric sleep 
disorders. One of these, insomnia, is defined as the difficulty in initiating 
and/or maintaining sleep despite adequate opportunities. It’s estimated thatone 
in four children will experience insomnia 
<http://www.alaskasleep.com/blog/what-is-behavioral-insomnia-in-children> at 
some point, and that figure is rising in part owing to use of technology and 
social media and the drive to be socially connected. Increased use of 
electronic devices before bedtime, such asmobile phones or tablets 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/11November/Pages/Smartphones-and-tablets-disrupts-childrens-sleep.aspx>
, is certainly a big factor, with their bright screens disrupting the 
production of the sleep hormone melatonin. To deal with tiredness, some 
adolescents use stimulants such as caffeine, nicotine and other highs of 
varying legality, which can make the situation worse.

It’s important to recognise that children differ in the amount of sleep they 
need, but a good place for parents to start is with the National Sleep 
Foundation’sHow Much Sleep Do We Really Need? 
<https://sleepfoundation.org/how-sleep-works/how-much-sleep-do-we-really-need> 
for an idea of the developmental norms.

If you feel your child is not getting enough sleep, gather information about 
their sleeping patterns through keeping a diary and reflecting on the bedtime 
routines. Where concerns arise, start with your GP or paediatrician for advice 
so as not to overlook physiological paediatric issues, including breathing and 
movement-related sleep disorders. These are often undiagnosed, and resolving 
the underlying physical causes can make a big different to the quality and 
duration of sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flack-of-sleep-children-obese-calorie-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1e6e2c8eaf0753e19c958f2d753c75cc5fbe88%2F387_316_4739_2844%2F4739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lack%20of%20sleep%20is%20making%20our%20children%20obese%20%E2%80%93%20but%20help%20is%20at%20hand%20%7C%20Jenny%20Stephenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flack-of-sleep-children-obese-calorie-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lack%20of%20sleep%20is%20making%20our%20children%20obese%20%E2%80%93%20but%20help%20is%20at%20hand%20%7C%20Jenny%20Stephenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flack-of-sleep-children-obese-calorie-intake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1e6e2c8eaf0753e19c958f2d753c75cc5fbe88%2F387_316_4739_2844%2F4739.jpg>
 Sensory overload before bedtime can stop a child’s mind winding down. 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Educate your child. Good-quality sleep leads to improved energy levels and 
promotes a healthy metabolism, immune system and growth. As they get older, 
support children to understand the process; why it’s so key for their wellbeing 
and strategies that they can use to get a good night’s sleep.

There are lots of helpful resources – from picture books for younger children 
to leaflets and websites for older children. Make it meaningful to your own 
child’s interests and motivations, particularly during adolescence. As parents, 
we should also reflect on ourselves as role models and our own sleep habits and 
use of electronic devices. Practise what you’re preaching and you’ll likely 
benefit yourself.

Ensure the foundations for promoting good sleep are established by supporting 
a consistent bedtime routine and following advice around “good sleep hygiene”. 
Discuss and set limits about electronic device exposure and eliminate usage in 
the hour leading up to sleep. Limit sensory overload and multitasking in the 
lead-up to bed and aim for a routine that helps the brain and body to wind down 
ready for sleep. Discourage any caffeinated drinks after lunchtime and make 
sure to follow regular sleep/wake times, even over weekends and holidays. It 
helps to keep your child’s body clock in a regular rhythm, making it easier to 
get to sleep and wake up.

Even with all of this in place, some children will still need some additional 
support. For younger children, this may involve behavioural programmes to help 
them feel confident and secure in falling asleep without an adult present.

Other children may need psychological support to address areas such as 
anxiety-related sleep difficulties. Cognitive behavioural programmes have an
increasingly good evidence base 
<https://hbr.org/2016/11/mindfulness-works-but-only-if-you-work-at-it> for 
helping with insomnia by changing the cycle of thoughts, beliefs and behaviours 
around sleep. Other effective interventions promote relaxation of mind and body 
over a 24-hour cycle, including mindfulness techniques. Meditation has been 
shown to be a promising technique to help promote self-acceptance and 
relaxation, which helps when the mind needs to switch off .

Sleep <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sleep> is about far more than 
just recharging our batteries. It’s no accident that we spend a third of our 
lives doing it, and it’s of little surprise that researchers, in what is a 
relatively new field of study, are discovering just how pivotal it is for 
children to get the best start in life. Like diet, exercise and education, we 
need to start treating sleep with the respect it really deserves.

 * Jenny Stephenson is director of HappySleepers 
<http://www.happysleepers.co.uk/>, a team of chartered child psychologists 
offering expert help and advice on sleep; from newborns through to teenage 
years.  