
Leicester City are the preferred choice of most neutrals to win the Premier 
League. And probably the bookmakers, who will likely have to pay out less than 
if one of the favourites had run away with the league again.

Announcing better than expected first quarter results despite a poor 
Cheltenham racing festival,Ladbrokes said a Leicester win would cost it £3m 
despite a significant number of punters cashing out their bets already.

Meanwhile chief executive Jim Mullen called Cheltenham “the worst in living 
memory, which took some of the shine off the period.” Warming to his theme he 
added:

At Cheltenham we were reminded of the intense competition with offers and 
pricing at levels which, in our view, abandoned bookmaking principles. We 
competed hard but refused to pursue unsustainable strategies and our stance 
remains that we will compete where we know we can get the right returns from 
the right customers.

Overall revenues rose 10.9%, with retail up 4.1% and digital jumping 36.5% The 
company has the European Championship to look forward to in the summer, and 
said:

Recent wins under Roy Hodgson have seen liabilities increase around the 
England team but France remain favourites followed closely by Germany and Spain.

The company’s planned merger with Coral is still going through the regulatory 
process, and this week the competition authorities extended the timetable to 
publish their findings until mid-May.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> shares are up 1.6% 
at 118.4p following the figures, and analysts at Davy said:

This is an encouraging statement. Ladbrokes’ group revenues in the first 
quarter were up 10.6% versus our first half expectation of +7.9%. The group 
should benefit from Euro 2016 in the second quarter and this implies that the 
revenue beat for the first half as a whole should be greater again. Against a 
backdrop of negative commentary relating to Cheltenham, we suspect that this 
statement will very much ease investor concerns. Our current EBIT forecast for 
Ladbrokes sits 5% above consensus (£99.5m versus £94.8m) and we see scope to 
increase our numbers by a couple of percent at least at this point. Clearly 
market revisions should be greater again.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 16.25 points at 6394.01 after UK borrowing was 
above forecast and retail sales fell by more than expected.

Sky is the biggest faller following its figures, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/21/sky-tv-growth-slows-as-it-cuts-discounts>
 down 44.5p at 983.5p. Analysts at Jefferies said:

Having talked cautiously in recent weeks, Sky’s nine month results beat 
consensus by 2% at EBIT, in-line on revs. Group EBIT growth of +12% year on 
year is outstripping revenue growth of +5%. But this should be viewed in the 
context of weakening customer adds in the UK / Germany, and Champions League 
costs dropping out of comps in the UK / Italy. On an adjusted basis, UK EBIT 
now growing in-line with revenues. Overall, no surprises but no clear positive 
catalyst either, in our view.

A number of companies have gone ex-dividend including BAE Systems, down 16.2p 
at 494.3p,Capita, off 34p at £10.15 and Smith & Nephew, 19p lower at £11.51.
 