
The board of Labrokes has defended its proposed £2bn merger with Gala Coral 
after shareholder Dermot Desmond had described it as a “wrong deal”.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> issued a statement 
to the London Stock Exchange on Thursday, urging shareholders to vote for the 
merger at a meeting on 24 November.

The gaming group described the strategic rationale and benefits of the 
proposed merger as compelling and said it was confident shareholders would back 
the deal.

Ladbrokes and Coral merger 'wrong deal', says Dermot Desmond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/ladbrokes-coral-merger-wrong-deal-says-dermot-desmond>
Desmond, in his criticism of the merger, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/ladbrokes-coral-merger-wrong-deal-says-dermot-desmond>
 pointed out that Ladbrokes shares had fallen since news of the deal was 
announced in July.

Ladbrokes and Coral merger 'wrong deal', says Dermot Desmond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/ladbrokes-coral-merger-wrong-deal-says-dermot-desmond>
Ladbrokes sources believe the share price decline, from 130p to 109p, can be 
largely explained by investor worries over possible intervention from the
Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission>, which is 
investigating key aspects of a merger. The CMA is not expected to rule on the 
deal before mid-2016.

Ladbrokes says the deal will give it the potential to deliver faster online 
growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
; create the largest licensed betting estate; help create a large international 
portfolio of businesses; deliver big cost savings; and give the group the 
ability to operate across an enhanced technology platform.

Desmond, who owns about 3% of Ladbrokes shares and recently became a 
commercial partner, believes the benefits of any deal will accrue to Gala 
Coral. He wants Ladbrokes shareholders to press the group to set up an 
independent board, which would be advised by an independent investment bank, on 
future options for the group.

Desmond, an Irish billionaire, said Ladbrokes’ chairman, Peter Erskine, and 
chairman designate, John Kelly, have “led Ladbrokes down the disastrous path to 
a deal that is [in effect] the death of Ladbrokes as an independent company”.
 