
The Irish billionaire Dermot Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/dec/05/dermot-desmond-independent-news-media>
 has attacked the proposed £2bn-plus merger between Ladbrokes and Coral, saying 
he believed it to be a “wrong deal”.

Desmond, who is a shareholder in Ladbrokes, said on Wednesday the winners in 
any transaction would be the Coral shareholders and he has urgedLadbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> investors to vote against the 
proposal at the group’s EGM next Tuesday.

Instead of the merger, Desmond, who is also a shareholder in Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> football club, wants Ladbrokes 
shareholders to insist on the appointment of an independent committee to the 
board, with advice from an independent investment bank. He hopes this might 
lead to an alternative plan.

Desmond points out that since the announcement of the deal on 24 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
, Ladbrokes shares have fallen from 130p to 109p, wiping out £200m in 
shareholder value.

Ladbrokes and Gala Coral merger to create £2.3bn gambling giant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/24/ladbrokes-and-gala-coral-to-merge>
In contrast, he pointed out, since the announcement of the merger between 
Paddy Power and Betfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/08/paddy-power-and-betfair-merger-agreed>
, their share prices have increased 35% and 20% respectively.

He said Ladbrokes’ chairman, Peter Erskine, and chairman designate, John 
Kelly, have “led Ladbrokes down the disastrous path to a deal that is 
effectively the death of Ladbrokes as an independent company”.

Ladbrokes said it remained confident its shareholders would back the deal.

In a statement, the group said: “We have had significant dealings with Mr 
Desmond as both a shareholder and a commercial partner over recent times. We 
note his views and are not surprised by them as he has been in extensive 
dialogue with the management team and not been afraid to talk of undertaking 
such action. As a shareholder he has a right to express his view and to vote 
accordingly at the EGM next week.

“The rationale and terms of the merger are in the circular and we remain 
confident that shareholders see the attraction of the proposed deal and 
continue to work towards a successful conclusion to the deal.”


Desmond said he expected the Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> would not clear 
the deal until the middle of 2016 and thinks at that point Ladbrokes would be 
forced to dispose of a significant number of shops – between 400 and 1,000.
 