
Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> and Gala Coral have 
agreed to sell 359 betting shops to rival bookmakers in an attempt to meet the 
competition regulator’s requirements for approving their £2.3bn merger.

The companies said they would sell 322 shops to Betfred for £55m in cash and a 
further 37 to Stan James for £500,000 after the merger of Ladbrokes and Gala 
Coral. Ladbrokes will sell 185 shops and Gala Coral will sell 174. The money 
will be used to repay debt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fladbrokes-coral-sell-betting-shops-betfred-stan-james-merger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa85e4c5ca5ccedf0712fc04d0e5a23bc812fe6%2F0_0_2649_3312%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ladbrokes%20and%20Coral%20to%20sell%20359%20betting%20shops%20in%20run-up%20to%20%C2%A32.3bn%20merger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fladbrokes-coral-sell-betting-shops-betfred-stan-james-merger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ladbrokes%20and%20Coral%20to%20sell%20359%20betting%20shops%20in%20run-up%20to%20%C2%A32.3bn%20merger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fladbrokes-coral-sell-betting-shops-betfred-stan-james-merger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa85e4c5ca5ccedf0712fc04d0e5a23bc812fe6%2F0_0_2649_3312%2F2649.jpg>
 Jim Mullen, Ladbrokes CEO. Photograph: Racingfotos/Rex 
The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has ordered the companies to sell 
350-400 shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/20/ladbrokes-coral-merger-sale-of-up-to-400-betting-shops>
to ensure customers have a choice of bookmakers in a large number of local 
areas. Ladbrokes has about 2,100 UK shops and Gala Coral has 1,800, meaning the 
combined company would overtake William Hill, with almost 2,400, as Britain’s 
biggest bookmaker by number of stores.

Ladbrokes said the companies would ask the CMA to approve the merger based on 
the planned sales and talks to offload one more shop. A Ladbrokes spokesman 
said, based on talks with the CMA, the companies believed the sales would meet 
the regulator’s concerns about competition in specific locations.


When it ordered the companies to sell shops the CMA said the merger could 
reduce the number of discounts and free bets offered by bookmakers competing 
locally and lead to betting odds, which are set nationally, less favourable for 
customers.

Jim Mullen, Ladbrokes’ chief executive, said: “The sale of these shops will 
clear the last significant hurdle to delivering on the merger with Coral and 
paves the way for our focus on completion and quickly delivering on the 
opportunities the merger offers.”

Ladbrokes agreed the terms of its all-share merger with Coral in July 2015 and 
its shareholders backed the deal in November. The companies hope to complete 
the transaction by the end of October if the CMA approves its plans.

If the deal goes ahead, it will be structured as a takeover of privately owned 
Gala Coral by its bigger rival, the publicly listed Ladbrokes. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>
 The combined company would then apply to list its shares on the London Stock 
Exchange.
 