
England’s disappointing performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and Portugal’ssurprise victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 atEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> have helped 
Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> return to profit.

Jim Mullen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/apr/02/jim-mullen-ladbrokes-business-letter-richard-glynn>
, the chief executive of the high street bookmaker, said the “sporting gods 
have generally been on our side”, helpingthe firm to post pre-tax profits of 
£25.2m in the first half of 2016, compared with a loss of £51.4m in the same 
period last year.

EU referendum is bookies' biggest ever non-sporting event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/22/eu-referendum-is-bookies-biggest-ever-non-sporting-event>
Mullen said the most profitable results for the company had been England’s 
draws with Russia and Slovakia in Euro 2016, and Portugal’s victory over France 
in the final. He also revealed, however, that Ladbrokes had paid out £3m to 
punters who backed Leicester City towin the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 and endured an “absolutely shocking” run in majorhorse racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> events such as the Grand 
National, Cheltenham and Royal Ascot, where a string of favourites won key 
races.

The company announced revenues up 13.1% year-on-year to £662m during the 
half-year. Mullen said two-thirds of the improvement during the period was 
linked to the “bookmaker-friendly results”, and that the rest was down to a 
strategic drive to modernise Ladbrokes’ shops and website.

Mullen was promoted to chief executive from his role as digital boss in March 
2015 in an attempt to revitalise the company as it faced growing competition 
from online rivials such asPaddy Power Betfair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/08/paddy-power-and-betfair-merger-agreed>
.

“We are a business in transition,” he said. “We are focused on our 
recreational customers, where betting is a pastime. I also think that retail 
and digital can actually work hand-in-hand if done properly.”

Ladbrokes has agreed a £2.3bn merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/ladbrokes-board-defends-gala-coral-merger-plans>
 with its rivalGala Coral <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gala-coral>, 
which will combine the UK’s second and third-largest high street bookmakers 
behindWilliam Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill>. The 
Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission> cleared the deal 
last month, but ruled the enlarged company must sell between 350 and 400 shops. 
Ladbrokes and Gala Coral currently run about 4,000 shops between them

Mullen said the CMA’s ruling was fair and that Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> was delighted with the 
interest it had already received from companies looking to buy the shops it 
must offload. It hopes to complete the deal in the autumn.
 