
Irish billionaire Dermot Desmond has launched a stinging attack on the 
management ofLadbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> at its 
annual general meeting, but failed to scupper the company’s £2.3bn merger with 
Gala Coral.

Desmond, who owns Celtic Football Club, attended the meeting in London, which 
was called to ratify the deal tocreate the UK’s bigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>
est bookmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>
. It in effect involves privately owned Gala Coral buying Ladbrokes and listing 
on the stock exchange.

The financier said he intended to continue his fight even though shareholders 
overwhelmingly voted the deal through, although it is yet to be scrutinised by 
theCompetition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission>. Desmond warned 
the merger could lead to forced disposals of between 400 and 1,000 shops as 
well as lost revenue. The enlarged business would have about 4,000 high street 
outlets.

Ladbrokes and Coral merger 'wrong deal', says Dermot Desmond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/ladbrokes-coral-merger-wrong-deal-says-dermot-desmond>
“I believe there is widespread acceptance that the Ladbrokes board and 
management are not good enough and that performance over the past five years 
has been abysmal,” he told the meeting. “Total profit before tax has declined 
almost 40% in that period. Had it not been for a £90m increase in contribution 
from fixed-odds betting terminals, profits would have nearly been wiped out 
entirely.” Desmond owns 2.8% of the company.

“Shareholders won’t need me to remind them of the decline in the Ladbrokes 
share price, nor the fact that peers William Hill, Betfair and Paddy Power are 
91%, 100% and 300% respectively ahead over that same period. Simply put, the 
board and the management team have not earned the right to be entrusted with 
the negotiation and completion of this deal,” he said. “In my opinion, in the 
end this could be a deal too far for Ladbrokes shareholders.”

The enlarged company intends to employ Andy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/23/former-hbos-boss-andy-hornby-to-take-charge-of-public-company>
, the former chief executive of HBOS and current chief operating officer of 
Gala Coral, in a senior role. The Ladbrokes board defended his position when 
asked about his role by a shareholder at the meeting. Hornby could facea ban 
from City regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/hbos-collapse-report-recommends-formal-investigation-into-former-executives>
 over his role at HBOS after adamning report into the 2008 rescue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/19/hbos-report-a-damning-indictment-of-failed-bankers-and-regulators>
 of the bank was published last week.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fladbrokes-chiefs-shareholder-meeting-dermot-desmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3613867b2ecc91a2d5569c7c60e66cf31e6bc58e%2F772_220_1176_706%2F1176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ladbrokes%20chiefs%20scolded%20by%20Dermot%20Desmond%20at%20shareholder%20meeting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fladbrokes-chiefs-shareholder-meeting-dermot-desmond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ladbrokes%20chiefs%20scolded%20by%20Dermot%20Desmond%20at%20shareholder%20meeting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fladbrokes-chiefs-shareholder-meeting-dermot-desmond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3613867b2ecc91a2d5569c7c60e66cf31e6bc58e%2F772_220_1176_706%2F1176.jpg>
 Dermot Desmond, who holds a 2.8% in Ladbrokes. Photograph: Dave M Benett/Getty 
Images 
Speaking after the meeting, Desmond said he would not give up and may call 
other shareholder meetings. “This is only a start,” he said.

One of his concerns is a £75m payment to Playtech, the Ladbrokes software 
supplier, which he said was shared with other investors. Desmond said they were 
voting for the merger with Gala Coral “out of a sense of frustration and 
resignation with the current board and management”.

Desmond has previously complained to the Takeover Panel, which polices 
takeovers, about disclosure of information.

 