
Ladbrokes sank to its first annual loss in a decade in the run-up to a planned 
£2.2bn merger with bingo giant Gala Coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/ladbrokes-board-defends-gala-coral-merger-plans>
, blaming higher taxes and a costly marketing drive.

The chief executive, Jim Mullen, emphasised the bookmaker’s underlying 
results, which he said showed growth in revenues across all divisions amid a 
renewed focus on small bets.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> sank to a £43.2m 
loss before tax in 2015, compared with a £38m profit the previous year, after 
taking into account a range of one-off factors.

The bookmaker lamented the £50m impact of increased taxes on machine gaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/19/bookmakers-gambling-tax-budget-2014-fotbs>
 and a new point of consumption tax on gambling operators based overseas. It 
spent more on marketing to promote its digital business, but Mullen said this 
was already paying off, with revenue in the division up more than 31% in the 
fourth quarter.

Ladbrokes also booked £99m of impairments, of which £58m was due to 
revaluation of its UK and Ireland portfolio and £18m was attributed to costs 
associated with the Gala Coral merger.

Mullen brushed off fears that Andy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/23/former-hbos-boss-andy-hornby-to-take-charge-of-public-company>
, widely expected to be chief operating officer of the combined group, might be 
barred from being a company director amid an inquiry by regulators into the 
collapse of HBOS, the bank he ran. “Our view on Andy hasn’t changed,” said 
Mullen. “He’s an accomplished executive. We’ll assume that he’s joining and 
that continues to be the case.”

The amount Ladbrokes took from so-called high rollers sank from £16m to £4m, 
but Mullen said this was due to a strategic withdrawal from high-stakes bets, 
rather than an unlucky streak.

“I’m trying to move away from high rollers towards retail customers with £2 or 
£3 bets. We want the man in the street who might put on a £5 half-time 
full-time score.”

Ladbrokes has addressed concerns about responsible gambling amid an increase 
of online betting firms. Mullen said the bookmaker had a 100-member team in 
Gateshead using an algorithm to detect potential problem gamblers on the high 
street and online.

He said the system could detect potentially worrying changes in an 
individual’s betting patterns, triggering a warning that would result in staff 
discussing the issue with the customer.
 