
Planned as a celebration of newly improved relations between the United States 
and Cuba, the first scheduled flight from Miami to Havana in more than 50 years 
turned into a more subdued affair early on Monday, three days after the death 
of the island’s revolutionary leaderFidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>.

The milestone American Airlines Flight 17 touched down in the Cuban capital at 
8.26am, amid nine days of national mourning for the country’s former president, 
whodied on Saturday at the age of 90 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies>
.

Its low-key arrival at José Martí international airport, where flags were 
flying at half-mast in Castro’s honour, contrasted with the flight’s carnival 
send-off from Miami, where the 145 passengers enjoyed Cuban pastries and coffee 
before being handed straw Cuban fedora hats as they boarded the aircraft.

Ralph Lopez, vice-president of the airline’s Miami hub, said that despite the 
sombre mood in Havana, there was poignancy in the first scheduled flight to the 
Cuban capital since 1961, the year the US imposed its trade embargo on the 
country in response to Castro’s overthrow of the dictator Fulgencio Batista two 
years earlier, and subsequent human rights abuses.

“It’s a monumental day of great historic relevance, with Miami being the 
epicentre of the Cuban American community and American Airlines’ hub for the 
region,” he said.

“We’re excited to live in these exciting times and serve Havana.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&media=>
‘He led a humble life’: Fidel Castro’s biographer on the legacy of a 
revolutionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/he-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
The American flight was set to be followed into Havana by a JetBlue departure 
from New York on Monday afternoon, marking a new beginning for regularly 
scheduled services from the US to the Cuban capital. Non-charter flights to 
other Cuban citiesbegan in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/us-cuba-first-flight-jetblue-fort-lauderdale>
, the latest steps in Barack Obama’s attempts to thaw relations between the two 
cold war foes after a half-century of hostility.

In a tweet on Monday, President-elect Donald Trump promised to “terminate” the 
Obama administration’s conciliatory approach to Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>
 unless the Cuban government was willing to make “a better deal” for Cubans, 
Cuban Americans and “the US as a whole”.

'A powerful moment': first US-to-Cuba flight since 1961 is latest step in thaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/us-cuba-first-flight-jetblue-fort-lauderdale>
The detente is also unpopular with many in Miami’s large Cuban American 
population, among them Florida’s senator and former presidential candidate 
Marco Rubio, who was scathing of Obama’s response to Castro’s death. In his 
statement, the president offered condolences to Castro’s family and thoughts 
and prayers to the Cuban people.

“President Obama issued a pathetic statement on death of dictator Fidel Castro 
with no mention of thousands he killed & imprisoned,” Rubio fumedin a tweet 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/802539193226379264?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.
 