
Campaign group 38 degrees has taken down a petition calling for BBC political 
editor Laura Kuenssberg to be sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/bbc-laura-kuenssberg-jeremy-corbyn-petition>
, saying it had become a focal point for misogynist abuse.

The majority of those signing and supporting the petition expressed concerns 
about what they saw as biased reporting of the Labour party and its leader
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> by 
Kuenssberg. However, some supporters on social media used abusive and sexist 
language in calling for the BBC’s first female political editor to go.

We took down the Laura Kuenssberg petition to show sexist bullies can’t win | 
David Babbs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/laura-kuenssberg-petition-sexist-bullies-38-degrees>
38 Degrees executive director David Babbs said the petition had been taken 
down with the agreement of the person who had posted it. He said: “I am really 
concerned that a petition hosted on the 38 Degrees website has been hijacked, 
and used as a focal point for sexist and hateful abuse made towards Laura 
Kuenssberg on Twitter. That is totally unacceptable and, with the agreement of 
the petition starter, we’ve taken the petition down to prevent it being used in 
this way. There is no place in the 38 Degrees family for sexism or any form of 
discrimination or hate speech.”

Prior to the petition being taken down, former Independent on Sunday political 
editor Jane Merrick told the Guardian that Kuenssberg had faced an extra layer 
of sexist criticism. “She has been called a whore and a bitch on Twitter,” said 
Merrick. “Nick Robinson used to be accused of Tory bias but he never 
experienced this level of nastiness.”

“Of course, not all Corbyn supporters are sexist – far from it – but there is 
a core of hard-left misogyny that comes out against women when Corbyn is under 
pressure – such as the abuse against Stella Creasy and Jess Phillips.Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> said back in 
September he wanted a ‘kinder politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/29/corbyn-bashes-misogynistic-supporters-and-pledges-kinder-politics>
’ so he should condemn these vile attacks against a respected and experienced 
journalist.”

The original poster of the petition had also tried to distance himself from 
those using it to make misogynistic attacks, writing in an update that he 
“would like to reassure everyone that I am a passionate advocate for equality 
in all areas, not just gender equality”.

He added: “This petition has precisely zero to do with Kuenssberg’s gender. 
Regardless of the gender you identify with, there is no excuse for biased 
reporting and misrepresentation of facts when you represent an organisation 
that has been famed for its impartiality and balanced approach.”
 