
In Hollywood, short films are a necessary evil – crucial for assessing the 
potential of emerging film-makers, but near impossible to exploit for 
commercial gain. In practical terms, that means an ever-replenishing pool of 
great shorts, most of which are unlikely to find an audience. Eager to take 
advantage of this glut of overlooked work is Le Cinéma Club (lecinemaclub.com), 
a new online portal for underappreciated films, each of which screens for a 
full week free of charge. Founder Marie-Louise Khondji says that she’s open to 
works of any length, but the site’s offerings thus far have skewed short, with 
the longest clocking in at just over an hour.

The Witch review – an eerie campfire tale that gets under your skin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/the-witch-review-a-eerie-campfire-tale-that-gets-under-your-skin>
It’s not hard to imagine why. By looking beyond feature films – the rights to 
which are typically tied up in deals that would preclude seven days of free 
streaming on a quirky video platform – Le Cinéma Club has secured work from the 
likes of Gus Van Sant,Andrea Arnold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold> and Yorgos Lanthimos. 
Currently, the site is playing host to a short film from a more recent inductee 
to the arthouse hall of fame, Robert Eggers, who shot to indie stardom this 
year with his singular 17th-century horror The Witch.

With its indescribable mood, scalpel-precise plotting and counterintuitive 
casting of Finchy from The Office, that film rightly proved one of the breakout 
hits of last year’s Sundance film festival. Eggers’s 2014 dramaBrothers, 
meanwhile, was consigned to life as an industry calling card – a victim of its 
own 10-minute runtime. Now, though, presented in the rich context of Le Cinéma 
Club, the short reveals itself as just as beguiling and complex a piece of work 
asThe Witch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-witch>, and one that deepens 
our understanding of Eggers as a film-maker.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgud8viI-P7Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgud8viI-P7Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgud8viI-P7Q&media=>
Opening on an emblematic sequence in which a playfight between two boys tips 
over into genuine brutality, Brothers is a minimal but finely woven portrait of 
fraternal conflict and rural seclusion. Though set several centuries after The 
Witch, the short shares a number of cast and crew members with Eggers’s 
feature, as well as a woodland setting, an old-timey end-credit typeface and a 
general sense of ethereal unease.

It’s tempting, then, to call the film a warm-up, such is our collective 
disdain for films that happen to run less than 80 minutes, but Le Cinéma Club 
suggests a more enlightened interpretation: of Brothers as a partner piece to 
its more celebrated lengthier sibling, and short films in general as 
complementary to – not lesser than – their feature- length peers.
 