
World agency appeals against AFL tribunal decision in Essendon case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/12/world-anti-doping-agency-appeals-afl-tribunal-decision-essendon-case>
The World Anti-Doping Agency has reportedly turned to US guru Richard Young as 
it seeks to prosecute 34 current and formerEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> players. The top international 
sports lawyer is best known for playing a part in the downfall of drug cheats 
Marion Jones, Floyd Landis and Lance Armstrong. The Bryan Cave partner, who is 
based in Colorado Springs, helped draft the original World Anti-Doping Code.

Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> revealed last week it was 
appealing the AFL anti-doping tribunal’s verdict on 31 March, which cleared all 
the players of charges related to the banned peptide Thymosin beta-4. The venue 
and date of the upcoming hearing will be determined after the Court of 
Arbitration for Sport panel is appointed.

Wada is yet to reveal details on its legal team, but News Corp Australia 
reported on Wednesday that Young will present its case against the past and 
present Bombers. If confirmed, it will take little time for Young to be brought 
up to speed on proceedings. He advisedAsada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> during its initial investigation of 
the Bombers and NRL club Cronulla.

Young has handled high-profile cases involving the United States Anti-Doping 
Agency, United States Olympic Committee and other national Olympic bodies.


The news follows a Fairfax Media report that Wada wants the case to be held in 
Switzerland. Submissions on the location of the appeal won’t be heard until the 
CAS panel is appointed. But any push for an overseas location would frustrate 
the Bombers given CAS has an Oceania office in Sydney.

Collingwood president Eddie McGuire was unimpressed with reports that Wada 
wanted the matter to proceed in Lausanne. “If you want to get away from theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> influence, do it in Sydney. That seems 
to me to be really narky and beyond the pale,” McGuire said in his morning spot 
on radio station Triple M. “I can’t understand this. Why wouldn’t you send two 
people over here and hold it in Australia?”

Essendon coach James Hird, captain Jobe Watson and chief executive Xavier 
Campbell all expressed confidence last week that CAS will rule in favour of the 
players.
 