
LeBron James, who ended 52 years of sports heartache by bringing Cleveland a 
championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/cleveland-cavaliers-win-nba-title-golden-state-warriors-game-7-nba-finals>
 andused his fame to address social causes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/national-anthem-protest-lebron-james-colin-kaepernick-nba>
, has been chosen as the Associated Press 2016 male athlete of the year, an 
award he won previously in 2013.

Results of the vote by 59 editors from AP member newspapers and customers were 
announced on Tuesday. James collected 24 first-place votes, beating out a pair 
of Olympic legends:Michael Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michaelphelps> (16) and Usain Bolt (9).

Chicago Cubs third baseman Kris Bryant, the NL MVP who led his team to their 
first World Series title since 1908, tied for fourth with Golden State star 
Stephen Curry, last year’s winner. Cristiano Ronaldo, Von Miller and Andy 
Murray also received votes.

LeBron James leads Cleveland Cavaliers to NBA title and ends 52-year drought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/cleveland-cavaliers-win-nba-title-golden-state-warriors-game-7-nba-finals>
James joined Michael Jordan as the only NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> players to win twice. Jordan won the 
award three straight years from 1991-94.

US Olympic gymnast Simone Biles was named AP’s top female athlete on Monday 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/simone-biles-ap-female-athlete-of-the-year/>.

A rabid sports fan, James was flattered to be in the same class with Phelps, 
the 23-time gold medalist who added five more to his record collection at the 
Rio Olympics.

“To be that dominant in your respective sport, to see what he’s been able to 
do over the years, what he does in that water, man, it’s tremendous and very 
inspiring,” James said. “When you have that type of tenure to be able to 
dominate, when you know that the entire competition is gearing up to beat you — 
and only you — and you’re still able to come away No. 1 or always be at the top 
of the food chain, that’s very inspiring.”

That James received the honor in an Olympic year underscores the weight of his 
accomplishments. His third NBA crown was for Cleveland, delivering on a promise 
James made to a city that hadn’t celebrated a major championship since 1964 and 
had endured many torturous sports moments since.

James, whose game shows no signs of aging as he approaches his 32nd birthday 
in a few days, came up short in 2015, leading an injury-depleted Cleveland team 
to the finals where they lost to the Warriors. And although James posted the 
best statistical series of any player in history, his critics were quick to 
point out his 2-4 record in the finals compared to Jordan’s 6-0.

The Cavs got a rematch with the record-setting, 73-win Warriors. Led by Curry, 
the league’s unanimous MVP choice, Golden State was being talked about as 
potentially the best team ever, an argument that gained steam when it took a 
3-1 lead.

James, though, wasn’t going to be denied again. He scored 41 points in Games 5 
and 6 and posted a triple-double in an epic Game 7 that will be remembered for 
his chase-down block of Andre Iguodala in the closing minutes — a defensive gem 
that stands as the signature play of his magnificent career.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpvBhIUqNcM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpvBhIUqNcM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqpvBhIUqNcM&media=>
After the game, James collapsed on the floor and when asked moments later 
about his emotions, the Ohio native who proudly says he’s “just a kid from 
Akron,” screamed at the TV camera: “Cleveland, this for you!”

“At that moment,” James said, “I felt fulfilled. To know the history of our 
sports here and how heartbreaking at times it was for all those years that our 
fans had to go through, and the circumstances that we came back from, it was so 
fulfilling.”

James’ journey to his greatest triumph coincided with the passing of another 
great — the greatest of all — as Muhammad Ali died on 4 June. During the 
playoffs, James watched tapes of Ali’s fights for motivation. It was in the 
spirit of the boxing legend and global ambassador that James stood on stage 
with close friends Dwyane Wade, Chris Paul and Carmelo Anthony at the ESPYs in 
July to decry violence against unarmed black men and encourage fellow athletes 
to do more to support local police and improve communities.

James later donated $2.5m for a Smithsonian exhibit honoring Ali, and he’s 
producing a documentary on the champ.

“He’s definitely a person I’m inspired to be like, to have a social conscience 
about things,” James said. “What I always saw in Ali was that he was always 
educated about everything he was speaking about. He was never just talking to 
be talking. There was a method to the madness.

“Ali definitely showed me the way.”
 