
It’s a familiar rule of thumb in the Oscar-watching game that the best actors 
aren’t always recognised for their best work.Tom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy>’s as good an example as any this 
year: he cracked his first nod for his beardily villainous performance inThe 
Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant>, though it’s some of 
his wobblier work. I’d rather have seen him honoured forLegend (Studiocanal, 
18): his twin turn as Reggie and Ronnie Kray is no less brash a feat of 
scenery-chewing, but it’s a considerably more special one. Drawing on both his 
reckless movie-star magnetism and his character-actor peculiarities, often in 
the same frame, it’s a dazzling thespian stunt and a full-bodied (well, 
double-bodied) characterisation – and the lifeblood of Brian Helgeland’s less 
inventive chunk of East End gangland lore.

Legend distinguishes itself from Peter Medak’s 1990 biopic, The Krays 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099951/>, which starred Gary and Martin Kemp and 
centred vividly on the vicious twins’ relationship with their mother, by 
shifting focus to Reggie’s relationship with his young wife, Frances (Emily 
Browning). Yet while Helgeland’s script grants Frances the film’s narrating 
voice, her perspective is less generously defined – often seeming incidental to 
the film’s comic-book view of laddish underworld dealings. And with Hardy 
playing both Krays with such megawatt intensity – Reggie as a blemished urban 
lothario, Ronnie as an unhinged manchild – it’s not as if any other character 
has a chance to register. And while Helgeland’s film sits a notch below Medak’s 
as biography, Hardy doesn’t need dual roles to prove he’s twice the actor 
either Kemp is.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfvjS7rN8HT0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfvjS7rN8HT0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfvjS7rN8HT0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Infinitely Polar Bear. 
Future awards trivia collectors will delight in the fact that Mark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo> was Golden Globe-nominated this 
year not forSpotlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight>, but for his 
turn as a loving manic depressive dad in Maya Forbes’s cracked autobiographical 
comedyInfinitely Polar Bear (Sony, 15). Ruffalo’s endearingly crumpled human 
decency has become one of modern American film’s most reliable comforts, even 
in a film that yo-yos as rashly as this one. Forbes’s often frantically chipper 
film-making is perhaps too strained in reflecting its protagonist’s state of 
mind, but there are honest reserves of heart and hurt here.

Among the many reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/andrew-garfield-studio-the-amazing-spider-man-2-sequel>
 to look askance at the last two Spider-Man films: they tookAndrew Garfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> out of non-Lycra-clad acting 
for the better part of four years. Ramin Bahrani’s gripping, riled-up 
financial-crisis parable99 Homes (Studiocanal, 15) reminds us what we’ve been 
missing. Garfield’s an urgently curled fist here, pained and poignant as a 
jobless Florida dad evicted from his home by a predatory real estate broker, 
for whom he becomes, in desperation, a conflicted protege. Michael Shannon 
superbly plays the property baron as a kind of tan-suited Mephistopheles; the 
actors enact a terse, taut war of wills between these opposingly determined 
men, sturdily anchoring Bahrani’s seething script even at its most rhetorically 
heated.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYbuiJi52w9c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYbuiJi52w9c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYbuiJi52w9c&media=>
 Watch the trailer for 99 Homes. 
More gentle, if similarly direct, in its allegorical approach is Georgian 
director Zaza Urushadze’sTangerines (Axiom, 15). Not to be confused with the 
iPhone-shot transgender indieTangerine, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tangerine> this Oscar-nominated anti-war 
fable miniaturises the 1992 Abkhazia conflict to the battleground of a lowly 
rural homestead, as wounded soldiers from the Georgian and Russian factions are 
mutually sheltered by an elderly, disinterested carpenter. The mutual 
understanding that blossoms from their forced truce isn’t terribly surprising, 
but neither is it saccharine – Urushadze’s war-what-is-it-good-for? message is 
coloured with a doleful streak of gallows humour.

Matthew Heineman’s Cartel Land, a bruising, matter-of-fact documentary 
immersion into the Mexican drug war, came and went with relatively little 
fanfare in cinemas last year, but scooped a well-judgedOscar nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-2016-full-list-of-nominations-awards-movies>
. Happily, for those wishing to catch up, Netflix has just added it to its 
roster. It’s worth the hard graft. Tracing the parallel efforts of anti-cartel 
vigilantes on either side of the Arizona-Mexico border, the film remains 
cool-headed even when granted startlingly close access to the conflict – 
exposing the galling violence yielded by the drug trade even on the notionally 
right side of the law. Arriving around the same time as Denis Villeneuve’s 
fictional cartel filmSicario <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sicario>, it’s a 
thriller in its own right.
 