
When Leighton Aspell rode in the Grand National for the first time in 2003, he 
was on a 40-1 outsider called Supreme Glory. He finished second. “I was 
thrilled to bits with that,” he said this week. “I thought that was going to be 
my little piece ofGrand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> history.” He was right. It 
was his little piece of National history; and since then, Aspell has acquired a 
big piece of National history to go with it.

Only a handful of jump jockeys enjoy even a single victory in the most famous 
horse race in the world, as Aspell did on Pineau De Re in 2014. Fewer still 
ride a second winner, as Aspell did 12 months ago on Many Clouds. But in a 
storied history that extends to almost 200 years, no jockey has won three 
Nationals in a row.

Many Clouds gives Leighton Aspell back-to-back Grand National wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/many-clouds-grand-national-leighton-aspell>
If Aspell could win again aboard the favourite, Many Clouds, on Saturday, his 
achievement would be not merely extraordinary but unique.

If so, his name would be an appropriate addition to the list of legends in 
this, the “People’s race”. The National bestows its favours sparingly, and left 
champion jockeys such as Peter Scudamore and John Francome waiting for ever. It 
prefers to promote its heroes from the ranks and Aspell, a veteran of 23 
seasons, is the latest rider chosen to make the step up.

“The last two years have been fantastic,” he said. “There’s amazing stories 
behind lots of previous National winners and that’s part of the romance. It’s 
changed a lot but there’s still that element of luck in the race that attracts 
people.

“Growing up in Ireland, everybody had a bet on the National. All my classmates 
were having a bet in the National and on the school bus on Monday you’re 
talking about what you backed, how far it got, why you picked it and what a bad 
ride the jockey gave it, things like that. Riding in it was always what I 
wanted to do.

“I can remember all of my Nationals. Supreme Glory was a bit of a blur but as 
you get older, and I’m nearly 40 now, the pace of races is slower because 
you’re more experienced and relaxed and you can take in what’s around you, 
understand the speed and the dangers and try to work out the race in your head 
as it progresses.”

Aspell sounds a little like a fighter pilot when he talks about the National. 
The Grand National is the most intense 10 minutes of the year in any sport, a 
maelstrom of chance and possibilities from which a single horse and rider will 
emerge to claim victory. From the off, Aspell will be processing countless 
streams of information, arriving from every direction.

“I’ve got to put it all to the back of my mind that he’s favourite and I might 
be winning for the third time,” he says. “Before the race you just get your 
game face on and give it the respect it deserves. It’s a completely different 
atmosphere in the weighing room. There’s 40 jockeys in there, and it’s on 
everyone’s mind, every moment. Cheltenham is high pressure, but [in] the 
National, the chances of things going wrong are much higher.

“By the time of the race you have a picture of all the colours, and you know 
the horses that are the dangers. As you go around, you’ll think: that’s gone, 
that’s gone, that’s going well, that’s not jumping at all well so I’ll keep 
away from that.

“As the race progresses, you then adjust to the pace of it, you look at the 
ones that are still going and there’s also the ones you dismissed beforehand on 
their form so you think, that’s out in front but it’s not going to be there 
much longer.

“It’s milliseconds all the time that it’s going through your mind, and then 
the fences are coming up all the time as well. It’s multitasking in a huge way.

“Where I’m so lucky is that I promise you, you could ride Many Clouds with 
your eyes closed. I don’t want to jinx him so he’ll fall at the first but if he 
can see the fence, he can work it out, he doesn’t need me to tell him how to 
jump. That means I can focus on being in the right place at the right time, 
when to use energy and when to conserve it.”

Aspell talks about the National and his life as a jump jockey with such 
enthusiasm that it is difficult to believe he announced his retirement in July 
2007. “I wasn’t enjoying it as much as I should,” he says. “The mileage was a 
real drag and there were other parts of the sport I could work at, but in the 
end I realised that I couldn’t replace the race‑riding part of it. I should 
have just taken a couple of months off.”

He was away from race-riding for 18 months but his decision to return 
coincided with a serious injury for his fellow jockey Dominic Elsworth, who had 
taken over Aspell’s role at Oliver Sherwood’s stable.

“I just wanted to get enough rides to make a living and support my family,” 
Aspell says. “I promise you I’d have been happy just making a living at it but 
then Oliver had an injection of new owners and Many Clouds came along.”

Aspell will never be the champion jockey, or the top rider at the Cheltenham 
Festival in March. Whatever happens on Saturday, he will have slipped back into 
relative sporting obscurity by the middle of next week with no complaints.

“All the media can be tiring and a bit repetitive sometimes but I’m glad it’s 
me talking about it and not somebody else,” he says. “If I was on a 50-1 shot 
and watching someone else get all the attention I’m getting now, I’d be jealous.

“It’s not like being a footballer where you’re in the spotlight every weekend. 
I’d be a celebrity around these parts [in West Sussex] and at the kids’ school 
and the pony club and things like that, but other than that, people wouldn’t 
know me from Adam, really. That’s how I like it.”

Leighton Aspell wins Grand National on Pineau De Re at Aintree
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/05/leighton-aspell-grand-national-pineau-de-re> 