
Christmas, says the poet Lemn Sissay <http://lemnsissay.com/>, divides the 
world into two sorts of people. One group gathers around the domestic hearth: 
all jocularity and teasing, memories and traditions. The other group is, as 
in the Victorian cliche, outside the window looking in. They have never felt 
the warmth of the homely festive glow.

Most of us have families who, even if it’s with some reservation, we join for 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. We roll our 
eyes and sigh, we anticipate the annoyances; we steel ourselves for the nuances 
that only we could ever understand.

Sissay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/30/lemn-sissay-my-foster-parents-were-good-people-who-did-bad-things>
, though, is a member of the second group. He was raised in care, first in a
foster family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/13/we-sneaked-into-the-larder-and-had-a-food-fight>
 and then, from the age of 12, in a string of children’s homes. Christmas came 
with the tree and the fairy lights, the baubles and the presents, but all those 
other unseen ingredients – the real flavours of the season – were absent; all 
those essentials that, as the Grinch finally realised, can’t be bought from a 
shop.

Given what he’s missed, it would be understandable if Sissay were resentful 
and scathing about how thoughtlessly the rest of us sometimes complain about 
something so vital and yet unknown to him. But he is not – he is magnanimous.

Lemn Sissay: ‘I would die if I didn’t live in the present’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/lemn-sissay-i-would-die-if-i-didnt-live-in-the-present-interview-gold-from-the-stone>
Yes, he agrees, all the things we take for granted about a family Christmas 
are a luxury. “They are a luxury, and you do take them for granted. But so you 
should, and so we all should be able to. We don’t walk around saying: ‘I’m 
breathing.’ But take your breath away, and you soon realise that you’re utterly 
dependent on it – and that’s the closest I can get to describing what a family 
does for you. Everything in life is connected, and everything is connected to 
family. People say: ‘If you’ve got no family, you can always have friends.’ But 
what they don’t understand is that your friendship-making skills are themselves 
connected to being part of a family.”

Sissay was awarded the MBE for services to literature in 2010. He is the 
chancellor of the University of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/lemn-sissay-interview-foster-child-poet-chancellor-manchester-university>
, and in 2012 he was the official Olympics poet. “I probably look like a 
success,” he muses. “I seem like an achiever, someone who’s done well in life. 
But it’s an idea I’ve always struggled with. Because, when it comes down to it, 
who gives a shit whether I’m chancellor of a university? Who really cares?”

The people who would care, who always care, would be family; and that caring 
and that noticing and that reflecting who we are and what we have become is as 
intrinsic to this time of year as the presents under the tree. Christmas is a 
moment to pause, to look back, not just year on year but across a lifetime. And 
it’s about the future, too.

“Families are about the power of suggestion,” says Sissay. “When are you going 
to get married? When are you going to get a new job? All those questions that 
are a pain in the backside are also a wake-up call, a prompt.”

Sissay was born in 1967 to a young Ethiopian woman who discovered she was 
pregnant soon after arriving in England. She asked for him to be fostered while 
she finished her studies. Instead, the arrangement continued until Sissay was 
12, at which point his foster family gave him up, and he was sent to a 
children’s home. From there, he was moved from one home to another, usually the 
only black kid wherever he was resident.

He was rootless; an unwanted parcel. And Christmas, as for any kid in care, 
was the hardest time: when the festive lights served only to expose what was 
missing, and would never be there. “It feels an incredibly risky time,” he 
says. “I used to fold myself into myself. All the memories were of Christmases 
that hadn’t been good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab35846b9d2c18431977a5c142c5c0dedeaeac1%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lemn%20Sissay%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20in%20life%C2%A0is%C2%A0connected%2C%20and%C2%A0everything%20is%20connected%20to%20family%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lemn%20Sissay%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20in%20life%C2%A0is%C2%A0connected%2C%20and%C2%A0everything%20is%20connected%20to%20family%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab35846b9d2c18431977a5c142c5c0dedeaeac1%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘I used to fold myself into myself. All the memories were of Christmases that 
hadn’t been good.’ Photograph: Tom Pilston for the Guardian 
The truth about family, Sissay agrees, is this: its platform and its web, its 
support and its structures, are extraordinarily difficult to replicate in any 
other setting. Extraordinarily difficult, but not impossible: and yet the gap 
between what family life provides and what a life in care provides is a yawning 
chasm.

“‘Care’ is a one-word oxymoron,” he says, a flash of anger in his face. “If we 
were to truly replicate what a family is for the child who’s being looked after 
by the state, if the state was truly to provide that, it would give them the 
best of everything.”

But what society gives the kids is not the best; it’s the dregs. “After I left 
care, I was always being asked: ‘What did you do wrong?’ There’s this Victorian 
idea that there must be something bad about you if you end up in care. ‘If 
you’re naughty, we’ll send you to the children’s home’ … that kind of 
mentality.”

Sissay is fired up now. He is furious, not only for himself but for the 
hundreds of thousands like him, kids who grew up in this misnomer of a system. 
“Do you know the worst thing they said to me, the people who were in charge, 
when I was in care? They said: ‘What doyou want? What do you want, Lemn?’ Those 
fuckers! How dare they! They had the gall to turn round to a kid and say: ‘What 
do you want?’ The whole care system is flawed, deeply flawed, and hopelessly 
unimaginative. I get so irritated when I hear people saying to children in 
care: ‘Why don’t you become a social worker when you grow up, so you can change 
things?’ How little imagination do these people have? Why should children in 
care become social workers … we’re not feedback machines for the system that 
fucked us up.”

So where should change begin? “I’d look at the nature of a functioning family 
and work out how we can replicate that for kids in the care system. One of the 
worst things that happened for me was that the big thing I needed was a hug, 
and a hug was the last thing I ever got. When you’re in care you’re acutely 
aware of how you’re not love or pleasure for anyone – you’re an obligation. 
Your social worker is just that – a worker. She or he is being paid. However 
brilliant yourrelationship with your social worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/17/the-social-worker-who-changed-my-life>
 is, for them it’s a job. To you, it’s your life. And when you leave care, your 
social worker is no longer allowed to have contact with you. How does that feel 
for a young person?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa9519598dd771f21910bb6d390bb81d2aabe05d%2F33_1136_2945_3679%2F2945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lemn%20Sissay%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20in%20life%C2%A0is%C2%A0connected%2C%20and%C2%A0everything%20is%20connected%20to%20family%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lemn%20Sissay%3A%20%E2%80%98Everything%20in%20life%C2%A0is%C2%A0connected%2C%20and%C2%A0everything%20is%20connected%20to%20family%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Flemn-sissay-poet-christmas-dinner-childrens-homes-care-leavers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa9519598dd771f21910bb6d390bb81d2aabe05d%2F33_1136_2945_3679%2F2945.jpg>
 Lemn Sissay. Photograph: Tom Pilston for the Guardian 
Sissay left care three decades ago, but he says you don’t leave it behind – 
part of you is always that rootless kid, that person with no one to chivvy or 
complain about, no one to boast to or moan about. And while he is not sure 
whether he would count much of his life’s work as achievements, there is one 
thing he is incredibly proud of. It is his Christmas present to hundreds of 
young people who, like him, have never had a family to be with at this time of 
the year. It’s called theChristmas Dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2013/nov/28/christmas-dinner-care-leavers-manchester-lemn-sissay>
, which he founded in 2013, and this year it promises a fabulous day to about 
300 young care leavers aged 18 to 25 in five UK cities – London, Leeds, 
Manchester, Liverpool and Oxford.

The Christmas Dinner is run by volunteers, who persuade local businesses and 
organisations to donate food and services. Not just any food or services, 
though: only the best will do. Guests are picked up by taxi, and driven to one 
of the swankiest venues in town. Dinner is cooked by a leading chef, and the 
goody bags are stuffed with top-drawer gifts. “The thing is,” says Sissay, “I 
remember saying when I left care, ‘I don’t want to just survive. I want to 
live.’ And the Christmas Dinner isn’t about surviving; it’s about living.”

For the invitees, the event is life-changing. At one dinner last year, two 
sisters who hadn’t spent a Christmas together for seven years sat down side by 
side; another guest said that every year when theJohn Lewis ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/10/meet-buster-the-john-lewis-2016-christmas-advert-video>
 was launched she felt really sad, but from now on, because of the Christmas 
Dinner, she wouldn’t have to. Megan Macleod, 21, who moved out of her foster 
home when she was 17, and who will be attending the Oxford meal, bursts into 
tears when I ask her what it will mean to her. “I just can’t believe they’re 
doing all this so we have a happy Christmas,” she says. “I’m super-excited for 
it.”

Of course, Sissay knows that one lunch, provided by one set of volunteers, 
shared by one group of care leavers, can’t provide everything that a family 
get-together does. But you only have to look at Megan’s face to see how much it 
means. And it isn’t only about the youngsters. “It’s about all the people who 
made it happen, getting them to think about care leavers and their lives,” 
says Sissay.

“Marks & Spencer has just agreed to give us the food, and there will be 
conversations happening there about what it means to be a young person in care. 
Up until now, some of those people probably thought care leavers equated to 
shoplifters. This might make them stop and think – because care leavers are 
incredible people. They are people with so many prejudices stacked against 
them. Their capacity for empathy is often extraordinary: they have to use other 
skills to make contact with the world, because they don’t have the skills 
people with families have.”

What about Sissay himself? He has never married, and has no children. He said 
he would never do that until he had found his birth family: but in his late 20s 
he did, and he is now in touch with his mother, who lives in New York. So yes, 
he says, he would love to settle down with someone; he would love children. He 
looks a bit startled by the question, as if it would be the gateway to a life 
that is still almost unimaginable. On the other hand, he now knows what matters.

“If I’m not defined by my success, I am defined by my ability to heal,” he 
says. “Because we’re all hurt, and we’re all healing.”

In 2017, The Christmas Dinner will be raising £100,000 for Christmas dinners 
throughout the country. Details are inThe Seven Goals of Christmas blog 
<http://blog.lemnsissay.com/2016/09/20/christmas-dinner-seven-goals-christmas/#sthash.zOy4OOOb.dpbs>
; lemn@thechristmasdinner.org.uk
 