
Comedian Leslie Jones has spoken out against Simon & Schuster’s decision to 
publish a book by outspoken “alt-right” figure Milo Yiannopoulos, months after 
he was banned from Twitter forallegedly encouraging a bombardment of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 abusive tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 towards theGhostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters> actor.

It was announced last week that Yiannopoulos, an editor for Breitbart News, 
had signed a $250,000 (£203,000) contract with Threshold, a conservative 
imprint of publisher Simon & Schuster, after he was offered – in his words – “a 
wheelbarrow full of money”. Threshold has previously printed books byDonald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, Dick Cheney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dick-cheney> and Rush Limbaugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rush-limbaugh>.

Publishing Milo Yiannopoulos’ book is wrong. My magazine is fighting back | 
Adam Morgan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/simon-schuster-alt-right-hate-breitbart-milo-yiannopoulos>
The news sparked outrage among those who say he should not have a platform to 
share his views. After a coordinated appeal began on 29 December, with 
instructions on how to call the publisher and individual agents being shared 
widely online, Simon & Schuster briefly responded to the backlash, asking 
critics to “withhold judgment until they have had a chance to read the actual 
contents of the book”.

It later issued a longer statement, saying it does not and never has condoned 
discrimination or hate speech in any form, that it had “always published books 
by a wide range of authors with greatly varying, and frequently controversial 
opinions”, and that “while we are cognisant that many may disagree vehemently 
with the books we publish we note that the opinions expressed therein belong to 
our authors, and do not reflect either a corporate viewpoint or the views of 
our employees”.

Jones, who almost left Twitter after the abuse until the CEO of the social 
media platform, Jack Dorsey personally intervened, accused Simon & Schuster of 
helping the likes of Yiannopoulos “spread their hate”.
Leslie Jones (@Lesdoggg) 
@SimonBooks <https://twitter.com/SimonBooks> @threshold_books 
<https://twitter.com/threshold_books> @simonschuster 
<https://twitter.com/simonschuster> yea but you still help them spread their 
hate to even more people.
 <https://twitter.com/Lesdoggg/status/816001288630599681> January 2, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Lesdoggg/status/816001288630599681> 
By 30 December the book, entitled Dangerous, was already No 2 on Amazon’s 
overall bestseller list and the No 1 in the site’s political commentary and 
opinion category, despite not being scheduled to arrive until March.

Authors and industry bodies have denounced Simon & Schuster for making the 
deal. The Chicago Review of Booksannounced 
<https://www.facebook.com/bookschicago/posts/817378008401183?hc_location=ufi> 
it would not be reviewing any Simon & Schuster books in 2017 – the company 
publishes about 2,000 books a year across its 35 imprints.


Author Karen Hunter, who is published by Simon & Schuster, tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/karenhunter/status/814534848043950080> that she’s 
“rethinking my relationship” with the company, while fellow Simon & Schuster 
author Danielle Henderson wrote: “I have calls in with my editor, agent and 
lawyer. This is too personal for me to ignore.” She later explained that the 
publisher had paid a large advance for her forthcoming book The Ugly Cry but 
that she would be happy to find another publisher if it did go on to put out 
Yiannopoulos’s book.

My night out in Cleveland with the worst men on the internet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/my-night-out-in-cleveland-with-the-worst-men-on-the-internet>
Jones’s colleagues in Hollywood also spoke out. Comedian Sarah Silverman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sarah-silverman> tweeted: “The guy has 
freedom of speech but to fund him & give him a platform tells me a LOT about 
@simonschuster YUCK AND BOO AND GROSS”, while directorJudd Apatow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juddapatow> tweeted: “In these times we can 
not let hatemongers get rich off of their cruelty. Shame on @simonschuster!”

A conservative who led the Gays for Trump movement during the 2016 US 
elections, Greek-born Brit Yiannopoulos has labelled transgender people as 
“mentally ill”, called feminism “cancer” and said theBlack Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> movement is a 
“hate group”. He was also a leading figure in theGamergate controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/gamergate-alt-right-hate-trump>
.

Yiannopoulos has announced books twice before that never materialised: one on 
Gamergate, whichhe announced in December 2014 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2014/12/15/i-m-writing-a-book-about-gamergate/>
, and one called The Sociopaths of Silicon Valley, in January 2015.


 