
I reported on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/oct/24/buenos-aires-herald-to-switch-from-daily-to-weekly-format>
 that the Buenos Aires Herald, the only English-language daily newspaper in 
Latin America, was to become a weekly.

Why, asked an emailer, should we care what happens in Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>? Leaving aside the chauvinistic 
rudeness, by recording what is happening in media elsewhere we are better able 
to perceive what the Herald rightly calls “a worldwide phenomenon”.

The central point to be learned from the Herald’s leading article 
<http://www.buenosairesherald.com/article/223575/at-the-end-of-the-day> on 
Wednesday, is universal: journalism is in crisis.

In registering its “unspeakable sadness” at giving up daily publication, the 
paper said it had been “facing difficulties for a while now”.

It spoke of the “dramatic change”, which “reflects a media industry in 
crisis”, and acknowledged that people now prefer to access news for free on 
digital platforms rather than by reading newsprint.

Then it touched on the likely result: “as many as 2,000 journalists may lose 
their jobs in the country in 2016, a staggering number which will damage the 
profession greatly”.


The Herald is no exception because it is shedding most of its staff due to the 
change to a weekly. “The overwhelming majority of our colleagues were told that 
they would be losing their jobs”, said the editorial, which revealed that 14 
“are leaving us today”.

The 140-year-old title, majority-owned by the Indalo Group, also mentioned 
“our most illustrious period during the military dictatorship”. That was a 
reference to the paper’s defiance of the brutal regime in the 1976-83 period by 
reporting on its abductions of people who came to be known as “the disappeared”.

The Herald’s editor at the time, Robert Cox 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Cox_(journalist)>, was forced into exile 
because of threats and intimidation. His heroism wasfinally recognised in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2010/aug/02/press-freedom-argentina>
 when he received honorary citizenship.

From 4 November, the weekly Herald will be published on Fridays “to be read at 
leisure over the weekend” 
<http://www.buenosairesherald.com/article/223537/a-message-to-our-readers>.

The emailer might like to reflect on the implications for democracies across 
the world of the declining number of full-time journalists.

I accept that we can overstate our value to societies, and I also accept that 
we are far from perfect. But - to quote the Herald editorial once more - 
“freedom of expression is a delicate flower” and, despite the roughness of our 
trade, its benefits outweigh its faults.

You may not cry for Argentina, but shed a tear instead for the fate of 
journalism.
 