
The shortlist for the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction, 
announced earlier today, suggests a broad definition of the genre. Along with 
tales of androids and genetic engineers, the six books nominated this year 
include prize-winning literary fiction, a novel for young adults, and what has 
been described as "a postmodern psychological mash-up".

Sarah Hall's The Carhullan Army is a bleak portrait of a near-future Britain 
after oil reserves have been exhausted, focused on a renegade women's commune 
in Cumbria, which has already won last year's mainstream John Llewellyn Rhys 
prize.

Hall, who was shortlisted for the Booker prize in 2004 for Electric 
Michelangelo, was delighted to find herself in contention for the science 
fiction prize.

"Any collapsing of imposed literary boundaries heartens me," she said, "and 
the possibility that writers might be freer to exercise imaginative versatility 
is tremendously exciting."

The nomination for The Raw Shark Texts, an exuberant fantasy about a man whose 
memory is being eaten by a psychic shark, might surprise some readers, but 
pleased author Stephen Hall.

"The book has been described as a thriller, a romance, metaphysical adventure, 
part of the new horror revival, slipstream, fantasy, postmodern psychological 
mash-up, and science fiction too," he said. I'm happy with all those 
descriptions because I've always felt that it isn't a writer's job to tell a 
reader how to read. If a reader decides my book is science fiction, then it is. 
That works for me I'm glad it worked for the judges and, who knows, it might 
even get me one step closer to writing that episode of Doctor Who..."

It is joined on the list by The H-Bomb Girl, Stephen Baxter's teen novel about 
a 14-year-old growing up in Liverpool in 1962, who finds herself haunted by the 
looming threat of nuclear conflict over Cuba.

The other nominees are more straightforwardly within the science fiction 
genre. Matthew de Abuitua's The Red Men follows an uneasy employee of a giant 
corporation manufacturing androids as part of increasingly authoritarian 
operations. Ken MacLeod's The Execution Channel places an IT man working 
undercover for the French in a Britain dominated by American power while 
Richard Morgan has described his novel Black Man as a "detective(ish) novel" 
looking at the social fallout from genetic engineering.

The award's administrator, Tom Hunter, said: "The Clarke Award has always been 
about pushing at the speculative edges of its genre. It's one possible map 
amongst many, never the whole territory, and this year's shortlist stands as 
both the perfect introduction to the state of modern science fiction writing as 
well as a first tantalising glimpse of possible futures to come."

This year's judges are Niall Harrison and Claire Weaver for the British 
Science Fiction association, Pat Cadigan and Francis Spufford for the Science 
Fiction Foundation and Pauline Clarke for the website sfcrowsnest.com. Paul 
Billinger chairs.

The winner will be announced at a ceremony on April 30 in London, with the 
victor carrying off a cheque for exactly Â£2,008.
 