
One of film director Barnaby Southcombe’s clear memories from his childhood is 
of the revelation that a teacher at his school had been having an affair with a 
16-year-old girl, a relationship that he believes went on to be long-lasting.

Thirty years on, Southcombe is about to start work on a film that will shine a 
spotlight on the subject of sexual attraction between teachers and pupils, and 
will take a less black-and-white approach than the usual hysterical tabloid 
headlines.

“The problem within the teacher-pupil relationship is that there is a duty of 
care and a responsibility that you can’t betray,” he said. “That’s interesting 
but also very problematic, because you do have instances of genuine love in 
these inappropriate situations.”

Southcombe, son of the Oscar-nominated actress Charlotte Rampling, is bracing 
himself for the controversy such an approach will no doubt bring. Teachers’ 
sexual relationships with their pupils have frequently caused outrage and 
consternation, and have been the subject of numerous lurid tabloid newspaper 
stories. Perhaps most memorably in recent times was the case of 31-year-old 
teacher Jeremy Forrest, who ran away to France with a 15-year-old pupil. He was 
subsequently jailed for five -and-a-half years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fteacher-pupil-affairs-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49268854bc31308255e889ece39dbc7e260d3a9%2F462_86_2253_1352%2F2253.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20in%20illicit%20love%3A%20new%20film%20explores%20the%20pull%20of%20teacher-pupil%20relationships&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fteacher-pupil-affairs-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons%20in%20illicit%20love%3A%20new%20film%20explores%20the%20pull%20of%20teacher-pupil%20relationships&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fteacher-pupil-affairs-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49268854bc31308255e889ece39dbc7e260d3a9%2F462_86_2253_1352%2F2253.jpg>
 Director Barnaby Southcombe with his mother, actor Charlotte Rampling. 
Photograph: Mark G. Renders/WireImage 
The film, Scarborough, will explore an illicit relationship between a male 
teacher and a teenage girl, and another between a female teacher and male 
pupil. The children are “barely” 16. “Certainly it’s a very inflammatory 
subject, which can ruffle feathers,” said Southcombe. “But, like all these 
things, it does need to be discussed.”

He makes a distinction between the sexual abuse suffered by young footballers 
at the hands of their coaches and relationships that have a “consensual aspect”.

He said: “There’s obviously the more predatory aspect of teachers towards 
pupils. But there’s also the reverse, which is quite different, when you have 
extremely forthright young individuals who are at a very young and attractive 
age. It’s a very confusing thing and there is no real structure for teachers to 
be able to deal with that.”

His film is inspired by a play of the same title by Fiona Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/feb/13/theatre>, which he saw at the 
Royal Court theatre in London in 2008. He found himself debating the 
controversial issue with fellow audience members for an hour afterwards: “I 
found it really affecting and very thought-provoking. It challenged my own 
preconceptions.”

Certainly it’s a very inflammatory subject. But, like all these things, it 
does need to be discussed.
Barnaby Southcombe 
Under the Sexual Offences Act 2003, it is illegal for an adult to have a 
sexual relationship with a person under 18 years of age where that person is in 
a position of trust with that child, even if the relationship is consensual.

Southcombe said: “First and foremost, I am in no way condoning actions of this 
nature. However, these instances do happen and, in certain cases, the 
relationship continues beyond the educational environment, after the student 
has left school. In that subsequent consensual relationship, should the 
individuals in question be retrospectively punished? How do we perceive a 
relationship of this nature?”

Arguing that this issue “needs addressing, not brushing under the carpet”, he 
points to a report showing that, between 1991 and 2008, 129 teachers were 
prosecuted for relationships with pupils and asks how often others perhaps go 
undetected.

“In a culture of shaming, there is no place for teachers to safely voice their 
mixed emotions without fear of criticism and instant dismissal. Teacher-pupil 
relations go unspoken, boundaries become more blurred and teachers are more 
likely to end up crossing the line if they have no outlet to help them make 
sense of these feelings.”

Southcombe directed Rampling in a 2012 noir thriller, I, Anna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/06/i-anna-review>. With Christopher 
Simon, his founding partner on Embargo Films, Southcombe also produced 2012 
feature filmThe Sweeney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/27/the-sweeney-review>, starring Ray 
Winstone and Damian Lewis, which topped the UK box office on its release 
weekend.

He describes his new film, set over three days in the North Yorkshire seaside 
town of Scarborough, as both “love story and probing social commentary”. 
Southcombe plans to start shooting in the next few weeks, though he admits that 
a film of this nature “is difficult to fund at the moment”.

The cast includes Edward Hogg (Jupiter Ascending) and Jodhi May (Defiance).

Southcombe said: “I’m interested in films about human frailty and how people 
can continue to do things they clearly know are wrong. The characters in this 
film are wrestling with conflicted emotions. They most likely are wrong; they 
are certainly misguided and confused. But what they are most is human.

“Scarborough is about responsibility and the time bomb that is underage sex. 
Can we be the arbiter of someone else’s love? Is it our place to decide what is 
genuine or what is manipulated in a consenting relationship?”
 