
The government of Sierra Leone issued a ruling 
<http://www.english.rfi.fr/africa/20150329-sierra-leone-pregnant-girls-barred-school-human-rights-education-ebola-education>
 last month barring “visibly pregnant” girls from attending class or even 
sitting for school equivalency exams, a decision that drew criticism from 
girls’ rights groups. While groups like Brac and others continue to advocate 
for the right of all girls to attend school, we can also draw attention to 
alternatives that allow girls who drop out, for whatever reason, to continue 
their education.


“This is a baffling policy,” says Chernor Bah, a Sierra Leonean children’s 
rights advocate and an associate at thePopulation Council 
<http://www.popcouncil.org/>. “The government says that having pregnant girls 
in school might have a negative influence on other girls. Show me one girl who 
saw a pregnant girl and said, ‘I’d like to get pregnant too.’ And in any case, 
basic education is a right to all, full stop.”

Others have joined the call to reconsider the ruling. “The ruling in Sierra 
Leone concerns us,” says Philippa Lei, advocacy director of theMalala Fund 
<http://www.malala.org/>, the organisation co-founded by 2014 Nobel-peace-prize 
laureate Malala Yousafzai. “The Malala Fund is calling on all governments to 
provide at least 12 years of education free to every child. Their child-bearing 
or marital status is immaterial.”

Brac <http://www.brac.net> shares in the concern. Along with other programmes, 
the organisation currently runs a network of girls’ empowerment clubs reaching 
5,700 Sierra Leonean girls in 200 villages, where researchers from MIT’s 
Poverty Action Lab areexamining the impact 
<http://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/empowerment-and-livelihood-adolescents-ela-sierra-leone>
 on girls’ lives.

The question for like-minded groups is whether to advocate for immediate 
repeal of the government’s decision or develop alternatives like these that 
allow pregnant girls to continue education on a separate track. “We cannot 
create an underclass or treat pregnant girls as a scourge that needs to be kept 
away,” says Bah.

But we need not support the ruling to pursue alternatives. In Tanzania, 
pregnant girls have faced similar prohibitions; in fact,all drop-outs are 
barred from returning to school 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/2010/03/education-tanzania-pregnant-teens-forced-out-of-school/>
. Brac has therefore begun targeting dropouts with study clubs, which are safe 
spaces close to the home where girls receiving tutoring and life skills 
training. If an evaluation of the pilot shows successful results, we may try 
that approach elsewhere, including Sierra Leone.

Radio-based education worked well for Sierra Leonean girls during the Ebola 
crisis. Brac’s network of girls’ empowerment clubs turned into places for 
primary school students to gather around radios broadcasting the government 
curriculum while schools were closed. “Some of our sisters got pregnant and 
won’t be able to go back to school,” says Munda Rogers, 17, one of the peer 
mentors in charge of an adolescent club. “The radio schools must continue so 
they can keep learning through their pregnancy.” It is not yet clear if the 
government intends to do so.

We should have the flexibility to work around cultural and legal barriers to 
girls’ schooling. In March, at theWorld Affairs Council 
<http://www.worldaffairs.org/media-library/event/1438#.VT_eXiFViko> in San 
Francisco, Brac’s founder, Sir Fazle Hasan Abed, reflected on the 
organisation’s experience in Afghanistan, where it has managed to put 200,000 
girls through school. “What we did was find a culturally appropriate way of 
teaching girls,” says Abed. “If girls were accompanied by an older woman who 
brought them back home safely, even the Taliban seemed to accept that. It was a 
little additional cost, but it was more effective. I hope that the next 
generation of girls – when these girls are mothers, their children – won’t need 
chaperoning at all.”

The ruling against pregnant girls attending school is indeed unjust, but while 
outsiders can show solidarity, effective change will only come from within
Sierra Leone <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone>. Regardless of 
what we think of the restrictions, let’s keep girls’ options open in the 
meantime.

Scott MacMillan is a senior writer and communications specialist at Brac USA 
<http://www.brac.net/content/about-brac-usa>. Follow @BRACWorld 
<https://twitter.com/BRACworld> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 