
People who have worked and paid national insurance (NI) for at least 45 years 
should be allowed to take their state pension early or risk missing it out on 
it entirely, thePensions Policy Institute 
<http://www.pensionspolicyinstitute.org.uk/> has argued.

In a research paper published on Wednesday, the thinktank claims such a move 
would enable up to 250,000 people to enjoy a much-needed retirement after 
decades of physically demanding, manual work – a retirement that many will be 
denied because they will die before they’re old enough to retire.

Increases in average life expectancy have led successive governments to raise 
thestate pension age to 67 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/310231/spa-timetable.pdf>
 by 2028 – for men and women.

The paper, sponsored by Age UK, noted that, while most people will live to 67 
and beyond, there are others – particularly men from deprived areas – who will 
be unfairly penalised by the change.

In Glasgow, the latest figures show that healthy life expectancy at birth – an 
estimate of how many years people might live in full health – is55.9 years for 
men and 58.5 years for women 
<http://www.scotpho.org.uk/population-dynamics/healthy-life-expectancy/data/local-authorities>
 – nearly 10 years below the current state pension age.

Those in manual work or with caring responsibilities who are most likely to be 
hard hit by state pension age increases, says the report.

Age UK is urging the government to fully consider the effect of extending 
working lives and has offered potential policies, which could mitigate the 
effects.

 * It has proposed allowing people with more than 45 years of NI contributions 
to receive their state pension early unreduced. These people are more likely to 
be in manual occupations, having started working straight after school. This 
option is already happening in Germany, it says.

 * Another option would be to allow early access to reduced state pension to 
allow for the fact that the pension will be paid for a longer time. This could 
provide a source of income for people who are happy to accept a lower state 
pension in return for an earlier retirement. Many countries, including the USA 
and Canada, already allow this.

 * The paper 
<http://www.pensionspolicyinstitute.org.uk/briefing-notes/briefing-note-83---how-could-the-effect-of-rises-in-spa-be-mitigated-for-the-most-vulnerable>
 has also proposed allowing early pension access to those with disabilities 
and/or caring responsibilities, or de-linking of Pension Credit (PC) and the 
state pension age that would allow the age at which people receive PC could 
remain at 65.

Women’s state pension age rise: an unfair burden or a necessary reform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
Caroline Abrahams, Age UK’s charity director, said increasing the state 
pension age based on average life expectancy will cause hardship for many 
people.

 “It is reasonable to consider raising the state pension age as overall life 
expectancy goes up – but, as a blanket approach, it risks leaving many people 
facing serious problems in later life through no fault of their own. In fact, 
as the state pension age climbs ever higher, many of those with lower life 
expectancies – who are also likely to be on lower incomes – may end up with 
little or no time left in retirement to enjoy.”

John Adams, the PPI’s senior policy analyst and author of the briefing paper, 
said: “With increasing life expectancies in the UK, it is understandable that 
the government might wish to increase state pension age, but care should be 
taken to recognise the impact on people who may be unable to continue in work, 
for example, as a result of health issues or caring responsibilities.”

Age UK offers a free advice service for older people who are affected by any 
of these issues on 0800 169 6565, or contact their localAge UK 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/> for further information.
 