
If you want the distilled essence of Shane Black, look no further than the 
title of his directorial debut:Kiss Kiss Bang Bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/11/2>. What you see is not simply 
what you get. Yes, there are guys, girls, guns and sex, all more or less 
promised by those two doublings, and if they’re not the hallmarks of great 
action-thriller cinema, then they come pretty close. Look deeper though, and 
you’ll remember that they are the words Ian Fleming once used in a private 
letter to define – and deprecate – the James Bond novels he was churning out on 
a yearly basis and swiftly tiring of. Have yourself another layer: Kiss Kiss 
Bang Bang is also the title of the 1968 collection ofPauline Kael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/sep/05/guardianobituaries.arts1> reviews 
that first made her name as a witty, acerbic and deeply knowledgeable film 
critic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad75545c693f05f6f61612a6de435e1924124a36%2F191_237_3709_2225%2F3709.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lethal%20weapons%3A%20Shane%20Black's%20pulp%20fiction%20is%20still%20the%20best%20action%20around&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lethal%20weapons%3A%20Shane%20Black%27s%20pulp%20fiction%20is%20still%20the%20best%20action%20around&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad75545c693f05f6f61612a6de435e1924124a36%2F191_237_3709_2225%2F3709.jpg>
 Shane Black, third from left, alongside Ryan Gosling, Matt Bomer, Angourie 
Rice and Russell Crowe at the Cannes screening of The Nice Guys. Photograph: 
Ian Langsdon/EPA 
So in that title, characteristically of Shane Black, we have doppelganger 
references, a plot line, a sales pitch and an admission that this is all fun 
and nonsense at its core. Yet he also tells us that it will be highly 
intelligent, beautifully written, splendidly self-conscious and 
omni-referential. Black’s latest movie,The Nice Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
, may have a less zingy and clever title, but it’s still all Black, all the 
time.

In the 90s, Black was almost as famous for the numbers on his paychecks as he 
was for the words in his screenplays. His third produced script, forThe Last 
Action Hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/11/last-action-hero-sequel-arnold-schwarzenegger-jurassic-park>
, earned him $1m. His fourth,The Long Kiss Goodnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/22/shane-black-12-rounds>, earned 
him $4m. Alongside Joe Eszterhas’s $3m for the script of Basic Instinct, 
Black’s big paydays, which were at the time unprecedented, caused immense 
unease among producers in an industry noted for its contemptuous treatment of 
writers, long accustomed to paying them poorly. But they didn’t just unsettle 
the money men, his screenplays paved the way for a new wave of writers.

The Nice Guys review: Crowe and Gosling are abysmal PIs in a high hit-rate 
action comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
Black’s early screenplays were self-aware in a way that paved a path for 
Quentin Tarantino and the movie-crazy film-makers of the late 90s – David O 
Russell, David Fincher,Paul Thomas Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-thomas-anderson> et al – and his 
innovations were simple and liberating for the writers who followed him. In 
Richard Donner’s Lethal Weapon, he upped the conventional post-48 Hours 
buddy-buddy cop pic by the simple expedient of making the lead (Mel Gibson) a 
crazed unpredictable nihilist.

Black was tired of the franchise by the time he was halfway through co-writing 
the sequel (he quit and lost half his fee), and moved onwards into his abiding 
obsessions with his next script,The Last Boy Scout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148904/last-boy-scout>, another 
mismatched-partners action thriller, whose wildness and over-the-top aesthetic 
found a perfect analog in directorTony Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tony-scott>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVVrsGHs2MCk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVVrsGHs2MCk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVVrsGHs2MCk&media=>
 The Last Boy Scout 
Its unforgettable opening sequence is a pure Shane Black calling card. A 
football player, sweating profusely in the locker room, menaced by gangsters 
into throwing the big game, slides a handgun into his waistband and hits the 
field. When he gets the ball he thunders toward the touchline and when anyone 
approaches to tackle him, he shoots them dead. He touches the ball down, looks 
wearily into the camera, grunts “Ain’t life a bitch?” and blows his own brains 
out. Not many movies could follow that opening for another two hours, but this 
one did, luxuriating in Black’s scintillatingly funny and ferocious dialogue, 
nimbly delivered by co-starsBruce Willis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis> and Damon Wayans, constantly 
riffing on the absurdity of each plot turn and the cartoonishness of their 
opponents.

Madly entertaining, absolutely committed to overkill and the triple-layer 
punchline, that script was a thing of beauty. His next two movies – the big 
paydays for Black- were both less successful. John McTiernan’s The Last Action 
Hero – in which Arnold Schwarzenegger’s titular killing machine walks out of 
his own movie into a kid’s real life – might have been a bigger hit, had it not 
been blown away by the arrival of the Jurassic Park box-office phenomenon the 
following week. The Last Kiss Goodnight, starring Geena Davis (the then wife of 
director Renny Harlin) as a suburban mom who discovers she’s a CIA sleeper 
asset, was a plain flop, despite featuring perhaps the best of Black’s early 
screenplays and an able partner for Davis in the form ofSamuel L Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/samuel-l-jackson>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0d1e83d2f302d27b0c2d4b961682f9c828114cf%2F69_243_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lethal%20weapons%3A%20Shane%20Black's%20pulp%20fiction%20is%20still%20the%20best%20action%20around&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lethal%20weapons%3A%20Shane%20Black%27s%20pulp%20fiction%20is%20still%20the%20best%20action%20around&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fshane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0d1e83d2f302d27b0c2d4b961682f9c828114cf%2F69_243_3142_1886%2F3142.jpg>
 Hard boiled eggheads: Robert Downey Jr and Val Kilmer in Kiss Kiss, Bang Bang. 
Photograph: John Bramley 
Finally, someone let him direct his own script, and the result was Kiss Kiss 
Bang Bang, a riotous riff on the hard-boiled works of Raymond Chandler (chapter 
titles are all from Philip Marlowe novels: Lady in the Lake, The Simple Art of 
Murder, The Little Sister, etc), that nimbly satirizes the movie business, 
detective-movie plotting (there are always two cases that implausibly tie up 
together), the action hero as idiot and the conventions of the film noir 
voiceover (“Oh shit, back up, back up, I forgot to mention – Jesus, this is 
terrible narration, it’s like my dad telling a joke and saying, oh, I should 
have told you the cowboy’s horse is blue …”). And this time Black got to cast 
his own stars. The presence of such talented, inventive and intelligent actors 
as Robert Downey, Val Kilmer (as detective Gay Perry) and Michelle Monaghan 
marked an exponential leap in quality and wit over the scripts that had been 
realized by other directors.

And that brought Black back into relevance, to some degree. The association 
with Downey earned him the helm of Iron Man 3, a partial reboot after the 
disappointment of the sequel that came before it, and a return to more organic 
(think more analog/less CGI) action film-making that breathed new life into the 
franchise – all of it due to the infusion of Black’s wit and self-consciousness 
into the project.

The Nice Guys is more of the same, exquisitely: two guys (one idiot), a girl, 
a kidnapping, murder, suicide, intelligent dialogue, the maze-like complexity 
of film noir, and a healthy helping of violence.Russell Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> and Ryan Gosling – in one of 
those WTF casting coups that shouldn’t work but somehow does – are hard man and 
henchman on the trail of a missing girl. Their investigations takes in a 
suicidal porn star and an escalating city-wide criminal conspiracy, and the 
movie soars heavenwards on a surge of adrenaline and effervescent Black comedy. 
Oh, and it’s set in Los Angeles in the 1970s, so feast on those porn-taches, 
the chest hair and the sly retro-noir nods to The Long Goodbye and Night Moves. 
Black’s essence may have a formula, but it’s infinitely variable and 
dependable. In truth, perhaps nobody does it better.
 