
Silence review: the last temptation of Liam Neeson in Scorsese's shattering 
epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
How many other 64-year-old actors will have three feature films opening over 
the Christmas season? Or is Liam Neeson the only one? The man works a lot – 
three or four movies per year for the last couple of decades, and this year his 
films all arrive in the same two-week period: first the South Korean war drama
Operation Chromite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/22/operation-chromite-review-liam-neeson-south-korea-war-film>
, then Martin Scorsese’s historical epicSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
 andA Monster Calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
. Next year, he will return to the tender embrace of Euro-hack action director 
Jaume Collet-Serra – who also directed Non-Stop and Unknown – for The Commuter.

It’s this cadet branch of Neeson’s career – the two-fisted senior-citizen 
action movies he has been making since Pierre Morel’s Taken in 2008 – that has 
held most people’s interest over the last decade. Sure, he can play General 
Douglas MacArthur in Chromite and a Catholic missionary inSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence> and deliver convincing performances, 
but he keeps getting drawn back into the Euro-action vortex, each time with 
vastly diminishing returns. We’ve had two Taken sequels (directed by that 
especially egregious hack Olivier Megaton), Unknown and Non-Stop. And certain 
tendencies, tics and tropes of those movies apparently dictated Liam’s 
involvement with equally underwhelming US action thrillers such as A Walk Among 
The Tombstones, The Next Three Days and Battleship.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
A Monster Calls review: Liam Neeson's tree offers pre-teen bereavement therapy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/a-monster-calls-review-liam-neesons-tree-offers-pre-teen-bereavement-therapy>
I enjoyed all this when it started. Taken came four years before superb 
whiteout tundra-thriller The Grey, and I, like many others, was smitten with 
the idea of a man pushing 60 turning into a righteous killing machine with “a 
very particular set of skills…” And, since I was born in Northern Ireland, 
about 40 miles down the road from Neeson’s home town, I’ve always been really 
glad to hear that accent onscreen.

But there’s a limit. The Commuter may prove an upward blip, but I’d rather 
hope that Silence portends a return to deep-dish projects. Action movie-wise, 
I’m reminded of The Delta Force, in which Neeson was uncredited muscle 
alongside Chuck Norris and Lee Marvin, that most poignant of elderly 
action-heroes, in his truly miserable final movie. Sooner or later, Neeson may 
turn into 1980s Charles Bronson, wandering dolefully from set to set as the 
scripts keep worsening, the directors get increasingly hackish, but the cheques 
keep steadily rolling in. This is the man who played Oskar Schindler, after 
all; Sir Gawain in Excalibur, Michael Collins – not a resource that should be 
wasted. We deserve better, and we all know he can do better. It’s time. Come 
back, Liam!

Operation Chromite is in cinemas from Boxing Day; Silence and A Monster Calls 
from New Year’s Day
 