
Liam Gallagher <https://www.theguardian.com/music/liam-gallagher> has been 
censured by one of the UK's leading mental health charities after making light 
of mental illness in a quip about Adam Ant. A spokesperson for Mind criticised 
the former Oasis singer, who had referred to Ant as "nutty".

"It's not helpful for people brave enough to be open [about mental illness] to 
be met with name calling," Mind's Sue Baker toldthe Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/bizarre/3931179/Liam-Gallagher-nutty-rap.html>
. "Many celebrities, such as Adam Ant, have spoken out about their mental 
health problems and we are so grateful that they do."

Ant, who has bipolar disorder, has been feuding with Gallagher since Beady 
Eye's Andy Bell recorded a bass part on Cool Zombie, a track from Ant's 
forthcoming comeback album,Adam Ant <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-ant>
 Is the Blueblack Hussar in Marrying the Gunner's Daughter. Gallagher has 
allegedly tried to block Ant from releasing the song, promising "trouble" if it 
saw the light of day. "[Liam's] attitude, well, it's unacceptable," Ant said in 
February. "Nobody tells me what to do … This is a personal thing between me and 
him, and we will deal with it man-to-man."

In a recent interview with NME, Gallagher mocked the 80s star. "[I'm] not into 
a geezer who wears makeup," he said. "Especially fucking nutty ones. And tell 
him: 'You're not the only cunt who's off his tits' … Bring it on, any time, you 
fucking cowboy."

Ant, 57, has experienced mental health issues since his early 20s. "People 
don't know anything about mental illness," he toldthe Quietus 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/04165-adam-ant-interview-oasis-lady-gaga-madonna-punk>
 last year. "I was sectioned under the Mental Health Act, a Victorian law, 
which upset me because I don't think I'm nuts … The one liberty I have left, 
along with deciding who I sleep with, what I wear, how I vote, what I spend my 
money on, what job I do, is primarily what is going on in my mind."
 