
The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> Liberal party is 
scrambling to finalise candidates for western Sydney while the fate of the 
international development minister, Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, hangs in the 
balance.

Three weeks into the election campaign, the Liberal candidates for Blaxland 
and McMahon have yet to be finalised, with four other westernSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> seats only confirming 
Liberal candidates in the past fortnight.

While most of the seats are safe Labor the seat of McMahon – currently held by 
the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen – is considered marginal. Bowen only holds 
the seat by 4.6% and, at the last election, itwas considered winnable 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2013/obamastyle-tactics-helped-labor-in-west-20130909-2tgcq.html>
 by the Liberals yet the lack of a candidate has made the seat a shoo-in for 
Labor.

Mathias Cormann refuses to rule out Coalition governing with independents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/mathias-cormann-refuses-to-rule-out-coalition-governing-with-independents>
Meanwhile the Liberal division is preparing for a special state executive 
meeting on Tuesday night to determine the running order of the NSW Senate 
ticket.

At issue is the future of Fierravanti-Wells, who was beaten for the top spot 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/concetta-fierravantiwells-loses-vote-to-top-nsw-senate-ticket-to-hollie-hughes-20160319-gnmf6f.html>
 of the ticket by Hollie Hughes, who is country vice-president of the party and 
a disability campaigner.

The preselection took place before the double dissolution so it applied to a 
half Senate election. No preselection has been held to determine the ticket for 
the full Senate election.

Liberal sources said the defence minister, Marise Payne, would be in the top 
spot on the Coalition ticket, followed by the cabinet secretary,Arthur Sinodinos
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos>, at second and 
the deputy Nationals leader, Fiona Nash, at third position.

The Liberals then have the No 4 and No 6 spots for Fierravanti-Wells and 
Hughes with the Nationals senator John Williams in No 5.

Although there is some uncertainty given the new Senate voting system and the 
halving of the voting quota required, the No 4 spot is winnable while No 6 
would be unlikely.

The high-profile retired major general Jim Molan, who was a commander in Iraq, 
has been placed at the unwinnable No 7 spot – behind both Fierravanti-Wells and 
Hughes.

It was a move that angered some in the party, who said it would discourage 
talented people from joining the party.

A spokeswoman for Fierravanti-Wells said the issue was a matter for the NSW 
Liberal division.
 