
Cabinet secretary Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> has called for 
all members of the New South Wales Liberal party to been given a say on reforms 
which would open up preselection processes for MPs.


If passed, the reforms, first recommended in John Howard’s reform report 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/former-prime-minister-john-howard-backs-democratic-reform-of-nsw-liberal-party-20140723-zvyvk.html>
 in 2014, would mean that every member would get a vote for the preselection of 
their local MPs.

NSW remains one of only two state divisions of the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> that do not 
routinely allow each party member a vote on preselections.

Liberal party's existence under threat without reforms, Tony Abbott warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/liberal-partys-existence-under-threat-without-reforms-tony-abbott-warns>
Instead, candidates for parliamentary seats are chosen by a small core of 
delegates, including state executive members andinfluential members who are 
also lobbyists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/17/new-south-wales-liberals-grassroots-revolt-former-minister-jackie-kelly-quits>
.

Sinodinos, who is a former president of the NSW party and a close ally of the 
prime minister, said similar reforms had already taken place in Victoria and 
they had “worked pretty well”.

“I believe there should be a vote of the division as a whole, all of the 
membership of the division, as to what the changes will be because then I think 
they will stick,” Sinodinos said.


“Doing it through state council is one thing but I think the membership as a 
whole [should vote] and I think we need to speed up the process of having 
plebiscites.”

Malcolm Turnbull, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/tony-abbott-publicly-challenges-malcolm-turnbull-liberal-party-reform-plebiscites>
, Mike Baird and Liberal frontbencherAngus Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/liberals-forum-on-party-reform-to-be-told-to-mind-its-manners-angus-taylor>
 have all publicly supported a more open preselection process.


On Saturday Abbott addressed a “democratic convention” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/liberal-partys-existence-under-threat-without-reforms-tony-abbott-warns>
 to push the reforms and Turnbull and Baird provided video messages to an 
audience estimated to be around 500 members. While Abbott emerged has as a 
strong supporter since he was deposed, he dragged his feet on reforms during 
his prime ministership.

On Sunday Sinodinos said the plebiscite reform had to go hand-in-hand with 
changes to stop potential members from being rejected so that existing members 
could not block others to maintain control over a branch.


Turnbull’s video message to the convention was taken from an address for the 
retirement of former Nationals leader Warren Truss.


Turnbull had praised the National party’s grass roots approach and said 
parties needed to give members more of an opportunity to have their opinions 
heard and valued.

“[Members] need to know that their views are important and all members are 
given a fair say in both policy formulation and the decision-making processes 
of their party,” Turnbull said.

“That means we have to explore the need to hold more open party forums, more 
frequent and direct access to MPs at meetings, it means more open delegate 
selection and preselection process.”

But there remains fierce opposition amongst Turnbull’s own moderate support 
base which controls the NSW party on the grounds that it will encourage 
branch-stacking – though no members would voice their opposition on the record. 
It is against the party rules for ordinary members to speak about party matters.

But Walter Villatora, president of Abbott’s Warringah federal electorate 
conference who organised the convention, told the audience that arguments 
against reform on the grounds it would allow factions to exert more control 
were nonsense.

“Can someone explain to me how the opponents of democratic reform can think 
that it is easier to exert control over 8,000 members across the entire state 
than 165 members that have been appointed over many years?” Villatora said.

“It’s time to get real and apply primary school maths. The more members that 
have a say, the harder it is to manipulate or branch stack the system – this is 
where the shift occurs from patronage to merit.”

The convention also heard from Victorian Liberal state executive member Marcus 
Bastiaan, who wrote in theSpectator on Saturday 
<http://spectator.com.au/2016/10/october-revolution-time-for-democracy-in-the-nsw-liberals/>
 that since the state instituted the reforms in 2008, party membership was 
flourishing.

At the recent federal election, the Liberal party won their only Labor gain in 
Victoria while Bastiaan said the NSW division “suffered the party’s worst 
result – a seven-seat electoral wipeout”.

Bastiaan likened the involvement of lobbyists in the NSW party to the recent 
donation scandal that forced Labor senator Sam Dastyari to resign from the 
frontbench.

Factional fanfare rears its head again within Labor and Liberal parties | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/factional-fanfare-on-the-boil-again-within-labor-and-liberal-parties>
“Whether Dastyari’s actions were explicitly legal or not is secondary to the 
perception of wrongdoing,” Bastiaan wrote.

“The mere perception was sufficient cause for the public to lose faith and 
trust in Dastyari. In an era where a corporate brand matters almost as much 
shareholder returns, companies found to be employing lobbyists involved in the 
blatant manipulation of major political parties may well receive a similar fate 
to Dastyari.

“NSW leadership figures have an opportunity to draw a line in the sand and 
embrace a reform agenda as Victoria and other states have done. The Victorian 
example demonstrates that democratisation grows membership, increases 
fundraising capacity, develops campaign volunteerism and promotes excellence in 
candidates. Centralisation has proven to do the opposite.

“The consequences of continuing with the status quo are dire and will affect 
the party’s electoral outlook in the years to come.”
 