
America, says Patience Carter sadly over the phone from New York, has moved on 
from Orlando. But six months after the mass shooting, which left 49 people dead 
and 53 injured, the 20-year-old survivor feels few lessons have been learned.

Carter, a student, was on holiday in the Florida city with her best friend, 
Tiara Parker. On 12 June, the pair decided to go to local gay club Pulse with 
Parker’s cousin, Akyra Murray, who was celebrating her graduation from high 
school. “The energy in the club was amazing,” Carter remembers. “Everyone was 
smiling.”

The three women made friends with other clubbers, watched Beyoncé and J-Lo 
tribute acts, and danced to hip-hop until they realised it was almost time to 
leave. “I glanced at Akyra’s phone and it was 1.58am,” she says. “I asked how 
we were getting home and Tiara said she was about to order an Uber. In the 
space of that conversation we started hearing gunshots.”

City of Orlando buys Pulse nightclub to turn it into memorial for victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/10/pulse-nightclub-orlando-buys-memorial-shooting-victims>
The gunman, Omar Mateen, had entered the nightclub and begun his killing 
spree. Carter and her friends didn’t know what was happening, and only knew it 
was serious because the “energy in the room changed. There was fear and shock.” 
Carter dropped to the floor and then escaped through a nearby exit, but after 
Murray joined her, they went back inside to get Parker, who had fled in a 
different direction. When they found her, the three of them joined clubbers 
hiding in a bathroom and locked themselves in a disabled stall.

Pinned down by an injured clubber called Jason, Carter said they were trapped 
in the bathroom for almost three hours. When the police arrived, Mateen began 
shooting in the bathroom. “He said: ‘Hey you.’ Then, pow! He shot somebody. 
‘Hey you’. Pow! He shot somebody else.”

Carter says her mind could not process the sudden lurch into tragedy. Even 
when Mateen began spraying the stalls with bullets, it took her a few seconds 
to realise she was truly in danger. “I had two holes in my leg, Akyra was shot 
in the arm and Tiara was bleeding too.” When Mateen turned towards Carter, 
Jason shielded her body with his own, saving her life. He, along with Murray, 
was among those killed in the homophobic hate crime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Flife-after-orlando-massacre-pulse-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7a3a583b403eaea45ba0994c735b2063e4b8e4%2F0_84_4209_2525%2F4209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%20after%20the%20Orlando%20massacre%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20to%20brace%20myself%20every%20day%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Flife-after-orlando-massacre-pulse-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%20after%20the%20Orlando%20massacre%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20to%20brace%20myself%20every%20day%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Flife-after-orlando-massacre-pulse-nightclub%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7a3a583b403eaea45ba0994c735b2063e4b8e4%2F0_84_4209_2525%2F4209.jpg>
 Patience Carter in hospital after the shooting. Photograph: Phelan M. 
Ebenhack/AP 
It is clear that Carter, originally from Philadelphia, is still deeply 
traumatised. “I am constantly suppressing fear,” she admits quietly. “I have to 
brace myself every day. I can’t relax any more. I am always thinking: ‘What if 
that man over there starts shooting now?’ Anything could happen at any time.”

She still walks with a limp, and the constant pain is an ever-present 
reminder. “Physically I am still connected to what happened. When I hear loud 
noises, it reminds me of being in there.”

Carter has not returned to Orlando, but has written a song about overcoming 
pain, and says she and Parkermeet other survivors whenever they are offered the 
chance 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/hip-hop/7604470/orlando-pulse-nightclub-shooting-survivor-patience-carter-lost-souls>
. She has also had to deal with anonymous phone calls and texts from conspiracy 
theorists who claim the shooting never happened. Some have even warned that 
they would “expose” her as an actor. “It’s such an insult – clearly people have 
no idea how it feels to survive something like this. I was shot in both legs. I 
am never going to feel the same way again.”

But the media, culture and communications student is also frustrated at how 
quickly the debates that the shooting sparked have slipped from the agenda once 
the news cycle moved on. “Why do we wait for something terrible to happen 
before we start having conversations about terrorism, gun control or hate 
crime? I just wish people would have these conversations without a new 
headline.”
 