
You have to feel for actors from time to time. (Well, you don’t have to at 
all, but it’s a new year and we’re still feeling benevolent.) There’s the 
finest of lines in a career between feeling overly defined by a successful role 
and feeling entirely undefined once that role’s cultural currency plummets – 
and once you’ve crossed it, it’s awfully difficult to pry your way back into 
the popular imagination. As much as we criticize certain big-name stars for 
clinging to the predictable comforts and rewards of franchise cinema, it’s hard 
to argue with its strategic benefits.

The most exciting film sequels of 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/21/most-exciting-film-sequels-2017-fast-furious-8-guardians-of-galaxy-lego-batman>
Take Renée Zellweger: after a six-year absence from screens (longer for the 
vast majority that didn’t see her whimsical country-and-western disability 
drama My Own Love Song), what better way to jump-start a comeback than a third 
outing as the still beloved, still beleaguered everywoman Bridget Jones? A 
dozen years after The Edge of Reason, US audiences may have demurred, but 
elsewhere – not least in the UK – Zellweger andBridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/sep/06/bridget-joness-baby-film-premiere-in-pictures>
 were embraced like old, long-absent friends. However the star’s other new 
projects turn out, she clearly still has a fallback role.

At this stage, Zellweger is hardly the only participant with something to gain 
from prolonging Bridget’s diary, even if Hugh Grant thought it was time to call 
it a day. But what happens when an actor’s enthusiasm for reviving a 
career-high franchise isn’t quite matched by anyone else’s? Thus do we enter a 
perilous subdivision of vanity project, one in which sequels and reboots become 
less an act of fan service than a drive for self-preservation – one no less 
difficult than trying to make “fetch” happen.

Which brings us, unhappily, to Lindsay Lohan. Once the brightest and most 
relatable of Hollywood’s mid-2000s teen pack, the actor presently known as 
“troubled” has earned fewer headlines of late for her work than for her broken 
promise to switch on Christmas lights in thesmall English town of Kettering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/27/kettering-left-in-dark-over-lindsay-lohans-offer-to-light-up-xmas>
 – a variety of scandal generally unfamiliar to 30-year-old Hollywood starlets. 
Given her absence from cinema screens since Paul Schrader’s thoroughly greasy 
2013 indie The Canyons, you can hardly blame Lohan for taking to the rearview 
mirror and casting her mind back to 2004, when the fast, fizzy, ultra-quotable 
Mean Girls set the bar for a generation’s high school comedies. Lohan’s 
performance as the misfit newbie in a shark pool of classroom cliquery remains 
her easiest, breeziest star turn; she clearly agrees, as she’s so desperate to 
play Cady Heron (at least) once more that she’s written her own script 
treatment for a sequel.

“I have been trying so hard to do a Mean Girls 2,” she said in a CNN Facebook 
Live interview last week 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/election-center-2016/2016/12/29/lindsay-lohan-wants-mean-girls-2.cnn>
, conveniently (and not unreasonably) overlooking the existence of a 2011 
television film with that very title. Trouble is, original Mean Girls 
screenwriter Tina Fey isn’t quite so eager. “I know Tina Fey and Lorne Michaels 
and all of Paramount are very busy. But I will keep forcing it and pushing it 
on them until we do it.” Those well acquainted with Lohan’s sometimes 
recklessly impassioned tweets should understand that this is no minor threat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQhNFW1AXLOg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQhNFW1AXLOg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQhNFW1AXLOg&media=>
Lohan’s one-woman campaign brings to mind misty memories of another actor’s 
attempts to reignite a dormant franchise with behind-the-camera input. As early 
as 2007,Sharon Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sharon-stone> was 
fuelling talk of Basic Instinct 3 – with a view not only to playing the 
bisexual icepick murderer Catherine Tramell again, but to directing the entire 
unrequested vehicle. We have yet to find to find out whether Stone was merely 
in stubborn denial of the fascinatingly all-encompassing failure of 2006’s 
abject Basic Instinct 2: Risk Addiction, or thought she could improve on 
director Michael Caton-Jones’s bungled handling – and let’s face it, she 
probably could. The rumor gets a fresh airing every few years, but Lohan would 
be wise to view it as a cautionary one.

Sharon Stone: 'After Basic Instinct, no one wanted to pay me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/09/sharon-stone-after-basic-instinct-no-one-wanted-to-pay-me>
Yet it says much for the industry’s persistent gender imbalance that the 
attempts of past-peak actresses to reanimate career-making roles are so often 
treated as futile folly, while their male counterparts frequently get the green 
light for equally absurd proposals. Having written his own breakthrough part 
with Rocky 40 years ago,Sylvester Stallone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone> thinks nothing of keeping 
fusty franchises going entirely on his own steam: Rocky V in 1990 was already 
pushing it, but writing and directing Rocky Balboa 16 years later and 
persuading MGM to back it was a feat of startling devotion to one’s own brand, 
if little else. Poetic justice came last year, when Stallone and Balboa were 
demoted to an admittedly Oscar-nominated supporting presence in Ryan Coogler’s 
Creed, an urgent, red-meat boxing drama that asserted itself as the best film 
in the Rocky, er, universe, without a scrap of writing or directing input from 
Sly himself. Meanwhile, even the franchise’s lowest points were higher than 
2008’s Stallone-directed Rambo, a grim, desultory return to the jungle for the 
actor’s grizzled Vietnam vet, arriving a whopping 20 years after Rambo III and 
betraying every one of them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxEuM4IUFWu8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxEuM4IUFWu8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxEuM4IUFWu8&media=>
Vin Diesel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/vin-diesel>, meanwhile, may yet 
prove to be Hollywood’s king of endlessly extended action gruel – not so much 
for the Fast and Furious series, for which demand remains globally clamorous 
even at the seven-film and 16-year mark, but for the considerably more 
against-the-odds achievement of bringing two far less actively invited 
properties back into play. Does anyone remember the xXx films – a less formally 
dressed James Bond reworking firmly rooted in the nu-metal era and aesthetic of 
the early 2000s – quite as fondly as Diesel does? We’ll find out this year, 
when Xander Cage pummels us back into submission in the prosaically titled xXx: 
Return of Xander Cage (no time or breath for definite articles here), while 
Diesel’s tirelessly slogging sci-fi antihero Riddick is also due to test 
audiences’ loyalties (or simply memories) with a fourth go-round. (Let’s not 
even dignify the mooted possibility of a Last Witch Hunter sequel with our 
consideration before we absolutely have to.)

At this rate, Lindsay Lohan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lindsay-lohan> 
isn’t looking quite ambitious enough: she should strike with a proposed Parent 
Trap re-up while the iron’s cold.
 