
Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> scored one 
and created two in his first Copa America Centenario start to lead Argentina to 
a 4-1 win over Venezuela – and into a semi-final against the United States.

Argentina 4-1 Venezuela: Copa América – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/18/argentina-v-venezuela-copa-america-live>
Messi’s goal after an hour gave Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> a 3-0 lead and was his 54th 
for the national team, equalling the record set by Gabriel Batistuta. The 
Barcelona star also became the leading scorer in this year’s Copa America with 
his fourth goal of the tournament.

Argentina now have two days to rest before playing USA in Houston in a 
mouthwatering semi-final on Tuesday night. The Americans have been off since 
beating Ecuador on Thursday.

With many fans in Gillette Stadium wearing Argentina and Barcelona shirts with 
“Messi 10” on the back, the five-time Fifa world player of the year started the 
game after playing a total of just 74 minutes in the three group stage matches. 
Just eight minutes in, he found Gonzalo Higuain with a brilliant long pass, and 
the Napoli striker made it 1-0.

Messi gathered it in from the right touchline and lofted a beautiful pass to 
Higuain, who split two defenders and beat Dani Hernandez with a well-struck low 
shot. Higuain scored again in the 28th to make it 2-0, picking up an errant 
backpass byVenezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/football/venezuela> 
midfielder Arquimedes Figuera and sidestepping Hernandez before slotting home.

In the 42nd minute, Argentina goalkeeper Sergio Romero tripped Josef Martinez 
in the box, but from the resulting penalty, Luis Manuel Seijas got it all 
wrong: he tried to chip it down the middle, but Romero stood tall and caught it 
with ease. Salomon Rondon had earlier hit the post with a header.

Messi made it 3-0 when he took a pass from Nicolas Gaitan just outside the 
six-yard box and poked home. It followed another defensive error.

Venezuela finally beat Romero in the 70th minute when Rondon glanced in a 
header from Guerra’s telling cross. But Messi fed Erik Lamela a minute later, 
and the Tottenham forward made it 4-1.
 