
After moving to London from South Africa, the journalist Lionel Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/02/lionel-morrison-a-tireless-activist-for-black-journalists>
, who has died aged 81, became theCommission for Racial Equality 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/equality-and-human-rights-commission>
’s head of communications. He also helped start some of Britain’s pioneering 
black newspapers, including West Indian World, and was the first black 
president of the National Union of Journalists. Passionate about housing, he 
was aformer chairman 
<https://www.nhhg.org.uk/news/news/all/tribute-to-lionel-morrison-obe/> of the 
Notting Hill Housing Trust.

The first time he was arrested in South Africa for anti-apartheid activities, 
in 1954, he was a 19-year-old Witwatersrand University student. Soon afterwards 
he served four months in jail for painting slogans on walls in Cape Town. Two 
years later Lionel was the youngest of the 155 accused, including Nelson 
Mandela, in the1956 treason trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/sep/01/nelson-mandela-tv-interview-1956-south-africa-video>
, and served another five months awaiting trial.

Lionel was acquitted and resumed both his journalistic career and his 
political activism, working for publications including the Golden City Post, 
South Africa’s first black weekly, and Drum, then noted for its reportage of 
township life under apartheid. His first job was writing an agony aunt column, 
helped by advice from his mother and sister.

Born in Johannesburg, to Elizabeth (nee Smith), a garment worker, and Peter 
Morrison, a teacher and social worker, Lionel went to school in Coronationville 
and then attended Catholic schools in KwaZulu-Natal before going to university.

He was one of the founders in the late 1950s of the non-racial South African 
National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> – the existing 
journalists’ union, the South African Society of Journalists, was then only for 
white people.

In 1960 he spent another five months in prison during the state of emergency 
declared after theSharpeville massacre 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/topic/sharpeville-massacre-21-march-1960>. 
Following his release he heard that he was likely to be rearrested and so came 
to Britain. Once he had obtained a British passport he travelled widely, and 
was briefly President Kwame Nkrumah’s press officer in Ghana, lived in China, 
and helped to found theAfro-Asian Journalists Association 
<https://www.marxists.org/subject/china/peking-review/1966/PR1966-04j.htm> 
before eventually settling in Britain.

One product of his travels was an informed interest in world, and especially 
Chinese, cookery, and his friends knew him as an accomplished and versatile 
chef. Dinner with Lionel and his wife, Liz (nee Glover), whom he married in 
1970, was always a treat.

Black journalists were a rarity in London at that time, and Lionel struggled 
to find work, making many unsuccessful applications despite his solid 
professional record.Ken Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jan/20/ken-morgan-the-nuj-leader-who-was-the-pragmatists-pragmatist>
, then secretary of the NUJ central London branch and later the union’s general 
secretary, made it his business to ensure that work was found, and in 1970Bob 
Edwards <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/30/bob-edwards>, editor of 
the Sunday People, was the first Fleet Street editor to commission work from 
Lionel.

Elected to the NUJ’s national executive in 1971, Lionel became president in 
1987 – the first black president in NUJ history. He used his presidential year 
to establish theblack members council 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/rights/black-members/>. He had also helped to establish 
theGeorge Viner Memorial Fund 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/rights/george-viner-memorial-fund/> in 1986, which 
gives financial help to black journalism students.

Journalism courses at further education colleges had always interested Lionel 
because they attracted the least affluent students, who were also often members 
of ethnic minority communities, and he helped to set up several inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

In the late 70s he became the CRE’s head of communications, a job he did with 
distinction into the 90s.

Housing was another of Lionel’s enduring concerns. The housing crisis in 
London during the 60s and 70s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/09/housing-crisis-tenants-shelter-private-rent>
 was made worse by the activities of rogue landlords. From 1970 Lionel had 
helped and advised the Notting Hill Housing Trust, the charity working to 
provide affordable housing for Londoners, and joined its board in 1976, showing 
a determination to involve tenants in decision-making. He became chairman in 
1994, and supported sheltered housing for the elderly, housing with special 
care for those with disabilities, and short-stay housing for the homeless. He 
remained on the board well into his retirement, and in 1999 was appointed OBE 
for his work in this field.

Lionel was a man of deep convictions, which he wore lightly, being a humorous 
companion with a store of entertaining anecdotes, even about the darkest parts 
of his life. Mandela, on his visits to London, made time to meet Lionel, 
however busy his schedule.

Ten years ago Lionel had a heart operation and was given a less than evens 
chance of surviving, so, rather typically, he held a party, telling his friends 
cheerfully that we were invited because we might not see him again.

He is survived by Liz, their two sons, Sipho and Dumisa, their grandson and 
granddaughter.

• Lionel Edmond Morrison, journalist and political activist, born 13 October 
1935; died 31 October 2016
 