
What are you doing in the summer of 2018? If George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has his way, you will be 
booking a day off to attend hisGreat Exhibition of the North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/05/more-than-flat-caps-and-whippets-exhibition-to-celebrate-best-of-the-north>
, the latest idea he has nicked off the Victorians.

More than flat caps and whippets: exhibition to celebrate best of the north
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/05/more-than-flat-caps-and-whippets-exhibition-to-celebrate-best-of-the-north>
The first Great Exhibition, held in 1851, was part of Prince Albert’s 
willy-waving competition with France. The French Industrial Exposition of 1844 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Industrial_Exposition_of_1844> had made 
quite a stir, irritatingly, and Albert was determined to go one better. His 
riposte, held in a specially commissioned “crystal palace” in Hyde Park, held 
100,000 objects, displayed along more than 10 miles.Highlights 
<http://www.bl.uk/victorian-britain/articles/the-great-exhibition> included a 
steam-hammer that could forge the main bearing of a steamship or gently crack 
an egg, as well as ribbons from Coventry. Six million people attended, 
equivalentthen to a third of the UK population 
<http://www.visionofbritain.org.uk/census/table_page.jsp?tab_id=GB1851POP2_M%5b1%5d&u_id=10001043&show=&min_c=11&max_c=15>
.

Osborne’s answer, for which he has pledged the not-so-princely sum of £5m, is 
for “a showcase of the great creative and cultural sectors across the north, to 
help boost the economy in the region”,according to the department for culture, 
media and sport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/competition-opens-to-host-great-exhibition-of-the-north>
. The chancellor will no doubt fill it with boring old engineering components 
he can flog to China next time he invitesXi Jinping over for some brown-nosing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/chinese-president-xi-jinping-manchester-visit-northern-powerhouse-status>
. But as the Guardian’s North of England editor, I have some better ideas.

Gillian Duffy <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gillian-duffy>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f881ef537c3802262c75ff1d7c03b50f5837145%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here's%20what%20I'd%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here%27s%20what%20I%27d%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f881ef537c3802262c75ff1d7c03b50f5837145%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Gillian Duffy, who Gordon Brown called ‘that bigoted woman’ during the 2010 
general election. Photograph: Gary Calton 
Unfairly dismissed by Gordon Brown as “that bigoted woman” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/29/gordon-brown-gillian-duffy-bigot>
, Rochdale’s Duffy could be employed on meet and greet, to give some real talk 
about life in a struggling former mill town largely left out of the 
chancellor’s northern powerhouse. I would recreate her trinket-filled living 
room and install her on her mechanical armchair in the corner, where she would 
give visitors a piece of her mind. When I last saw her, for a lunchtime pint 
and arag pudding <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rag_pudding> (see the bakery 
zone, below) in Rochdale’s excellentBaum <http://www.thebaum.co.uk/>, she gave 
me a hard time foroffering my spare room to a Syrian refugee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/09/my-syrian-refugee-lodger-helen-pidd>
. “What you doing, you, taking in an illegal immigrant?” she asked. Yet along 
with her blunt nature comes kindness: by the time we had finished eating, she 
was trying to get me to bring Yasser round for tea. Classic northerner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabdd021a946b5fa5d0ca28305505f24c4e487005%2F0_0_3672_5412%2F3672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here's%20what%20I'd%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here%27s%20what%20I%27d%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabdd021a946b5fa5d0ca28305505f24c4e487005%2F0_0_3672_5412%2F3672.jpg>
 Sir Gary Verity wants graduates to stay local instead of heading for London. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The bakery zone

The Millennium Dome was divided into 14 zones, including one designed by Zaha 
Hadid <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/design/mind-zone/>. My Great Exhibition would 
have a special sector to celebrate the range of the north’s bakeries. In 
Newcastle, they havestotties <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stottie_cake>: 
massive, flat rolls that look like squashed breakfast muffins. In Rotherham, 
you don’t have your bacon in a bap but abreadcake 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=breadcake>, while in Wigan, a 
chip butty comes in abarm <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barm_cake>. I can also 
recommend aFat Rascal scone at Betty’s in Ilkley 
<https://www.bettys.co.uk/cakes/fat-rascals>, a slice of halal Victoria sponge 
in Middlesbrough (£1.35 for the whole cake from Yasmin’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/teesside-shops-await-budget-as-steelworks-closure-reverberates>
) and aBakewell pudding <http://www.bakewellpuddingshop.co.uk/> (not tart) from 
the eponymous Derbyshire town – not to mention that deliciousRochdale rag 
pudding <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rag_pudding>, a suet parcel filled with 
mince and onions.

The house-swap experience

Sir Gary Verity (who is chairing the Great Exhibition board), having 
masterminded Yorkshire’s successful bid to host the2014 Tour de France Grand 
Depart <http://www.letour.com/le-tour/2014/us/grand-depart-yorkshire.html>, 
hopes the show will encourage more graduates from northern universities to 
stick around once they get their degrees, rather than legging it down to the 
capital. The best way to do this would be to mock up two three-bedroom houses. 
One in London, somewhere grim in zone five, and another in a leafy bit of 
Leeds, within walking distance of the city centre. The London one would be 
shared by five people with no living room and a kitchen too small for a table. 
The Leeds house, occupied by two, would have a garden and dining room and a 
free parking space right outside. A sign would show the average graduate salary 
in each city (£29,000 in London 
<http://www.totaljobs.com/salary-checker/average-graduate-salary-london> v 
£25,000 in Leeds 
<http://www.totaljobs.com/salary-checker/average-graduate-salary-leeds-west-yorkshire>
) and the monthly cost to rent each property (£1,850 v £900), plus commuting 
time and cost.

The vernacular zone

Along with the bakery zone, there would be a vernacular zone, where visitors 
could learnhandy words and phrases 
<https://twitter.com/MrLewzer/status/715980704048357377> to roll out during 
their time in England’s better half. For example, “wrong ’un”, masterfully 
deployed by Ian Brown when he was called to give evidence againsthis former 
science teacher, ITV weatherman Fred Talbot, in his sex abuse trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/27/fred-talbot-boys-masturbate-ian-brown-court>
. “How do you remember the defendant, Mr Brown?” asked the prosecuting 
barrister, prompting the peerless response from the Stone Roses frontman, who 
kept his coat on, Manc-style, throughout cross-examination.

Choose your accent audio guide
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bde3774ba77a4fb1fdd5908b8f19bc5d2420a0e%2F252_586_5382_3229%2F5382.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here's%20what%20I'd%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here%27s%20what%20I%27d%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bde3774ba77a4fb1fdd5908b8f19bc5d2420a0e%2F252_586_5382_3229%2F5382.jpg>
 Listening to the Manchester Metrolink lady announce each tram stop is a 
reliable highlight of what can often be an unreliable journey. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond 
Oldham Mumps, Shadowmoss, Besses o’th’ Barn, Pomona, Crumpsall ... Listening 
to the Manchester Metrolink lady announce each tram stop is a reliable 
highlight of what can often be an unreliable journey. Like all good Mancs, she 
pronounces “y” as “eh” – “You Citeh or United?” – which makes her rendition of 
“Piccadilly” a particular joy. Her voice would be one choice on my Great 
Exhibition audio guide, which would also offera Hull option 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/humber/content/articles/2005/02/14/voices_hullspeak_glossary.shtml>
, where five is “faaaahve” and no is “nerrr”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff184e5cbe8e6b3714d2034e5397874b5df3f1c8%2F0_0_1982_2975%2F1982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here's%20what%20I'd%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Listen%20up%2C%20George%20Osborne%3A%20here%27s%20what%20I%27d%20put%20in%20a%20Great%20Exhibition%20of%20the%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fgeorge-osborne-great-exhibition-of-the-north-2018-barm-breadcake-gillian-duffy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff184e5cbe8e6b3714d2034e5397874b5df3f1c8%2F0_0_1982_2975%2F1982.jpg>
 Coleen Rooney knows the right way to dress. Photograph: Danny Martindale/Getty 
Images 
A northern night out

Visitors would be invited to join locals on a night out in a northern town of 
their choosing. Outfits will be provided for those in inappropriate attire: no 
football shirts, no trainers. There will be no age limit on the pub crawl. 
Unlike in London, where only young people go out and sometimes don’t even 
bother to get dressed up (Coleen Rooney was appalled to see girls in jeans on a 
visit to one of the capital’s bars), the northern night out is an all-age 
affair, where you are just as likely to end up fighting a nana for the karaoke 
mic as her underage grandson.

See you in 2018!
 