JK Rowling's pen name for The Cuckoo’s Calling was Robert Galbraith. What genre 
does the book belong to?  Fantasy  Crime fiction  Children’s literature  Romance
Who created plentiful pseudonyms out of anagrams of their real name?  Edward 
Gorey  Martin Amis  Kurt Vonnegut  Lewis Carroll What surname did literary 
sisters Charlotte, Emily and Anne Brontë adopt?  Babbage  Bell  Black  Barker 
What alter ego did Booker winner John Banville create for his crime novels?  
Owen McDonald  William White  Declan Davies  Benjamin Black By which pen name 
is Eric Arthur Blair popularly known?  Aldous Huxley  Graham Greene  George 
Orwell  Evelyn Waugh Whose real name was Samuel Langhorne Clemens?  F Scott 
Fitzgerald  Karl Marx  Mark Twain  Roald Dahl Which author announced that their 
alter ego died of “cancer of the pseudonym, a rare form of schizonomia"?  
Stephen King  John Banville  Jonathan Freedland  Louisa May Alcott Which 
acclaimed crime writer published non-genre books under the pen name Mary 
Westmacott?  Margery Allingham  Agatha Christie  Patricia Highsmith  Ruth 
Rendell Which unconventional Edwardian writer, suffragette, and socialist 
adopted the pen name Rebecca West after a character in an Ibsen play?  Lillie 
Langtry  Beatrix Potter  Cicely Isabel Fairfield  Emily Wilding Davison What is 
JK Rowling's middle name?  Kathleen  Kim  She doesn't have one - her publisher 
wanted a name with two initials  Karen  You got…  Well done! Despite the 
Brontës’ adversity to "personal publicity", you traced the writers’ true 
identities with forensic skill  Promising! You have an eye for spotting the 
author behind the name, but need to do a little more reading  Oh dear! Are you 
better at remembering faces than names? Better luck next time  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  