
Didn’t get the A-level results you need? Don’t panic – you could still get 
into university yet.

Thousands of places are still available through the Clearing system 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/results/clearing-service-2016>
. Students who missed their grades can be swooped up for degree courses at 
dozens of institutions – including 17 Russell Group universities.

But the dash for a place can be an anxious experience. Changing your life 
plans straight after finding out your exam results is no mean feat. IsClearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> right for you? Should you 
accept an offer? And who should you call to sort it all out?

To help you through the process, we’ve assembled a team of experts to answer 
any questions you might have.


The panel


Lynsey Hopkins, head of admissions at Sheffield University, @sheffielduni 
<https://twitter.com/sheffielduni>. Lynsey has worked in university admissions 
for fourteen years, at the universities of Birmingham, Warwick and Sheffield. 
She chairs UCAS’s Undergraduate Advisory Group and the Russell Group Admissions 
Forum.

Hattie Wrixon, co-founder of Unisnotforme.com <http://unisnotforme.com/>, @ 
<https://twitter.com/unisnotforme>unisnotforme 
<https://twitter.com/unisnotforme>. Hattie launched Uni’s Not For Me, a 
resource for young people exploring their career options, when she was 17.

Lorraine Westwood, director of marketing and communications at Keele 
University,@LAWheduc <https://twitter.com/LAWheduc>. Lorraine has over 20 years 
experience of advising and guiding students through Clearing.

Sophie Graham, education and awareness co-ordinator and careers adviser for the
National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. Sophie has 
worked in careers advice and guidance since 2010 and this will be her sixth 
year supporting students with their A-level results.

Bradley Busch, psychologist, @Inner_Drive <https://twitter.com/Inner_Drive>. 
Bradley is a registered psychologist and director atInnerDrive 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/>, a mental skills training company. 

Emma Jubbs, schools and colleges liaison manager at the University of Lincoln, 
@unilincoln <https://twitter.com/unilincoln>. Emma has worked at the University 
for over 15 years and has a wealth of experience advising students on the best 
route to University.

Nick Hynes, careers adviser at UCAS National Exam Results Helpline 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/results/exam-results-helpline>
.With over 25 years’ experience, Nick can advise on all options available to 
A-level students.

Ucas Clearing timetable 2016

University league tables 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017>
18 August – A-level results day

31 August – Adjustment ends and any remaining conditions to be met – otherwise 
the institution may not accept you

30 September – Clearing vacancy search closes; you can still add choices in 
Track, but contact institutions to discuss spaces first

20 October – Last date to add Clearing choices and for universities to make 
decisions

Post your questions in the comments section below, and come back on Thursday 
18 August from 2-4pm to follow the live discussion.
 