
How organised are your business finances? With the deadline looming for the 
self-assessment tax return, it’s likely they are at the forefront of your mind. 
And if proposals for small business owners to filequarterly tax returns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jan/07/tax-return-proposals-firms-government-quarterly>
 go ahead, it’ll pay off to be prepared.

Perhaps you’re trying to find a reliable accountant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/jan/05/how-to-choose-accountant-for-small-business>
 to help you manage your finances? While this can be a significant expense, a 
qualified professional with experience of working for small businesses could 
save you money in the long term.Research 
<https://www.aat.org.uk/news/article/small-and-medium-businesses-leaking-29-billion-due-unqualified-finance-staff>
 from the professional body for accounting technicians (AAT) found that SMEs 
were leaking £2.9bn annually because of unqualified staff handling their 
finances.

Perhaps you have big ambitions for growth this year? If you need to raise 
finance to achieve your goals, there are a number of routes. A crowdfunding 
platform, angel investors or an enterprise loan are all options, each with 
different benefits and considerations.


Meanwhile, scrutinising the nitty gritty of your outgoings, from your office 
energy use to staff expenses, could help you save money.

During this live Q&A our panel of experts will offer advice on how to organise 
and improve your finances. Taking part is simple: justregister to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you’ve signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article. Alternatively, tweet@GdnSmallBiz 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your questions, or email them to 
smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com> and we’ll put them to the panel 
for you. Comments are currently open and we welcome questions in advance.

Our panel

Clive Lewis is a chartered accountant and head of enterprise at The Institute 
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW). He writes on small 
business finance and taxation issues as well as contributing to research on the 
UK economic environment.

Katrine Richardson is the director of Metric Accountants, which provides 
services to technology and high growth companies.


Rebecca Harrison-Vickers looks after the SME propositions team at E.ON. She is 
responsible for bringing new technologies and solutions to market for small 
businesses in order to help them become more energy efficient.

Caroline Morgan is an experienced freelancer running her own small business 
providing consultancy services. She is also a non-executive director of IPSE; a 
membership organisation supporting independent professionals and the 
self-employed.


Dani Woodward is a qualified accountant and member of Blue Acorns, an 
organisation that provides flexible access to professional services including 
finance, legal, HR and communications.

Arina Osiannaya is the founder and managing director of the Business Funding 
Show, a UK exhibition focused on SME funding and growth.

Anne Ovens is founder and director of Aspiration Europe, which provides 
outsourced business accounting and consultancy services.

Carol Cheesman is the principal of Cheesmans Accountants based in North London.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 