
“The millennium development goals [MDGs] did not address the root causes of 
poverty, most especially women’s inequality, which made it impossible for the 
goals to be truly transformative,” said Action Aid in areport to the UK 
government in 2012 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmintdev/657/657vw02.htm>
.

Lucie Faucherre at the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD),agrees 
<http://post2015.org/2014/07/21/building-a-post-2015-world-fit-for-young-women-and-girls/>
 that the MDGs did not adequately target the origins of gender equality:

“An unequivocal lesson from the MDGs experience is that tackling entrenched 
norms and practices 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/POST-2015%20Gender.pdf?utm_source=social-media&utm_medium=twfbgppin&utm_campaign=devtw>
 is the business of development. In fact, it is a prerequisite to creating an 
environment that respects and protects girls’ rights. This might mean taking 
risks and being innovative.”

So now the opportunity is here to set the road map for the next 15 years with 
the sustainable development goals (SDGs), how can they catalyse truly 
transformative change? Can they actually achieveambitious aims 
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgsproposal.html> to end 
discrimination, eliminate violence against women and girls and end child 
marriage and female genital mutilation?

What risks and innovations are worth taking? What are the best ways to measure 
achievement? And how can girls voices be included in the process? Join an 
expert panel on Thursday 28 May, 1–3pm BST, to discuss these questions and more.

The panel

Professor Jo Boyden, director, Young Lives <http://www.younglives.org.uk/>, 
Oxford Department of International Development, Oxford, UK,@yloxford 
<https://twitter.com/yloxford>
Jo had led this international study of childhood poverty since 2005 and has 
written on child labour, children and political violence, and child migration.

Lucie Faucherre, junior policy analyst, Gender Equality and Women’s Rights OECD
 <http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/>, Paris, France, @luciefaucherre 
<https://twitter.com/luciefaucherre>
Lucie supports the work of GenderNet 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/gender-development/About-GENDERNET.htm>, the only 
international forum where gender experts from the donor agencies and foreign 
ministries meet to define common approaches.

Katja Iversen, chief executive, Women Deliver <http://www.womendeliver.org/>, 
New York, US,@katja_iversen <https://twitter.com/Katja_Iversen>
Katja has more than 20 years’ experience working in NGOs, corporates and UN 
agencies. Previously, she held a leading position at Unicef.

Saket Mani, UN global youth advocate, World We Want 2015 
<http://www.worldwewant2015.org>, Pune, India, @SaketMANI 
<https://twitter.com/SaketMANI>
Saket is a global youth activist, community mobiliser and strategist 
advocating for democratic sustainability, youth rights, human rights, gender 
justice, accountability, transparency and youth engagement.

Nebila Abdulmelik, head of communications, Femnet (African Women’s Development 
& Communication Network) <http://femnet.co/>, Nairobi, Kenya, @aliben86 
<https://twitter.com/Aliben86>
Nebila is a pan-Africanist and a feminist passionate about social justice. She 
has been actively engaged in the post-2015 SDGs process since 2012.

Kasia Staszewska, women’s rights policy adviser, ActionAid UK 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/>, London, UK, @KasiaStasz 
<https://twitter.com/KasiaStasz>
Kasia is a Women’s Rights Adviser in ActionAid and focuses on violence against 
women, economic inequality and post-2105.

Anush Aghabalyan, head of advocacy, World Association of Girl Guides and Girl 
Scouts <http://www.wagggs.org/en/home>, London, UK, @Anushik_Ag 
<https://twitter.com/Anushik_Ag>
Before joining World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts (WAGGGS), the 
largest voluntary movement dedicated to girls in the world, Anush worked for UN 
agencies.

Nyaradzayi Gumbonzvanda, general secretary, World YWCA 
<http://www.worldywca.org/>, Geneva, Switzerland, @worldywca 
<https://twitter.com/worldywca>
Nyaradzayi is a goodwill ambassador for the African Union on ending child 
marriage. She is a human rights lawyer has worked on issues of women and 
children’s rights for the past 20 years.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter to recommend someone 
for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.
 