
There is a certain perspective on the current wave of female-led movies – the 
recent Ghostbusters remake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/20/ghostbusters-trashing-internet-tantrum-change-troll-reviewing>
 and the similarly pitchedforthcoming reworking of Ocean’s Eleven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/rihanna-anne-hathaway-all-female-oceans-eleven-cast-sandra-bullock-cate-blanchett>
 – that we’ll call, for simplicity, the Ernie Hudson rule. It suggests that 
these movies really ought not to exist at all, but if they must exist, let them 
feature gorgeous young women primed to appeal to male filmgoers’ base instincts.

Hudson, who played Winston Zeddemore in the original 1984 Ghostbusters, 
typified such thinkingwhen he told the Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/27/all-female-ghostbusters-cast-melissa-mccarthy-kristen-wiig>
 in 2014 that the new version of the classic supernatural comedy, then just an 
apple in director Paul Feig’s eye, was a “bad idea”. “I love females. I hope 
that if they go that way at least they’ll be funny, and if they’re not funny at 
least hopefully it’ll be sexy.”

Amy Schumer set for title role in Barbie movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/03/amy-schumer-barbie-movie-set-for-title-role>
The Ghostbusters remake was pretty “sexy”, in its own way. But most of the 
movie’s va-va-voom came from Kristen Wiig’s hilarious meta-infused 
objectification of Chris Hemsworth’s Kevin the receptionist and Kate McKinnon’s 
inoffensive flirting. Charlie’s Angels with proton packs it certainly was not. 
And why would anyone expect it to be? The original Ghostbusters – Bill Murray, 
Dan Aykroyd, Zeddemore and Harold Ramis – did not take down Gozer and his 
minions while wearing skimpy, tight-fitting clothing. So where did “sexy” come 
from for the all-female rejig?

Hudson’s comment was stereotypical of a Hollywood system that values male 
stars for their charisma, charm and screen presence, while continuing to define 
women by their youth and vital statistics. Hence the barrage of criticism 
greeting the appointment ofGal Gadot as the new Wonder Woman 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Gal-Gadot-Had-Awesome-Response-Her-Boobs-Being-Too-Small-Wonder-Woman-70428.html>
, and now the disgruntlement incertain darker corners of the internet 
<http://www.barstoolsports.com/dmv/amy-schumer-is-playing-fat-barbie-in-a-new-bullshit-movie-about-how-its-whats-on-the-inside-that-counts/>
 andTwittersphere 
<http://www.gossipcop.com/amy-schumer-barbie-movie-backlash-twitter-reacts-casting-mocks-news-tweets/>
 over thereported casting of Amy Schumer as Barbie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/03/amy-schumer-barbie-movie-set-for-title-role>
 in a new live-action movie about the famously hourglass-figured doll. 
Presumably themen’s rights types who got themselves in a tizzy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/15/mad-max-fury-roads-strong-women-wont-surprise-true-genre-fans>
 over Charlize Theron’s supposed upstaging of Tom Hardy in Mad Max: Fury Road, 
would have been less upset if the South African actor had been infull glossy, 
demure and polished Dior mode 
<http://www.eonline.com/uk/news/801443/charlize-theron-goes-for-the-gold-in-new-dior-perfume-commercial>
, rather than appearing as a one-armed skinhead.
Buck Buckelson (@BuckyBuckBuck1) 
@GodfreyElfwick <https://twitter.com/GodfreyElfwick> "Barbie Goes to Fat Camp" 
starring Amy Schumer.
 <https://twitter.com/BuckyBuckBuck1/status/804782775450505216> December 2, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/BuckyBuckBuck1/status/804782775450505216> 
One can only imagine the rigid world view that inspires such anger. Clearly a 
Hollywood where Ghostbusters and Ocean’s Eleven movies feature all-male casts 
and Wonder Woman and Barbie are played by buxom 20-somethings with tiny waists 
is the only thing holding some people back from apoplexies of outrage. Who knew 
that upon such curious details were built so many filmgoers’ sense that 
everything is right in the world?

The good news is that there is no bad news, for Schumer’s casting means we 
might just be getting a Barbie movie that rises above the toy’s rather naff 
roots. One can only imagine that the executives at Mattel saw the fabulously 
affectionate job Pixar did with the sartorially obsessed doll in the Toy Story 
movies and decided to take an even bigger risk with their brand. And why not? 
The Lego Movie has done nothing but favours for the Danish toy-maker.

Schumer brings with her a veneer of spiky feminist cool, not to mention a 
singular mode of warm-hearted yet hard-hitting satire. She challenged attitudes 
towards female promiscuity with the fiercely honest and surprisingly joyful
Trainwreck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/trainwreck-review-amy-schumer-romcom-judd-apatow>
, but no one should expect a Schumer-led Barbie film to veer into such 
obviously adult territory – because it doesn’t need to. Even without her 
trademark ribald humour, the comic’s involvement on a creative level (she has 
been given permission to polish the script in her own image) transforms a 
project that would surely have struggled at the box office – Barbie movies have 
previously been TV-only affairs – into one with serious buzz.

Moreover, Schumer embodies the kind of healthy female empowerment that Mattel 
increasingly seems to wants to tap into, if the company’sintroduction of a new 
fuller-figured doll earlier this year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-35670446> is anything to go by. And the 
American actor gets to introduce herself to a younger audience that might not 
have been aware of her work. Everybody wins.

Except, perhaps, those who would rather see an actor with more over-the-top 
proportions playing the doll. But unless I’m much mistaken, these are hardly 
genuine Barbie fans who have been crying themselves to sleep at night over the 
prospect of Schumer’s appointment. There are no childhoods being ruined here, 
only the possibility that a much-loved plaything might soon be better known for 
being played by the hottest kick-ass comic in Hollywood right now, rather than 
for having enormous bosoms.
 