
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> is facing a legal 
challenge to close the gap in pensions for its female staff.

The Lloyds Trade Union, which has 30,000 members, has begun action against the 
bailed-out bank over an issue it estimates could cost major UK companies £20bn.

The action relates to guaranteed minimum pensions (GMPs), whereby companies 
provided an equivalent pension to those wanting to top up their retirement 
savings.

“It’s been accepted by almost everyone that GMPs are by their nature 
discriminatory between men and women,” the LTU said. This is because men and 
women accrue benefits at different rates and are entitled to their pensions at 
different ages, 65 for men and 60 for women.

The government published a consultation on the matter in 2012 but has not 
legislated on how the situation should be resolved for an estimated 5 million 
women who have contracted out of pension schemes.

A big thank you to George Osborne – from the pensioners of Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/aug/06/george-osborne-pensioners-annuity-income>
Mark Brown, general secretary at LTU, is now seeking action. He said: “GMPs is 
one of the last bastions of pensions discrimination and the issue needs to be 
resolved now. Up to 5 million women, including up to 148,000 in LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group, have either got or are 
going to get smaller pension increases than men and that is simply 
unacceptable.”

The LTU’s legal advisers have launched a legal action on behalf of three women 
which could lead to a class action on behalf of 28,000 female members of the 
defined benefit pension schemes. The case could rise to 148,000 individuals, 
based on estimates of active scheme members, those who have deferred 
entitlements and existing pensioners. Lloyds’ schemes have about 275,000 
active, deferred and pensioner members.

Lloyds declined to comment. 

The LTU was “derecognised” by the bank last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/14/lloyds-bank-to-derecognise-its-staffs-biggest-union>
.
 