
Here are some local newspaper articles culled from both websites and newsprint 
editions: “13 things you’ll understand if you are a Southern rail passenger 
<http://www.surreymirror.co.uk/13-things-you-only-know-if-you-are-a-southern-rail-passenger/story-29538733-detail/story.html>
” (Surrey Mirror); “9 secrets you won’t have known about Croydon’s old 
Blockbuster video stores 
<http://www.croydonadvertiser.co.uk/secrets-and-stories-from-croydon-s-old-blockbuster-video-stores/story-29552550-detail/story.html>
” (Croydon Advertiser); “Out-of-date pasty is sold to young mum 
<http://sandsmediaservices.blogspot.co.uk/2011/09/wheres-meat.html>” 
(Folkestone Herald); “Entire KFC feast of fried chicken breasts and fries 
strewn across Cheltenham pavement this morning 
<http://www.gloucestershirelive.co.uk/entire-kfc-feast-strewn-cheltenham-pavement/story-29068611-detail/story.html>
” and “Is this the biggest chip in Gloucestershire? 
<http://www.gloucestershirelive.co.uk/is-this-the-biggest-chip-in-gloucestershire/story-19547377-detail/story.html>
” (both Gloucestershire Echo).

They are cited by journalism lecturer Sean Dodson in a piece for The 
Conversation, wittily headlined “Four reasons why listicles and clickbait are 
killing real journalism 
<http://theconversation.com/four-reasons-why-listicles-and-clickbait-are-killing-real-journalism-67406>
”. In his polemic, Dodson wrote:

Discarded fast food and stale pasties are simply not news as generations of 
reporters have understood it.

There is widespread academic consensus – a solitary piece of litter or a big 
chip or a stale pasty does not conform with any of the news values codified by 
eitherGaltung and Ruge 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/423011?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents> or Harcup and 
O’Neill <http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14616700118449>, whose work 
on news values is generally accepted as the gold standard for journalists.

Can we expect more? You bet. Regionals across the land are using ever more 
content written by amateurs to fill newspapers left chronically understaffed by 
rounds of job losses.

He continued: “Fewer journalists, fewer scoops, fewer hard questions, less 
topicality and weaker attribution. It all contributes to the falling 
credibility of Britain’s regional papers.

“The idea of a critical or rational press so clearly defined by Jurgen Habermas
 <https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/critical-theory-jurgen-habermas> cannot, 
surely, be consistent with editorial policy that counts generating clickbait as 
part of its schedule.

“And so, we see more listicles, more user-generated content and more stories 
without any recognisable news value.”

Dodson, a lecturer at Leeds Beckett university, approvingly quotes the 
Guardian’s editor, Katharine Viner, who criticised a media business model based 
on“chasing down cheap clicks at the expense of accuracy and veracity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
”.

She argued that “junk-food news” and “chasing page views in the vain hope of 
attracting clicks and advertising” undermine the reason that news organisations 
exist: “to find things out and tell readers the truth - to report, report, 
report”.

Does the publisher of the titles who purveyed that nonsense above, Trinity 
Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror>, share that view? 
Dodson thinks not.

He points out that Trinity Mirror cut jobs after it recently “transformed” its 
titlesinto “digitally-led news publications” 
<https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/how-newsroom-3-1-will-change-trinity-mirror-s-local-titles/s2/a556221>
 and the surviving staff were ordered to produce live blogs – everything from 
fascist marches tothe opening of a branch of KFC 
<http://www.nottinghampost.com/live-opening-kfc-cinderhill/story-29277918-detail/story.html>
.

Other publishers have sought copy for free from non-journalists. Johnston Press
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>, in relaunching The Bourne 
Local in Lincolnshire as a “people’s paper”, said it would feature up to 75% 
its content from local people.

And the Wolverhampton-based Express & Star, the biggest regional newspaper 
outside London, established a “user-generated content desk 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21677662-local-newspapers-are-just-about-managing-survive-stop-press>
” to accept contributions from the public.

Source: The Conversation 
<http://theconversation.com/four-reasons-why-listicles-and-clickbait-are-killing-real-journalism-67406>
Hat tip: HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2016/news/lecturer-says-regional-press-listicles-and-clickbait-killing-journalism/>


NB: Dodson’s piece is an edited extract from a forthcoming book, Lost for 
words: can journalism survive the slow death of print?to be published by 
Abramis in January 2017

*In the original version, the owner of the Folkestone Herald was wrongly 
identified as KM group. Apologies to them for the error.
 