
With Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in the 
White House, tourists from other states may soon be able to bring their guns to 
shops of Fifth Avenue, the plaza at Rockefeller Center and other New York City 
sights.

Advocates say they expect Congress to finally pass a sweeping gun rights law 
that could dismantle local gun-carrying restrictions in states includingNew York
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, New Jersey, Maryland, 
California and Hawaii.

These changes could come soon. If Congress passes a federal right-to-carry 
law, it’s “certainly possible” that within a year or two, New York tourists 
might be able to carry a concealed weapon as they tour the city, said Robert 
Spitzer, a gun politics expert at SUNY Cortland.

Trump, who himself has a permit to carry a concealed firearm, has already 
endorsed a new reciprocity law as part of hisgun rights platform 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/>. 
Concealed-carry permits from one state “should be valid in all 50 states”, his 
platform reads, calling the proposal “common sense”.

Smith & Wesson stocks dive as Trump victory eases gun control fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/gun-stocks-dive-trump-victory> 
Gun control groups call national reciprocity “a threat to public safety” and 
have pledged to fight the legislation, as they have done before. But it’s not 
clear how successful they may be against a united government, with Republican 
majorities in the House and Senate and a Republican president.

Gun rights advocates say the law would be a major victory for civil rights. 
Passing national carry reciprocity is a top priority for the National Rifle 
Association, one of Trump’s most loyal supporters throughout his campaign.

“We now have a president and Congress who understand that our fundamental 
right to self-defense does not stop at a state’s borders,”NRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nra> spokeswoman Jennifer Baker said in a 
statement. “Our members and gun owners across the country look forward to the 
day when President Trump signs this important legislation into law.”

Adam Winkler, a gun politics expert at the University of California Los 
Angeles law school, said: “Right now, the NRA has got its way. It’s not clear 
why it would be looking for major compromises.”

Under current law, states have widely varying standards for what it takes to 
get a permit to carry a concealed weapon in public – and not all states 
recognize gun-carrying permits issued by other states. Logistically, this 
“patchwork” of state and local laws “is confusing for even the most 
conscientious and well-informed concealed-carry permit holders”, wrote Baker, 
the NRA spokeswoman.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Visitors to New York City have been routinely arrested 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/10/nyregion/lawful-handguns-departing-for-new-york-but-unlawful-upon-arrival.html>
 atNew York airports 
<http://www.tuscaloosanews.com/news/20140325/alabama-man-one-of-25-out-of-towners-arrested-on-felony-weapons-charges-at-new-york-city-airports-for-traveling-armed>
 for attempting to check guns they were not supposed to have brought in the 
first place. In 2013, for instance, the NRA championed the case of Shaneen 
Allen, a mother of two and a legal gun owner in Pennsylvania, who wasarrested 
and jailed 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/new_jersey/20150403_Christie_pardons_Phila__mom_snagged_by_N_J__gun_law.html>
for more than a month for bringing her gun into New Jersey.

Gun rights advocates view the widely varying laws, and the tight restrictions 
on gun carrying in places like New York City, as “a very heavy civil rights 
violation”, said Alan Gottlieb, the founder of the Second Amendment Foundation.

Advocates often compare the issue to driving: if a state driver’s license is 
valid in all 50 states, a permit to carry a concealed weapon should be, too.

“On its face, it sounds reasonable,” Spitzer, the gun politics expert, said. 
But the driving metaphor does not take into account the huge variations of 
different state standards for granting a concealed-carry permit, he said.

In Virginia, a brief online gun safety training course  
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2012/09/03/online-classes-make-it-easy-for-non-virginia-gun-owners-to-get-permits.html>
is sufficient to get a permit. Other states require more intensive firearms 
training courses that include a live-fire shooting exercise.

While many states grant permits to anyone who is not legally barred from gun 
ownership, states such as New York and California give local authorities 
discretion in granting permits, and require would-be permit holders to 
demonstrate a specific need for a gun. A few states even require applicants for 
a concealed carry permit to submit character references.

Reciprocity, Spitzer said, “would have the effect of gutting the stricter laws 
that appear on the books in many states. It would have a really profound change 
on what standards are applied.”

The Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence argues reciprocity would create a ‘
lowest common denominator standard 
<http://smartgunlaws.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/forced_reciprocity2.pdf>” 
for gun carrying across the country, “eviscerating state authority to restrict 
who may carry guns within their borders”.
gun rights explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=eeb74528-5dfb-4870-ad1a-ddb251f76bcb>
Shannon Watts, the founder of Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, 
called carry reciprocity “a dangerous policy”.


“The gun violence prevention movement has successfully defeated it before, and 
we will again, if necessary,” she said in a statement.

Paul Valone, the president of Grassroots North Carolina, a gun rights group, 
said he expected that gun control advocates would overplay the potential 
dangers of national reciprocity.

“I don’t think there’s any reason to freak out over this,” he said. Over the 
past decades, North Carolina has repeatedly extended concealed carry rights, he 
said. Each time, anti-gun advocates “have come up with predictions of doom and 
gloom, and each time, they are wrong”.

The exact form the reciprocity legislation may take is not yet clear, though 
the NRA has highlighted several differentnational right-to-carry reciprocity 
bills 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20151030/national-right-to-carry-reciprocity-legislation>
. Even among pro-gun groups, there’s debate over whether the legislation should 
create uniform, national requirements for carrying a concealed weapon, or 
whether it should respect states’ authority to set their own different 
standards, Gottlieb said.

It’s not certain whether the law would completely undermine local gun 
restrictions, allowing residents of places like New York City, which issues 
very few gun-carrying permits, to dodge local requirements and get concealed 
carry permits from other states with less stringent requirements. State 
governments might be able to find a way to block that kind of workaround, said 
Laura Cutilletta, managing attorney at the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.

Donald Trump Jr's gun rights coalition includes Olympian and beauty queen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/donald-trump-jr-gun-rights-coalition-chris-cox-theresa-vail>
Another issue is how to address the growing number of states – 10 and counting 
– that require no permit at all to carry a concealed weapon, a policy often 
called “constitutional carry”.

A national reciprocity law would still leave many other state and local gun 
control measures in place. Tourists from other states still have to obey local 
laws about where gun carrying is permitted, Cutilletta said. If New York City 
forbade carrying guns into bars, for instance, tourists from other states would 
not be able to bring their guns into a bar.

With “so much on the plate”, Congress is unlikely to pass the carry 
reciprocity law in the first few months of Trump’s administration, Gottlieb 
said. But he said he was hopeful it would be passed sometime in 2017.

The new law would be a “major victory”, he added. After waiting so long, he 
said, gun rights advocates were not concerned about waiting a few months longer.
 