
Just before Christmas 2013, I was taken to Harrow-on-the-Hill station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2013/dec/06/london-underground-future-step-free-harrow-hill>
 by very important people from Transport for London (TfL) who outlined a plan 
for redeveloping the adjacent bus station and staff car park and using the 
profit to improve the place, including by installing passenger lifts that would 
cost around £25m. The station has a faded charm, which includes a lot of steps, 
though those aren’t much use to you if you are disabled or pushing a child in a 
pram.

Two-and-a-half years on, local MP Gareth Thomas has written to TfL 
<http://www.gareththomas.org/letter_regarding_developments_at_harrow_on_the_hill_station>
 with concerns about how the plans were taking shape. He had heard that 
half-a-dozen tower blocks were on the cards, each of them 20 storeys high, with 
only 10% of them “affordable” and no “first dibs” deal for Harrow residents. He 
asked for “early publication of the financial projections around these 
particular proposals”.

That was in July. By then, of course, London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> had a new mayor with new ideas about 
how TfL should go about exploiting its substantial land assets and to what 
ends. Under Boris Johnson, TfL’s primary aim had been to make money from the 
land by entering into joint ventures with property developers and building 
mostly market-priced housing on the land.

By contrast, Sadiq Khan, has said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-35465056> he wants 50% of the 
homes built on TfL and other public land to be “genuinely affordable” shared 
ownership dwellings for first-time buyers who’ve been renting for five years. 
And, sure enough, TfL’s director of commercial development Graeme Craig has 
told the Harrow Times that conversations have taken place with the new mayor’s 
team “about increasing the number of affordable homes that could be delivered 
on the site” along with maintaining the original focus on “delivering local 
station improvements, including step-free access [lifts]”.

This may hearten Gareth Thomas. But what would an increased amount of 
affordable housing at Harrow-on-the-Hill at the expense of more profitable 
properties mean for TfL’s finances, both with regard to its plans for the 
station itself and overall?

On the face of it, more “genuinely affordable” homes on the site would mean 
less income from the development for TfL at the very same time as the 
organisation is required by Khan to find the money to freeze its public 
transport fares throughout his four-year term and as the government is phasing 
out its operational grant, which helps fund the day-to-day running of its 
services.

Khan’s manifesto lists putting TfL land to “better use” by “retaining 
ownership while building affordable and market homes, as well as commercial 
space” and thereby “generating a long-term and secure revenue scheme” as one of 
the ways of funding the freeze.

But if insisting on 50% “genuinely affordable” homes at Harrow-on-the-Hill - 
or even anything substantially higher than the 10% Thomas understands TfL 
initially had in mind - makes it harder both to fund the local station 
improvements and to bridge the fares freeze funding gap, doesn’t something have 
to give?

One solution would be to simply increase the total number of homes to be built 
at Harrow-on-the-Hill, meaning that the while thepercentage of profitable 
market-price homes would fall, thenumber could still be maximised. But such an 
increase in the density of development might have to be achieved by increasing 
its height, and Thomas is already unhappy with its reaching 20 storeys. Local 
people might feel the same way.

This is a very basic description of a conundrum which captures the tensions 
between two of Khan’s most attractive and important policies. There are other 
influential interested parties involved, including Labour-run Harrow Council 
and local Labour London Assembly memberNavin Shah <http://www.navinshah.com/>. 
No plans for Harrow-on-the-Hill had been set in stone and there are always 
creative options for doing the difficult sums and for increasing housing 
density without increasing building heights.

No doubt such things are being looked into. It will be instructive to see what 
happens next.

 