
Global warming has increased the severity of the ongoing drought in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/california-el-nino-drought-rain-snowpack>
, as part of a larger trend of human-caused climate change intensifying dry 
weather spells, scientists said on Thursday.


Scientists predict that “enhanced drought” will continue in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> throughout this century 
because global warming has “substantially increased” the likelihood of extreme 
droughts in the state.

Recent studies have looked at climate models to predict the future frequency 
of droughts while others have analyzed historical records to see the 
probability of drought. Thepaper published on Thursday in the journal 
Geophysical Research Letters 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015GL064924/full>, however, looks 
at how much of the current drought can be blamed on global warming.

Scientists looked at factors that could impact the drought, including 
temperature, rainfall, humidity, wind speed and other factors and found that 
climate change intensified the drought in California between 8% and 27% in the 
period from 2012 to 2014.

Park Williams, a climate scientist at Columbia University and the lead author 
of the paper, said he hoped the findings would motivate the state to continue 
thinking about its response to the drought with a long-term strategy.

“California, I believe, has a history of when droughts end, they have a 
history of discontinuing their efforts to improve resiliency to future drought 
because those efforts are costly in the short-term,” Williams said.

But this strategy is not sustainable, according to the study. “I hope that the 
measures that are under way now to improve resilience to droughts don’t end as 
soon as it gets wet again in a few years,” Williams said.

His comments are particularly prescient as California prepares for rain from 
the El Niño weather phenomenon – which the National Weather Service said could 
beone of the strongest to ever hit the state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/california-el-nino-drought-rain-snowpack>
. The storm system is known for bringing heavy rains to California, though it 
is not expected to have a significant impact on the drought.

A Public Policy Institute of California 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-what-if-drought-continues-20150819-story.html>
 report released earlier this week cautioned that “it would not be prudent to 
count on El Niño to end the drought”.

The report predicts that if the current drought continues, it will most 
acutely harm low-income rural communities and California’s forests and 
wetlands, putting the region’s biodiversity under “extreme threat”.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced on Thursday that 
July was the hottest month in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/jun/30/weatherwatch-hottest-july-record> 
since record-keeping began in 1880. This came a month after scientists 
announced that the first half of 2015 was the hottest recorded.

Jessica Blunden, a Noaa climate scientist, said that heat records like this 
were “getting to be a monthly thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/21/climate-scientists-say-2015-on-track-to-be-warmest-year-on-record>
”.
 