
Today's newest pensioners are yesterday's student radicals. If they don't like 
the deal they get in retirement they are far less likely to accept it than 
their parents.

 This is a fact the Government might want to ponder. For angry and rebellious 
thoughts are fomenting among people in late middle age who are preparing to 
retire. As they prepare for their new lives, the baby boom generation is 
discovering that the money they have saved towards their pension is buying a 
pitifully small amount of income.

 The problem has been caused by a radical change in the way our economy works. 
Inflation and interests rates are low, but this has dragged down the return on 
the investment vehicle that thousands of people are obliged to use, when a 
pension fund matures, to buy a retirement income.

 That investment vehicle is known as an annuity and, where once it was little 
known outside Jane Austen novels and the back offices of insurance companies, 
it is now replacing house prices as a topic of dinner party conversation among 
adults of a certain age.

 An annuity provides a guaranteed level of income for life in return for 
payment of a lump sum. Today, a sum of £10,000 would buy a pension income of 
less than £800 a year for a man aged 60 - less if he wanted bells and whistles 
such as inflation-proofing. For a woman, the figure will be barely £700, 
because it is assumed that she will live longer, and cost the insurance company 
more.

 These figures translate into a pre-tax income of £15 a week for the man and 
£13 for the woman. Slice out income tax and, as one aggrieved former teacher 
complains: 'That's about four pints of beer. It seems an extraordinarily low 
return.'

 He, like many others saving for retirement, is now wondering whether it is 
worthwhile continuing to invest in a pension scheme that requires him to buy an 
annuity. He still works in education and is also involved with his union. 
'Several people have raised this point. I think everyone is concerned.

 The value of annuities has fallen dramatically, particularly in the past two 
to three years. This is because most insurance companies selling them usually 
buy government stock, known as gilts, to pay out the income, and the yield on 
these has been falling. Another drag on annuity rates is the fact that 
pensioners are living longer, so the money has to last for more years.

 The Annuity Bureau, a specialist firm that advises on annuity purchases, 
estimates that 10 years ago a couple retiring with a pension fund of £100,000, 
where the man was aged 65 and the woman 62, would have enjoyed an income of 
£10,800 for their investment (assuming a guaranteed increase of 3 per cent a 
year). A couple retiring today in the same circumstances would get an income of 
£5,500.

 But it is not just low returns that are upsetting people preparing for 
retirement. Many are astonished to learn that unless they pay extra for their 
annuity - by accepting an even lower annual income - the entire fund will 
belong to the insurance company if they die prematurely.

 This is leading to accusations of insurance industry profiteering. Former 
welfare reform minister Frank Field, for example, believes that some of the 
larger insurers are, quite literally, making a killing on annuities. If a 
company is large enough to underpin its annuity liabilities without investing 
solely in gilts, Field argues, it will do quite nicely thank you out of the 
exercise.

 Insurers deny this, insisting that with lengthening life expectancies they 
are having problems breaking even. 'It is difficult to be confident about 
making a profit out of annuities, let alone a killing,' says John Hylands of 
Standard Life.

 But no one denies that annuities are failing to meet the expectations of 
pensioners. And increasing numbers of people are discovering that they are 
affected.

 If your main pension scheme is a 'final salary' one, where your retirement 
income is determined by how long you have been in the scheme and the salary you 
are receiving at the time of retirement, you do not have to buy an annuity for 
this part of your pension.

 However anyone who has some or all of their retirement savings invested in a 
'money purchase' arrangement from their employer or through a personal pension, 
will be required to buy an annuity with the funds they have invested.

 And many people, including teachers, social workers and government workers, 
top up their final salary schemes by paying Additional Voluntary Contributions 
(AVCs) and the proceeds of these must be used to buy an annuity.

 At present the only way you can escape buying an annuity is if you choose one 
of the new type of retirement income schemes known as income drawdown plans. 
This allows you to keep money invested in the stock market. But these are 
thought by most advisers to be too risky for anyone with a fund of £250,000 or 
less, and you still need to buy an annuity by the time you are 75.

 As employment patterns change and employers become less enthusiastic about 
the cost of running generous final salary schemes, more people will be forced 
to rely on money purchase.

 Even if you are years way from retirement, you can't dismiss this as a 
problem for your ex-hippy parents. Questions are now being raised about whether 
the sums produced by annuities are large enough to make pension saving 
worthwhile at all for many.

 Not surprising then that the Government is coming under increasing pressure 
to reform annuity rules.

 Field's pensions reform group is starting work on the subject and the 
Conservative party is also investigating. Shadow Treasury spokesman Nick Gibb 
says policy will be formulated over the next few months. The Annuity Bureau is 
hoping to push the subject up the political agenda with a seminar in July.

 Last week, former MP and Financial Services Authority director Oonagh 
McDonald called for reform of the annuity system in a report for the 
Association of Unit Trusts and Investment Funds.

 A variety of options is being looked at, including:
  Developing new products to improve returns on annuities. It is thought that 
relaxation in legislation and Inland Revenue rules may free up the insurers to 
develop new types of annuities.

  Allowing people to invest their funds as they wish by scrapping the 
requirement to buy an annuity. Steve Bee of Scottish Life says: 'There is no 
reason why we should spend all our retirement savings in our sixties.'
  Developing insurance schemes to repay capital if the pensioner dies 
prematurely.
  Introducing government annuities. Few think this is likely as this 
Government is trying to shed responsibility for pensions, not take on more.
  Allowing for the proceeds of a fund to be returned to the investor's estate 
on early death, minus a tax charge.
  Allowing for increased contributions to pensions so larger funds can be 
built up. Investors nearing retirement should not assume, however, that there 
are any quick fixes. Because investment returns are low, alternatives to the 
annuity will not necessarily produce noticeably higher levels of income.

 And the higher the return, the greater the level of risk. But war babies are 
on the march for a more flexible system that gives them control over their 
hard-earned savings.
 Meanwhile, as McDonald notes in her report: 'The only revenge we can all take 
on life offices for such poor-quality products is to live much longer than 
actuarial forecasts.'

 