
It was the joke that almost achieved the impossible. Speaking straight down 
the camera during the 18th episode of Saturday Night Live, a television 
sensation in 1976, the young producer followed some raucous sketches by Dan 
Aykroyd, John Belushi and Chevy Chase with an audacious play for some very 
special guests.


“We have heard and read a lot about personality and legal conflicts that might 
prevent you guys from reuniting,”Lorne Michaels told the Beatles, 
<http://www.beatlesbible.com/1976/04/24/john-lennon-paul-mccartney-saturday-night-live-lorne-michaels/>
 who had separated six years earlier. “But it’s also been said that no one has 
yet come up with enough money to satisfy you.”

Announcing that his NBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> bosses had 
authorised him to make them an offer, a deadpan Michaels then theatrically 
produced his enticement. “A check, made out to you, the Beatles, for $3,000,” 
he said, brandishing the slip of paper. “All you have to do is sing three 
Beatle tunes. ‘She loves you, yeah, yeah, yeah’. That’s $1,000 right there. You 
know the words – it’ll be easy.”

The comically meagre bid sent the crowd into hysterics. But just a couple of 
miles farther up Manhattan from the Rockefeller Center, two recently reconciled 
Liverpudlian millionaires in their mid-30s, sitting in an apartment in the 
Dakota Building, were seriously tempted.

“We were watching it, and almost went down to the studio, just as a gag,” John 
Lennon later recalled. “It was a nice idea,” Paul McCartney, who was visiting 
his estranged bandmate in New York, told an interviewer. “But it would have 
been work. We were having a night off”.

He did not quite manage to reunite the Beatles. Almost 40 years later, his 
name is barely known in households outside the media elites of New York and 
California. Yet Michaels has enjoyed a career so wildly successful as to see 
him named “comedy’s most important man ever 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/how-snls-lorne-michaels-became-179894>” 
by The Hollywood Reporter.

In recruiting them for SNL, he has played kingmaker to some of US comedy’s 
biggest names. “Think the Godfather with a whoopee cushion,”one critic wrote 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/lorne-michaels-kingmaker-comedy-article-1.1323674>
. As well as Aykroyd, Belushi and Chase, he introduced Bill Murray, Tina Fey, 
Al Franken, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Mike Myers, Amy Poehler, Will Ferrell, Kristen 
Wiig and Adam Sandler – among others – to America’s living rooms.

“There has never been anything in show business like his track record for 
discovering stars,” said Doug Hill, the author of Saturday Night: A Backstage 
History of Saturday Night Live. “It is a remarkable, remarkable career, and the 
influence he has had is only going to grow.”

Indeed, Michaels, 69, is about to extend his empire. On Monday night Jimmy 
Fallon, another protege, willseize the prestigious reins of NBC’s Tonight Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/06/jimmy-fallon-jay-leno-tonight-show-nbc>
, the stale Jay Leno finally having beenrelieved of his duties  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/07/jay-leno-hosts-his-last-tonight-show>
earlier this month, after 22 years. Seth Meyers, another Michaels creation and 
SNL’s head writer, will soon slip behind the desk of Late Night, the 12.35am 
slot being vacated by Fallon. Michaels will oversee both as executive producer.

His dominion is fast approaching that of the caricature created by Fey for her 
series 30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/feb/07/30rockisthebestshowonte>
: Jack Donaghy, the ball-busting NBC executive played by Alec Baldwin, who 
thought only farmers should be seen out of a dinner jacket after six. Michaels, 
naturally, produced the show.

Professionally, Donaghy is an amalgam of various bosses, Baldwin said last 
year, “but in his personal life, he’s Lorne Michaels. As I always say, ‘Lorne 
is someone who has a tuxedo in the glove compartment of his car.’”

The man who would go on to dominate television comedy was born Lorne Lipowitz 
in November 1944, on a kibbutz in what would become Israel. He emigrated as an 
infant with his family to an affluent suburb of Toronto, in Canada, where his 
father Abraham worked as a furrier. At school, he mentored Rosie Shuster, a 
girl two years his junior, whose father Frank was the straight-man in a popular 
Canadian comedy duo. She would become Michaels’s first wife.

After his father died when he was 14, young Lorne sought father figures, and 
was persuaded to change his surname at the urging of Rosie’s parents, who told 
him that they could not envisage a Lorne Lipowitz making it big in Hollywood.

“Lorne had been aiming himself toward show business at least as early as 15,” 
said Hill. He put on productions at summer camp, before joining the Follies, a 
Footlights-style comedy troupe, at University College in Toronto, where he 
studied English.

Michaels worked part-time in a local department store, selling jumpers and – a 
decade before addressing the group live on television – spent his earnings on 
Beatles records and psychedelic drugs such as LSD and magic mushrooms, friends 
from the time have claimed.

After college, while working at Canada’s CBC Radio, Michaels eagerly submitted 
jokes to Woody Allen. None of his material was used, but Allen did once call to 
say a joke he’d written was “brilliant”. It was praise that would keep Michaels 
going through some anxious early years.

The arrival of Monty Python across the Atlantic “was miraculous” Michaels has 
said, and pushed him towards an edgier, looser style of comedy that he honed in 
Hollywood and back in Toronto. And in 1974, as a 29-year-old in Hawaiian 
shirts, with shoulder-length hair and a rock-star lifestyle, he was selected by 
fellow wunderkind Dick Ebersol, a 27-year-old NBC executive, to create a fresh 
kind of programme to enliven the graveyard slot of late-night weekend 
programming, for which the network was literally giving away advertising.

The show they conceived, originally titled Saturday Night, would aim to leave 
viewers with the impression that “a bunch of kids had slipped into the studio 
to put on a show”, said Hill, but it paid Michaels an adult’s salary. He 
received $115,000 for the first series – almost half a million dollars in 
today’s money – and is now estimated to be worth more than $350m.

The “kids” he sought were “enlightened amateurs”, a world away from the stuffy 
1960s hangovers still dominatingUS television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television>. Plucked from the 
alternative circuit that Michaels identified early on as the future of comedy, 
his first cast, also featuring Gilda Radner and Jane Curtin, was known as the 
Not Ready For Prime Time Players, revelling in their shambles.

The programme was an instant hit, and made stars of Michaels and his gang. Now 
in its 39th season – 34 of them led by Michaels, who took a hiatus in the early 
1980s – SNL boasts of being “the longest running, most Emmy-nominated and 
highest-rated weekly late night television programme in history”. It still 
frequently pulls in almost seven million viewers, and remains a coveted gig for 
celebrity guest hosts.

The hippyish hair and baggy shirts made way for a close crop and tailored 
suits. Yet Michaels remains a notoriously hard-to-impress showrunner, who 
tirelessly trawls for new talent. He found Tracy Morgan, a star of SNL and 30 
Rock, selling souvenirs outside Yankee stadium, and he can reduce a young 
hopeful to a quivering wreck. “Lorne Michaels doesn’t laugh when you audition,”
Fallon has said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/25/arts/television/the-god-of-snl-will-see-you-now.html>
 he was told before his tryout. “So don’t let that throw you.”

Divorced from Shuster in 1980, Michaels married Susan Forristal, a model, 
before divorcing for a second time in 1987. He has two sons at university and a 
16-year-old daughter with his third wife, Alice Barry, his former assistant, 
with whom he lives in a mansion in the Hamptons. He has collected 36 Emmys, 
three Writers Guild awards, and has a star on Hollywood’s Walk of Fame.

The hard-drinking, hell-raising and drug-taking of his cast’s early days, 
personified by Belushi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/28/features.review>, who died of a 
cocaine and heroin overdose at just 33, has long since mellowed. But an intense 
group dynamic remains. “We lived the show, we breathed the show, we slept with 
each other about the show,” Tom Schiller, one of the writers, said for the 
programme’s biography. “There was no private life. I would compare it exactly 
to living on a submarine”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Florne-michaels-kingmaker-comedy-saturday-night-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F17%2F1392648552637%2Ff8a379b1-09e1-46c1-b5ac-fe6a3775d6d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lorne%20Michaels%3A%20the%20inscrutable%20kingmaker%20of%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Florne-michaels-kingmaker-comedy-saturday-night-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lorne%20Michaels%3A%20the%20inscrutable%20kingmaker%20of%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F17%2Florne-michaels-kingmaker-comedy-saturday-night-live%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F17%2F1392648552637%2Ff8a379b1-09e1-46c1-b5ac-fe6a3775d6d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Amy Poehler as Coast Guard Carrie, Rachel Dratch as Vidalis, and Tina Fey on 
Weekend Update. Photograph: NBC/NBC via Getty Images 
A key to Michaels’s success over the decades, however, has been keeping his 
cool among the hotheads. “You will not find a more unflappable man,” said Hill. 
“When fights break out, he will go to his office and close the door.”

His inscrutability even extends to politics – he donated thousands of dollars 
to both Barack Obama and John McCain in 2008 – and many have found it 
maddening. Cast members recalled receiving effusive greetings from Michaels in 
the corridors at the Rockefeller Center one day, only to be blanked the next. 
“He gets to lord over people who want to kneel at his feet and he doesn’t 
acknowledge them, which makes them work harder,” Jane Curtin told the authors 
of Live From New York, another biography of the show.

Gilda Radner joked that “she would search through Lorne’s desk hoping that 
she’d find a note in there that said ‘I really like Gilda.’” Alan Zweibel, a 
writer and producer, said: “We were a bunch of kids, and if we were denied 
Daddy’s – his – approval, we worked harder and harder to get it.”

While admitting he is “certainly demanding”, Michaels has raised eyebrows 
among those who cast him as a control freak by trying to style himself as a 
warm-hearted paterfamilias. “The only way you can really deal with creative 
people is with very loose reins,” he told one interviewer. “You don’t want 
someone standing over your shoulder saying, ‘Why are you writing this?’”

Somehow, however, the show is ready by 11.30pm, every Saturday. And whatever 
disaster might strike, “on Monday, there is a new host in my office, and you 
start all over again,” Michaels has said. “There’s always a chance of 
redemption.”

Almost as legendary as the show is the after-party, which sees Michaels and 
his stars kick back at a flash Manhattan nightspot after a week in the 
“sweatshop of anxiety” watching up to 50 sketches whittled down by the last 
moment to just eight or so for broadcast.

At the final party of 2013, in a restaurant in the meat-packing district, 
Michaels reportedly spent much of the evening deep in conversation with 
McCartney, whom he now calls a friend, and who had appeared on that night’s 
show without the need for a $3,000 cheque.

Amid speculation about how much longer he will carry on – and Fey’s claims 
that “when he wants to stop, [SNL] should just stop” – the pair of veterans 
might have discussed how to work past 70, which Michaels reaches later this 
year. For the time being, however, he shows no sign of slowing down. “He has 
just taken on two huge shows,” said Hill. “He is not slacking off just yet.”
 