
A whiff of revolution was in the air last weekend: could it be that it was 
coming from that new low-budget Chinese comedy? ButLost in Thailand 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UqZb1bUKJQ0>, opening in a mere 29 out of 
America's 5,000 cinemas, was no ordinary Chinese comedy. Dubbed China's answer 
toThe Hangover 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/jun/12/film-review-the-hangover>, the $3m 
(£1.9m) chancer knocked Life of Pioff China's No 1 spot in December 
<http://chinafilmbiz.com/2012/12/18/sleeper-hits-put-china-box-office-growth-back-on-the-fast-track/>
 and blindsided several domestic blockbusters on its way to becoming their most 
successful film ever – homegrown or foreign. Something unspoken lay behind
expectant articles in the film press for its US opening 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-lost-in-thailand-20130207,0,4655276.story>
: the idea that this could be the point when cinema's trade winds stopped 
blowing from west to east, and the reverse became possible.

Well, sorry, not quite. Not even Chinese-Americans represented in serious 
numbers, given this auspicious opportunity; Lost in Thailand took only $29,143 
over the weekend (a tepid screen average of $833), to bolster its 
record-breaking $194m Chinese haul. It's a blow for those interested observers 
who had noted that thisunexpected hit from a minor studio 
<http://chinafilmbiz.com/tag/enlight-media/> was a very different breed of 
Sino-blockbuster 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/lost-thailand-ren-zai-jiongtu-420346>. 
It wasn't the normal blowhard historical epic or martial-arts fantasia, but a 
limber contemporary comedy in which a businessman (Xu Zheng 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1905770/>, who also directs) trying to track down 
his boss in Thailand is waylaid by a Zach Galifianakis-like buffoon (Wang 
Baoqiang <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1316170/>). (Technically, it's more Chinese
Due Date <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/138926/due-date> than The 
Hangover.)

Lost in Thailand touched on an open contemporary nerve rarely visible in the 
country's commercial cinema. It's been praised for speaking directly to the 
ambitions and anxieties of China's growing urban middle class. "Many of them 
feel confused and tired and even like they are losing themselves," Beijing 
university's Zhang Yiwu told theSouth China Morning Post 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1127386/lost-thailand-redefines-mainland-audiences-tastes-films>
, "Lost in Thailand is a very good movie for invoking thought and showing the 
frailty of urban citizens." Invoking thought wasn't something The Hangover, or 
many of the other mismatched-buddy Hollywood models for Lost in Thailand (the 
Zheng-Baoqiang partnership was first struck up in 2010'sLost on Journey 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wMyYiWq_UE>, apparently inspired by Planes, 
Trains and Automobiles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNWx7_tZRcI>), were 
remembered for – but then this style of film is still a novelty for Chinese 
audiences.

The hope was that this new vein of comedy, and the resulting boost to the 
industry's self-confidence, would register on the other side of the world; that 
it would prove Chinese cinema was finally gaining the kind of zeitgeist 
antennae needed to be truly responsive and commercial. Then the unimaginable – 
that the country's film-makers would one day challenge Hollywood for global 
influence – might look plausible. Butcinema chain AMC 
<http://www.amctheatres.com/>'s decision to treat Lost in Thailand as just 
another niche release means that the new face of Chinese film (if there is one) 
remains untested in this biggest of arenas. It's possible, of course, that AMC 
(who acted, unusually as both distributor and exhibitor) made a prudent market 
call, and Lost in Thailand's humour is simply too Chinese to gain wider sway. 
That was presumably the case with the entertaining but often baffling 2010 
action-comedyLet the Bullets Fly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144029/let-the-bullets-fly>, another 
former Chinese No 1, which grossed a feeble $69,000 in the States.

The curious twist is that AMC, responsible for over 5,000 screens across North 
America, are actually Chinese-owned – byDalian Wanda Group 
<http://www.wanda.cn/English/>, now the world's largest exhibitor chain. Part 
of me does wonder if the company's low-key treatment of Lost in Thailand (there 
was little publicity outside of YouTube and Facebook) is also to do with not 
being seen as a broadcasting mouthpiece for the Chinese government and its 
global soft-power ambitions; it's a sensitive time, with many eyes trained on 
the US and China's diverging fortunes. Whatever the reason for the decision, 
the marketing muscle to propel Chinese blockbusters will surely materialise at 
some point in the near-future.

I don't buy the argument that any film is "too culturally [whatever]" to 
succeed – the east, withChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
catching up over the last decade, has been lapping up Hollywood and American 
values for half a century, and there's no innate reason the opposite won't 
happen. Chinese culture overall might have to start looking a bit more comely 
first; there might have to be a few more Lost in Thailands to break in western 
audiences. Perhaps Xu Zheng's comedy needs time to freshen up the Chinese 
industry internally for those things to happen. Hollywood might have got a 
reprieve from that particular hangover for a couple more years.

• Next week's After Hollywood will look at Cloud Atlas's international release 
strategy. What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.
 