
A 40th anniversary celebration of the documentary Grey Gardens 
<http://greygardensonline.com/> in the Hamptons seems an appropriate moment to 
look at it again, not least because its protagonists, “Big Edie” and “Little 
Edie” Bouvier Beale, themselves seem to live approximately 40 years in the 
past. Captured by theMaysles brothers <http://mayslesfilms.com/>, Albert and 
David, in the excremental squalor of their once-magnificent, now faded, 
rodent-infested Long Island estate, the pair – more like competitive sisters 
than mother and daughter – bicker and squabble, reconcile, sing old show tunes 
and, most of all, dwell on the vanished Atlantis of their glory days, a time of 
cotillions, debutante balls, summer estates, swimming parties, the Social 
Register, ceaseless champagne and splendid wealth. Abandoned by Big Edie’s 
husband in 1931, mother and daughter were left to the not-so-tender mercies of 
their relative “Black Jack” Bouvier, father of Jacqueline, who, by Little 
Edie’s account, promptly appropriated their inheritance for his own daughters 
and left them to decay in an ever more dilapidated Grey Gardens.

Grey Gardens: rarely seen images from the film about the eccentric Beale family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/apr/25/grey-gardens-documentary-jackie-kennedy-onassis-in-pictures>
They came to the Maysles’s attention after a local news item in 1971 described 
“two cousins ofJacqueline Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jackie-onassis>” living in “a 
garbage-infested, filthy, 28-room house with eight cats, fleas, cobwebs and no 
running water – conditions so unsanitary that the Suffolk County Health Dept 
has ordered them to clean up or face eviction”. Jackie (by then Jackie O) came 
to the rescue with a $32,000 donation and a clean-up crew who removed 1,000 
bags of trash from the premises.

That’s the thing I always forget about Grey Gardens: the squalor that the pair 
live in – cats peeing behind portraits, crapping on every available surface, 
raccoons rampant beyond the drywall – is how the place lookedafter the cleanup. 
New York Times reporterGail Sheehy <http://gailsheehy.com/>, who visited the 
place at the high tide of its awfulness in 1971, remembered encrusted cat shit 
underfoot and being given “a chilling version of Jackie Kennedy’s famous White 
House tour” by Little Edie. The Maysles spent a year getting to know the Edies 
and then set about capturing their strange little castaway universe of ecstatic 
nostalgia and present-day ruination.

And what a pair they make. Trapped in a world of memory and sic transit gloria 
mundi 
<http://audiolatinproverbs.blogspot.com/2006/11/sic-transit-gloria-mundi.html>, 
they instantly call to mind indelible, time-trapped and memory-ridden figures 
such asMiss Havisham 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/charles-dickens/9084922/Miss-Havisham-My-favourite-Charles-Dickens-character.html>
 and Estella, or old Miss Coldfield inAbsalom, Absalom! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/jul/23/great-american-novelist-tournament-final-32>
 And their camp appeal is off the chart: the more they squabble, the more one 
is reminded of Bette and Joan inWhatever Happened to Baby Jane? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/07/robert-aldrich-whatever-happened-to-baby-jane>
 And the resemblance they bear to Divine and Edith “the Egg Lady” Massey inPink 
Flamingos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/03/interview-john-waters-pink-flamingos-liverpool>
, released two years earlier, is so eerie one is almost prepared to credit John 
Waters with ESP. There’s a Blanche Dubois/Tennessee Williams echo to all of it 
as well, noted by the film-makers themselves as they arrive to film as the 
movie begins. “It’s the Maysles!” cries Little Edie in delight as she opens the 
door. “Your gentlemen-callers!” beams Albert, with a little nod toThe Glass 
Menagerie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/21/the-glass-menagerie-review-a-revival-to-remember>
, and perhaps to Williams’s entire universe of faded beauties and shipwrecked 
aristocrats on their uppers.

The Edies also feel like de facto Warhol superstars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2015/dec/07/holly-woodlawn-walk-on-the-wild-side-lou-reed-candy-little-joe>
, the kind of talentless, unselfconscious chatterboxes who nevertheless emit a 
grungy, low-wattage version of stardom and fabulousness. Little Edie’s 
ingenious scarves (constructed of anything but actual scarves) and her insane 
makeshift skirts (ditto), to say nothing of her incessant singing and her 
flag-waving Yankee-Doodle-Dandy dance in the hallway, make her something of a 
female drag queen and, indeed, within months of the movie’s release, every drag 
act in America had worked up some Edie-related material.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fgrey-gardens-anniversary-hamptons-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd623525341c098aa3de0ba6c90d980a8a424ace%2F0_0_2781_1878%2F2781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20and%20squalor%3A%20how%20Grey%20Gardens%20changed%20the%20documentary%20genre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fgrey-gardens-anniversary-hamptons-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%20and%20squalor%3A%20how%20Grey%20Gardens%20changed%20the%20documentary%20genre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fgrey-gardens-anniversary-hamptons-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd623525341c098aa3de0ba6c90d980a8a424ace%2F0_0_2781_1878%2F2781.jpg>
 The film made a splash – and not always in a good way. Photograph: Criterion 
collection 
Grey Gardens made quite a splash on its initial release, and not always in a 
good way. The Maysles were accused of exploiting their subjects and betraying 
the tenets of the“direct-cinema” 
<https://www.nyfa.edu/student-resources/cinema-verite-vs-direct-cinema-an-introduction/>
 movement to which they were deemed to belong, principally by dint of their 
1969 masterpieceSalesman <http://mayslesfilms.com/film/salesman/>, perhaps the 
pinnacle of the genre. The American documentary movement was a much more 
ideologically disputatious field then than it is now. This was the era of 
Barbara Kopple’s Harlan County USA 
<http://www.cabincreekfilms.com/films_harlancounty.html>, about a brutal coal 
strike in Kentucky; the collectively filmedWinter Soldier 
<http://www.wintersoldier.com/>, in which ex-GIs confessed to horrifying 
atrocities they’d committed in Vietnam; Emile De Antonio’sUnderground 
<http://creativetimereports.org/2014/12/16/editors-letter-december-2014-mary-lampson-weather-underground/>
, a secretly filmed interview with fugitive members of the Weather Underground; 
and the steady gaze ofFrederick Wiseman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/19/frederick-wiseman-truth-crazy-horse>
’s early work on American institutions – the Marine Corps, high school, city 
police departments and lunatic asylums.

In retrospect, Grey Gardens – especially with its long afterlife of 
Tony-nominated musicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/08/grey-gardens-review-musical-recluses-edith-bouvier-beale-little-edie-maysles>
, Little Edie’s own (terrible) cabaret revue in 1978, anda 2009 HBO movie 
starring Drew Barrymore and Jessica Lange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/apr/20/hbo-grey-gardens-barrymore>
 – does seem to bid adieu to the golden age of 60s documentary that come into 
being after the introduction of cheaper and more portable cameras around 1960, 
and the simultaneous solidification of the ideas behind direct-cinema and 
cinema-verite. The non-intrusive fly-on-the-wall approach – do nothing to 
influence or affect the things you are filming – suddenly seems inappropriate, 
given the presence of two characters who are always performing and are addicted 
to drama. Indeed, the presence of the camera itself prompts everything we see, 
and becomes itself the story of the film: an audience necessitates a 
performance, and what performances we get.
 