
I admit my heart sank a little – only a little, mind you – when I first heard 
thatWhit Stillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/15/whit-stillman-the-cosmopolitans>
 was making a Jane Austen adaptation. A singularly literate comic voice in 
American cinema, he doesn’t work often enough as it is: we can ill afford to 
donate his gifts to someone else’s comedy of manners, right? Happily, I was 
wrong; inLove & Friendship (Lionsgate, U), Austen’s brisk sense and Stillman’s 
wily sensibility make for about as perfect an arranged marriage as you could 
hope for.

A quick, zesty take on Austen’s novella Lady Susan that adores and embellishes 
her language with equal care, Stillman’s film bridges the social and romantic 
politics of her era with ours. Beneath its whipped-cream quippery, it shows a 
very real and ruthless understanding of why we pursue relationships – for a 
multitude of reasons quite apart from love, friendship or even a compromise of 
the two.Kate Beckinsale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/kate-beckinsale-phones-tapped-jane-austen-love-friendship>
, an actress too few film-makers have thought to challenge over the years, 
turns out to be an optimum fit for Austen – all surface serenity masking 
Stanley-knife severity. But it’s Tom Bennett, so inspired and endearing as the 
most gormless of Austen suitors, who is the revelation here, finding exquisite 
possibilities for physical comedy amid all those impeccable words. Stillman, 
for his part, lets no opportunity for a laugh, however rueful, slip. Ang Lee’s
Sense and Sensibility remains the most gracious of Austens on film, but it’s no 
longer the funniest.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz-_HQ0bUzS8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz-_HQ0bUzS8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz-_HQ0bUzS8&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Nice Guys. <https://youtu.be/z-_HQ0bUzS8> 
It’s a good week for film comedy, as it happens. The jokes in Shane Black’s 
underworld odd-couple comedyThe Nice Guys (Icon, 15) are certainly broader and 
bro-ier than those cultivated by Stillman, but they land just as deliciously. 
Black has always managed a surprising balance of brawny genre muscle with fleet 
comic footwork, and while this throwback effort – stewed in 1970s sweat the 
colour of tea – is a straighter, less subversive party than 2005’sKiss Kiss 
Bang Bang, he still has considerable fun at the expense of Hollywood’s most 
po-faced masculine archetypes.

The character names are your first clue. Russell Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> is brutish enforcer Jackson 
Healy,Ryan Gosling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> is louche 
private eye Holland March. As they haphazardly join forces on a missing persons 
case in disco-era LA, their macho puffery is about as formidable as Jessica 
Fletcher in an armoured vest, which is of course half the fun. Crowe and 
Gosling have a tipsy, hangdog chemistry that keeps Black’s most clever-clogs 
writing from falling into snark, but that’s rarely a risk. There’s a genuine 
love here for the neo-noir tropes that the film so breezily inverts and it’s 
never smarmy when it can be funny instead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df8Kc5wy0Rxg&media=>
Watch the trailer for Fire at Sea. <https://youtu.be/f8Kc5wy0Rxg> 
We stop the laugh riot abruptly in its tracks, however, for Fire at Sea 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 12), Gianfranco Rosi’s subtly shattering observational 
documentary on Europe’s migrant crisis, which examines life on both sides of 
the border with all the level-headed humanity we need in this ugly age of
Skittles analogies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/donald-trump-jnr-compares-refugees-poisoned-skittles-twitter-reacted>
. Concentrating its focus on the tiny Sicilian isle of Lampedusa, a key passage 
point for many North Africans desperate for a better life, Rosi’s patient 
camera absorbs both the everyday and more extreme frailties of resident and 
refugee communities, resisting both patronising parallels and sanctimonious 
assertions of difference. It’s graceful but upsetting viewing, perhaps best 
viewed with the relatively hopeful chaser of Netflix’s 40-minute originalThe 
White Helmets, in which documentarian Orlando von Einsiedel (recently 
Oscar-nominated forVirunga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/guy-lodge-dvds-fury-serena-effie-gray-life-itself-virunga>
) ventures into Aleppo to study the work of the Syrian Civil Defence, a 
volunteer group charged with retrieving human life from the rubble. Gripping 
and more considered than sentimental, it offers an unfamiliar perspective on a 
crisis usually documented in entirely despairing terms.

Finally, the pick of this week’s rereleases come with an autumnal shiver. 
Jacques Tourneur’s slinky, shape-shifting 1942 horror filmCat People 
(Criterion, PG) has been given typically immaculate Criterion Collection 
treatment. With a 2K restoration this lush, the knife edge between B-movie and 
capital-A art film has never been sharper.

There’s a further treasure in Early Murnau: Five Films 1921-1925 (Eureka, PG), 
a fascinating, deep-cut compilation of the German expressionist’s 
less celebrated silent work, from class-conscious murder mystery The Haunted 
Castle to smoky psychological reverie Phantom, a glorious apparition thought 
lost until a decade ago.
 