
A little-known playwright once wrote “the course of true love never did run 
smooth”, but actually, it does. All the time, in fact. For most of us, falling 
in love works a bit like this: you meet someone at random, then arrange to meet 
them, then arrange to meet them a few more times, and before you know it, 
you’re home on a Friday night, falling out over who has the last bit of Popcorn 
Chicken while watching Big Brother. You would leave them, but you’re now 
worried you’ve become too old and ugly for the single’s market. It’s like 
falling off a log.

But this is not the stuff of great, romantic literature. In novels, love isn’t 
worth a thing unless it’s defined by hardships overcome. To do this, authors 
gleefully scatter an array of barriers in the way of love’s young dreamers. 
Here are 10 ways in which writers have been the metaphorical third wheel in 
many a fictional romance.

1. SHE DOESN’T EVEN GO HERE
This is your classic star-crossed lovers, whose backgrounds (often beyond 
their control) render them victims of circumstance. It’d be churlish to not 
mention Romeo and Juliet (warring families) but far more interesting, I think, 
are Callum and Sephy from Malorie Blackman’sNoughts & Crosses 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/noughts-and-crosses-6.html>, set in a 
racism-flipped world where dark-skinned Sephy isn’t allowed to pash with the 
white son of the lowly cleaning lady. I also have a huge soft spot for Catholic 
Kevin and Protestant Sadie in Joan Lingard’s 90’s IRA-centric series that 
started withThe Twelfth Day of July 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/books/the-twelfth-day-of-july/9780140371758/>.

2. HE’S A BIT OF A FIXER-UPPER
“It’s not you, it’s me” is certainly true of these difficult nuts to crack. 
From Mr Big toMr Rochester <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/jane-eyre-47.html>, 
emotionally crippled and wholly unavailable men - far from undesirable - are 
actually a sexy challenge for many literary heroines. If onlyTwilight’s Bella 
could meet Edward’s impossible standards 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/twilight-11.html>, if only Anastasia could get 
her head around Christian’s contract, if only Mina Harker could resistDracula 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dracula-47.html>’s allure. Hard work, if you 
ask me, just get on Tinder, ladies, there’s plenty of fish in the sea.
 Twilight’s Edward and Bella: It’s hard to meet the standards of someone who 
was born in 1901... even if they are the undead. Photograph: Everett Collection 
/ Rex Features/Everett Collection/Rex Features 
3. I’VE BEEN AROUND THE WORLD AND I, I ,I, I CAN’T FIND MY BABY
Sometimes, when I say writers put obstacles in the path of a couple, I mean 
just that – actual space and time in the way of their love. Will and Lyra meet 
inThe Subtle Knife <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/subtle-knife-4.html> only 
to then have to move heaven and earth (literally) to be reunited. In the end 
(spoilers) there is a world between them. Similar story for Viola and Todd in 
Patrick Ness’sThe Ask and The Answer 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ask-and-the-answer.html> while spiky Daisy 
meets Edmund inHow I Live Now 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-i-live-now-4.html> by Meg Rosoff about 
half an hour before WW3 breaks out. Unfortunate. It’s lucky she has a psychic 
link with him, enabling her to track him down. In Audrey Niffenegger’sThe Time 
Traveller’s Wife <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/time-traveler-s-wife.html>, 
it’s time itself that gets in the way.

4. EXPIRATION DATING
Is there anything sexier than a dying person? Terminal illness is well hot, 
right? Well at least it was for Hazel and Augustus inThe Fault In Our Stars 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/fault-in-our-stars-4.html>, Landon and Jamie 
in Nicholas Sparks’ A Walk To Remember  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/walk-to-remember.html>and Tessa and Adam in 
Before I Die. But why let death get in the way of love – just ask Mia in Gayle 
Forman’sIf I Stay <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/if-i-stay-4.html>, or, of 
course, Cathy fromWuthering Heights 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-34.html>.

5. I WOULD DO ANYTHING FOR LOVE
Nothing says “I Love You” like completing a mythical quest for a loved one. 
Orpheus had to travel into the Underworld and perform his greatest hits for 
Hades before he was allowed to take Eurydice back to the land of the living 
(only to then muck it up at the last minute). Rama had to rescue Sita from 
Ravana, Mal must bring the antlers of Morozova’s Stag to Alina in Leigh 
Bardugo’sShadow and Bone 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/287335/>, and pretty 
much ANY YA roadtrip novel would fall into the “quest” category. I prefer my 
quests a little darker and Valmont’s deflowering of Madame De Tourvel to win 
the “love” of Madame de Merteuil inLes Liaisons Dangereuses  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/liaisons-dangereuses-3.html>is much more to my 
taste.

6. FEMININE MYSTIQUE
It’s not just the men who throw a spanner in the works when it comes to love. 
Sometimes a female character proves just too much of an unknowable mystery to 
welcome love in. These characters, often too damaged to love or be loved, pop 
up throughout fiction, with John Green a notable fan. Both Alaska (in John 
Green’sLooking For Alaska 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/looking-for-alaska.html>) and Margo (Paper 
Towns <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/paper-towns.html>) are simply too 
complicated for their male suitors. The Lisbon sisters prove too much for a 
whole teenage boy Greek chorus in Jeffrey Eugenides’The Virgin Suicides 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/virgin-suicides.html>. Perhaps the ultimate 
romantic enigma is Margaret Atwood’s Oryx inOryx and Crake 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/oryx-and-crake.html>: while the horrors of her 
childhood are clear, we’re never invited into her head and she offers little 
more than “Oh Jimmy” when he tries to love her.

7. TIME ISN’T ON YOUR SIDE
Or, Any Gay or Dark-Skinned Character In A Novel Set Before 1970. The most 
famous example is Annie Proulx’sBrokeback Mountain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brokeback_Mountain>, and Robin Talley’s Lies We 
Tell Ourselves <http://www.robintalley.com/lies-we-tell-ourselves-2/> goes one 
better by featuring a gay character of colour in segregated 1960s America. My 
contribution to theLove Hurts <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-hurts.html> 
anthology was to explore historically forbidden love in the navy during the 
Korean War. Hello sailor!

8. THERE THE WHOLE TIME
Fiction would love us to believe that one day we’ll see the reliable best 
friend or Boy-or Girl-Next-Door in a whole new light and fall hopelessly in 
love with them. I once announced this never really happened and half of Twitter 
chimed in with “It did! It happened to a friend of my second cousin!” Please! I 
can hear the biological clock ticking from here! Anyway, Stephanie Perkins’Lola 
and the Boy Next Door 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lola-and-the-boy-next-door.html> does what it 
says on the tin, and I was keen to explore if you CAN fall for the reliable 
friend in my new novel Under My Skin. Jo inLittle Women 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-women-30.html> bucks the trend by 
rejecting hapless Boy Next Door Laurie.

9. HATE AT FIRST SIGHT
I hate you! No…wait…I love you! Again, I’m not so sure this one ever really 
happens, but in the land of fiction it’s more than likely that an early 
antagonistic relationship will bloom into something romantic. The ultimate 
example is Darcy inPride and Prejudice 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pride-and-prejudice-47.html>, although more 
recent victims of Hate At First Sight would include Patch inHush, Hush 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hush-hush-2.html>, Damon in The Vampire Diaries
 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/100-the-vampire-diaries-the-unofficial-guide.html>
 and Eric in theSookie Stackhouse 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sookie_Stackhouse> books.
 Jennifer Lawrence as Katniss Everdeen and Josh Hutcherson as Peeta in a scene 
from the film version The Hunger Games, but Gale is always there in the back of 
Katniss’s mind. Photograph: Allstar/LIONSGATE/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
10. THE LOVE TRIANGLE
Well, throw a dart into the YA section of any bookshop to find an example. 
Sometimes a third party is what makes it so hard to establish where the OTP 
really lies. I do accept that sometimes it’s hard to choose between two 
suitors. It happens to me on the daily. The most famous recent example is 
Katniss, Peeta and Gale inThe Hunger Games 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-11.html>, although I always 
secretly shipped Katniss and Johanna Mason to be honest. Ali Condie’sMatched 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/matched.html>, Twilight 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/twilight-11.html>, Andrew Smith’s Grasshopper 
Jungle <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/grasshopper-jungle-266203.html> and 
many more novels have all made three a crowd. Personally I prefer the love 
triangle in Melvin Burgess’sJunk <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/junk.html>, 
in which Tar’s devotion to heroin split he and Gemma apart.
 Love Hurts 
James Dawson is the current Queen of Teen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/11/james-dawson-wins-queen-of-teen>
 who’s latest books areSay Her Name 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/say-her-name.html> and This Book Is Gay 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-book-is-gay.html>. He joins authors 
Patrick Ness, David Levithan,Laura Dockrill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/ng-interactive/2015/feb/10/free-read-gentlewoman-laura-dockrill-love-hurts-malorie-blackman>
 and Malorie Blackman herself in Malorie’s anthologyLove Hurts 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-hurts.html>, which is our teen book focus 
this month -get your free copy here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/competition/2015/feb/10/malorie-blackman-love-hurts-giveaway>
.

James Dawson, children’s laureate  
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Malorie|Blackman>
Malorie Blackman, 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Malorie|Blackman>
Patrick Ness and 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Malorie|Blackman>
Catherine Johnson will be live 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Malorie|Blackman>
in discussion about what “love against the odds” means for today’s teens 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Malorie|Blackman>
 at Waterstones Picadilly in London tonight.

For those living in and around Birmingham, there’s another Love Hurts event on 
Friday 13 February with James Dawson, Susie Day and Bali Rai 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/displayDetailEvent.do?searchType=1&author=Bali|Ra>
 at Birmingham Waterstones.
 