
One of the linchpins of the City – the way financial products denominated in 
euros are cleared – should not be under any immediate threat as a result of 
Brexit, the chief executive of theLondon Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> said.

Xavier Rolet, who has agreed a £21bn merger between the LSE and Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-agree-merger-terms-costs>
, insisted that the combined company would be based in London and said there 
would be “no immediate threat” that it would lose euro-denominated clearing.

The referendum result has cast doubt over the merger, which has been approved 
by shareholders from both companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/lse-shareholders-expected-to-back-deutsche-borse-merger-london-stock-exchange>
, but the LSE said it was making “good progress”. Under the terms of the deal, 
the combined firm will be domiciled in Britain, with head offices in Frankfurt 
and London, butGerman politicians and regulators have questioned the London base
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-brexit-vote-uk-german>
, and whether the merger should go ahead at all.

The vote for Brexit has raised questions about the role of the City and some 
of the institutions based in the financial centre. But Rolet played down ideas 
that euro-clearing, which takes place through its clearing house arm, would 
lose out.

This is despite the fact that there has been opposition from German and French 
politicians and regulators 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/07/26/deutsche-boerse-wins-investor-support-for-london-stock-exchange/>
, who say euro-denominated trades should not be cleared outside the currency 
bloc. The UK won a court ruling last year to protect its right to clear euro 
trades in a dispute with the European Central Bank, which regulates the 
currency.

Rolet said the ECB had no regulatory powers over clearing euros and to change 
this would require an EU treaty change. “That’s not impossible but at this time 
there is no immediate threat from that standpoint.”

Rolet, who is due to leave once the merger goes through, also said the result 
of the 23 June referendum would not alter the plan for the business to be 
domiciles in the UK. “The deal isn’t subject to change,. Its terms are set. The 
top co will be in the UK.”

He expects the deal to be completed in the first or second quarter of next 
year, with both companies focused on gaining approval from regulators in 40 
jurisdictions around the world. The boardwould be made up of six non-executive 
directors from both sides, and any substantive changes would require a 75% 
majority.

The LSE’s chairman, Donald Brydon, who is to chair the combined group, has 
hinted that there could be changes to its structure before the UK formally 
leaves the EU.

Deutsche Börse’s chief executive, Carsten Kengeter, is to run the combined 
group.He has reportedly floated the idea of setting up a dual holding company 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b6148af2-42d3-11e6-9b66-0712b3873ae1.html#axzz4GLUvXsYe>
 after the merger to appease German regulators.

Rolet said it was in the EU’s interest to give Britain access to the single 
market. “The cost would be very high not just for the UK but also for the rest 
of the EU. We’d be going to fragmentation, small liquidity pools, added cost.”

He argued that European industry would lose out hugely if it did not have 
access to London’s “first-class financial services” when it needed to raise 
money. The UK accounts for two-thirds of the EU’s financial services.

His comments came as the LSE reported a 9% rise in revenue to £722m for the 
six months to June, while adjusted operating profit was also up 9%, to £333m.


The LSE has spent £55m in advisory fees on the merger so far. The company and 
its Frankfurt counterpartannounced plans for a “merger of equals” this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/lse-london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-europe>
 after two previous failed attempts.
 