
Heading for a first … the LSE's new director, Craig Calhoun

After the messy affair that surrounded the resignation of Sir Howard Davies as 
director, the London School of Economics will hope that the announcement of the 
appointment of Professor Craig Calhoun this week will see the beginning of a 
new chapter in the school's history. Despite the rather unseemly controversy of 
the last few months, the LSE remains one of the most prestigious and 
world-leading institutions, and a return to academic debate rather than the 
merits (or otherwise) of its links with Muammar Gaddafi will be paramount.

As I understand it, the final shortlist for the post of director was comprised 
entirely of international candidates. Calhoun comes from the US, and was born 
in Watseka, Illinois in 1952. He is an outstandingly accomplished academic, who 
took an undergraduate degree in anthropology at the University of Southern 
California, a Masters in social anthropology at the University of Manchester 
and his Doctorate at Oxford University in 1980 Since 1999 he has served as 
president of the Social Science Research Council in the US, as well as a 
professorial role at New York University.

His academic expertise is wide-ranging, with work including historical 
sociology and the study of social movements and political participation. Given 
what's happened at LSE recently, it's apt that Calhourn inEvicting the public: 
why has occupying public spaces brought such heavy-handed repression? 
<http://www.ssrc.org/calhoun/2011/11/18/evicting-the-public-why-has-occupying-public-spaces-brought-such-heavy-handed-repression/>
 wrote: "University presidents are also tasked with raising money from wealthy 
donors. This isn't optional, partly because politicians have slashed public 
funding for higher education. Yet relying on private donations to make up the 
differences changes the character of universities.

"Among other things, it makes it less and less possible for them to offer 
public spaces for protest against the control of society by financial 
interests." WithLord Woolf's report into the links between LSE and Libya 
<http://www.woolflse.com/> published on 30 November, this may well prove to be 
prophetic.

Heading for a fail … mature university applicants from the north east

With total applications 13% less than this time last year, with a drop of 15% 
for those born in the UK, if this trend holds it will mark the biggest drop in 
university applications in over a generation.

The latest set of UCAS figures for the first generation of £9,000 fee entrants 
makes for depressing reading. Although it's important to stress that these are 
still interim figures, a point made strongly by Universities UK and the Russell 
Group in their response, it nonetheless paints a worrying picture.

But this masks some even more worrying factors. For those over the age of 25, 
the drop in applicants is a staggering 21.3%, which sends a worrying signal to 
institutions that have been successful at recruiting mature students. In Wales, 
where the Welsh Assembly has moved to mitigate the excesses of the fee rise, 
the drop in applications is 10%, whereas in the East Midlands the drop is 
20.1%. Worst hit of all, the north east of England has seen a 21.4% drop.

When you consider that these are some of the more deprived parts of the 
country, hard hit by the recession, it hardly comes as a surprise that it looks 
like the poorest applicants are being the ones most deterred by the new fees.

When the government pushed through these regressive finance reforms this time 
last year, Tories and Lib Dems promised that the higher fees wouldn't act as a 
deterrent. They even suggested that by making universities do more to widen 
access that social mobility could be improved. That now seems unlikely to 
happen.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, he was 
formerly president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 
2010-11. He tweets at @AaronPorter <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>
 