
The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse haven’t managed to settle on a 
name fortheir proposed union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-agree-merger-terms-costs>
 – it still labours under the clunky title of UK TopCo – but both parties 
insist the deal would be that rare thing, a “merger of equals”.

That’s half the problem, many LSE shareholders will feel. Their exchange is 
not obviously in need of a partner that won’t offer a takeover premium. The 
LSE’s pre-tax profits for 2015 improved by 31% to £643m and the dividend was 
raised 20%. If somebody wants to grab the business, let them offer a proper 
price rather than cuddle up via a nil-premium exchange of shares, purists will 
argue. Thus all eyes will now turn to the Intercontinental Exchange (Ice), 
owner of the New York Stock Exchange, which has threatened to get involved 
without committing to do so.

The bourse of true love never did run smooth. Ask the LSE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/28/bourse-true-love-never-did-run-smooth-deutsche-borse-lse>
The first formal documentation from the LSE and Deutsche moves the plot along 
but in truth, it contained few surprises. Carsten Kengeter, Deutsche’s man, 
will be the chief executive of the combo and Xavier Rolet, his counterpart who 
has led seven years of success for the LSE, will depart. This is not a popular 
choice, at least from the perspective of LSE’s owners. Rolet has the proven 
record in running exchanges; Kengeter doesn’t. The fact that the chairman will 
be Donald Brydon, aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> boardroom 
warhorse, is little consolation.

On the plus side, there are the inevitable cost savings. Some €450m (£353m) a 
year can be removed in three years at a one-off cost of €600m. Not bad. Then 
come the claimed benefits to customers in the form of £7bn of capital savings 
by being able to post collateral for deals across a broader range of exchanges 
under common ownership. Over time, runs the theory, that will help combat 
incursions intoEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> from US 
and Asian competitors.

That argument is entirely coherent and, if Ice and others stay away, one 
suspects Rolet and Brydon would be able to see off the doubters in the LSE’s 
ranks. The timing of the deal – before a UK referendum where a vote to leave 
the EU could herald regulatory and legislative upheaval in financial services – 
is fundamentally odd but nothing talks like substantial cost savings.

The big question remains: are the Americans about to throw a bucket of Ice 
over the whole thing?
 