
The planned merger between the London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-agree-merger-terms-costs>
, which is set to create a £21bn pan-European trading giant, is likely to lead 
to 1,250 job cuts.The prospectus issued to shareholders 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/londonstockexgroup--lse-/rns/publication-of-prospectus-and-circular/201606011318329139Z/>
 of both companies said the cuts would be necessary to achieve annual savings 
of €450m (£350m) by 2019 – a fifth of the combined operating costs. At the same 
time, more than 550 new jobs could be created in growth areas and through 
international expansion.

France airs fears over London Stock Exchange merger with Deutsche Börse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/20/france-airs-fears-over-london-stock-exchange-merger-with-deutsche-borse>
A spokesman for the LSE said the job losses would be spread between Frankfurt, 
London and other international locations over the next three years and would 
mostly affect technology roles. The aim, he said, was to achieve this through 
natural wastage, as people retire or leave.

The LSE, which owns Milan-based Borsa Italiana, employs more than 3,500 people 
in the UK, North America, Italy, France and Sri Lanka, while its Frankfurt 
counterpart has more than 5,200 staff globally. The two companies’ trading and 
post-trading platforms will be merged, but LCH.Clearnet and Eurex Clearing will 
remain separate clearing houses. LSE shareholders are to own 45.8% of the new 
holding company, while Deutsche Börse investors will own 54.2%.

The two companies said the deal, agreed in March, would create the world’s 
biggest exchange group by income, and lead to growth opportunities in China, 
the rest of Asia and North America. The merger is expected to result in extra 
annual revenues of €250m within five years. Benefits will come from developing 
trading and clearing products and combining the index and information services 
businesses, including the FTSE Russell and Stoxx indices.

The enlarged company, which will be incorporated and resident in the UK for 
tax purposes, will be run by Deutsche Börse’s boss, Carsten Kengeter, who is to 
become chief executive. The LSE’s chair, Donald Brydon, will be chair of the 
merged group. The LSE’s chief executive, Xavier Rolet, is to leave.

The all-share merger is expected to be completed early next year, once it is 
approved by shareholders and 40 regulators around the world. LSE investors will 
be asked to back the deal at a meeting on 4 July. Deutsche Börse shareholders 
have until 12 July to tender their shares, swapping them for stock in the new 
company.

Kengeter talked of a “truly transformational transaction” that would benefit 
customers, shareholders and employees. He told analysts and investors that it 
was the “right transaction at the right time for both companies”, with a “very 
good fit” between the two businesses.


The prospectus stated: “The outcome of the United Kingdom referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on membership of the 
European Union is not a condition of the merger.”

The deal marks the third time Deutsche Börse and LSE have tried to merge, 
after previous attempts at a tie-up failed in 2000 and 2005. If it falls 
through, Deutsche Börse could be vulnerable to a takeover from outsideEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, for example by the 
Chicago-based CME Group, Kengeter told journalists in Frankfurt. He noted that 
ICE, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange, which walked away from a 
possible takeover offer for the LSE in early May, could “step back on to the 
stage in November”.
 