Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414155624636%2FLuis-Suarez-interview-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20'Everyone%20has%20different%20ways%20of%20defending%20themselves'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20%27Everyone%20has%20different%20ways%20of%20defending%20themselves%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414155624636%2FLuis-Suarez-interview-017.jpg>
I knew straight away, as soon as it happened.

I had let people down. My coach Óscar Tabárez 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%93scar_Tab%C3%A1rez>, “El Maestro”, was in a 
bad way in the dressing room. I couldn’t look at my team-mates. I didn’t know 
how I could say sorry to them. I couldn’t look at the Maestro. He told me that 
journalists had asked him about the incident, and he’d told them that he hadn’t 
seen anything. My team-mates were trying to tell me that maybe the situation 
was not so bad. But I didn’t want to hear a single word of it. Two more days 
would pass before I had to leave Brazil, but in my head I was already gone.

I was at training the next day, still in this unconscious state of denial. 
Just as we finished the session, the Maestro called me over. He had news: “This 
is the worst thing that I have ever had to tell a player.” At that moment, I 
thought maybe the ban would be 10, 15 or even 20 games, but then he said, “Nine 
matches.” That didn’t seem any worse than I had feared. But he wasn’t finished: 
“And you can’t set foot in any stadium. You have to leave now. You can’t be 
anywhere near the squad.”

I wanted to stay and support my team-mates. You could see that emotionally the 
team had died. They were sunk. Even if I was not playing, I wanted to try to 
make up for things in some small way. But the team manager, Eduardo Belza, had 
been informed that I had to leave the squad as soon as possible. They treated 
me worse than a criminal. You can punish a player, you can ban a player from 
playing, but can you prohibit him from being alongside his team-mates? The only 
reason I didn’t cry was that I was standing there in front of the coach when he 
told me the news.

Had the ban stopped at nine Uruguay matches, I would have understood it. But 
banning me from playing for Liverpool, when my bans in England never prevented 
me from playing for Uruguay? Banning me from all stadiums worldwide? Telling me 
I couldn’t go to work? Stopping me from even jogging around the perimeter of a 
football pitch? It still seems incredible to me that, untilthe Court of 
Arbitration for Sport <http://www.tas-cas.org/news> decreed otherwise, Fifa’s 
power actually went that far.
 Luis Suárez holding his teeth after biting Giorgio Chiellini at this year’s 
World Cup. Photograph: Andrew Boyers/Action Images 
They had never banned a player like that before for breaking someone’s leg or 
smashing someone’s nose across his face, asMauro Tassotti did to Luis Enrique 
at the 1994 World Cup <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxCbz-kRNhI>. They made 
a big thing of saying the incident had happened “before the eyes of the world”.
Zinedine Zidane headbutted Marco Materazzi in a World Cup final in 2006 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-L8z830KuxA> and got a three-match ban.

I was an easy target, maybe. But there was something important I had to face 
up to: I had made myself an easy target. I made the mistake. It was my fault. 
This was the third time it had happened. I needed help.

After my 10-match ban in 2013 for biting Branislav Ivanovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/apr/22/luis-surez-bites-branislav-ivanovic-video>
, I had questioned the double standards and how the fact that no one actually 
gets hurt is never taken into consideration. The damage to the player is 
incomparable with that suffered by a horrendous challenge. Sometimes English 
football takes pride in having the lowest yellow-card count in Europe, but of 
course it will have if you can take someone’s leg off and still not be booked. 
When they can say it is the league with the fewest career-threatening tackles, 
then it will be something to be proud of.

I know biting appals a lot of people, but it’s relatively harmless. Or at 
least it was in the incidents I was involved in. When Ivanovic rolled up his 
sleeve to show the referee the mark at Anfield, there was virtually nothing 
there. None of the bites has been likeMike Tyson on Evander Holyfield’s ear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AwEXdven_Oc>. But none of this makes it right.

When I got home and saw the television pictures of my bite on PSV Eindhoven 
midfielder Otman Bakkal in 2010 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pAl74ovJP-4>, 
I cried. I had just become a father to a young daughter, Delfina, and the 
thought that she would grow up to see that I had done this upset me more than 
anything else. When my wife Sofi saw the footage, she said to me, “What on 
Earth were you thinking?” I had to start trying to answer that question for 
myself.

The adrenaline levels in a game can be so high; the pulse is racing and 
sometimes the brain doesn’t keep up. The pressure mounts and there is no 
release valve. In 2010, I was frustrated because we were drawing what was a 
very important game, and we were on a bad run. I wanted to do everything right 
that day, and it felt as though I was doing everything wrong. The pent-up 
frustration and feeling that it was my fault reached a point where I couldn’t 
contain it any more.

With Ivanovic in 2013, we had to beat Chelsea still to have any chance of 
making it into the Champions League. I was having a terrible game. I gave away 
a stupid penalty with a handball and I could feel everything slipping through 
our fingers. I could feel myself getting wound up.

Moments before the Chiellini bite, I had a great chance to put us 1-0 up. If I 
had scored that goal, if Buffon hadn’t made the save, then I would not have 
done anything. But I missed the chance.
 Uruguay fans wait for their hero at the airport in Montevideo. Photograph: 
Imago/Barcroft Media 
When the heart has stopped racing after the game, it’s easy to look back and 
say, “How could you be so stupid? There were 20 minutes left.” But out on the 
pitch with the adrenaline pumping and the tension mounting, you’re not even 
really aware of how long is left. You don’t know anything. All I could think 
was: “I didn’t score. We’re out of theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.”

There are some players who in that position would have said, “Well, we’re out, 
but I scored two great goals against England. I’m the star.” I could have asked 
to be taken off: “My knee is hurting again, I scored two in the last game, I 
did my best.” But I wanted more.

The fear of failure clouds everything for me – even the blatantly obvious fact 
that I have at least 20,000 pairs of eyes on me; it is not as if I am not going 
to be seen. Logic doesn’t come into it.

Equally illogical is that it should be a bite. There was a moment in a game 
against Chile in 2013 when a player grabbed me between the legs andI reacted by 
punching him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WAnkiNKhmUA>. I didn’t get banned 
for that. That’s considered a normal, acceptable response. When I called 
Ivanovic after the 2013 incident, he told me that the police had come to see 
him and asked if he wanted to press charges, and thankfully he had said no. I’m 
grateful to him, because the circus could have gone on for a lot longer. Punch 
someone and it’s forgotten, there is no circus. So why do I take the most 
self-destructive route?

The problem is that this switching off also happens when I do something 
brilliant on the pitch and, of course, I don’t want to lose that. I’ve scored 
goals and later struggled to understand how exactly I managed to score them. 
There is something about the way I play that is unconscious, for better or 
worse. I want to release the tension and the pressure, but I don’t want to lose 
the spontaneity in my game, much less the intensity of my style of play.

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> sent a sports 
psychologist to see me in Barcelona after the Ivanovic incident, and we spent 
two hours talking about what was going through my head at the time. He said I 
could see him again, but I resisted. Part of it was the concern that this 
treatment would make me too calm on the pitch. What if the next time the ball 
goes past me, I just let it go instead of chasing it? I’m the player who will 
kill himself just to prevent a throw-in in the 90th minute. To a certain 
extent, it’s also normal that a striker is irritable and on edge. For those 90 
minutes on the pitch, life is irritating. I get irritated when a defender 
pushes up against me from behind. I get irritated when I miss chances. If my 
first few touches are off, then I think to myself, “What’s wrong with you 
today?” And I know that the first time a player clashes with me, there’s a risk 
I’ll react.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fluis-suarez-biting-appals-people-but-its-relatively-harmless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413991509118%2F206a4f41-2689-46fd-bbf0-7905df33efd1-631x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20%E2%80%98Biting%20appals%20people%2C%20but%20it%E2%80%99s%20relatively%20harmless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fluis-suarez-biting-appals-people-but-its-relatively-harmless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20%E2%80%98Biting%20appals%20people%2C%20but%20it%E2%80%99s%20relatively%20harmless%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Foct%2F25%2Fluis-suarez-biting-appals-people-but-its-relatively-harmless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413991509118%2F206a4f41-2689-46fd-bbf0-7905df33efd1-631x720.jpeg>
 Suárez playing for Barcelona in August. Photograph: Rex 
Defenders know that, too. In the Premier League, when I played against someone 
likePhilippe Senderos <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philippe_Senderos> at 
Fulham whenMartin Jol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/martin-jol> was 
their manager, I knew the drill. About five minutes into the game, Senderos 
would step on the back of my ankle when the ball had gone. “Ah, sorry,” he 
would say.

I just thought, “Yeah, Jol has told you what I’m like and has told you to do 
that.”

It seems strange to say it after a third incident, but I have improved, I am 
calmer. When I was a kid, I got sent off for headbutting a referee: I ran 50m 
to argue a decision, I was shown a red card and I headbutted him. I’m really 
not proud of that.

I didn’t want to talk to anyone after the Chiellini bite, though – back in 
Montevideo with the shutters down, depressed and not wanting to digest what had 
really happened, I was watching the press conference on the television when 
Tabárez announced that, in support of me, he was resigning his post on the Fifa 
Strategic Committee. Ever since the Italy game, I had felt depressed. I was in 
shock, numb. The sadness overwhelmed me. I watched him and the tears started 
rolling down my face. I couldn’t believe what he was doing for me. To see how 
much he loved me, to see what was happening, what the consequences of what I 
had done were, was soul-destroying.

Sofi and I went away to the countryside to talk about everything, and I 
finally began to accept what I needed to do. She was annoyed with herself for 
not having been firmer with me before. She said to me, “So now are you going to 
listen to me?” This time it felt like there was no alternative, and I took the 
initiative.

I did the research and I found the right people. If I had been at Liverpool, 
then maybe I would have gone back to the people I had spoken to there, or if I 
had already been settled in atBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, I would have looked within 
the club, but I was almost between clubs, so I went out myself and found the 
right people to help me. It still feels like something very private, but I feel 
that they are helping me to understand that I don’t have to hold things in; and 
that I don’t have to feel such a huge weight of responsibility when I’m on the 
pitch.

I’m already learning how to deal with these build-ups of pressure. I have 
always preferred to keep things to myself, rather than sharing them with 
anyone, but I am learning that if you let it go, you feel better for it. Don’t 
keep it all bottled up inside; don’t take it all on alone.

• This is an edited extract from Crossing The Line: My Story, by Luis Suárez, 
published next week by Headline at £20. To order a copy for £15, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/luis-suarez-my-autobiography-el-pistolero.html>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 