Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414155624636%2FLuis-Suarez-interview-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20'Everyone%20has%20different%20ways%20of%20defending%20themselves'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%3A%20%27Everyone%20has%20different%20ways%20of%20defending%20themselves%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Fluis-suarez-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414155624636%2FLuis-Suarez-interview-017.jpg>
Luis Suárez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez> is squinting 
into the Spanish midday sun. We are sitting by the side of a pitch at 
Barcelona’s training ground, and he is talking movingly about his relationship 
with his wife, Sofi, the humility of his new team-mates atBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, the Monopoly games he enjoyed 
with the players back atLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. And the more he talks, the 
more I’m thinking, can this be the same man who sank his fangs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/jul/01/luis-surez-apologises-to-giorgio-chiellini-video>
intoGiorgio Chiellini <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giorgio_Chiellini> at the 
World Cup? He speaks quietly, with a sweet if monotonous intensity, and still 
there’s this nagging question.

Eventually it just blurts out. “Do you think there’s something wrong with 
you?” I ask. Even I am surprised by my abruptness.

He looks at a loss. “I don’t know,” he says. “I don’t really know what I can 
say to that.”

Well, I say, you seem like a good man – kind, decent, shy, and yet when you’re 
on the pitch, you’re an animal. “I think the people who really know who Luis is 
are the people who are by my side, who have always been by my side.” He speaks 
about himself in the third person, as if somehow he is not fully answerable for 
the footballerLuis Suárez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez>. 
“Of course, people will always judge you by your attitude on the pitch, judge 
you on things that have happened in your past. I have been through a tough 
time. I always say, in all honesty, that the Luis on the pitch is nothing like 
the Luis off the pitch.”

Has any other footballer packed so much controversy into what is still half a 
career? The bites, the bans, the diving, the2011 suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/20/liverpool-luis-suarez-patrice-evra>
 for racially abusing Patrice Evra,the handball off the line in the 2010 World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/04/luis-suarez-world-cup-villian-hand-of-god>
 quarter final – it’s hard to know where to start. For me, one image dominates: 
it came at the end of a match this May, one that Liverpool had to win to have a 
realistic chance of securing their first league title in 24 years. They had 
been leading 3-0 and went forward, looking for more goals to reduce Manchester 
City’s superior goal difference. But every time they did, Palace broke away and 
scored.The match ended 3-3, and Suárez was in tears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/06/liverpool-luis-suarez-brendan-rodgers-steven-gerrard>
, beyond comfort. He pulled his shirt over his head so the fans couldn’t see, 
and had to be led off, blind and wretched, by his team-mateKolo Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kolo-toure>.

It looked like an extreme end to an extreme season: despite having been 
suspended for the first five matches (forbiting Branislav Ivanovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/apr/22/luis-surez-bites-branislav-ivanovic-video>
), he finished top scorer in the Premier League – an astonishing 31 goals in 33 
games. But the best and worst was yet to come. After missing the opening game 
of the Brazil World Cup while recovering from knee surgery, he returned against 
England to beat them single-handedly with two goals. Then came that final group 
game against Italy. Suárez, desperate to see Uruguay through, again tried to 
win the game single-handedly. But nothing was going his way, and in the 80th 
minute he took it out on Chiellini’s shoulder. Gnash. Suárez threw his hands to 
his teeth and went down as if he’d been punched. Somehow this bite was even 
more shocking than the previous two: he was representing his country in front 
of the world, and seemed to have learned nothing. The referee missed the 
incident, but Fifa reacted ferociously – with a four-month ban from 
football-related activity (meaning he couldn’t even train), later reduced to a 
four-month ban from football.
 Italy’s Giorgio Chiellini shows his shoulder, after being bitten by Suárez 
during a 2014 World Cup group match. Suárez eventually apologised and vowed 
there would never be a repeat of the incident. Photograph: Reuters 
This would have done for most players, but not Suárez. The first time he bit a 
player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/23/luis-suarez-bite-otman-bakkal>
 (PSV Eindhoven’s Otman Bakkal, in 2010), he followed up with a lucrative move 
to Liverpool. The second time, he responded by equalling the record for goals 
scored in a single Premier League season (31, up withAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> and Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>). This time, he secured himself 
a stonking £65m transfer to Barcelona, arguably the world’s most successful 
football club. He is likely to make his Barcelona debut tonight – againstReal 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>, a match between the 
two Spanish giants known as El Clasico. As the Liverpool chant used to go, 
there’s only one Luis Suárez…

On Monday morning, the day before Barcelona’s Champions League match against 
Suárez’s old club Ajax, the Uruguayan is warming up at the club’s 
state-of-the-art training ground. Scores of cameras click and whir as the squad 
play their tiki-taka version of piggy in the middle. There’s Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> and Neymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> pinging the ball to each other 
along the ground, in true Barcelona style. Here’sIniesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta> and Alves 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dani_Alves> and Mascherano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jul/10/javier-mascherano-argentina-world-cup-final-germany>
. Ping, ping, ping. It’s a lovely, collegiate kickaround. And at the centre of 
the action is Suárez, already more vocal, more demonstrative, more physical 
than most of his colleagues. Even in a training session, for the benefit of the 
press, he holds out his hands in disgust when he doesn’t receive a ball, loudly 
claps a good pass, barges into a team-mate to collect the ball. He doesn’t do 
anything by half.

That includes his new autobiography, Crossing The Line. The first chapter is 
devoted to biting, the third chapter is titled The Hand Of Suarez, and the 
fifth is simply called Racist. It’s a revealing and surprising book, not least 
in its depiction of his relationship with Sofi – the couple have been together 
since he was 15 and she was 13.

Like most of today’s great forwards, Suárez is a supreme physical specimen. He 
has the balance of a ballerina and the thighs of a weightlifter. He is a true 
predator, but while most predators operate within the penalty area, he can 
swoop from the halfway line. He still plays football like a child – always keen 
to shoot and try a new trick, quick off the mark, selfish, as goalscorers have 
to be. He is also one of the game’s great chasers, constantly harrying 
defenders.

Last week, he received the Golden Shoe for 2013/14, awarded to the leading 
scorer from the top division of every European national league. Now he says his 
job is to help winLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> 
for Barcelona. Although the relatively impoverishedAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> won Spain’s top league 
last season, the past couple of years has seen an arms race between Barcelona 
and Real Madrid as they have stockpiled global superstars. So the signing of 
Neymar by Barcelona was matched by the signing of Gareth Bale for Real Madrid 
last year; and Suárez’s signing has been matched by World Cup top scorer James 
Rodríguez’s move to Madrid. But Barcelona’s outrageous South American attack – 
Brazilian Neymar, Argentinian Messi, Uruguayan Suárez – could be the greatest 
yet in club football.
 Suárez with his wife Sofi and daughters: ‘I know that the person on the pitch 
is me, but the person off the pitch, who lives life in the right way, with good 
rest, good diet, this comes from the person you have by your side. Without her, 
it would have been difficult.’ Photograph: Liverpool FC via Getty Images 
In a way, Suárez says, signing for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> is like coming home. He grew 
up wanting to play for the club, and Sofi’s family lives here. You can see the 
little boy in him when he talks about his new job. “I still can’t believe it, 
it still hasn’t sunk in.” He pauses. “After everything that happened, the 
various difficult situations, what I need to do now is enjoy things – because I 
have got to where I want to be.”

It seems bizarre to talk about last-chance saloons for a player who has just 
enjoyed a season like his last, and yet for Suárez this isthe opportunity to 
prove himself as one of the true footballing greats – to prove that he will be 
remembered more for his artistry than his antics. For all his achievements, he 
has never stayed at a club longer than three years.

Is he worried that he won’t get into the team, with Messi and Neymar already 
ahead of him? No, he says, he’s looking forward to them all playing together. 
“They are players of such high quality that they can adapt to any new player. 
The only thing I need to do now is adapt myself, not just to them but the whole 
team. I need to watch them and learn from them. They are making me feel 
comfortable.” The word Suárez returns to again and again is humble – whether 
it’s his own background, his attitude towards his team-mates, his lack of 
education, his desire to be a good family man.
 Luis Suárez receives the Golden Shoe award from Kenny Dalglish for scoring 
the most goals in Europe’s domestic leagues during the 2013/2014 season, shared 
with Cristiano Ronaldo. Photograph: Manu Fernandez/AP 
Suárez was born in the town of Salto 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salto,_Uruguay> 27 years ago (one of his 
nicknames is El Salta; the other is Grumpy) and left for the capital Montevideo 
at the age of seven. His father, a former soldier, took work where he could 
find it – in a biscuit factory, as a concierge; his mother worked as a cleaner 
at the local bus station. They split up when Luis was nine. He describes his 
upbringing as “anarchic”, and the young Suárez spent much of his time on the 
streets – playing football or just hanging around with friends and drinkingmate 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mate_%28beverage%29>, a South American herbal 
tea, drunk through a silver straw. And apart from family, his life is still 
very much aboutmate and football.

He signed for Montevideo’s major football club, Nacional, at 14, but he was 
overweight, on a kill-me-quick diet, and insists there were many players with 
more natural skill. What he did have was attitude – a hatred, even a fear, of 
losing. At the age of 15, he ran 50 yards to argue with a referee and ended up 
head-butting him. (“The referee had a broken nose and was bleeding like a cow,” 
the technical director of Nacional, Daniel Enriquez, has said.) Nacional wanted 
to let him go because he was spending too much time on the town, and had scored 
only eight goals in 37 matches.

Then he met Sofi. Her father was a banker, and she lived in well-to-do 
Solymar, just outside Montevideo. When her father’s bank shut down a year 
later, the family moved to Barcelona and Suárez was distraught. When the Dutch 
side Groningen scouted him three years later, he moved to Holland because he 
thought at least he’d be close to Sofi; one weekend she came to stay and never 
left.

After Groningen, he captained Ajax. There, he scored 81 goals in 110 
appearances and barely put a foot wrong – until he bit Otman Bakkal on the 
shoulder in November 2010. For that, he received a seven-match ban and was 
labelled “the cannibal of Ajax”. Two months later, he signed for Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/28/liverpool-luis-suarez-ajax-agree-fee>
, for what turned out to be a bargain £22.8m. His goalscoring record was almost 
as impressive in England’s tougher Premier League, and he didn’t tuck into 
another player until April 2013, when he bit Chelsea’s Branislav Ivanovic on 
the upper arm. The referee missed the bite and Suárez went on to score an 
equaliser in injury time; he was subsequently banned for 10 games.

The constant through Suárez’s highs and lows has been Sofi. There is something 
incredibly tender and unmacho in the way he talks about her and their two 
children; in fact, Suárez has a notably unmacho side. He has pictures of Sofi 
and the children on hismate bottle and his scruffy washbag, and the word Sofi 
elegantly tattooed on to his wedding finger; the children’s names, Delfina and 
Benjamin, are tattooed on his wrist. When he scores, he kisses each tattoo. Why 
doesn’t he have a more conventional footballer’s tattooed sleeve? He says he 
can’t be doing with that kind of nonsense.

Like all elite footballers, Suárez, who earns £200,000 a week, is surrounded 
by yes-men. Sofi is the one critic he will listen to. “She was there at the 
beginning of my career – she supported me when I was a nobody. She put her 
trust in me, helped me with my studies, with work. When we started living 
together in Holland, we started getting older and things started getting more 
serious. We always wanted to start a family. We are aware that, for a famous 
footballer, it is difficult to have someone by your side in this way. That is 
why I really value it.”

It’s unusual to hear a footballer talk about his partner so lovingly. “Well, 
Sofi means everything. She means the start of my career, she means a change of 
countries and lifestyles. She’s been there all the time, through good and bad.” 
Would he have succeeded without her? “I don’t know. I know that the person on 
the pitch is me, but the person off the pitch, who lives life in the right way, 
with good rest, good diet, this comes from the person you have by your side. 
Without her, it would have been difficult.”
 Suárez training with his new team, Barcelona. His £65m transfer went through 
while he was banned following the World Cup. Photograph: Joan 
Valls/Urbanandsport/Nur/Rex 
Look, I say, I’m confused. How can such a gentle man become so feral on the 
pitch? Now it’s his turn to look confused, and he struggles to answer. He says 
that he gets so stressed, so hyper, he just needs a release, however 
irrational. He is also terrified that if he subdues these instincts on the 
pitch, he will lose his hunger. Did he feel disappointment or shame after he 
bit Chiellini? “Of course. I felt disappointed in myself, for my wife, my 
children, and particularly for all the Uruguayan people, and when something 
like that happens, the most important thing is to accept what you’ve done wrong 
and to apologise. When you feel you’ve done something wrong, you should 
apologise for it.” He latertweeted an apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/30/luis-suarez-apologises-giorgio-chiellini-bite>
 to Chiellini from Montevideo.

What did Sofi say? He doesn’t reply, so I try to make light of it. “Did she 
say, ‘Oh for God’s sake, not again, Luis!’” But his answers have become morose. 
“The truth is, I don’t really remember what she said. I had no desire, no will 
to speak to anybody.”

Because you were so upset with yourself?

“Of course.”

I tell him I have an autistic friend who bites when he feels he’s losing 
control. Does he think he could be on the autistic spectrum? “No, it doesn’t 
make me think that. Everyone has different ways of defending themselves. In my 
case, the pressure and tension came out in that way. There are other players 
who react by breaking someone’s leg, or smashing someone’s nose across their 
face. What happened with Chiellini is seen as worse. I understand why biting is 
seen so badly.”

It’s interesting that the three times he has bitten people, he has never taken 
a lump out of anyone – asMike Tyson did from Evander Holyfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/23/mike-tyson-evander-holyfield-ear-bite>
’s ear. So even though it’s an act of wrecklessness there is some control? 
“Yes, it is like an impulse, like a reaction. Almost as if you realise straight 
away…”

And you pull back?

He nods, almost enthusiastically. He has sought help for his biting, and I ask 
what advice his therapist has given him. “They are personal issues, private 
issues, which I won’t make public now or ever in the future.” He is biting his 
nails, looking at the floor. Is his biting in the past? “Yes, I think all the 
bad things I have been through are in the past. I believe I am on the right 
path now, dealing with the people who can help me, the right kind of people.”

He looks desperate to get away, so I change the subject. In his book, he is 
very warm about his former Liverpool team-mates –Steven Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/steven-gerrard>’s inspiration and 
fatherly advice,Glen Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/glen-johnson>
’s banter with him in Spanish,Daniel Sturridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/daniel-sturridge>’s talent (“The best 
partner I’ve had in my career”), playing Monopoly withLucas Leiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/18/lucas-leiva-liverpool-interview-brazil>
.

Did he ever knock over the board if he was losing? He grins. “No, no. I got 
angry, but not that.”

I ask if we can have a kickabout on the pitch. Again, he is gentle and 
obliging. We do a few keepy-uppies. “Would I make the Barcelona veterans’ Z 
team?” I ask. He says I’ve got “not-bad technique” and I tell him he’s made my 
life. We continue to chat while kicking the ball to each other. One of the most 
compelling chapters in his book comes when he talks about the occasion 
Manchester United’s Patrice Evra accused him of racism, after a match in 2011. 
It emerged that nobody else had heard anything, but Suárez eventually admitted 
to having called him “negro” once; he was suspended for eight games. His 
defence was, and remains, that negro simply means black in Spanish, and is 
acceptable in his culture – like calling somebody chubby or skinny. I believe 
him when he says he’s not a racist, but I don’t believe him when he says it 
wasn’t meant as an insult. After all, they were rowing at the time.
 Suárez clashes with Manchester United’s Patrice Evra. After the match, he was 
found guilty of racially abusing Evra and banned for eight games. Photograph: 
EPA 
He says he can accept being criticised for biting and diving (though he does 
point out he’s only been booked twice for diving), but he cannot accept the 
racist allegation, and insists he will never speak to Evra again; herefused to 
shake his hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/11/luis-suarez-patrice-evra-handshake-ferguson>
 before a game after completing his ban. I ask why he thinks it’s so much worse 
to be labelled a racist. “I know I was wrong with the biting and the diving, 
but I was accused of racism without any proof. There were lots of cameras, but 
no evidence. It hurts me the most that it was my word against theirs.” But 
surely that’s irrelevant – he himself admitted he used the word, as he does 
again today. “Every culture has its way of expressing itself, and that’s a word 
people in Uruguay use all the time, whether somebody’s black or not black. It 
gets used a lot without those connotations, and that’s why it is completely 
different from how it is expressed in England, no?”

Did he mean to insult Evra, just not in a racist way?

“No, not at any time. I just said, ‘Why, negro?’ and it was just like asking 
‘Why?’ These are things that footballers say, that happen all the time.”

We’ve finished playing keepy-uppies. I lean on Suárez’s shoulder and tell him 
I’m knackered. I am genuinely touched by his relationship with Sofi and would 
love him to see out the rest of his career at Barcelona, as the non-diving, 
non-racist, non-biting world-beater he probably is at heart. Although it is 
obvious he hates talking about biting and race, he must realise that when he 
does, people are more likely to regard him as a reformed character. And it 
feels to me that we have got on well.

It turns out I have misjudged the situation. Suárez does not feel the same way 
and abruptly decides to terminate the interview. Sweet Suárez has been replaced 
by Stroppy Suárez. But there’s so much left to talk about, I protest: we were 
meant to be hanging out for longer. We’ve not had time to re-enact that first
Liverpool goal against Norwich <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j0o__dpEiKg>, 
let alone discussed his ambition to be a goalkeeper. But Suárez has had enough. 
He has to collect his daughter, he says. He raises his eyes to his agent, and 
off they go. The microphone he is wearing for filming is still on, and we can 
hear him complaining.

“Calm down, man, you’re getting flustered,” the agent says.

“They are asking me again about the biting. They have asked me about the bite 
38,000 times. Never again, never again, I swear never again, this is the last 
time.”

I watch him squeeze into his Audi sports car, and he is off. We’ll wait for 
him to come back, I tell his agent, hopefully. Don’t bother, he says. “Nobody 
tells Luis Suárez what to do.”

• Watch an exclusive film of Suárez at the Barcelona training ground and 
talking to Simon Hattenstone attheguardian.com/video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/video>
 