
A trial of three people accused of involvement in the leaking of documents 
that revealed industrial scale tax avoidance has begun inLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg>, with attending MEPs vowing to 
propose a whistleblowers’ charter to prevent such cases in future.

The so-called Luxleaks revelations brought to light multibillion-euro 
sweetheart deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 for companies including Amazon, Ikea and Shire Pharmaceuticals, causing an 
international tax outrage that rocked the European commission president, 
Jean-Claude Juncker, and set the scene for thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>.

The leaked tax structures were published by more than 20 news organisations 
around the world, including the Guardian, in a project coordinated by the
International Consortium of Investigative Journalists <https://www.icij.org/>.

The details helped bring about international tax reform through the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

But the whistleblowers, Antoine Deltour, a former PricewaterhouseCoopers 
auditor, and another former PwC employee, Raphael Halet,face up to five years 
in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/24/luxleaks-antoine-deltour-luxembourg-tax-avoidance-pricewaterhousecoopers-trial>
 accused of theft, secrecy violation and wrongfully accessing a database. 
France 2 journalist Edouard Perrin is accused of complicity.

Speaking on Tuesday, the German Greens MEP Sven Giegold told the Guardian that 
the draft directive being proposed by his group next week would create a common 
framework shielding whistleblowers from prosecution and a “protected 
disclosure” defence.

“It is absurd that we have EU protection of commercial secrets but no 
protection for those who reveal them for the common good. Current protections 
for whistleblowers only cover clearly illegal activities, but often tax 
avoidance is legal even if it is illegitimate,” he said.

The law would apply to the public and private sectors, and tilt the burden of 
proof towards the employer in disputed cases, as well as setting out guidelines 
for reactions by authorities.

The text will be presented to the commission shortly after its launch. While 
this cannot oblige Brussels to act, previous draft directives have spurred the 
commission into bringing forward its own legislation.

“When you show that a proposal is legally feasible, it increases the 
likelihood that the commission will do it,” said Giegold, who will be 
testifying in Deltour’s defence. “There are many cases where this has happened.”

Earlier this year, Deltour was awarded the European parliament’s citizens’ 
prize 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52015XP0702(01)&rid=1>
 andpraised by the EU’s competition commissioner 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/interview/vestager-we-should-thank-the-luxleaks-whistleblowers/>
, Margarethe Vestager, for his actions.

“Luxleaks could not have happened if it was not for the whistleblower, and the 
team of investigative journalists,” shetold the news website EurActiv 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/interview/vestager-we-should-thank-the-luxleaks-whistleblowers/>
. “The two worked very well together to change the momentum of the debate about 
corporate taxation in Europe. I think everyone should thank both the 
whistleblower and the investigative journalists.”

The case in Luxembourg is expected to last until 4 May, although PwC has also 
begun civil proceedings.
 