
A former employee of PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> has been 
convicted of theft by a court in Luxembourg following an unprecedented leak of 
controversial tax deals granted to many of the world’s largest corporations.

Antoine Deltour received a 12-month suspended sentence and was fined €1,500 
(£1,200). Deltour was found guilty on charges including theft and violating 
Luxembourg’s strict professional secrecy laws.

In 2014, Deltour won widespread praise for helping bring to light hundreds of 
controversial tax deals granted in previous years by theLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> tax office. The revelations, 
known as the LuxLeaks, helped lay bare the tax arrangements of companies 
including Burberry, Pepsi, Ikea, Heinz, Shire Pharmaceuticals and others.

The Guardian and other media outlets, working with the International 
Consortium of Investigative Journalists, used the leaked data toexpose 
controversial tax practices rubber-stamped by Luxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
. The documents disclosed that the the country’s authorities had helped 340 big 
companies to minimise their tax payments, in some cases to 1% or less.

These revelations sparked parliamentary inquiries around the world and helped 
shape major reforms to the way multinationals are taxed.

But Luxembourg’s finance minster, Pierre Gramegna, described the leak as “the 
worst attack” his country had ever experienced. During Deltour’s trial, 
prosecutors claimed the former PwC employee was an “anti-capitalist” and 
requested he be sentenced to 18 months in prisoon – though they later indicated 
they would accept a suspended sentence.

PwC also gave evidence at trial, pressing for a conviction. The accountancy 
firm insisted Deltour was a thief, not a whistleblower. He was accused of 
costing the company huge sums, though PwC told the court it sought only a 
symbolic €1 in damages.

In his annual statement last year 
<http://www.pwc.lu/en/annual-review/2015/2015-results.html>, the British boss 
of PwC Luxembourg, John Parkhouse, said: “We all experienced the impact of the 
document theft, notoriously known as LuxLeaks. It is a real credit to our 
community in Luxembourg that we have not only weathered the storm, but have 
emerged as leaders in the international tax debate as well as retaining strong 
growth across the economy.

“It is truly in difficult times such as these, that we can feel the unique 
spirit of Luxembourg.”

Outside court, Deltour’s supporters immediately indicated he would appeal. In 
a statement, the whistleblower said his sentence ignored the public interest. 
It was, he said, “detrimental to citizen’s information and the good functioning 
of the democracy”.

His supporters include grassroots activists, dozens of whom protested daily 
outside the court during his trial, as well as many senior tax reformers and 
politicians.

Last year, the European competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, said 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/digital/interview/vestager-we-should-thank-the-luxleaks-whistleblowers/>
: “LuxLeaks could not have happened if it was not for the whistleblower, and 
the team of investigative journalists. The two worked very well together to 
change the momentum of the debate about corporate taxation in Europe.

“I think everyone should thank both the whistleblower and the investigative 
journalists who put a lot of work into this.”

France’s finance minister, Michel Sapin, has also expressed “solidarity” with 
Deltour, while more than 200,000 people have signeda petition in support 
<https://www.change.org/p/support-antoine-deltour-luxleaks?lang=en-GB> of the 
30-year-old whistleblower.

Another former PwC employee, Raphael Halet, was convicted on similar charges 
on Wednesday relating to the theft of a smaller cache of tax deal papers which 
was also eventually leaked to journalists. He was given a a nine-month 
suspended sentence and was fined €1,000.

Edouard Perrin, a French journalist accused of helping Halet, was acquitted. 
 