
It could all have been so different. Newsweek’s editor had obviously prepared 
issues for both possible US presidential election results, as is normal 
practice in such events.

Oddly, however, this one not only got published but also got distributed. 
About 125,000 copies had to be recalled,reported the New York Post. 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/09/national-recall-after-newsweek-misfires-with-clinton-cover/>

The copy above, tweeted by David Vick <https://twitter.com/DavidVick5> (many 
thanks), carries the cover line: “Madam President: Hillary Clinton’s historic 
journey to the White House.”

Think of all those wasted words resulting from Donald Trump’s victory. 
According to the standfirst on the right hand page, the election “was unique in 
a number of ways” because a female candidate faced a “the kind of demagogue 
previously unknown in American politics...

“President-elect Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> ‘went high’ when her 
opponent and his supporters went ever lower...” and so it transpired that “on 
election day, Americans across the country roundly rejected the kind of fear 
and hate-based conservatism peddled by Donald Trump... The highest glass 
ceiling in the western world had finally shattered.” If only!
 The real cover. Photograph: Newsweek 
According to the Post, Newsweek’s production partner, Topix Media, distributed 
only the Clinton issue to stores in the belief that she would be the winner.

Although retailers were told not to put issues on sale prior to the election, 
a few copies were sold. The paper quotes Topix chief executive Tony Romando as 
saying: “Like everybody else, we got it wrong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
“All wholesalers and retailers have been asked to return any issues they have 
as we need to clear room for the President Trump issue. We expect it to sell 
very well as there is obviously a great demand.”

It’s a reminder of the famous occasion after the 1948 US presidential election 
when the Chicago Daily Tribune ran with the headline “Dewey Defeats Truman”.

In fact, Harry Truman beat his Republican challenger, Thomas Dewey. A copy 
fell into Truman’s hands and he held it aloft, smiling at the mistake because 
the Republican-supporting Tribune had once referred to him as a nincompoop.

 