
A British scientist whose work could improve hip replacements and early tests 
forAlzheimer's <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers> has won one of 
the world's most respected prizes for female scientists.

Athene Donald <https://www.theguardian.com/science/athene-donald>, professor 
of experimental physics at Cambridge University, has become the second British 
scientist in the programme's 11-year history to be made a laureate of the For 
Women In Science awards, sponsored by L'Or√©al-Unesco. Only one laureate is 
chosen per continent each year. Donald said she hoped that her win would 
encourage young women to take science seriously as a career. 'I know what the 
level of competition is like for this prize. It's hugely prestigious and a 
great honour, but the role model aspect is probably the most important thing.

'Having very visible, successful women who have not become complete anoraks is 
really important to keep girls doing science. They are put off it; they think 
they can't have a family and be a successful scientist. There are all these 
myths, but if you can show it is possible to succeed and be relatively normal, 
that's a hugely important message,' said Donald, who is married with children.

She began her research career working on plastics and the effects of cooking 
and processing starch in industrial food preparation. She even produced images 
of ice cream at various temperatures and recalls making her daughter 'livid' at 
her 11th birthday party by explaining the structure and properties of ice cream 
to her friends.

More importantly, Donald's work on brain proteins could contribute to the 
development of diagnostic tests and treatment for Alzheimer's and other 
neuro-degenerative diseases. Donald has also been studying the way cells adhere 
to foreign bodies. This work has implications for implants such as bone and hip 
replacements and prosthetic limbs.

'Most replacement hips use metal and they are not ideal. The question is: can 
you coat the metal with something that is more bio-compatible and less prone to 
wear? Ultimately it might be useful for someone designing a prosthetic limb,' 
she said.

Donald will receive the award at a ceremony in Paris next March. The last 
British winner was Anne McLaren, another Cambridge University professor, in 
2001.
 