
The Harry Potter books and movies were always a little food and drink 
obsessed. Trawl through the kitschier corners of the web and you’ll find 
recipes for alcoholic butterbeer, polyjuice potion jelly shots and evena 
biscuit based on Ron Weasley’s jumper 
<http://www.goodtoknow.co.uk/recipes/545659/harry-potter-snack-ideas>. More 
than five years after the release of the final Potter movie, fans’ passion for 
wizarding-related nosh also continues to inspire new eateries: this week has 
seen the opening of aBoy Who Lived-themed pasta restaurant in Brooklyn 
<http://ew.com/movies/2017/01/11/harry-potter-pasta-restaurant-brooklyn/>, New 
York (the Dark Lord smoothie looks fairly quaffable), and acafe in Singapore 
that serves up flaming “Goblet of Fire” cocktails 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/news/2017/01/10/harry-potter-themed-cafe-singapore-goblets-fire/>
.

But, if Potter-related food and drink tends to be reasonably tasteful – or at 
least digestible - other movie branding tie-ins sound about as appetising as 
the vomit-flavoured sweetie in a packet of Bertie Botts Every Flavour Beans. 
Here are some of the more disgusting menu items from around the globe.

France’s dyed-black “Dark Vador” Burger

 To celebrate the release of The Phantom Menace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/09/star-wars-phantom-menace-review> 
in 3D in 2012, French fast food chain Quick cooked up this grim-looking 
double-pattied Darth Vader tie-in cheeseburger, complete with a bun so black it 
appears to have been grilled over the lava flows of Mustafar. For those 
ill-disposed towards the idea of ingesting the recommended yearly dose of E 
numbers in one half-hour sitting, the restaurant also offered a “Jedi” burger, 
featuring extra mozzarella cubes and a standard bun.


Ghostbusters ectoplasm energy drink

Ectoplasm is basically gloopy, gungey ghost goo, as excreted by Slimer and his 
pals in the Ghostbusters movies, so the idea of quaffing a pint’s worth in 
order to keep you feeling perky might seem a little vomit-inducing. This did 
not stop the release of a themed energy drink to mark the release ofthe new 
Ghostbusters movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/10/ghostbusters-review-paul-feigs-female-reboot-melissa-mccarthy-kristen-wiig>
 last year. For those desperate for a fruity-flavoured hit of caffeine, 
guarana, ginseng, taurine and essence of terrifying wight from beyond the 
grave, you can still purchase a can for just £148 on Amazon.


James Bond’s naked Daniel Craig ice lolly

If your idea of a tasty summer treat is licking the naked musclebound torso of 
Daniel Craig <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig> in Speedo-sporting 
Casino Royale mode, this iced confection might just be your licence to chill. 
The smoothie-based lolly was launched by Del Monte in 2009 to celebrate 
national ice cream week, after female filmgoers voted Craig the celebrity they 
would most like to see on the end of a stick in what must have been a pretty 
weird poll. Each lolly, whether enjoyed in blueberry, pomegranate or cranberry 
flavours, contained just 100 calories.


McDonald’s China’s Naughty Green Pork Burger

Perhaps topping even the Vader burger for gastronomic atrocity, this Angry 
Birds Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/09/the-angry-birds-movie-review-game-spin-off-that-doesnt-quite-reach-lego-movie-levels>
-themed meal features a bright green bun, pork patty, conveniently 
burger-shaped egg and spicy jalapeno sauce. Delicious, no doubt, if you keep 
your eyes closed while eating – because it looks like something nasty that’s 
been sitting in the fridge for too long. Fortunately, this evil piggy burger 
has only ever been available in Chinese branches of McDonald’s.


TGI Fridays’ meta-heavy Deadpool cocktails

One corporate sponsorship data firm estimated that Ryan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds>’ brief mention of the 
restaurant chain in the highest-grossing R-rated film of all time - the “Merc 
with a Mouth” responds: “That’s classified. They have a wonderful TGI Fridays!” 
when asked what he is doing in Jacksonville –was worth $785,000 in free 
advertising 
<http://digiday.com/brands/tgi-fridays-mention-deadpool-worth-785k-free-advertising-counting/>
. Presumably by way of thanks, TGI introduced a range ofDeadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/deadpool-review-marvel-ryan-reynolds-film-superhero>
 cocktails earlier this year, including the Fruity Spicy Drink-Thingy, which 
features Sailor Jerry spiced rum, fresh orange, mango puree, fresh sour, a 
cherry, and a Myers’ dark rum top, and the Merc Juice, made from Hornitos 
Reposado tequila, orange juice, fresh sour and pomegranate.

Dennys’ heart-attack-inducing Hobbit Hole breakfast

When JRR Tolkien dreamed up the sprawling yet gorgeously detailed fantasy 
world of Middle-earth before the second world war, he had in mind the creation 
of an epic myth for the English people. It is unlikely the donnish, 
pipe-smoking author ever imagined American Hobbit fans would be chowing down on 
hash browns, maple syrup pancakes and french toast in the name of Bilbo Baggins 
and his hairy-footed homunculi brethren the best part of a century later.
 In what must surely be one of the most off-message branding exercises in 
Hollywood history, US restaurant chain Dennys also included a One Ring burger 
and Campfire Cookie milkshake on its menu to celebrate the release ofThe 
Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hobbit-an-unexpected-journey> in 2012. A 
year later it added Elven Woodland pies for an updated menu tied into the 
release ofThe Desolation of Smaug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hobbit-the-desolation-of-smaug>, because 
nothing says cosy English eats like hastily rebranded pecan and pumpkin pie. 
Still, the super-calorific Hobbit Hole breakfast, featuring fried egg-filled 
cheddar bun halves served with extra melted cheddar cheese and bacon hash 
browns, certainly sounds as if it would put hair on your toes.




 