
“I’m trying to fix my mind,” says Will Smith at one point in his new movie, 
Collateral Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/collateral-beauty>. It’s 
accompanied by that quizzical crinkling of the eyebrows he does a lot these 
days, where it looks like he is trying to frown and look surprised at the same 
time. Unfortunately, the problem goes deeper than just his mind, or his 
eyebrows, or even this film: Smith has got alot to fix right now. In 2009, he 
was ranked the “most bankable star” on the planet by Forbes 
<http://metro.co.uk/2009/02/11/will-smith-named-most-bankable-star-451305/>, on 
account of his power to get movies made, and to make those movies hugely 
profitable. But Collateral Beauty has been the biggest flop of his career,
taking a paltry $7m 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=collateralbeauty.htm> worldwide on its 
opening weekend. You would have to rack your brains to remember his last hit as 
a leading man – or even the last time you saw him smile.

It must be said that Collateral Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/collateral-beauty> is one shockingly awful, 
emetically treacly, self-help tear-jerker. Smith plays a 
philosopher-marketing-guru type who is sent into a tailspin by the death of his 
six-year-old daughter. He writes letters to the abstract qualities he used to 
be fond of citing in his motivational speeches: Time, Love and Death. “This is 
… therapeutic,” says his perceptive colleague Kate Winslet, who has hired 
a private detective to intercept the letters. So his co-workers hire some 
amateur actors to play Time, Love and Death and go to talk to Smith – because, 
of course, there is no better way to heal a friend’s grief than convincing him 
that he is insane.

You do not need to know the rest, but what Collateral Beauty brings home is 
how miserable Smith seems these days. He seems to be on a complete downer. Even 
as Deadshot in this summer’sSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>, ostensibly a fun comic-book 
movie, Smith was again morose and crinkly eyebrowed with guilt over his 
daughter. Before that he was a Nigerian doctor taking on the NFL inConcussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/concussion>, who talked to dead football 
players and took care to be deadly earnest at all times. InSeven Pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/16/seven-pounds-film-review>, he 
glumly performed random acts of kindness to strangers, all the while concealing 
some deep personal sadness (“I haven’t treated myself very well,” he 
confessed). The Fresh Prince has become the sad king.

Collateral Beauty review: a Chernobyl of toxic sentimentality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/collateral-beauty-review-will-smith-helen-mirren-keira-knightley>
Before asking what went wrong, it bears remembering how right it has gone for 
Smith hitherto. Even before he had it all, he always looked like someone who 
was going to get it. He cut his first record before he left high school and was 
living the rap-star life before he turned 20 (at least till the tax office 
caught up with him). As an actor, he had the perfect origin story in the form of
The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVbQo3IOC_A>, a 
semi-autobiographical sitcom in which Smith’s charming, cocky, streetwise 
persona shook up polite, moneyed Los Angeles. Smith, the son of respectable 
Philadelphia Baptists, was never really a graffiti-spraying hood rat. But The 
Fresh Prince doled out the same fantasy of social mobility that Smith appeared 
to be living for real off-screen. It was like he had won the golden ticket in 
life – and that aura of charmed existence stuck with him.

By the late 90s, Smith was, as he put it in his single Just Cruisin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cugj6EBvkiA>, “the eclectic female attractor, 
rapper-slash-actor”. Everything he touched seemed to be a hit. And even when it 
wasn’t (such asWild, Wild West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/1999/aug/13/1>) Smith shimmied out of the 
wreckage with barely a dent in his box-office appeal – that is the true mark of 
a bankable star. That and calling your albumBig Willie Style 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6cvtxhUbRA> and not being laughed out of town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F136616f9b83081d1e53c7007cef9e67a84d957b0%2F89_182_2982_1790%2F2982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F136616f9b83081d1e53c7007cef9e67a84d957b0%2F89_182_2982_1790%2F2982.jpg>
 Crack team: with Tommy Lee Jones in Men in Black. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Pictures 
You do not get to this position by accident. Not even by talent or ambition. 
Smith certainly had those, but he also had a plan. In the early 90s, Smith 
later revealed, he sat down with his manager and figured out exactly what he 
needed to do to become the biggest movie star in the world. Together they 
analysed what the highest-grossing movies had in common: special effects, 
creatures, a love story. So, that was what he did. Independence Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/08/how-we-made-independence-day-roland-emmerich>
,Men in Black <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Men_in_Black_(film)>, Enemy of the 
State <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AoNT6u3mQew>, Bad Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f8HtmFtGSQo>, Wild Wild West 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_zXKtfKnfT8>, I, Robot 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0343818/reference>. It wasn’t about the art; it 
was about the product, the numbers, the objective, the brand.

There seemed to be no ceiling to Smith’s career. By 2010, he and his wife, 
Jada Pinkett Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/24/jada-pinkett-smith-gloria-madagascar>
, wereinterviewing Barack Obama <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1qGmq-peRM8> 
andhosting the president’s Nobel Peace prize concert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L1foglFsjlE>. Smith had earned his second 
Oscar nomination two years earlier (forThe Pursuit of Happyness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/12/willsmith.drama>; the first was 
forAli <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/feb/15/culture.peterbradshaw>). 
He was one of the highest-paid actors in Hollywood. And he was adored by the 
public. He couldn’t walk around the block without causing a traffic jam. 
Meanwhile, his 12-year-old son Jaden was starring in a hit remake ofThe Karate 
Kid <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/18/karate-kid-film-review> 
(produced by daddy). And 10-year-old daughter Willow was launching her music 
career with the school-disco floor-fillerWhip My Hair 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymKLymvwD2U>. The Obamas, it seemed, had 
competition for America’s First Family.

In retrospect, that was Peak Smith. Or Before After Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/06/after-earth-review>, as 
historians will one day call it. The title was prophetically terrestrial for a 
movie that brought Smith plummeting back down to the ground. There was no 
walking away from this one: After Earth was Smith’s magnum opus, and a family 
vanity project. He conceived it, wrote it, produced it (with Jada), mostly 
directed it (with help from M Night Shyamalan), and starred in it alongside 
Jaden. It looked like he had got his grandma to do the sets, too. A pompous, 
po-faced, post-apocalyptic mess, After Earth’s charge sheet is too long to 
summarise: terrible CGI, terrible acting, terrible dialogue, terrible 
everything. Worse still, Smith played a stern military father who remotely 
monitors and dictates his son’s every move after they crash on a hostile future 
Earth – a dynamic that uncomfortably mirrored Smith’s own attempt to position 
Jaden as a viable Hollywood leading man. It most likely achieved the opposite. 
It was the first Will Smith summer movie in 20 years not to open at No 1 at the 
box office.

You could say the knives were out for Team Smith after that, but their wounds 
were largely self-inflicted. There was the bizarre joint interview in New York 
Magazine, whereSmith declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/30/will-smith-new-york-magazine-interview>
: “I’m a student of patterns. At heart, I’m a physicist.” And Jaden answered a 
question about being responsible about money with: “I like Cartier.” Or the 
even more bizarre interview Jaden and Willow gave the New York Times in 2014 
<http://tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/11/17/jaden-and-willow-smith-exclusive-joint-interview/?_r=0>
, where they spoke about “prana energy”, being able to control time, and 
writing their own novels rather than reading other people’s. They were 
literally too cool for school. “I went to school for one year,” said Willow. “I 
was, like: ‘Oh, now I know why kids are so depressed.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5789884731832d0a717d512ee0da83f11802415f%2F0_136_2060_2573%2F2060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5789884731832d0a717d512ee0da83f11802415f%2F0_136_2060_2573%2F2060.jpg>
 As Muhammad Ali in 2001’s Ali, a rare instance of him immersing himself in a 
real character. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia Pictures 
Instead, the Smith kids attended the New Village Leadership Academy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Village_Leadership_Academy>, a private, 
alternative institution founded and funded by their parents. Smith senior has 
always claimed to be secular, but the school’s teaching methods were heavily 
influenced by the philosophies of L Ron Hubbard, it was revealed, which cast 
further light on Smith’s links with Scientology over the years. Far from being 
First Family candidates, the Smiths were starting to look like a sinister 
breeding programme for future messiahs.

“After the failure of After Earth, a thing got broken in my mind,” Smith told 
reporters last year. And here we are, still waiting for him to fix it. He seems 
to have had a reassessment. He stopped working for a year and a half. “I had to 
dive into why it was so important for me to have No 1 movies,” he said. He has 
told the story several times of how he was motivated to conquer the world after 
being cheated on by a girl when he was 15. “All I have to do is make sure that 
no one’s ever better than me and I’ll have the love that my heart yearns for.” 
It doesn’t sound like the whole story, but the failure ofAfter Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/after-earth> prompted “a mature way of 
looking at the world and my artistry and love”.

One thing that is barely mentioned in Smith’s story, but needs to be, is the 
fact that he is a black man. In many respects, that adds to his 
accomplishments. Smith has achieved what previous generations of African 
American entertainers could barely dream of – almost to the extent where his 
race is an irrelevance to his roles. “If a movie makes more than $100m, some 
black people stop being black – they become Will Smith,” Lenny Henryrecently 
joked <http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/sir-lenny-henry-black-actors-7968558>
. It is not clear whether he meant it as an insult or a compliment.

Smith was the embodiment of that brief moment, early on in Obama’s first term, 
when America imagined itself to be “post-racial”, but, as you would expect, he 
has played a very careful game. His characters are invariably just black enough 
to please black audiences, but not so black as to frighten white audiences. His 
standard persona, from the Fresh Prince onwards, has been cool, streetwise, 
quick-witted, naturally talented, fun-loving but in no way threatening – 
physically, politically or sexually. His music is the same – inoffensive, 
clean, “fun”.

Smith has often distanced himself from race issues. “The execs don’t care 
about what colour you are; they care about how much money you make,” he once 
said. Earlier this year, he raised eyebrows by professing that “racism is 
actually rare”. But it’s no coincidence Smith has rarely had a white love 
interest on screen. The movies were not so post-racial, after all. Even in his 
romcomHitch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hitch>, the studios reportedly 
pushed Latina Eva Mendes as his partner rather than first choice Cameron Diaz, 
on the grounds that white audiences still don’t like seeing black men kissing 
white women. His 2015 movieFocus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/focus-will-smith-margot-robbie-first-look-review>
, with Margot Robbie, was the first time he actually did so.

More often, Smith is partnered with white men, usually older, grumpier, more 
authoritative ones who co-opt him into the status quo. The classic example is 
Men In Black, where Tommy Lee Jones inducts him as a secret government 
operative, symbolically replacing his bright, urban streetwear with an 
anonymous business suit. “You’ll not stand out in any way,” Jones tells Smith. 
“Your entire image is crafted to leave no lasting memory with anyone you 
encounter.” Smith gets a final quip in: “You know the difference between you 
and me? I make this look good.”

It was a similar story in Enemy of the State, Wild Wild West, Independence Day 
(to some extent), and the egregious 1930s dramaThe Legend of Bagger Vance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/feb/23/culture.peterbradshaw>, in which 
he played Matt Damon’s “magical negro” golf caddy. As Spike Leeremarked of the 
film <http://www.huhmagazine.co.uk/2401/spike-lee-to-direct-oldboy-remake>: 
“Black men were being castrated and lynched left and right … With all that 
going on, why are you fucking trying to teach Matt Damon a golf swing?”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ef6edb3c3d0892d5888cf4f58c93b9cf5395c4d%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Make%20Will%20Smith%20great%20again%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fmake-will-smith-great-again-collateral-beauty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ef6edb3c3d0892d5888cf4f58c93b9cf5395c4d%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 What’s eating Will Smith? A scene from Collateral Beauty. Photograph: Barry 
Wetcher/AP 
Practically the only exceptions in Smith’s career have been the Bad Boys 
films, where he partnered with Martin Lawrence, and the real anomaly, Ali, in 
which he immersed himself in a role rather than playing another variation on 
the Smith persona. And played a politically active African American icon to 
boot. And he did it very well.

That is the part Smith can’t fix himself: he has forgotten what he is actually 
good at. That “mature way of looking at the world” has so far translated into 
roles in which he is miserable, confused and hurting, as if we are all going to 
take pity on him – or at least consider him a serious actor. It’s not working. 
Hopefully the failure of Collateral Beauty will finally hammer that home. We 
don’t want Sad Will, we want Jiggy-Wit-It Will! We want the confident, cocky, 
charming,funny Will. We want action-comedy Will.

Now that the last tatters of “post-racial” America have been stomped into the 
ground by the incoming Trump presidency, fixing Smith ought to be a national 
priority. The country needs figures who can heal the divisions, who can talk to 
everyone, who can embody a semblance of an American Dream that is not based on 
bigotry or bitterness. We need to Make Will Great Again.

There are signs of hope. Two sequels to Bad Boys are in the works 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/new/Bad-Boys-3-4-Happening-Here-Latest-75517.html>. 
He is also getting off the fence politically. Following the lead of his wife, 
he boycotted the Oscar ceremony last year in support of#OscarSoWhite 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/35349772/oscars-so-white-what-people-are-saying-about-diversity-in-hollywood>
. His family foundation has also donated to black and racial equality causes, 
including $150,000 toJustice or Else! campaign <http://www.justiceorelse.com> 
last year.

There is one obvious way all of this could come together for Smith: the desire 
for serious roles, commercial clout, political respectability, personal 
achievement, the easy charm: a Barack Obama biopic. Surely there is no better 
candidate? No surprises, strategically minded Smith has already spoken to 
Barack about playing him. Obama told him he had the ears for it, apparently. He 
just needs to sort out those eyebrows and we will be good to go.
 