
Spoiler alert: contains details for the entire series of Making a Murderer on 
Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and for The Jinx on HBO

The point at which I knew I was indisputably hooked on Netflix’s true-crime 
saga Making a Murderer came at the end of the fourth episode.


The defence team representing Steven Avery, the Wisconsin man accused of 
killing photographer Teresa Halbach, were inspecting a piece of evidence: a 
vial of blood, taken several years before, around the time that Avery’s 
previous (and ultimately wrongful) conviction for a separate sexual assault was 
overturned.


But something’s off: the seal on the vial appears to have been broken, and 
there’s a hole in the lid, suggesting someone may have inserted a needle and 
sucked some of the blood out.


To the defence team, this tallies with everything they already thought about 
the case: that the police have gone out of their way to frame Avery for the 
murder, in this instance by planting blood from the vial in Halbach’s car. 
“Game on!” defence attorney Jerry Buting shouts triumphantly. The credits roll. 
I immediately click on to the next episode, not even willing to wait the 
customary 10 seconds for the autoplay feature to kick in.


Making A Murderer, a frighteningly addictive true-crime tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/making-a-murderer-documentary-review>
What’s perhaps most striking about that scene, aside from the monumental 
implications of Buting’s discovery, is how closely it resembles the techniques 
used in serialised drama: Buting’s sign-off, almost too perfect; the sudden 
smash cut to the blacked-out credits; the siren call of the dangling plotline, 
calling you in to watch “just one more episode”. None of it would have felt 
drastically out of place on, to use another Netflix example, House of Cards.

Which, of course, is the intention. Making a Murderer is the latest addition 
to a slow-burn documentary movement that takes its cues not from schlocky 
true-crime potboilers, but from cable-quality serialised drama. Judging by the 
rapturous response to Making a Murderer over the festive period, it is beating 
TV drama at its own game.

When This American Life host Ira Glass announced Serial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>, the podcast credited with 
kicking off the current craze for long-form crime, he declared that the show’s 
aim was “to give you the same experience you get from a great HBO or Netflix 
series, where you get caught up with the characters and the thing unfolds week 
after week.” HBO itself would soon, in the form ofThe Jinx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/16/the-jinx-robert-durst-documentary>
, have a real-life crime drama of its own, with a denouement –Robert Durst 
admitting on tape that he “killed them all, of course” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/robert-durst-what-did-i-do-killed-them-all-of-course>
 – that was no less jolting, in its own way, than that of The Sopranos.


In the UK, both the BBC (The Detectives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/19/the-detectives-benefits-street-review-greater-manchester-police>
) and Channel 4 (The Murder Detectives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/01/murder-detectives-review-real-life-investigation-gripping-moving>
) aired multi-part documentaries that were shot to mimic procedural dramas, 
told over consecutive nights to draw viewers in.

The Jinx: ‘So hard-boiled you could be watching a Coen Brothers movie’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/16/the-jinx-robert-durst-documentary>
Like the best drama, all of these series share a desire to tell complex 
stories in a way that doesn’t insult the intelligence of its audience. There’s 
minimal hand-holding and a emphasis instead on letting viewers draw their own 
conclusions. There are other parallels, too: languorous credit sequences filled 
with portentous, weather-beaten landscapes, artistic cutaways, storylines that 
hop back and forward in time, and the general sense – to use a bit of a TV 
cliche – of there being something “novelistic” about their telling.

Moreover, these true-crime series have advantages that scripted drama lacks. 
Their open-ended nature allows viewers to continue their sleuthing long after 
they’ve finished viewing. Their focus – the real stakes of real people – makes 
them more involving than fiction, where the fates of characters come down to 
the whims of a writer. And, of course, being rooted in reality, such shows 
don’t have to worry about stretching the audience’s credulity: each bizarre 
development in Making a Murderer merely makes it more engrossing, rather than 
less believable.

At the same time, you do wonder just how deep the well of grisly, “stranger 
than fiction” stories goes.While there are certainly enough miscarriages of 
justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/06/making-a-murder-netflix-series-miscarriages-of-justice-are-not-at-all-rare>
 to fuel a channel’s worth of true-crime serials, whether there are enough that 
boast the particular lightning in a bottle of Making a Murderer is another 
matter.


Criminal investigations are often long and arduous, filled with arcane 
minutiae and knotty details. Not all of them will be suitable for chopping down 
into episodic chunks, and, in some cases, that might even do them a disservice. 
One persistent accusation levelled at Making a Murderer is that it omitted 
potentially damning evidence in order to paint Avery in a more positive light. 
Facts can sometimes be an impediment to good entertainment.

Netflix's Making a Murderer shows the limits of web sleuthing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/31/netflix-making-a-murderer-limits-web-sleuthing>
Another problem may be one of quality. Thus far, the current wave of 
serialised true crime has managed to distance itself from the common-or-garden 
one-case-per-episode true crime found onCrime and Investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/oct/28/24-hours-crime-and-investigation>
 or Discovery’s ID channel. The likes of The Jinx and Making a Murderer sell 
themselves as more rareified fare , boasting higher production values and 
airing on platforms associated with quality TV: HBO, Netflix, BBC2.


Yet the success of Making a Murderer makes imitations inevitable; Discovery’s 
own multi-episode true-crime seriesKilling Fields 
<https://www.discovery.com/tv-shows/killing-fields/> aired its opening episode 
last night in the US. Might saturation mean a dip in quality? Might we 
eventually tire of the genre’s gimmicks – the ominous soundtracks, the True 
Detective-aping credit sequences – in the way that we have tired of glossy 
crime procedurals such as the recently cancelled CSI? And, crucially, might we 
become ill-at-ease with entertainment inspired by horrific and often deeply 
traumatic real-life events?

Those are perhaps questions for another time. For now, the genre is riding 
high, creating searching, intelligent and important television that doubles up 
as great entertainment. Time for one more episode?
 