
Early-morning airport queues, security checks, baggage delays, tedious 
transfers, high CO2 emissions ... Who would choose to fly to a ski resort if 
there were a better option?

Most skiers know of the famous Snow Train, which runs through the night to 
serve such British favourite resorts as Val d'Isere, Meribel and Tignes. In 
fact, many top resorts in Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Andorra and other parts 
of France are now within convenient reach. Depending on your destination, you 
can either travel by day or by overnight couchette, with time for a bite in 
Paris or Brussels on the way.

Going overnight enables you to sleep on the train and gives you an extra two 
days on the slopes because you arrive in the morning in time to ski and leave 
in the evening on your final day. The advantages of daytime journeys are a 
later departure time, a more relaxing, scenic journey and the satisfaction of 
knowing your trip produces only one tenth of the greenhouse gas emissions of 
the same journey by air. If you travel by train there are no charges for 
carriage of skis or snowboards and no luggage weight restrictions.

Some tour operators, such as Crystal Ski, offer 'accommodation only' or 
'self-drive' deals, with around £130 off the price of the holiday - allowing 
you to choose your mode of travel.

Ischgl, Austria

Though this lively, virtually traffic-free resort is consistently rated as 
Austria's second-best ski destination, few Brits have heard of it because 
Ischgl's hotels prefer to cater for independent travellers rather than tour 
operator groups. Serviced by an efficient network of fast, covered chairlifts, 
90 per cent of Ischgl's 230km ski area sits above 2,000m, guaranteeing generous 
amounts of snow. From the top of Palinkopf you can cruise the long red run into 
the Swiss duty-free village of Samnaun. On the way back watch out for 
plain-clothes customs officers, who patrol the border on skis, pursuing those 
suspected of exceeding the duty-free quota.

· Leave Friday on the 16.05 Eurostar from St Pancras to Brussels. Then catch 
the 20.25 Bergland Express, changing at Innsbruck, to Landeck, arriving 09.24 
on Saturday, then taxi (30 minutes, £36). Return the following Saturday on the 
18.35 train from Landeck, changing at Innsbruck and Brussels to arrive St 
Pancras 11.01 on Sunday. Return fares from £215.
Book through TTC Online (00 31 30 2320430; berglandexpress.eu 
<http://www.berglandexpress.eu>).

Kitzbuhel, Austria

Stunning scenery, vibrant apres-ski and a fairytale village setting combine to 
make Kitzbuhel an attractive resort. The rail journey from the UK could not be 
simpler, while on-slope highlights include the 6.8km red run from Pengelstein 
to Jochberg, with a great rosti stop at Kasereckhutte en route. With its 
highest point at 2,000m however, Kitzbuhel is somewhat vertically challenged, 
so in terms of snowfall late season is best avoided.

· Leave Friday on the 16.05 Eurostar from St Pancras to Brussels, and then the 
20.25 Bergland Express, arriving Kitzbuhel at 09.24 on Saturday. Return the 
following Saturday on the 19.47 train from Kitzbuhel, changing at Brussels to 
arrive St Pancras 11.01 on Sunday. Return fares from £195. Book through TTC 
Online (00 31 30 2320430;berglandexpress.eu <http://www.berglandexpress.eu>).

Chamonix, France

If you've only got a couple of days to play with, the mecca of steep terrain 
is an excellent choice. The size of Chamonix's charming town means weekend 
accommodation is relatively easy to find (contact the tourist office: 00 33 450 
530024 www.chamonix.com). If it is off-piste adventure you're after, Grands 
Montets is a great starting point, with a 2,000m vertical drop. Chamonix's bars 
and clubs - lively any night - really kick off at weekends. Straight from the 
slopes head for Chambre Neuf by the station. Later, MBC is good for microbrewed 
beer and Le Choucas or La Terrasse for dancing.

· Leave Friday on the 17.35 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then catch 
the 22.25 overnight train from Paris Austerlitz, changing at 
St-Gervais-les-Bains, to arrive at Chamonix at 09.25. Return on Sunday on the 
19.12 from Chamonix, changing in St-Gervais-les-Bains and Paris to arrive St 
Pancras at 09.33 on Monday. Return fares from £125.

Soldeu, Andorra

The Andorran resorts of Soldeu, Pas de la Casa, El Tarter and Canillo have 
finally linked up to form a 200km area marketed as 'GrandValira'. Apart from a 
few bottleneck lift queues, the area is uncrowded, with ideal terrain for 
beginners and intermediates. Nights out on cheap booze are a thing of the past 
in Soldeu, but the duty-free shops in El Tarter and Pas de la Casa remain. The 
resort is aiming increasingly at the family market: there are plenty of large 
hotels with pools, spas and impressive buffets. On the mountain - 
disappointingly - fast food has taken over, but gastronomic respite can be 
found at the delightful, log-fired Husky restaurant, which looks onto a frozen 
lake, tucked away off a run at Grau Roig. The 200km drive from the nearest 
airports is notorious for horrendous delays in bad weather, making the train to 
Andorra a more reliable alternative.

· Leave Friday on the 17.35 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then catch 
the 21.56 overnight train from Paris Austerlitz, arriving at L'Hospitalet 07.20 
on Saturday. A bus to Soldeu (60 mins, €5.50 single) connects with the train, 
getting you into Soldeu at 08.40. Return the following Saturday on the 17.35 
bus from Soldeu to L'Hospitalet. Catch the 20.49 overnight train, changing in 
Paris, to arrive at St Pancras at 10.35. Return fares from £111.

Zermatt, Switzerland

No resort can boast a more spectacular backdrop than Zermatt, sitting under 
the 4,478m Matterhorn. Not only can you reach Europe's most famous resort by 
train; once you are ready to ski, the Gornergrat railway drops you off on the 
slopes at 3,000m, with memorable views over the village. But it isn't just the 
scenery that makes Zermatt so popular; it's the exhilarating pistes, dotted 
with excellent mountain restaurants. One of the best-loved is Zum See, between 
Zermatt and the hamlet of Furi.

· Leave Saturday on the 08.32 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then 
catch the 13.04 train from Paris Gare de Lyon, changing at Lausanne and Visp, 
to arrive at Zermatt at 20.42. Return the following Saturday on the 09.30 train 
from Zermatt, changing at Visp, Lausanne and Paris, to arrive at St Pancras at 
20.40. Return fares from £163.

St Moritz, Switzerland

OK, St Moritz is awash with fur-clad clientele and pampered pooches. Even so, 
don't let its posh reputation overshadow the fact that, for intermediates 
particularly, it has 350km of five-star, well-groomed reds and blues to cruise. 
There are also some great off-piste areas, particularly by Piz Nair and Piz 
Corvatsch. In January, the resort hosts the impressive Polo on Snow tournament 
followed in early February by the Cricket on Ice competition.

· Leave Saturday on the 07.30 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then 
catch the 12.24 train from Paris Est, changing at Basel and Chur, to arrive at 
St Moritz at 20.58. Return the following Saturday on the 10.02 train from St 
Moritz, changing at Chur, Basel and Paris, to arrive at St Pancras at 20.40. 
Return fares from £185.

Serre Chevalier, France

Serre Chevalier is well-loved by the French, and for good reason: the 250km 
ski area is simply superb. The resort comprises four separate towns and 
villages: Briancon, Chantemerle, Villeneuve and Monetier. Villeneuve is the 
main hub, which combines a charming, olde-worlde village centre with some 
horrendous purpose-built architecture. At night the resort will be too quiet 
for some, but La Grotte du Yeti, Loco Loco and Le Frog are all decent watering 
holes.

· Leave Friday on the 17.35 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then catch 
the 22.05 overnight train from Paris Austerlitz to Briancon, arriving 08.38 on 
Saturday. A regular bus from Briancon (20 mins, €3.80 single) drops you in 
Villeneuve at 09.20. Return the following Saturday on the 19.10 bus from 
Villenueve to Briancon. Catch the 20.28 overnight train, changing in Paris, to 
arrive at St Pancras at 10.35. Return fares from £111.

Sauze D'Oulx, Italy

Part of the 400km Milky Way ski area, Sauze d'Oulx's has been unlucky with 
snowfall in recent years. What is guaranteed, however, is good partying. You 
can take your pick: brash Brit bars in the modern end of town; or more 
cosmopolitan venues a few blocks away in the 15th-century, cobbled centro 
storico, host to some lovely Italian bars and eateries. The atmosphere in Sauze 
is unpretentious and so are the prices. You can eat, drink and party without 
haemorrhaging euros, and the rail journey from the UK is the quickest and 
cheapest of any resort in Europe.

· Leave Saturday on the 09.25 Eurostar from St Pancras to Paris Nord. Then 
catch the 14.14 train from Paris Lyon to arrive in Oulx at 18.55. A taxi up to 
the resort takes 15 minutes and costs €18. Return the following Saturday on the 
11.31 train from Oulx, changing at Paris, to arrive at St Pancras at 19.33. 
Return fares from £96.

Essentials

· Unless stated, all journeys can be booked through Rail Europe (08708 304862; 
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>) or European Rail (020 7387 0444;
europeanrail.com <http://www.europeanrail.com>).

· All overnight fares include a couchette place in a six-berth compartment. 

· Apart from in Paris, all changes of train require only a change of platform. 

· Paris Nord to Paris Est is a 10-minute walk (use one of the station's 
luggage trolleys) or a five-minute taxi ride; Paris Nord to Paris Lyon or 
Austerlitz needs a metro or taxi (book a G7 taxi in advance: 00 33 1 4739 4739;
taxis-G7.com <http://www.taxis-G7.com>).

· This article was amended on Tuesday February 5 2008. Some of the fare 
information included in the above article was incorrect. Return rail fares to 
Ischgl, Austria are available from Bergland Express starting at £215. Return 
fares to Kitzbuhel, Austria are available from £195. These details have been 
corrected.
 