
Texts from Jane Eyre was the first book I ever wrote, or even tried to write, 
and when I found my agent, I rather assumed my part in the process was done. 
She had approached me about the project, so I assumed an editor would approach 
her in turn, and I would continue to attract publishing attention like a sea 
anemone attracts shrimp. This turned out not to be the case: it took over a 
year, and quite active shopping, to sell the book proposal, rather than seeing 
it snapped up straight away.

When it happened, writing the book turned out to be mostly 1) easy and 2) fun, 
which I’ve always felt a little sheepish about, but into every life a little 
rain must fall. Write a book, it’s easy and fun and you’ll definitely make 
money from it. Probably. Possibly.

Mallory Ortberg: 'If men show up that's great, but we don't need them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/03/mallory-ortberg-the-toast-interview>
I’d been running the “Texts from” series for a few months on the Hairpin 
<https://thehairpin.com/>, so it didn’t take long to put together a proposal 
and start shopping the book around. This was definitely the “comical 
misunderstandings” portion of the making-it montage, and my agent and I 
received the following notes from a variety of publishers:

 * This is a great idea but we don’t think people who send text messages also 
read books 
 * This is a great idea but does it have to be text messages 
 * This is a great idea but does it have to be about literary characters 
 * This is a great idea but have you ever thought about writing a YA novel 
 * Let us know when you write a YA novel 
I was actually quite willing to completely rewrite the book based on these 
notes, because I have no spine and would rather make strangers happy than 
maintain any sort of creative vision. So for a brief period of time this 
project was called Notes from Nancy Drew and the conceit was, I think, that I 
had found an assortment of Post-It Notes and, I guess, telegrams, from various 
literary characters. It was a very scattered idea and it was executed 
particularly poorly. Even the people who had asked for it did not want it once 
they saw it, and I do not blame them. It made no sense! So we shelved the idea, 
and I mostly forgot about it for a while.


(I do not have any good ideas for a YA novel. Please expect a YA novel from me 
in the fall of 20never, released by Never House.)

In the meantime, I created website the Toast <http://the-toast.net/> with my 
business partner Nicole Cliffe and decided to revive the Texts From series 
there because it would
1) particularly please me, and 
2) it was my website, so no one could stop me. 

I had a merry old time. Things chugged along for a while, and then my agent 
told me that a few new publishers had developed interest in Texts from Jane 
Eyre after seeing how well it did online. They also, presumably, realised that 
the overlap on the Venn diagram of “people who own smartphones” and “people who 
read books” is greater than zero. Which was very satisfying to hear. My agent 
and I dug up the old proposal, got an offer, accepted it, and then I wrote the 
book, which was by far the simplest part of the process. I think it took six 
months and I think I wrote it mostly in Google Docs. I have no more specific 
memories of that time.

The moral here is that you should be ready either to change everything about 
your passion project in the hopes of getting someone else to like it, or to 
abandon said project on a moment’s notice to go do something else. Writing and 
selling a book is a particularly complicated and whimsical process, and mine 
happened to be more-than-unusually lucky, which is quite nice.

More about Texts from Jane Eyre

The premise, to make it clear, is that great books have been reduced to the 
speech bubble conversations you get on aniPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>. Hamlet is reimagined as a 
dialogue between a nice American mom and her ghastly spoiled son who doesn’t 
want to come down to dinner; Heathcliff and Cathy get to swap lines like “i 
love you so much let’s break each other’s hearts” “oh my god let’s / i love you 
so much i’m going to marry edgar”; “do you know who i hate?” “everyone?” 
“EVERYONE” “:) :) :)/i love you SO MUCH”, etc. –Nicholas Lezard


Read the full review. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/22/texts-from-jane-eyre-mallory-ortberg-review-favourite-literary-characters>

Buy the book

Texts from Jane Eyre is published by Constable and Robinson for £8.99 and is 
available from the Guardian bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/texts-from-jane-eyre-413887.html>.

Extract
 