
A man was killed and another injured at a birthday party for a 15-year-old 
Mexican girl that become an internet sensation after more than a million people 
accepted her father’s invitation to attend.


In December, Cresencio Ibarra, from the central Mexican state of San Luis 
Potosí,inadvertently invited “everybody” to his daughter Rubi’s coming of age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/mexico-rubi-birthday-video-quinceanera>
, orquinceañera, party.

“There will be a [horse race] with 10,000 pesos (£400), as for second and 
third places, we’ll work that out,” he said in a video that a local 
photographer posted on Facebook. Ibarra then added: “Everyone is cordially 
invited.”


Despite dozens of mocking internet memes and hundreds of thousands of gleeful 
acceptances, the party went ahead on Monday, with thousands of people turning 
up.

Although state police and Red Cross workers kept an eye on proceedings, a 
local man died after being trampled by his own horse, which was taking part in 
the traditional amateur race, orchiva.

Mexican man's open invitation for daughter's birthday goes too viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/mexico-rubi-birthday-video-quinceanera>
Police had warned the crowds to stay clear of the race as there were no fences 
to protect them, but the man appears to have stepped out in front of his horse 
and died soon afterwards. Another man was reported to have been injured.

Several hundred guests had arrived by Monday morning for an outdoor mass, but 
the number swelled as the day progressed so that by evening there were 
thousands and the event resembled a rock concert.

Family members had to open a path for the girl through dozens of reporters and 
photographers snapping her picture so she could reach the mass. A large 
billboard saying, “Welcome to my 15th birthday party”, with Rubi’s picture 
towered over the tents and tables filled with food.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fman-dies-at-mexican-teenagers-birthday-party-that-went-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe99de41dfa2486e43301dbd05789b33ffb98b5ba%2F0_383_4423_2653%2F4423.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20dies%20at%20Mexican%20teenager's%20birthday%20party%20that%20went%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fman-dies-at-mexican-teenagers-birthday-party-that-went-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20dies%20at%20Mexican%20teenager%27s%20birthday%20party%20that%20went%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fman-dies-at-mexican-teenagers-birthday-party-that-went-viral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe99de41dfa2486e43301dbd05789b33ffb98b5ba%2F0_383_4423_2653%2F4423.jpg>
 People attending the 15th birthday party celebrations. Photograph: Ronaldo 
Schemidt/AFP/Getty Images 
People had travelled from far and wide to attend the party and to sample their 
host’s generosity.


 “I came to see if they would give me a dress for my granddaughter for her 
15th birthday in May,” said Victoriano Obregón, who had come all the way from 
the northern state of Coahuila.

After the video emerged three weeks ago, Rubi’s mother explained that her 
husband had only been referring to everyone in the neighbouring communities, 
not the world, but by then the video had been picked up dozens of times on 
YouTube and had been seen by millions, sparking tributes by music stars, jokes 
and offers of sponsorship by companies.

Mexican airline Interjet published a promotion offering 30% discounts on 
flights to San Luis Potosi, under the slogan: “Are you going to Rubi’s party?”

Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> users published 
mocked-up photos of troops of turkeys, diggers stirring giant cauldrons of soup 
and massive crowds “heading for Rubi’s party”.

The actor Gael García Bernal made a parody video of the invitation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJKVBZBuNMQ>, while the Mexican singer Luis 
Antonio López “El Mimoso” composed a song for Rubi. She even received an offer 
to appear on the soap opera The Rose of Guadalupe.

Sergio Octavio Contreras, a communications professor at La Salle-Bajío 
University inMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, said the saga 
was an example “of how the internet amplifies and makes hyper-transparent 
people’s personal lives and how traditional media look for stories on social 
networks to bring in new audiences”.

The Ibarras’ neighbours, meanwhile, hope the fascination with the quinceañera 
will endure beyond the festivities and bring money and improvements to the poor 
community, where there is a mescal distillery but people are pleading for 
mobile phone coverage.

“More than anything, this can bring attention to us … so people can see the 
unemployment,” said Rutilio Ibarra, a local resident.
 