
Michael Carrick has expressed his happiness at seeing Bastian Schweinsteiger 
return to Manchester United’s first team in the 4-1 EFL Cupvictory over West 
Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-west-ham-united-efl-cup-match-report>
.

The German came on for the last four minutes of the quarter-final at Old 
Trafford. He replaced Anthony Martial in his first appearance since the1-0 win 
at Manchester City in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/manchester-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Schweinsteiger’s United career appeared to be over after José Mourinho made it 
clear soon after taking over that the World Cup winner was not part of his 
plans. “I think it’svery difficult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/bastian-schweinsteiger-jose-mourinho-manchester-united>
 [for Schweinsteiger to play for United], said the manager in August. “I’m not 
saying it’s impossible. I’m saying it’s very difficult.”

The midfielder has gradually been reintegrated into the squad and returned 
during an impressive performance by United on Wednesday.

José Mourinho praises Mkhitaryan after watching win from secret location
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/jose-mourinho-mkhitaryan-secret-location-manchester-united-west-ham>
“He got an unbelievable reception. It was great for him,” Carrick said. “Just 
to see him back playing. He nearly scored as well, so that would have been 
nice. It was good to see him back. 

“You understand all sorts of situations occur in football. You get on with it. 
Decisions are made by people. There are all sorts of ups and downs along the 
way. You just have to get on with it. That is the only way you can do it. 
Bastian has trained well. He has trained hard. He has got his game, which is 
great. Who knows what the future will hold.”

The victory over West Ham was also a positive occasion for another player 
whose United’s future has looked in doubt for some time. Martial scored twice 
to double his goal tally for the season and suggest he is not the busted flush 
that has appeared the case following an excellent debut season.

“The ability and attributes he has got are frightening at times. When he is on 
fire he is a threat for anyone,” said Carrick of the 20-year-old France 
striker. “He started the game terrifically well. It is great to see him playing 
like that. He is fully confident and believing. There is plenty more to come 
from him, which is a good sign for us.”

Carrick is in his 11th season at United, with his latest deal expiring in 
June. Mourinho has stated he would like the 35-year-old to remain at Old 
Trafford beyond then and the player is open to that idea.

“I am quite relaxed,” Carrick said. “It [his future] is not something I am 
looking to do at the minute but it would be very difficult to play somewhere 
else.

“At any stage of your career, people have their strengths and what they can’t 
do so well. You just have to put yourself in a position where you can play to 
your strengths more often than not. You learn that from experience. As long as 
I am enjoying it, can feel I can contribute and the manager does, then great.”
 