
The painful and irreparable wrongness of life is the theme of Kenneth 
Lonergan’s superbly acted new film about grief. It starsCasey Affleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/casey-affleck> as Lee, a guy who lives on his 
own in Boston, working as a janitor and seething with poisonous rage at the 
world and himself. Lee returns to his hometown after the death of his brother 
Joe to find to his astonishment that he is now legal guardian of Joe’s teenage 
son.

Related: Manchester by the Sea: how Matt Damon and brutal honesty helped make 
2017's most affecting film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/kenneth-lonergan-golden-globes-nominee-manchester-by-the-sea>

This is about life as it is lived in the real world, with unassuageable pain, 
loose ends untied, life lessons unlearned. Life with no narrative closure. Lee 
bears the burden of a terrible tragedy, which explains his exile from the place 
where he grew up; the current situation appears to offer the familiar trope of 
an unsympathetic guy poignantly redeemed by the responsibility of parenthood 
and odd-couple friendship with the quasi-child. Yet things don’t work out 
anywhere near as cleanly as that.

This film has already been hailed as a masterpiece and I think it is, though 
of a more conventional kind than Lonergan’s previous movie,Margaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/01/margaret-film-review>. Manchester 
By the Sea sees him assume the self-aware weightiness of an Arthur Miller or a 
Eugene O’Neill, but blends this with some wonderfully played comic scenes, and 
even uses some trad jazz over a scene transition that is rather like Woody 
Allen. And as in Seinfeld, there is no hugging or learning. After a 
fire-related disaster, Lee still manages almost to burn the house down by 
falling asleep with a pan on the stove. It is a brilliant moment of abject 
horror.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Michelle Williams on Manchester by the Sea: ‘Closure only comes when we die’ – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/06/michelle-williams-on-manchester-by-the-sea-closure-only-comes-when-we-die-video-interview>
The Massachusetts hometown of the title looms oppressively over Lee. It is a 
port dominated by the fishing industry. There is no seaside, no beach. It is a 
place of work. Yet the nearest that Lee comes to smiling is when he goes out on 
his brother’s boat. When Lee gets word that he must come back, it is an almost 
primeval confrontation. To use his own phrase, it is as if he must “beat” this 
place and what happened here. Lee once lived in Manchester By the Sea with his 
wife Randi (Michelle Williams) and their kids; his brother Joe (Kyle Chandler) 
lived there with his own wife Elise (Gretchen Mol). They had a boy, Patrick, 
played by Ben O’Brien as a little kid; Lucas Hedges makes a tremendous troubled 
16-year-old Patrick in the present day. Both Lee and Joe came to be separated 
from their wives.

Anger pulses from Lee’s thin, shrewd face, with clenched teeth that resemble 
angry little white squares like tiny tiles. And anger radiates also from the 
grumpy tenants whose apartments he has to fix. He sees them at their grumpiest, 
absorbs the feeling and sweats it from his pores. Affleck compresses and dams 
and forces the anger, anger that can’t quite find release in tears, except – 
nearly – at the very end, when Lee tells his sort-of son Patrick he is getting 
a place with a spare bedroom. There is a kind of dark, self-harming eroticism 
in the way Lee goes to bars, ignores attractive women coming on to him, and 
instead finds men to fight.

Lonergan intersperses the action with the flashbacks that jab agonisingly into 
Lee’s mind. Joe suffered from a heart condition and an unspeakably painful 
hospital scene replays the moment in which he gets the diagnosis, which may 
also be the moment when Elise walks out on him for good.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Manchester by the Sea trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/29/manchester-by-the-sea-trailer-casey-affleck-michelle-williams-acclaimed-drama-video>
Hedges gives a glorious performance as Patrick, the teenager who finds that 
tricky Uncle Lee is now his dad. He is a mixture of vulnerable, clueless and 
precociously worldly. When Lee shows up in the town to tell Patrick that his 
dad is dead, it is as if he is making a reckoning with a younger, freer version 
of himself.

Manchester By the Sea is a sombre and wintry film, and in fact the sheer 
arctic chill is what delays the funeral and creates the important, though 
hardly palliative interval in which the drama can take place and feelings can 
be worked through, as far as that’s possible. It is a movie composed in an 
inexpressibly sad minor key.
 