
The Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> 
bandwagon, which flattened all before it at the weekend, moves on to Cheltenham 
on Saturday with the Gold Cup favourite Djakadam a prohibitive 5-2 on favourite 
with Ladbrokes for the BetBright Trial Chase.

Faugheen puts up ‘electrifying’ show to land the Irish Champion Hurdle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/faugheen-irish-champion-hurdle-leopardstown-willie-mullins-douvan-victoria-pendleton>
The fact Mullins has 11 horses ante-post favourites for the 28 races at the 
meeting in March is prompting plenty of discussion about the Irish handler’s 
domination of theCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> landscape, and this 
weekend’s feature race is unlikely to offer much in the way of interest for 
anyone fancying a bet.

Djakadam is a best-priced 7-2 for the Gold Cup and the nearest in the betting 
for the traditional Festival highlight entered for Saturday’s race are Smad 
Place, a well-beaten fourth in the King George VI Chase at Kempton on Boxing 
Day, and O’Faolains Boy, and both horses are on offer at 33-1 for the 
Cheltenham Blue Riband event.

Oliver Sherwood’s Many Clouds on Gold Cup trail after Cheltenham win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/oliver-sherwood-many-clouds-gold-cup-cheltenham-betbright>
The competitiveness of Saturday’s race would at least be boosted if last 
year’s winner, Many Clouds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/oliver-sherwood-many-clouds-gold-cup-cheltenham-betbright>
, was to take part but trainer Oliver Sherwood is going to wait before making a 
decision as to whether the horse who went on to win last year’s Grand National 
actually turns up.

Many Clouds, who also won the Hennessy Gold Cup last season before beating 
Smad Place by just over a length in the 2015 BetBright Chase, is among 11 
entries for this year’s renewal and 6-1 joint second-favourite with Smad Place 
and O’Faolains Boy for this weekend’s race. The nine-year-old was last seen 
back at Aintree in December when he was beaten four lengths by the Gold Cup 
third favourite Don Poli, a stablemate of Djakadam.

“We’ve entered him for Saturday. He’ll work [on Tuesday] and we’ll make a 
decision later in the week,” said Sherwood on Monday. “We’ll look at the 
entries as well and take it from there.”

Djakadam, the runner-up in last season’s Gold Cup, made a winning return to 
action this winter in the John Durkan Memorial Punchestown Chase last month and 
is the sole Irish entry.

David Bridgwater has put in the 2014 winner of Saturday’s event, The Giant 
Bolster, while Paul Nicholls is doubly represented with Rocky Creek and Sam 
Winner, as is Rebecca Curtis with Irish Cavalier and the aforementioned 
O’Faolains Boy. Sue Smith has given an entry to her in-form chaser Wakanda, 
while Colin Tizzard’s Theatre Guide and the Mick Channon-trained Knock House 
complete the 11.

At Kempton on Monday the 1-5 favourite Wait For Me made it two wins in 
succession after an unconvincing success in the opening division of the novices 
hurdle on the card. Last year’s Cheltenham Festival Champion Bumper third 
defied a penalty for his last-time-out Newbury success, but was far from 
convincing in the jumping department.

Richard Johnson was required to get more serious than he would have liked 
aboard the winner but the Philip Hobbs-trained gelding just had enough in hand 
to defeat Querry Horse by two lengths.

Johnson said: “He has been very slow to get to grips with it all. In behind, 
he jumped really well but he was travelling so well he took me to the front.

“Basically he is a baby and he doesn’t know what to do when he gets there. The 
ground is not ideal for him but he has got to get the practice in. Whether he 
goes to Cheltenham or Aintree, only time will tell. He is a very exciting horse 
for the future and is not the finished article yet.”
 