
There is one thing Nintendo is really good at. No wait, there are lots of 
things, obviously, but one thing it does better than anyone else. It makes 
games that teach you about game design. TheSuper Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> Bros titles show us why 
pacing and power-ups are important in a linear environment and Zelda shows us 
how to direct a player within an open world.

Mario Kart? Well, Mario Kart has always told us: hey, this is why racing games 
are all about cornering. Its drift system is so sharp and exciting and nuanced. 
It also says that capricious systems can be empowering if players understand 
that they can all get lucky at times.


Super Mario Kart, released on the Super Nintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> entertainment system in 1992, 
at the height of the 16bit console wars, was sort of perfect. The controls, the 
power-ups, the courses, the structure, the handling feel, the music, the 
characters. Perfect. And as great as the sequels have often been, they haven't 
quite got back there. Maybe until now.

Mario Kart 8. The scores are coming in:

Eurogamer: 10/10
IGN: 9/10
CVG: 9/10
Videogamer: 9/10
Joystiq: 4.5/5


Out of the majors, only Shacknews and Gamespot have dropped down to 8/10. 

There are around 30 courses, half of them tweaked versions of classics, half 
newcomers. I love the picturesque Shy Guy Falls, which sounds more like a 
late-90s emo band than a racing circuit, but it looks beautiful. There are also 
30 characters, each with their own abilities: mix in with the customisable 
elements of each kart and you get a wealth of speed, acceleration and strength 
combinations.


Key amongst the game's qualities are its handling and, especially, its 
drifting systems. "While the intricacies of drifting and boosting are rote by 
this point for long-time Kart players,Mario Kart 8 drives home the brilliance 
of this system,"writes Polygon's Philip Kollar 
<http://www.polygon.com/2014/5/15/5673346/mario-kart-8-wii-u-review>. "It's 
simple – you're just pressing one button and adjusting your angle to make sure 
you don't run off the track – but it looks cool and made me feel skillful when 
I pulled it off. It also forced me to constantly be engaged with a track. I 
couldn't just memorise a layout and be safe; I was constantly tweaking and 
improving my approach to each lap."

Nintendo has also added to the list of power-ups, used to attack nearby 
competitors, either in front or behind, or elude their offensive moves against 
you. "In addition to the Lucky 8, a rare gift that offers you eight items all 
at once, there are three new items,"writes Simon Parkin at Eurogamer 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-05-15-mario-kart-8-review>. "The Super 
Horn, which emits a defensive shock wave and can be used to fend off even a 
blue shell; the Piranha Plant, which is held in the character's hand and bites 
down nearby rivals and items; and the Boomerang, which can be hurled three 
times to send a rival into a spin."

The Super Horn may well prove the key addition, a defensive smart bomb that 
will counter the critics of the unstoppable blue shell, designed specifically 
to knock out the lead racer. "Once you leave your competitors in the dust, you 
can stay in first place,"writes Tom McShea for GameSpot 
<http://www.gamespot.com/reviews/mario-kart-8/1900-6415760/>. "It's a strange 
feeling driving all alone, without anyone else nearby. In most other Mario Kart 
games, staying in front of the pack would have been impossible. The computer 
was never far behind, often passing you even when you were performing 
flawlessly. Or else you would be pelted by so many items that you wouldn't even 
know in which direction you were supposed to travel. That constant fight was 
maddening for me, so I welcome the loneliness of Mario Kart 8."

There is four-player local racing, which halves the framerate to 30fps, but is 
as fun as ever. There is 12-player online racing, which is smooth and 
accessible but, according to GameSpot, may lack depth in the long run.

But surprigingly perhaps – at least to those who ascribe aesthetic quality 
merely to processing power and texture resolution – Mario Kart 8 is praised for 
its beauty.


"The game's visual glory resides in its sense of scale, naturally: vast 
stadiums, giant seaside cities, titanic ruins," writes Parkin. "Toad Harbour is 
San Francisco by way of the Mushroom Kingdom, complete with trundling trams and 
nosebleed descents. Shy Guy Falls sees you drive up two enormous waterfalls. 
Cloudtop Cruise is a spectacular tour through the heavens, accompanied by a 
joyful burst of Super Mario Galaxy's Gusty Garden theme. Sunshine Airport, set 
on Super Mario Sunshine's Delfino island (where you're waved on by tilting 
Piantas), has you glide towards jumbo jets on take-off, while Dolphin Shoals 
challenges you to drive along the back of a giant conger eel.


"Perhaps the most memorable track of the new set, Mount Wario, is a winding 
point-to-point race which begins when the karts drop from the cargo hold of a 
plane and ends, minutes later, at the bottom of a slalom-crossed mountain."


Nintendo is a good teacher, and one of its most consistent lessons is that 
beauty and wonder have little to do with technology and so much to do with 
imagination. This old company has traded on its key brands for so long, 
resolutely, definiantly, perhaps almost destructively at times, but within the 
substance of them it finds ways to school other designers and studios. Mario 
Kart 8, it seems, isn't perfect; it still exhibits Nintendo's uncertainty about 
online social competition; it will still frustrate purists.


But it is Mario Kart, and bundled with the Wii U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wii-u>, with the right sort of 
marketing, and with the luscious Super Mario 3D world hanging about in the 
background, it could provide that boost for Nintendo's troubled console. Games 
are about balance, and so is success. Mario Kart 8 may just drift delicately 
toward the tipping point of mainstream interest, and put its weight on the 
right side.

• Our review of Mario Kart 8 will be posted later.

• Nintendo's five ideas to save its future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/08/nintendos-five-ideas-to-save-its-future>

• Nintendo reports annual loss as Wii U stalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/07/nintendo-reports-annual-loss-as-wii-u-stalls>

• Nintendo's rejection of gay characters gives fans a lot to be angry about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/08/nintendo-rejects-gay-relationships-tomodachi-life>

 