
Cost-cutting is an essential skill for firms looking to survive the downturn, 
and this morning three companies told the City that their belt-tightening had 
delivered better results than expected.

Telecoms giant BT raised its forecasts for this current year and pledged to 
increase its dividend by 5% aftermaking £900m of cost savings in the last six 
months 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270853>
. It had been aiming to save at least £1bn, but has now hiked that target to 
£1.6bn.

BT also beat City forecasts with earnings of £1.436bn. It now expects its 
revenues to decline by between 3% and 4% this year, not the 4-5% fall 
previously expected.

Centrica reported that it is on track to exceed its target of £100m cost 
savings 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270825>
 at its British Gas arm. Less cheerily, profits will be hit because the company 
stopped producing gas at its Morecambe Bay site because of a supply glut in the 
market.

Meanwhile Aga Rangemaster is looking forward to a return to profitability in 
the second half of the financial year 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270834>
, after being badly hit by the recession and the housing slump:

At the beginning of the financial year, the Group set a target of having more
cash in the bank at the end of 2009 than the £5.8 million with which it started
the year. The focus on cash management including working capital reductions
means that this target will be exceeded.

Aga also reported that it has seen the usual increase in sales in the autumn 
after a quiet summer:


Order levels in key areas are above those of late 2008 and the first half of 
2009 when the sharp decline in the housing market fed through to weak order 
intake. Order levels, however, continue to be below those of two years ago.

Elsewhere, Dairy Crest has been banging the cost-saving drum after reporting a 
20% jump in pretax profits 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270833>
, despite a 1% drop in revenue:

We continue to implement further cost reduction measures with a view to 
driving efficiency. For example we have contracted out milk collection for our 
Davidstow creamery, have changed our media buying agency and have recently 
started consultation on the closure of the glass bottling operation at our 
Fenstanton dairy.

Resolution has told the City it is "focused on securing further acquisitions 
to build the enlarged group" 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270819>
, having recently bought Friends Provident. Helpfully, many Friends 
shareholders took Resolution shares rather than cash, leaving it with a larger 
warchest.

And mining giant Eurasian <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/enrc> has 
reported that its high-carbon ferrochrome and iron ore production haverecovered 
to pre-financial crisis levels 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10270847>
.
 