
The assassination of President John F Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-f-kennedy> in Dallas on 22 November 
1963 remains a subject of contention and dispute more than half a century 
later. The lawyer Mark Lane, who has died aged 89, was at the centre of that 
dispute almost immediately after the killing, and remained there, often 
controversially, for almost all that time. His 1966 book, Rush to Judgment, an 
indictment of the Warren Commission’s finding that Lee Harvey Oswald was 
Kennedy’s lone, crazed assassin, became the first bestselling book to suggest 
an untold story to the killing.

Lane was an indefatigable researcher and a relentless self-promoter, and his 
activism and pursuit of conspiracy exposed him to much criticism. He was often 
accused of sensationalism and hyperbole, which could obscure the most valuable 
parts of his work; his career might stand as a metaphor for the chaotic web 
that surrounds the assassination itself.

Lane was drawn to the assassination after reading early press reports of 
witnesses contradicting the official version, that assumed Oswald’s guilt. As a 
lawyer, he realised the evidence was shaky, with no cross-examination on 
Oswald’s behalf, and he quickly wrote a 10,000-word article, Oswald Innocent? A 
Lawyer’s Brief.

The only publisher he found was a small, far-left weekly, the National 
Guardian, based in New York. In Britain, Bertrand Russell followed up with a 
similar article and formed the Who Killed Kennedy Committee with JB Priestley, 
Hugh Trevor-Roper and others.

Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, hired Lane to represent her son, but the Warren 
Commission would not accept him. They did, however, call him to testify. He 
used his own interviews with witnesses to point out anomalies in their 
testimonies, but when the Warren Report was published his points were dismissed 
or ignored.

Like his article, Rush to Judgment had a similar story of rejection before it 
was published, and then sold 85,000 copies immediately. Lane and the filmmaker 
Emile De Antonio combined on a documentary based on the book. In 1969, Lane 
published A Citizen’s Dissent in response to his critics, and he and the 
screenwriter Donald Freed collaborated on a script adapted from Rush to 
Judgement, which was rewritten by Dalton Trumbo and became the 1973 film 
Executive Action.

Lane was already an activist by the time Kennedy died. He was born in 
Brooklyn, New York, where his father, Henry, was an accountant and his mother, 
Betty, a secretary. After serving in US Army intelligence in Vienna, after the 
second world war he studied at Long Island University and took a degree at 
Brooklyn Law School, first making his name when he exposed mistreatment in a 
Long Island psychiatric home.

In the late 1950s he helped found a liberal reform faction, backed by Eleanor 
Roosevelt, within the New York Democratic party, and in 1960, as Kennedy became 
president, he was elected to the New York State Assembly. He served one term, 
during which he was arrested during the civil rights Freedom Rides in the 
south, but he was defeated in the primaries for Congress in 1962.

In 1968 he was the comedian Dick Gregory’s vice-presidential candidate for the 
Freedom and Peace party, and was one of the celebrities alongsideJane Fonda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-fonda> in the early days of Vietnam 
Veterans Against the War. He went on to work as a consultant to the New Orleans 
district attorney Jim Garrison in his investigation of the Kennedy 
assassination, which became the basis of Oliver Stone’s 1991 film JFK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fmark-lane-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ae0ba8ec51915a819e100e3890a21d265dbf37%2F208_494_2981_1789%2F2981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Lane%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fmark-lane-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Lane%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fmark-lane-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ae0ba8ec51915a819e100e3890a21d265dbf37%2F208_494_2981_1789%2F2981.jpg>
 John F Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline in the motorcade in Dallas shortly 
before the president was assassinated in November 1963. Photograph: Reuters 
Alongside the celebrated lawyer William Kunstler 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-william-kunstler-1599692.html>
, Lane represented the American Indian Movement activistsRussell Means 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/01/russell-means> and Dennis Banks, 
following the 71-day stand-off between federal forces and members of the Oglala 
Sioux at Wounded Knee (they were eventually acquitted). In 1977 he and Gregory 
published Code Name “Zorro”, about the assassination of Martin Luther King; 
that led, eventually, to his representing James Earl Ray, the accused killer, 
before the US House of Representative Select Committee on Assassinations.

Lane represented Jim Jones and his People’s Temple; he and Freed were 
investigating Jones’s claim that intelligence agencies were conspiring against 
him. Lane was in Jonestown, Guyana, but escaped as some 900 Temple members died 
in a mass suicide, and he went on to write Strongest Poison: How I Survived the 
Jonestown Guyana Massacre (1979).

Lane’s most unlikely client was Liberty Lobby, a far-right group whose 
magazine, The Spotlight, claimed thatE Howard Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jan/25/guardianobituaries.usa>, one of 
the Watergate burglars, had been in Dallas when Kennedy was shot. In 1981 Hunt 
sued for libel, and Lane was brought in for the 1985 appeal hearing. He 
produced witnesses who claimed Hunt was in Dallas and won the case – though 
some jurors apparently voted against Hunt on the grounds that his reputation 
couldn’t be defamed. On the back of the trial, Lane published Plausible Denial 
(1991), positing CIA involvement in the assassination.

Lane said his proudest moment came when James Richardson, a black fruit 
picker, was released from prison in Florida in 1989 after serving 21 years for 
the murder of his seven children. Lane’s book Arcadia (1970) had argued his 
innocence, and he had campaigned for two decades to have the case reviewed.

In 2011 Lane returned to Kennedy, publishing The Last Word: My Indictment of 
the CIA in the Murder of JFK.

His memoir, Citizen Lane (2012), was made into a 2013 documentary. He is 
survived by his third wife, Tricia, and three daughters.

• Mark Lane, lawyer and author, born 24 February 1927; died 10 May 2016
 