
Being the hero of a blockbuster entertainment franchise, you might expect Mark 
Hamill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-hamill> to be far removed from 
the sort of merchandise-obsessed fans who probably own five different plastic 
re-creations of his lightsaber-wielding Jedi, Luke Skywalker – all of course 
still in their original packaging. But as it turns out, Hamill is, and always 
has been, one of them.

He now looks more like Obi-Wan than Luke thanks to the greying hair and beard, 
but in his new web-based docu-series Pop Culture Quest we see the happy hoarder 
of toys, comics and other assorted geekery Hamill has been for decades.

Hamill’s show – on the subscription streaming service launched by uber-fan 
gatheringComic-Con <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comic-con> this year – 
finds him probing a different kind of galaxy. It’s one populated by aficionados 
of popular culture who, like him, seek out all kinds of oddball prizes from 
rare monster toys to pinball machines.

In it Hamill seeks out and chats with those collectors. They’re as 
idiosyncratic a set of characters as you’d find in a Mos Eisley cantina, yet 
there’s also something compelling in the interaction between them and Hamill as 
he explores the motivations behind their obsessions. That goes for the star 
host too, some of whose prized possessions include comics he keeps in storage, 
a prototype of the original unused Chewbacca mask that George Lucas didn’t like 
and decided to let Hamill keep, and Beatles model kits that Hamill has never 
opened.

Pop Culture Quest is a look at the nature of fandom and, as Hamill tells the 
Guardian, the escapism it provides..

“Part of the fun of all this is escaping the drudgery of real life,” Hamill 
says. “Whether you’re having a difficult time at work or you’re not achieving 
career goals – there’s things that make you personally happy. And collecting is 
a way to sort of express your personality. To show appreciation for the things 
that you value.

“In a way, I’m in a really trivial business. I have a brother who’s a doctor, 
and to me that’s something that’s a really tangible skill that helps people. 
But he was saying to me, you know, that entertainment and diversion is really 
important for people’s wellbeing overall. They need that escape mechanism from 
how harsh life can be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmark-hamill-part-of-the-fun-is-escaping-the-drudgery-of-real-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e7c996c27818ae619f7d43167da8c84a58aeac%2F0_0_2789_1989%2F2789.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Hamill%3A%20%E2%80%98Part%20of%20the%20fun%20is%20escaping%20the%20drudgery%20of%20real%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmark-hamill-part-of-the-fun-is-escaping-the-drudgery-of-real-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Hamill%3A%20%E2%80%98Part%20of%20the%20fun%20is%20escaping%20the%20drudgery%20of%20real%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fmark-hamill-part-of-the-fun-is-escaping-the-drudgery-of-real-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e7c996c27818ae619f7d43167da8c84a58aeac%2F0_0_2789_1989%2F2789.jpg>
 Mark Hamill, left, as Luke Skywalker during the filming of the first Star Wars 
movie. Photograph: Allstar/Lucasfilm 
Pop Culture Quest is many things in one. It might be a celebration of 
frivolity, yet there’s also a subtext of innocence and even melancholy – of a 
natural urge to chase the illusion of permanence. The movie ended, the TV show 
was eventually cancelled, the hero got the girl, but by collecting the 
mementoes and trinkets, in a way the show doesn’t end.

It’s a common language, pop fandom; a thing to pass down. Mapping the 
topography of a person’s life invariably meanders to their diversions and 
individual tastes. We are the things we love.

And of course, a lot of people love Star Wars. “I don’t take it for granted,” 
Hamill says about the passion ofStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> fans. “In this business, you want 
to make people happy. And the fact so many people get such joy out of it and 
pass it on to their children – to be a part of people’s lives like that is 
something I’ll always be grateful for.”

Speaking a few days before the franchise’s latest instalment Rogue One hits 
cinemas, Hamill admits to not knowing as much about it as fans might expect, 
but he shares their anticipation.

“What I think is exciting about the standalone films is since they don’t have 
to follow that three-act structure of a trilogy, they can really get in, 
establish the story, and get out and leave you wanting more,” Hamill says. “And 
each standalone film can have its own identity.

“[Rogue One] looks like a gritty second world war film, in a way. It looks 
hyper-realistic. When they do the young Han Solo film, he’s a rogue and a 
womaniser, and it could be much more of a comedic thing. The swashbuckling 
rogue. But that’s what’s exciting about the standalone films. They can be 
vastly different in style and still within the Star Wars universe.”

Next year’s various Comic Con events around the world, which will attract 
hordes of fans dressed as their favourite sci-fi or fantasy characters, will 
almost certainly see its fair share of outfits inspired by Rogue One. But 
Hamill’s show and the new streaming service it airs on – called Comic Con HQ – 
are part of an attempt to tap into that fandom on a more regular basis..

Seth Laderman, the service’s executive vice-president and general manager, 
says the idea is to make Comic-Con “a year-round situation”, with Pop Culture 
Quest central to the project.

“I asked the guys who created Comic-Con: how did you make this so successful? 
And they said: ‘We programme an event for us, because we are the fanbase,’” he 
says. “I think our goal is to try to be a complement to some of these other 
platforms out there. We’re not trying to compete with Netflix. We’re trying to 
hit that real passionate audience and programme stuff specifically for them.”

Laderman won’t give audience figures but says the response since Comic-Con 
HQ’s launch in May has been “resoundingly positive”. At the moment, the service 
is only available in the US via the web, iOS and Android devices, Amazon 
Channels, Roku and AppleTV. Fans around the world can for now stream individual 
Comic-Con HQ series on other platforms such as Vimeo. Comic-Con HQ original 
series are also available for download in select territories via services such 
as iTunes and Google, and on games consoles.

Hamill’s show is an example of what the service wants to offer fans – content 
programmed for them, that in a way also celebrates them. Not that it’s an easy 
hill to climb, launching a service into a media landscape chock-a-block with 
competition.

The biggest players such as Netflix and Amazon have deep pockets and reach, 
and other niche services keep emerging, likethe new streaming service BritBox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/13/bbc-and-itv-to-launch-britbox-on-demand-service-in-us>
 – a partnership between BBC Worldwide and ITV.

The answer for Comic-Con HQ is to look for well-known talent such as Hamill 
and turn them loose.

“We’re in a lot of conversations for our next shows right now,” Laderman says. 
“We’re working with people and brands that have pre-existing audiences attached 
to them. One of our goals is to allow innovators like Mark the opportunity and 
platform to create and bring their own ideas to life.”

And for Hamill, that idea is straightforward: pop culture is a way for people 
to gravitate to brands and ideas and tangible things to “communicate through 
what you love”.

Hamill loves, among other things, pinball machines. And he points to one 
episode of his show that sees him visit a man with a warehouse full of them. 
The collector can talk about their histories, which ones are rare and valuable. 
But the joy of the show, Hamill explains, is that you don’t have to be as 
enthusiastic about pinball machines to appreciate his passion.

That appreciation of pop culture and collections is, he says, the “connective 
tissue behind all the episodes of our show”. And given the number of toy Luke 
Skywalkers appreciated by fans the world over, it’s a topic he is almost 
uniquely suited to explore.
 