
Norway’s largest newspaper has published a front-page open letter 
<http://www.aftenposten.no/meninger/kommentar/Dear-Mark-I-am-writing-this-to-inform-you-that-I-shall-not-comply-with-your-requirement-to-remove-this-picture-604156b.html>
 to Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, lambasting the company’s decision to censor a 
historic photograph of the Vietnam war and calling on Zuckerberg to recognize 
and live up to his role as “the world’s most powerful editor”.

Espen Egil Hansen, the editor-in-chief and CEO of Aftenposten, accused 
Zuckerberg of thoughtlessly “abusing your power” over the social media site 
that has become a lynchpin of the distribution of news and information around 
the world, writing, “I am upset, disappointed – well, in fact even afraid – of 
what you are about to do to a mainstay of our democratic society.”

Facebook backs down from 'napalm girl' censorship and reinstates photo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-reinstates-napalm-girl-photo>
“I am worried that the world’s most important medium is limiting freedom 
instead of trying to extend it, and that this occasionally happens in an 
authoritarian way,” he added.

The controversy stems from Facebook’s decision to delete a post by Norwegian 
writer Tom Egeland that featured The Terror of War, a Pulitzer prize-winning
photograph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/02/girl-vietnam-napalm-photo-peace> 
by Nick Ut that showed children – including the naked 9-year-old Kim Phúc – 
running away from a napalm attack during the Vietnam war. Egeland’s post 
discussed “seven photographs that changed the history of warfare” – a group to 
which the “napalm girl” image certainly belongs.

Egeland was subsequently suspended from Facebook 
<http://www.aftenposten.no/kultur/Norsk-forfatter-midlertidig-utestengt-fra-Facebook-etter-a-ha-postet-bilde-fra-Vietnamkrigen-603854b.html>
. When Aftenposten reported on the suspension – using the same photograph in its
article 
<http://www.aftenposten.no/kultur/Norsk-forfatter-midlertidig-utestengt-fra-Facebook-etter-a-ha-postet-bilde-fra-Vietnamkrigen-603854b.html>
, which was then shared on the publication’s Facebook page – the newspaper 
received a message from Facebook asking it to “either remove or pixelize” the 
photograph.

“Any photographs of people displaying fully nude genitalia or buttocks, or 
fully nude female breast, will be removed,” the notice fromFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> explains.

Before Aftenposten could respond, Hansen writes, Facebook deleted the article 
and image fromthe newspaper’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/aftenposten/>. 

In his open letter, Hansen points out that Facebook’s decision to delete the 
photograph reveals a troubling inability to “distinguish between child 
pornography and famous war photographs”, as well as an unwillingness to 
“allow[ing] space for good judgement”.

The Zuckerberg Files: everything the Facebook CEO has said publicly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/02/mark-zuckerberg-files-facebook-public-statements>
“Even though I am editor-in-chief of Norway’s largest newspaper, I have to 
realize that you are restricting my room for exercising my editorial 
responsibility,” he wrote. “I think you are abusing your power, and I find it 
hard to believe that you have thought it through thoroughly.”

Hansen goes on to argue that rather than fulfill its mission statement to 
“make the world more open and connected”, such editorial decisions “will simply 
promote stupidity and fail to bring human beings closer to each other”.

The Aftenposten editorial comes at a time of scrutiny on Facebook for its 
ever-increasing dominance in the dissemination of news.

News organizations are uncomfortably reliant on Facebook to reach an online 
audience. According to a2016 study 
<http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-social-media-platforms-2016/>
 by Pew Research Center, 44% of US adults get their news on Facebook.

Facebook’s popularity means that its algorithms can exert enormous power over 
public opinion.

A May 2016 report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/facebook-newsfeed-censor-conservative-news>
 by Gizmodo that Facebook’s trending bar was deliberately suppressing articles 
from conservative news sites set off a firestorm that saw Zuckerberg making
personal outreach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/12/zuckerberg-denies-facebook-bias-invites-conservatives-talk>
 to top conservatives.

In firing human editors, Facebook has lost the fight against fake news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-trending-news-editors-fake-news-stories>
Facebook recently fired the team of editors who managed the trending topics 
section, choosing to replace them with algorithms that quickly demonstrated the 
difficulty of automating news editorial judgment bypromoting a fake news story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-trending-news-editors-fake-news-stories>
.

In his open letter, Hansen points out that the types of decision Facebook 
makes about what kind of content is promoted, tolerated, or banned – whether it 
makes those decisions algorithmically or not – are functionally editorial.

“The media have a responsibility to consider publication in every single 
case,” he wrote. “This right and duty, which all editors in the world have, 
should not be undermined by algorithms encoded in your office in California.”

“Editors cannot live with you, Mark, as a master editor.”

Speaking in Rome last month, Zuckerberg addressed the question 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-facebook-zuckerberg-idUSKCN1141WN> of 
Facebook’s role in the news media and appeared to downplay his editorial 
responsibilities.

“We are a tech company, not a media company,” he said. “The world needs news 
companies, but also technology platforms, like what we do, and we take our role 
in this very seriously.”

Hansen’s suggestions for Facebook to improve its behavior include 
“geographically differentiated guidelines and rules for publication”, 
“distinguish[ing] between editors and other Facebook users,” and a 
“comprehensive review of the way you operate”.

He also called for increased accessibility from the company, writing, “Today, 
if it is possible at all to get in touch with a Facebook representative, the 
best one may hope for are brief, formalistic answers, with rigid references to 
universal rules and guidelines.”

“While we recognize that this photo is iconic, it’s difficult to create a 
distinction between allowing a photograph of a nude child in one instance and 
not others,” a spokesman for Facebook said in response to queries from the 
Guardian.

“We try to find the right balance between enabling people to express 
themselves while maintaining a safe and respectful experience for our global 
community. Our solutions won’t always be perfect, but we will continue to try 
to improve our policies and the ways in which we apply them.”
 