
Bovis Homes has become the latest housebuilder to report 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10342464>
 upbeat figures, adding to hopes of a recovery in the housing market.

Its average sales price has risen 2.5% to £154,600, with the average private 
home priced at £165,500. Bovis said that annual pretax profit would meet its 
expectations. It achieved 1,801 private home reservations last year - some 82% 
ahead of 2008.

The housebuilder completed 1,803 homes compared with 1,817 in 2008, of which 
1,527 were private homes, up 25%. The number of social and partnership homes 
halved.

Bovis said in a trading statement this morning:

The group continues to expect trading conditions in 2010 to be subdued 
relative to historical levels, given ongoing economic uncertainty. Mortgage 
approval volumes are slowly rising, but mortgage providers continue to require 
record high levels of deposits, particularly from first-time buyers. This all 
said, longer-term market demand and supply trends remain positive.

On the high street, Pets at Home delivered 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/Article.aspx?id=201001150700076129F> bumper 
Christmas sales. Like-for-like sales were 6.7% ahead in the six weeks to 7 
January, and 9.8% higher in the 41 weeks to 7 January.

Matt Davies, the chief executive, said: 

Our performance has been very strong all year and I am pleased that despite 
the bad weather of the past few weeks, we were also able to deliver a good 
sales performance over the Christmas period, demonstrating the resilience of 
our business. I am particularly pleased that this sales growth has been 
accompanied by further improvements in our margin.

And Aga Rangemaster reported 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10342561>
 improved trading in the last quarter of 2009 and expects to be profitable for 
the year, even though orders for its famous cookers were 12% below the previous 
year (they were down 20% in the first half).

Meanwhile, hedge fund firm Man Group saw assets under management fall 4% 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10342511>
 to $42.4bn in between October and December due to losses from its flagship 
futures fund AHL.

Defence group Qinetiq announced 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10342621>
 that its chairman, Sir John Chisholm, will retire on 28 February. The company 
appointed Mark Elliott, who joined its board in May as an an independent 
non-executive director, as chairman.

Qinetiq, which provides military technology including bomb disposal robots and 
sniper detectors, also admitted that ongoing delays in the award of US and UK 
government contracts would dent its second-half performance.

Over in the US, Kodak has launched lawsuits 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2010/jan/14/kodak-apple-blackberry> 
alleging that the iPhone and BlackBerry - two of the world's most popular 
mobile phones - infringe its patents.

And chipmaker Intel unveiled blockbuster results 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/blog/2010/jan/14/intel-q4-results-blockbuster>
 for the quarter to December 26, about a third ahead of Wall Street estimates.
 