
Stagecoach warned the City this morning that the recession is eating into its 
revenue growth, particularly its train services 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10169343>
.

The company, which runs South West Trains and has a 49% stake in Virgin Rail, 
said that UK rail revenue has grown by just 0.9% in the three months to the end 
of July, a sharp fall compared to the 6.2% organic growth it managed in the 
previous 12 months.

Bus revenue is holding up better in the downturn with a 4.4% increase, but 
Stagecoach <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup> is still 
cautious:

Trading conditions across the Group, and at our rail businesses in particular, 
remain challenging and we are experiencing further reductions in the rate of 
revenue growth. We continue to take action to control the cost base of our 
operations.

Otherwise, there's just as much corporate news as you'd expect on the last 
Friday in August.Aga Rangemaster Group 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/agafoodservicegroup> has reported an 
operating loss of £1.7m for the first half of the year 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10169311>
, with sales of its famous cookers down by 20%.

Another company suffering from the downturn is Independent News and Media 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/independent-news-and-media>, which reported a 
loss after tax of €34.7m 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10169328>
 for the first half of 20090. A sharp fall in advertising revenue helped to 
knock its sales down by nearly 15%.

The same trend has hit Johnston Press, where first-half pre-tax profits more 
than halved to £27.5m 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10169345>
. Chief executive John Fry sees reasons to be optimistic, though:

The timing of the economic upturn remains uncertain but advertising revenues 
are demonstrating greater stability and we expect the cyclical improvement when 
it comes to more than compensate any ongoing structural change.

And Restaurant Group, which runs Frankie and Benny's, Chiquito and 
Garfunkel's, has seenstatutory profits fall 9% to £20.1m 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10169292>
.
 