
Next to me, a battered old van is vibrating gently. Its driver, a wrinkled, 
toothless man wearing a whitetaqiyah (prayer cap) leans out of the window and 
grins at me. I gamely smile back and wave. He gives me a thumbs up. I return 
it. Then he puts his index finger and thumb together in the universal sign for 
“you’re so cool”. He’s right, I think. I do look pretty cool, sat nonchalantly 
on the back of a vintage motorbike in Marrakech’s rush hour, to a soundtrack of 
beeping, rumbling truck engines and the distant call of a muezzin. Then the 
gendarme lifts his arm, the traffic roars and I have to cling on (less 
nonchalantly), while we leave the old man and his pick-up for dust.

Of course, it’s what I’m sitting on that’s cool. Not me. I’m on a tour with 
Insiders Experience, which has just begun offering motorbike city tours in 
Morocco. The company started in Shanghai in 2008 when French founder Thomas 
Chabrieres opened a business that combined his love of vintage sidecars and 
travelling. His passion resulted in the purchase of a number of Urals (a 
Russian copy of a 1930s BMW design) and some imaginative rebranding of these 
rugged pieces of Soviet history into suitable sightseeing vehicles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b7eefd1d5e13a77a29168b375c21c08952cb79a%2F0_1434_2688_2598%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b7eefd1d5e13a77a29168b375c21c08952cb79a%2F0_1434_2688_2598%2F2688.jpg>
 Passengers can sit on the back of the bike or hop in a sidecar 
As a passenger, you can choose to sit on the back – which may feel a bit 
intimate for those who prefer not to touch thighs with their tour guides – or 
you can hop in a sidecar. I can’t help but feel that this option, which puts 
the rider at the exact level of bus exhaust pipes, might mar the novelty factor 
but it would be prissy to whimper about lungfuls of CO2. A wind-in-the-hair, 
dirt-in-the face romp is what you’re signing up for.

The blurb on the website talks about majestic landscapes and fabled history, 
which sounds rather formulaic, just the reason I’m not normally a fan of 
organised tours – too ordered, too unadventurous. But then I meet Felix.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd5f60825902768c08b14b38e209dd4d55725805%2F0_130_4027_2416%2F4027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd5f60825902768c08b14b38e209dd4d55725805%2F0_130_4027_2416%2F4027.jpg>
 Motorbiking around the city. 
“So, where are we going?” he asks, in a strong Irish accent. All of the tours 
are tailor-made, so we discuss what I’d like to see and when I need to be back 
(in time for gin atRiad El Fenn <https://el-fenn.com/>, a characterful hotel in 
the heart of the medina). I’ve already spent plenty of time (and money) in the 
old town, so Felix decides on a route that will take in bits of the city I 
haven’t seen and we roar off northwards.

We cruise by the Catholic L’Eglise Des Saints Martyrs, the first church to be 
built in Marrakech. Felix points out the striking pink mosque opposite it, two 
buildings often cited as an example of the city’s religious tolerance. In some 
ways the area, Guéliz, is unremarkable – smart houses, wide streets and kids on 
their way home from school. But it’s also an area emerging as an artistic hub 
and we rumble past spots such as127 
<http://www.galerienathalielocatelli.com/galerie127/Galerie.127.html>, which, 
in 2006, became the first photo gallery ever to open in the Maghreb. Felix 
weaves through the traffic and we negotiate one of the wider entries to an 
outer, less-visited part of the souk. I constantly expect him to shout “hang 
on”, or something that might indicate a concern for my welfare as we round a 
blind corner. But he does no such thing. “We are really highly trained,” he 
reassures me later. “Sometimes I won’t talk because I’m concentrating,” but 
generally, as the average speed is only 20kmh, “we answer emails faster than we 
drive motorbikes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef4d0a0db625e3fa2eba210433d96f40a4fa282d%2F0_290_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marrakech%20express%3A%20the%20Red%20City%20by%20motorbike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmarrakech-desert-morocco-motorbike-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef4d0a0db625e3fa2eba210433d96f40a4fa282d%2F0_290_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
 View over the nearby Atlas mountains. Photograph: Felix Mathivet 
Soon we are beyond the hubbub, zooming past the city walls and into the 
Palmeraie, a now-protected neighbourhood where centuries of palm cultivation 
provided the city with food, raw materials and greenery. You could stop at the 
ancient underground irrigation systems that brought the area to life, but 
instead we pull up at the lovelyAddi Ou Addi <http://www.addi-ou-addi.com/>, 
the oldest villa in the area. It has vibrant zellige floor tiling, ornately 
carved wooden walls and the original 1927 furniture. It’s not open to the 
public and is one of several places that Chabrieres’ wide network makes 
accessible. Next, we head offroad through the groves that give the Palmeraie 
area its name. Expanses of pink-tinged sand are dotted with palm trees whose 
roots are protected from the elements (and wandering goats) by mounds of 
compacted sand. It’s a picturesque spot for a picnic and a drink – with the sun 
setting, and kicking up a cloud of rosy tangerine dust as we go, only 
sunglasses and a billowing head scarf could make it more cinematic.

Afterwards, petrolhead friends ask me unanswerable questions about the 
motorbike; Moroccophiles wonder whether you see anything differently from the 
bike. Of course, the city’s sights don’t change but Insiders’ take on it is a 
new one for me.

Marrakech isn’t the most accessible city – cycling is hard work and the abrupt 
ending of pavements makes it less walkable than some cities. The motorbike’s 
agility allows access to things you wouldn’t otherwise see. But also, just 
being along for the ride makes you feel good – wind-blown, grubby, and with a 
face aching from smiling in response to all those beeps, stares and waves.
• The trip was provided by Insiders Experience. Tours in Marrakech, from one 
hour to half a day, cost from £100,insidersexperience.com 
<http://marrakechinsiders.com/>
 