
Nearly three decades after his film The Last Temptation of Christ was deemed 
“morally offensive” by officials in the Roman Catholic church,Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> met Pope Francis at the 
Vatican on Wednesday.

The American director, who is said to have considered joining the priesthood 
when he was a young man, met the pope a day after his new film,Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>, about Portuguese Jesuits in 
17th-century Japan,was shown to an audience of 300 Jesuit priests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/25/martin-scorsese-silence-premiere-vatican-jesuit-missionaries-japan>
 at a pontifical college.

The Vatican said Francis had received Scorsese, his wife and two daughters, 
and the 15-minute meeting was “very cordial”. The pope told the group that he 
had the book that inspiredSilence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>, 
and they spoke about the experience of Jesuit missionaries in Japan.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Scorsese gave the pope framed images depicting “hidden Christians” in Japan, 
including a reproduction of an ancient image of the Virgin of Nagasaki and a 
portrait of the “martyrs of Japan”. The pope gave the guests some rosaries.
Javier M-Brocal (@javierMbrocal) 
Los regalos de Scorsese al Papa: reproducción de antigua imagen de la Virgen 
de Nagasaki, y otra de los mártires de Japón.pic.twitter.com/c0CStiBGLz 
<https://t.co/c0CStiBGLz>
 <https://twitter.com/javierMbrocal/status/803924095624708096> November 30, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/javierMbrocal/status/803924095624708096> 
Francis did not attend the showing at the pontifical university on Tuesday, 
but the theme of the film was seen as being close to the pope’s heart. When 
Francis was young he joined a Jesuit order with the aim of becoming a 
missionary in Asia, a wish that was never fulfilled because of his health 
problems.

Another screening of the film will be held on Thursday. It is unclear whether 
Francis will attend.


Among Scorsese’s most famous films are Raging Bull, Taxi Driver, Goodfellas 
and The Last Temptation of Christ, for which he was nominated for an Oscar for 
best director.

The latter film, released in 1988, provoked a fierce battle in America’s 
culture wars 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/cultureshock/flashpoints/theater/lasttemptation.html>. 
Its depiction of Jesus as a confused man and a dream sequence in which he has 
sex with Mary Magdalene shocked conservative Christians, who claimed the film 
was blasphemous.

There were attempts to stymie the showing of the film, and many cinemas 
refused to screen it. Producers at Universal took out newspaper adverts saying 
the film was an expression of free speech.

Argentina, where Francis was born and served as a cardinal, was one of many 
countries where the film was banned for several years.
 