
Martin O’Neill is determined to reach Euro 2016 although he knows it is a 
relatively trivial pursuit. On Monday in Dublin his Republic of Ireland team 
contest the return leg of theirqualification play-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/republic-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off-report>
 against Bosnia-Herzegovina and O’Neill is hopeful a sporting contest, and 
nothing else, will unfold.

“I don’t feel uneasy about the game,” he said. “It was horrendous, the events 
in Paris, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/15/paris-attacker-named-investigation-continues-live-updates>
 and obviously puts a lot of things into perspective including football 
matches. I’m hoping the stadium is well policed and I’m hoping we will be OK.”

The hope, then, is the night will bring as dramatic a reckoning as can be 
served by that wonderful frivolity, a football match. For O’Neill and Ireland a 
campaign that began 14 months ago with a win in Georgia and has also featured a 
dispiriting defeat in Scotland,an epic victory over Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/republic-ireland-germany-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
 and that fog-cloaked 1-1 draw in Bosnia, will be definitively declared a 
triumph or a flop.

Ireland go in with a slim advantage thanks to Robbie Brady’s away goal in 
Bosnia but the tie could still take twists aplenty at the Aviva Stadium, with 
extra time and even a nerve-shredding penalty shootout among the possibilities. 
And at the end, Ireland will be going toEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, or they will not. O’Neill 
will sign a new contract, or he may not.

To secure passage to France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, 
O’Neill will probably have to get some difficult decisions right.

Poland’s Robert Lewandowski condemns Republic of Ireland to play-offs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/poland-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
Will John O’Shea return to central defence after missing the first leg through 
suspension, or will Ciaran Clark and Richard Keogh be allowed to prolong the 
partnership that worked well in the first leg? Will Shane Long be considered 
fit enough to start despite missing the last month with a knee injury? Will 
Ireland’s 35-year-old record scorer, Robbie Keane, be given what would surely 
be his last competitive appearance in Dublin?

O’Shea, Long and Keane have made important contributions to this and other 
campaigns but O’Neill is not about to let sentiment influence his decisions 
now. “It’s called tough luck,” the manager said. “I’m not going to put players 
in because it’s their last international game. I’d put them in because the 
experience they have garnered in the last 15 years puts them in decent stead.”

One loyal servant who seems certain to be included from the start is Jon 
Walters, who missed the first leg through suspension. His return alone would 
make Ireland stronger than they were in the away leg, as his relentless 
endeavour and power, plus his goal threat, make him a crucial component of the 
team.

“We might lack a few things in our side, but a bit of strength of character I 
think is there and the likes of Jon Walters epitomises that,” O’Neill said.

“Jon has been terrific in the campaign. He epitomises the spirit, never say 
die, and he’s come up with big goals for us as well. He’s been pretty 
exceptional throughout the tournament and I couldn’t speak more highly of him.”

The left-back Stephen Ward has shown the same admirable spirit as his 
team-mates but there are doubts about his solidity, as he has barely played for 
his club, Burnley, this season and Edin Visca, Bosnia’s right-wing, tormented 
him in the first leg. Brady may revert to left-back, from where he can launch 
attacks, reflecting Ireland’s more offensive approach.

There is also a case for deploying O’Shea at left-back instead but O’Neill 
rejects the notion that Ward is a weakness that Bosnia deliberately exploited 
in the first leg and could do so again in Dublin.

“I wouldn’t have any problems about playing Stephen again,” he said. “Bosnia 
raid down the right-hand side because they’ve got a very fine right-winger. I 
don’t think that Bosnia necessarily target players in that sense. They want to 
get it out to the little lad Visca, who is exceptionally talented and can cause 
problems to anybody.”

O’Neill is certainly not thinking exclusively about how to defend, as he 
believes it would be foolish to rely on the away goal to progress. “If we think 
we can keep them out for 90 minutes and camp ourselves outside our penalty 
area, that would be a recipe for disaster,” he said. “We have to consider being 
on the front foot, genuinely. We want to be really positive.”
 