
Just after Paul Lambert was appointed as manager of Wycombe Wanderers in June 
2006 he got a call from one of his mentors who had worked wonders at the same 
club at the start of a career that would bring garlands and joy. “A couple of 
words of advice for you, Paul,” said Martin O’Neill. “Just win, and get people 
to run for you.” O’Neill is still practising what he preaches.

It sounds easy but there are a thousand former managers who can confirm the 
contrary. There is –even though after the defeat in Scotland a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/14/scotland-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 it did not look like it – more to the Republic of Ireland side that will go to 
Euro 2016 than a mighty spirit. That, however, has been the primary fuel 
throughout their qualification from the toughest group in Europe and it was the 
main asset that took thempast a Bosnia-Herzegovina side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/16/republic-of-ireland-bosnia-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
 that may have some better technicians but who ended up soundly beaten. 
Encouragingly, it is a spirit with a fuller flavour than the powerful one 
generated byO’Neill’s predecessor, Giovanni Trapattoni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/11/ireland-giovanni-trapattoni-manager>
.

The Italian bred formidable defiance; O’Neill has retained that and augmented 
it with a positivity that has uplifted players and fans. O’Neill has certainly 
advocated caution at times but his emphasis has been on instilling a belief 
that his players can score against anyone, rather than just shut down anyone. 
The number of late goals Ireland scored throughout their campaign – fromAiden 
McGeady’s winner in Georgia in the first match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/07/georgia-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-group-d-report>
toJohn O’Shea’s equaliser in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/14/germany-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
,Shane Long’s equaliser at home to Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/29/republic-of-ireland-poland-euro-2016-qualifier>
 orRobbie Brady’s opener in Bosnia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/republic-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off-report>
 – showed how deep the belief runs.

The method underlying O’Neill’s alchemy is difficult to define – he does not 
just big up players with matey bluster, nor does he empower with a method of 
steel, but he projects a likability and credibility that brings the best out of 
his players.

Jon Walters underlines Martin O’Neill’s Republic of Ireland philosophy | Paul 
Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/16/jon-walters-martin-o-neill-republic-of-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off>
Unlike under Trapattoni, who showed faith in a small core of players while 
those on the fringes were left to stew, O’Neill has fostered an inclusiveness 
that has meant even those not playing have stayed eager and been ready to fill 
gaps when summoned unexpectedly, as, for example, Cyrus Christie, Stephen Ward 
or Darren Randolph have shown.

Randolph is a perfect example of another of the qualities O’Neill has shown in 
this campaign: a knack for getting big selection decisions right. Even the West 
Ham reserve goalkeeper admits to having been surprised when the manager turned 
to him rather than David Forde when Shay Given was injured one minute before 
half-time in thehome match against Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/oct/09/germany-republic-ireland-euro-2016-joachim-low-video>
.

Forde had performed brilliantly in the 1-1 draw in Gelsenkirchen earlier in 
the group, whereas Randolph had never before played a competitive senior 
international – but, against the world champions and with the score at 0-0, 
O’Neill opted for the more inexperienced goalkeeper and his judgment was 
vindicated. Randolph has been solid since then and having started the campaign 
as No3 at best he will likely go to the finals as his country’s No1. Deftly, 
Given may be phased out.

England have 50/50 chance of British Isles derby at Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/england-ireland-wales-northern-ireland-euro-2016>
A similar process of transition has been smoothly applied throughout the team 
and continued right up to the second leg of the play-off. No one would have 
criticised O’Neill for restoring O’Shea to the starting lineup for the home 
match against Bosnia, indeed the manager would probably have been lambasted for 
not doing so if Edin Dzeko had thrived and Ireland had lost.

O’Shea has well over 100 caps and had started every group game but O’Neill 
stuck with Ciaran Clark alongside Richard Keogh, central defenders who had 
never partnered each other before the play-off but did well in the first leg 
and even better in the second. Suddenly Ireland do not look so dependent on 
O’Shea, and that is good. Similarly, Ireland have continued to score despite 
the inevitable dwindling of Robbie Keane. It would be a stretch to say that 
Long and Jonathan Walters have developed into strikers as sharp as Keane once 
was, but they have certainly become invaluable to their country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Frepublic-of-ireland-martin-oneill-euro-2016-bosnia-herzegovina-playoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c27601b1fb7dbcb0e47037fcc6becdba36a753%2F0_154_4928_2958%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20O%E2%80%99Neill%20has%20forged%20Republic%20of%20Ireland%20into%20a%20lean%2C%20green%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Frepublic-of-ireland-martin-oneill-euro-2016-bosnia-herzegovina-playoff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20O%E2%80%99Neill%20has%20forged%20Republic%20of%20Ireland%20into%20a%20lean%2C%20green%20machine%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Frepublic-of-ireland-martin-oneill-euro-2016-bosnia-herzegovina-playoff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31c27601b1fb7dbcb0e47037fcc6becdba36a753%2F0_154_4928_2958%2F4928.jpg>
 Ireland’s players and backroom staff celebrate after their 3-1 play-off win. 
Photograph: David Maher/Sportsfile/Corbis 
Most heartening of all, perhaps, has been the flourishing of creative players. 
It is sad that Wes Hoolahan was not given a chance to shine until his 30s but 
he has taken his opportunity, as have Brady and Jeff Hendrick, the latter pair 
getting better with every game.

And so the Republic head to France with spirit and a little splash of 
audacity: no wonder one of the first things that an emotional Walters said 
after the final whistle on Monday night was that “hopefully we can put right
what went wrong in Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/14/euro-2012-spain-republic-of-ireland>
” at Euro 2012.
 