
The phone call that would, just hours later, inflict a highly damaging blow to 
Donald Trump’s presidential ambitions came through to Washington Post reporter 
David Fahrenthold mid-morning on Friday 7 October. The source – a Snapchat-era 
“Deep Throat” – informed Fahrenthold, whose doggedexposure 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-donald-trump-retooled-his-charity-to-spend-other-peoples-money/2016/09/10/da8cce64-75df-11e6-8149-b8d05321db62_story.html?tid=a_inl>
 of the operations of the Trump Foundation had so infuriated the billionaire, 
that they had some previously unaired video of Trump. Would he be interested in 
viewing it?

“David recognised immediately that [the footage] was explosive,” says the 
Post’s executive editor Martin Baron, “and the first task was to make sure it 
was authenticated, which he was able to do pretty quickly.”

The Post sent a transcript of the video – outtakes from a 2005 edition of the 
NBC show Access Hollywood, in whichTrump is heard bragging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 that “when you’re a star … you can do anything [to women] … grab them by the 
pussy” – to the Trump campaign for comment.

“They asked us for the actual video,” says the softly-spoken Baron, “and 
shortly after that they sent us Donald Trump’s initial response.” Five hours on 
from the tip-off, the video and accompanying piece went live on the Post, 
reverberating around the world.

While Grope-gate (as some 
<http://www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2016/10/trumps-defense-gropegate-accusers-too-ugly-molest>
 are inevitably calling it) may be a far cry from Watergate, the Post’s most 
famous scoop, it was nevertheless a momentum-shifting event in the presidential 
race, which has seen Trump, who had previously claimed that he could“shoot 
somebody” on Manhattan’s Fifth Avenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/donald-trump-says-he-could-shoot-somebody-and-still-not-lose-voters>
 and not lose votes, sincestruggle 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/clinton-holds-lead-in-new-polls-but-trump-tape-impact-mixed.html>
 to regain his swagger. Yet, while the Trump revelations have lately flowed 
thick and fast, there has been criticism (even in the Post) that much of the US 
media was initially slow to take Trump seriously, particularly early on in the 
Republican primaries.

Baron vigorously defends his corner. “At the Post, we took the candidacy 
seriously from the very beginning,” he insists, going on to cite reporting, 
among other things, on Trump Mortgage, theTrump University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/01/trump-university-claim-revisited-by-new-york-appeals-court>
, and his“multiple bankruptcies in Atlantic City” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016/10/06/donald-trumps-greed-helped-ruin-atlantic-city-is-the-rest-of-the-country-next/?utm_term=.4d2a700971f6>
.

“Other people reacted in a different way. Certainly there was a tremendous 
amount of cable coverage of his rallies,” he says. “Wall-to-wall, they would 
cover his rallies from beginning to end, on live television. I don’t happen to 
think that was a wise decision on their part.”

Baron does concede, however, that Trump is “skilful” at using the media. 
“[During the primaries] he would call into shows, which would normally require 
a candidate to show up in person, they would just take his phone call and he’d 
be on the air, and then he’d call the next show. He’s been by far the most 
accessible presidential candidate ever.”

Indeed, even when the Trump campaign barred 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/06/13/donald-trump-just-banned-the-washington-post-from-covering-him-that-should-bother-everyone/>
 the Post’s reporters from his events (for, they claimed, inaccurate 
reporting), he still made himself available to Baron’s team. “We had actual 
published interviews with him, [even] while we were on the blacklist,” he says.

Born in 1954 and raised in Tampa, Florida, Baron, who’s a fluent Spanish 
speaker, cut his teeth at the Miami Herald, which he first joined in 1976. He 
went on to work at some of America’s most prestigious titles – the Los Angeles 
Times, the New York Times, and the Boston Globe. As Globe editor, the paper won 
six Pulitzer prizes, including in 2003 for the Spotlight team’s investigation 
into sexual abuse by Catholic priests, which was turned into theOscar-winning 
movie Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/spotlight-review-catholic-church-called-to-account-over-child-abuse>
 last year. In 2013, he became executive editor of the Post, which a little 
over three years ago wasacquired by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos for $250m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/05/washington-post-sold-jeff-bezos-amazon>
 from the Graham family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fmartin-baron-we-took-donald-trump-seriously-from-the-beginning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa761f1fbf80518db6e42ad812905f2701fa06264%2F0_31_5508_3305%2F5508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Baron%3A%20'We%20took%20Donald%20Trump%20seriously%20from%20the%20beginning'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fmartin-baron-we-took-donald-trump-seriously-from-the-beginning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Baron%3A%20%27We%20took%20Donald%20Trump%20seriously%20from%20the%20beginning%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fmartin-baron-we-took-donald-trump-seriously-from-the-beginning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa761f1fbf80518db6e42ad812905f2701fa06264%2F0_31_5508_3305%2F5508.jpg>
 Martin Baron (L) and Liev Schreiber who played Baron as editor of the Boston 
Globe in the film Spotlight. Photograph: Supplied by LMK 
Earlier this year, the Post – whose traffic numbers reached 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/pr/wp/2016/10/14/the-washington-post-reached-new-traffic-record-of-83-1-million-visitors-in-september-2016/>
 a record 83.1m unique visitors in September 2016, a 40% year-on-year increase –
moved from its former base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/washington-post-bids-farewell-to-office-where-it-broke-watergate>
 to a gleaming, light-filled building on K Street, where reporters sit 
cheek-by-jowl with software engineers. Beyond financial capital, the Amazon CEO 
has provided the Post with “intellectual capital, too”, Baron explains. “He’s 
basically forced us to confront how the internet is different and how we have 
to adapt to it and embrace it. He’s also given us what he calls ‘runway’, which 
is time to experiment. So, in funding the experiments, we have time to let them 
play out, without having to adhere to some strict timeline or strict 
requirements for profit.”

One area Bezos was especially keen that Baron address was the issue of 
aggregation. “One of the first questions he asked was: ‘You do these long 
narratives, these deep investigations, but after you’re published, within 15 
minutes, half a dozen websites have decided to aggregate you – and they get 
more traffic than you do. How do you propose to deal with that?’” Baron’s 
solution was, in effect, to fight fire with fire; hiring in-house bloggers, not 
only did the Post start aggregating itself, but it began aggregating other 
people’s content too.

Since acquiring the Post, Bezos – who’s added 140 employees in three years – 
has held regular conference calls with senior staff. So how interested is he in 
the editorial side of the paper? The question isn’t even complete before Baron 
jumps in: “He doesn’t inject himself at all into our journalism. He doesn’t 
suggest stories for us to do. He doesn’t critique us in any way. Every once in 
a while, when he sees a story which delights him, he tells us.

The Washington Post embarks on Amazon adventure with Jeff Bezos | Dan Gillmor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/04/washington-post-amazon-jeff-bezos>
“[The conference calls] are all about tactics and strategy. We talked about 
aggregation, way back when. We’ve talked about our audience engagement team. 
But in terms of particular stories, particular projects, or particular avenues 
of coverage, he does not get involved at all.”

When asked what he thinks the Post’s output and business model will look like 
in five years time, Baron concedes that he simply doesn’t know. “I always say 
the people who are most certain about what the model will be are the furthest 
removed from any responsibility for actually making that model occur,” he says 
a touch world-wearily.

“There’s so much that’s happened so fast, and the pace of change has really 
accelerated. Today we’re sitting here talking about what we are doing for 
Facebook Live. Or what we’re doing for Snapchat. We’re talking about using bots 
for Amazon Echo, which we did to provide scores during the Olympics. And during 
this election we’ll be [using bots] to provide election results. [These aren’t] 
things we talked about a year ago – maybe we should have, but we didn’t.”

Despite his ink-stained background, Baron believes that if institutions such 
as the Post are to survive, they have to think and behave like technology 
companies: they need to move fast, take risks, and accept that failure is an 
essential part of experimentation. “I think people [at the Post] do feel free 
to propose new ideas and try new things,” he says. “And there’s no penalty for 
failing. If it doesn’t work, it doesn’t work.” But, he adds quickly, newspapers 
must always stick to their principles and values. “We can never violate that. 
If we do, then we destroy our entire argument for existence.”

CV

Age: 62

Education: Lehigh University, Pennsylvania. BA Journalism 1972-1976; MBA 
1975-1976.

Career:

1976: reporter, the Miami Herald

1979: business reporter, Los Angeles Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/los-angeles-times>

1983: business editor, Los Angeles Times

1991: assistant managing editor, Los Angeles Times

1996: assistant to the managing editor, the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times>

1997: associate managing editor, the New York Times

2000: executive editor, the Miami Herald

2001: editor, the Boston Globe <https://www.theguardian.com/media/boston-globe>

2003: the Globe wins Pulitzer prize for public service (for exposing sexual 
abuse by priests in the Catholic church)

2013: executive editor, the Washington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post>

2014: the Post wins public service Pulitzer prize, with the Guardian US (for 
revealing widespread secret surveillance by the NSA)

2016: the Post wins Pulitzer prize for national reporting (for building a 
national database on police killings)
 