
Jon Walters described the Republic of Ireland’s victory over Bosnia as the 
greatest moment in his career but insisted the acclaim for reachingEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> should be equally divided 
among a “team of heroes”.

Walters scored both goals in the 2-0 win as Martin O’Neill’s team joined 
England, Northern Ireland and Wales in qualifying for next summer’s tournament. 
O’Neill identified the Stoke City forward as Ireland’s outstanding performer 
during the qualifying stages but Walters said it was a victory for the team’s 
collective spirit.

Jon Walters underlines Martin O’Neill’s Republic of Ireland philosophy | Paul 
Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/16/jon-walters-martin-o-neill-republic-of-ireland-bosnia-herzegovina-euro-2016-play-off>
“There was a whole team of heroes out there,” he said. “We got there in the 
end and it is the best moment of my career, in any shirt. To qualify for the 
European Championship finals is unbelievable. You’ve got to take in the 
atmosphere because these moments don’t come around in a career very often. The 
management team deserve lots of credit –they have been excellent throughout the 
campaign.”

Walters opened the scoring with a first-half penalty and then doubled 
Ireland’s lead in the 70th minute to set up a 3-1 aggregate win. “Walters has 
had a qualifying tournament to remember,” O’Neill said. “There have been a 
number of fantastic performances and fantastic performers and I think Walters 
has topped the lot. He has been exceptional.”

O’Neill added: “I couldn’t be more proud because they are a fantastic bunch of 
players. They all want to play for their country. That’s important because you 
hear that some players find it a chore playing for their country. Well, I’ve 
not experienced that at all in my two years.

“They gave everything. I don’t think they had anything left to give at the 
end. The spirit has been so strong. We may lack an occasional piece of absolute 
genius but we’ve been great. We deserve to go and that moment when the 
referee’s whistle went, and we’ve reached France, was just very special. I 
thoughtthe Germany game [winning 1-0] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/republic-ireland-germany-euro-2016-qualifier-report>
 was wonderful but I think it was eclipsed tonight. And these are the moments 
you live for.”

O’Neill also praised his assistant, Roy Keane, describing his appointment as 
the best decision he has made since taking the job. “I’ve had to make many big 
decisions. The biggest was bringing inRoy Keane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-keane> and he has been absolutely 
phenomenal. I couldn’t be more delighted with him. He’s an iconic figure. He 
sometimes polarises opinion but not in the dressing room.”
 