
The winner

Marvel took top spot at the worldwide box office 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2013&p=.htm> for 
the second year running, with a $1.215bn sweep forIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3> (No 5 in the 
all-time list <http://boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>). It's still unclear if 
it's the series' final instalment, or whether Robert Downey Jr will go Starkers 
on a full-time basis again. Nevertheless, seizing the momentum of The Avengers 
last year, Marvel's cross-fertilising approach to its IP has put it – or its 
paymasters, Disney – in pole position among the studios. (Thor 2 finished in 
eighth.) If the Chinese cut of Iron Man 3 wasn't quite the Mandarin-fluent 
blockbuster for a new red dawnpromised early on by co-producers DMG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/aug/28/looper-china-us-dan-mintz>
, the big Beijing promotional push did give a potentially rote threequel the 
allure of a global jetsetter.

 Shane Black and Ben Kingsley were praised for Iron Man 3's red-herring twist, 
an opportunity for the director to sprinkle his postmodern dust over the SFX 
blockbuster genre. But was Black's treatise on 
terrorism-as-global-panto-for-the-masses – and where that dovetails with the 
cinema industry – a case of dressing up old iron? Yet another CGI-grouted brick 
in the franchise wall tops the yearly list – and one that arguably benefitted 
from unusually lacklustre competition this time, with the 
not-exactly-earthshakingDespicable Me 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155771/despicable-me-2> ($918.6m) and 
Fast & Furious 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155252> ($788.7m) in 
second and third place. 2013 looks like a weaker 12 months for the upper 
echelons of the global box office, with just one film crossing the vaunted $1bn 
line (compared tofour in 2012 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2012> and three 
in 2011 <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2011>; 
though Peter Jackson's Desolation of Smaug is still in with a shout), and a 
noticeably shrunken spread of grosses in the top 10. Sony, after a triumphant 
2012 led by Skyfall, looked particularly wan, with just the underperforming 
Smurfs followup near the top 20 – and an embarrassing bomb in Will and Jaden 
Smith's $130m After Earth (31st, $243.8m).

The desolation of brands

 I noted in last year's global box office report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/dec/18/avengers-skyfall-china-2012-cinema-review>
 that 2012 was a transitional year, with many long-running franchises taking 
their final bow, and some newbies stepping in. It's still far from clear which 
will have the kind of legs (perennial guilty pleasure Fast & Furious apart) 
that let a certain speccy wizard cling to the top spot for so long. The Lone 
Ranger (29th; $260.5m) is dead wood. World War Z (11th; $540m), Oz the Great 
and Powerful (12th; $493.3m) and Pacific Rim (16th; $407.6m) were all putative 
franchise-starters that didn't fully ignite; the execs' fingers presumably 
hovered over the greenlight button for sequels there.Pacific Rim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141017/pacific-rim>, especially, was 
only saved by its impressive $111.9m Chinese take – validating Guillermo del 
Toro's eastern-centric canvas and casting in the end. Man of Steel (6th; 
$662.8m) was airborne, but not quite in speeding-bullet territory yet.

The Hunger Games and The Hobbit are definitely going concerns, showing the 
strong/expanding overseas base de rigueur for sequels these days. That movement 
is also true of Star Trek Into Darkness (14th; $467.4m) – but it remains an 
enigmatically US-centric divertissement, and still hasn't yielded megabucks. 
All in all, 2013 suffered a lack of anything new, piquant and resounding in the 
franchise world; the amount of critic-proof kids' fare (Despicable Me 2, 
Monsters University, The Croods, Frozen) plumping out the box office was 
telling. Maleficent, Guardians of the Galaxy andJupiter Ascending 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZoCyL_Pqzu8> step up to the plate for their 
shot next year. Anyone waiting for the implosion of the blockbuster-franchise 
paradigm will have to treasureGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>'s 7th place 
($653.3m) for now – a stunning result for a bona fide one-off, old-fashioned 
spectacular with absolutely no thoughts of a prequel, sequel or spin-off (apart 
fromthat Inuit thing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8>).

Check your currency
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCmKrgPr7PA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCmKrgPr7PA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCmKrgPr7PA8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Getting excited about a $1bn gross is so 2008. One billion yuan ($160m) is 
the box-office benchmark that movie stat heads should get goosebumps over now. 
That was the threshold breached at the beginning of the year in China by 
Stephen Chow's mythological rompJourney to the West 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CmKrgPr7PA8> – hard on the heels of 2012's 
Hangover rip-offLost in Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/13/lost-in-thailand-lost-in-translation>
, the first to achieve the feat. If any more proof was needed of the maturing 
Chinese market and the Chinese film industry's growing ability to feed it, then 
sentimental dramaSo Young <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Obin3ENttAY> and 
sleuth prequelYoung Detective Dee <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BXPl5-mdhVM> 
came within touching distance of 1bn yuan, and three other films posted strong 
results that ushered them into the top 10. One more: Feng Xiaogang's 
fantasy-fulfilment satirePersonal Tailor 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8TZt6dn30iE>, now in cinemas, looks a good bet 
to outstrip Journey to the West and hit 10 digits, too.

With six of China's top 10 grossing films of 2013 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/china/yearly/> homegrown (compared to three 
in 2012), the Chinese are showing signs of finally understanding how to turn 
their domestic market into a fortress – a crucial first step if they are to 
eventually go toe-to-toe with Hollywood. The Americans have their own bastion, 
of course, but US box office – despiteearly reports projecting a $10.9bn record 
for 2013 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/news/2013-domestic-box-office-to-reach-record-and-other-interesting-factoids-1201009706/>
 – is stagnant where it really matters: admissions. The reverse is true – 
spectacularly so – in China. Even using the most conservative growth 
projections, it will be the world's biggest movie market by the end of 2018. If 
the 1bn-yuan club packing them in stays predominantly Chinese, multiplex 
lineups in every time zone could start looking very different.

The rest of the world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fr6UmqNuMdY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fr6UmqNuMdY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fr6UmqNuMdY4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Snowpiercer trailer
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6UmqNuMdY4>
Of course, for the moment, Chinese cinema has a big export problem – and few 
of its class of 2013 looked like mainstream-botherers abroad. Journey to the 
West gets a US release on 7 March, but only Wong Kar-wai'sThe Grandmaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146655/grandmaster> ($64m) has 
registered at international level lately. Crossovers from anywhere else were 
equally scarce, with no sign of anIntouchables-style foreign-language ambush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/08/french-urban-films-intouchables>
 on the global mainstream, and Studio Ghibli's brand clout making it the one 
predictable fixture: Goro Miyazaki's From Up on Poppy Hill did a respectable 
global run ($56m) and his dad's swansong,The Wind Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/01/venice-film-festival-review-wind-rises>
, is certain – on the back on $119m in Japan – to surpass it next year.

Les Misérables's $441.8 haul through the first few months of the year gave 
British film big lungs, and Philomena ($33m) is travelling passably. The big
local hits in France, Germany and Italy 
<http://www.film.com/movies/international-box-office-hits-2013>, meanwhile, 
didn't get a look-in outside their countries of origin. But there are a few 
other hopefuls on the breakout front: Russia's No 1 film, the numinous 3D war 
filmStalingrad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGk2WZkFCCg> ($52m domestic), 
has already opened its account well in China, and been picked up by Sony for 
release in the UK on 21 February. In the last few weeks, Aamir Khan's buddy-cop 
movieDhoom 3 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yeF_b8EQcK0> has reminded us, with 
some of the strongest overseas business since My Name is Khan and 3 Idiots, 
that Bollywood can be a global player.

And then there's Bong Joon-ho's South Korean locomotive-based barnstormer 
Snowpiercer, currently in agonising Han Solo-style carbonite freeze in 
Anglophone markets as theWeinsteins dig their heels in over the 
English-language cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/08/snowpiercer-director-english-cuts-bong-joon-ho>
. Considering that, at $40m, it's the country's most expensive film ever, it 
could be said to have disappointed at home (it wound up at No 4,taking $59m 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/korea/yearly/>). But with its mostly 
English-speaking cast (including Tilda Swinton fielding the fruitiest Yorkshire 
accent since Geoff Boycott), it was built for international transit – and its 
quirky interpretation of dystopic sci-fi's operating manual could see it do 
runaway box office in the right hands. Harvey and Bob, do the decent thing: 
take off the brakes.
 