
He has not even left yet, his resignation after a bruising defeat at the hands 
of the Italian electorate having been put on ice by the country’s president.

But Matteo Renzi is already plotting his return to the prime minister’s 
office, according to Italian media reports, and has signalled his desire for 
elections to be called as soon as February, despite hishumiliating  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
loss at the polls just days ago.

The path back to Palazzo Chigi after his formal resignation on Monday – which 
has beentemporarily frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzis-resignation-frozen-by-italys-president>
 by Sergio Mattarella until the senate passes a budget, perhaps as early as 
Wednesday – represents a big gamble for Renzi. But it is one he apparently 
believes is the only way to spare himself and his centre-left party fromlosing 
more ground to populist and rightwing forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/m5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy>
.

Renzi’s desire for early – but not snap – elections was reported by a number 
of Italian media outlets on Tuesday and underscored by remarks from the 
interior minister, Angelino Alfano, a centre-right coalition partner.

“I forecast there will be the will to go to elections in February,” Alfano told
Corriere della Sera <http://www.corriere.it/>, adding that he had discussed the 
matter with Renzi.

'This was a protest vote': Sicilian city where 75% said no to Matteo Renzi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/this-was-protest-vote-sicilian-city-catania-where-75-said-no-matteo-renzi>
While most analysts do not think February is realistic timing, the statement 
nevertheless indicated that Renzi sees a path to defeating theFive Star Movement
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/m5s-calls-for-elections-after-matteo-renzi-loses-referendum-italy>
 (M5S) and the Northern League, even after 60% of Italians rejected the prime 
minister in a high-turnout referendum on constitutional changes.

“It is a gamble and their bet is that the 60% who voted against Renzi are 
divided between [Beppe] Grillo, [Silvio] Berlusconi, the Northern League,” said 
Wolfango Piccoli, an analyst atTeneo Intelligence 
<http://www.teneoholdings.com/divisions/teneo_intelligence>.

In the plan apparently favoured by Renzi, he will step down once the budget is 
passed and a new prime minister from his Democratic party (PD) – such as Pier 
Carlo Padoan, the economy minister – would take over and oversee the passage of 
a new electoral law. That would be followed by fresh elections.

One significant factor in Renzi’s calculation is that he wants to avoid tough 
internal party pressures to give up his role as head of the PD.


An early election would probably mean Renzi could bypass a party leadership 
vote and instead head directly to a primary, which he could win because he 
still has the support of the party’s base, if not all its leaders.

Piccoli added: “There is a risk that if they don’t go to elections soon, the 
Democratic party loses even more ground. The economy isn’t getting better 
anytime soon, and they may even have to make some politically unpopular 
decisions on bank [rescues].”


While Renzi was undoubtedly trounced on Sunday, having won the support of just 
40% of voters for his proposed changes to Italy’s constitution, one top 
official in his inner circle, Luca Lotti, tweeted that the PD had won two 
previous elections with 40% support.
Luca Lotti (@LottiLuca) 
Tutto è iniziato col 40% nel 2012. Abbiamo vinto col 40% nel 2014. 
Ripartiamo dal 40% di ieri!
 <https://twitter.com/LottiLuca/status/805785310978342912> December 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LottiLuca/status/805785310978342912> 
The gamble suggests Renzi and his allies believe significant advances by 
populist and rightwing forces, both in the UK Brexit vote and the US 
presidential election, will not consume the Italian electorate even thoughItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is suffering from high unemployment, 
a sluggish economy, great uncertainty over the stability of its banks, and 
strong anti-immigrant sentiment in certain pockets of the country.

There are also factors that are far beyond Renzi’s control that could 
complicate the maths and his desired election schedule.


The current government must address problems with the electoral law. Renzi’s 
government passed the legislation last year, which changed Italy’s 
traditionally proportionate system of government to one in which the winner of 
an election automatically wins a majority of seats in parliament.

But the law has been deemed unworkable after the government lost the 
referendum. Before it can go ahead and change the legislation – a potentially 
lengthy negotiation – parliament must wait to hear from Italy’s highest court, 
which is studying the issue, about what parts need to be changed. It is unclear 
when the verdict will be handed down.

Matteo Renzi's resignation temporarily 'frozen' by Italian president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzis-resignation-frozen-by-italys-president>
Francesco Galietti, an analyst at Policy Sonar 
<http://www.policysonar.com/team/francesco-galietti/> in Rome, said Renzi’s 
worst nightmare would be to remain “cornered” as a former prime minister and 
head of the PD. In this neutered role, Galietti said, Renzi would still be 
accountable to voters for any number of potential issues that could arise, 
damaging his prospects of winning a future election.

“He wants to have elections quickly but the problem is you cannot have them so 
quickly, the earliest is probably May or June,” the analyst said.

Others predict an election would be feasible in April.

Internal party politics aside, the bigger question will be whether the 
centre-left government can maintain and possibly grow its 40% share of the 
electorate, or whetherM5S or the Northern League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/referendum-win-may-lead-nowhere-for-five-star-and-northern-league>
 could defeat them.

Once the electoral law is changed back to a proportionate system, any winning 
party would probably have to form a coalition, but M5S on principle has always 
said it would not form a coalition.

It was possible, Galietti said, that this stance could change. While M5S would 
risk alienating supporters on the left who have been drawn to the 
anti-establishment party, it could feasibly form a coalition with the 
xenophobic Northern League and win a majority in parliament.
 