
Matt Damon and Ben Affleck <https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> 
reprised the roles that made them famous onstage in New York on Friday night, 
with a surprise appearance in a one-off live reading of the screenplay of Good 
Will Hunting.

The childhood friends were almost unknown when they wrote and insisted on 
starring in the tale of a young working-class polymath who is mopping floors at 
MIT when his life is turned around by a therapist, played by Robin Williams, 
and a Harvard student, played by Minnie Driver. It won the two an Oscar for 
best screenplay, was nominated for eight more (Williams also won), and provided 
them with a route to the big time. Today, they occupy numbers three (Damon) and 
six (Affleck) on the2016 Forbes list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/dwayne-johnson-top-earning-actor-hollywood-pay-gap-forbes>
 of the world’s highest-paid male actors.

John Krasinski reunited the pair on Friday as part of a Film Independent and 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Times series of “live 
reads”, in which actors read the screenplay of a film to a live audience. The 
cast list was not released in advance, allowing Krasinski a moment of pure 
showmanship before the reading began.

Matt Damon: five best moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/29/matt-damon-five-best-moments-jason-bourne>
Introducing his cast one by one – including his wife, Emily Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-blunt>, in the Driver role – Krasinski 
finally came to the leads, announcing that he himself would be playing Will … 
before Damon unexpectedly marched on to the stage, to a standing ovation from 
the crowd at New York University’s Skirball theatre.

“Thirty seconds before that, you were happy to see me do it!” Krasinski said. 
Preparing to sit down and take Affleck’s part instead, he said: “Chuckie’s a 
better role anyway …”

On cue, the Batman star followed Damon out from the wings, bringing the 
delighted audience leaping back to their feet.

The 1997 screenplay has held up well, and is often laugh-out-loud funny, much 
of its charm resting on the witty, wisecracking, believable banter between the 
dumb but protective Chuckie and his best friend, the brilliant, defensive and 
confrontational Will. Affleck and Damon slid easily back into characters based 
presumably on young men they had known or witnessed growing up in Boston, and 
Affleck in particular – now bearded, tanned and heavy-set – seemed to take 
great delight in revisiting the ribald put-downs and convoluted anecdotes which 
pepper the script.

Damon, whose DiCaprio-like quicksilver charisma has become something more 
stolid and workmanlike, was able to recapture that early magnetism. He was 
devastating in that indelible scene in which he tells Williams that when his 
father used to give him a choice of wrench, belt or stick for a beating, he 
would always choose the wrench – “because fuck him, that’s why”.

Blunt approached the part of Damon’s student girlfriend with something of the 
English naturalism that Driver brought to the film in 1997, and Krasinski, who 
read the stage directions, stumbled for comic effect over some of her love 
scenes with Damon, altering the ending of one to: “They do not kiss,” tripping 
over the word “postcoital” in another.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmatt-damon-ben-affleck-good-will-hunting-screenplay-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6389ccc0449684a549fb481e049e5e43007800bd%2F0_35_2933_1760%2F2933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Damon%20and%20Ben%20Affleck%20surprise%20fans%20with%20Good%20Will%20Hunting%20reading&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmatt-damon-ben-affleck-good-will-hunting-screenplay-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Damon%20and%20Ben%20Affleck%20surprise%20fans%20with%20Good%20Will%20Hunting%20reading&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmatt-damon-ben-affleck-good-will-hunting-screenplay-reading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6389ccc0449684a549fb481e049e5e43007800bd%2F0_35_2933_1760%2F2933.jpg>
 ‘As a kid from Boston, I think we all get tattoos of the poster of this 
movie.’ Photograph: Allstar/Miramax/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
 “It was really good!” his wife blurted out, to which Krasinski asked 
rhetorically: “You’re really going to take Jason Bourne over Jim from The 
Office?” Less successful was his casting of The Americans’ Margo Martindale in 
the crucial Williams role. The gender switch might well have worked, but she 
was hesitant and seemed under-rehearsed.

Introducing the event, Krasinski made the case for Good Will Hunting as a 
modern American classic. “As a kid from Boston, I think we all get tattoos of 
the poster of this movie on your back,” he said, calling it “unbelievably 
well-written”. In truth, Affleck and Damon lay it on a bit thick in 
establishing Will’s genius – what is meant to come off as autodidactic 
brilliance occasionally teeters over into insufferability – and it’s a more 
sentimental film than it thinks it is, emotionally manipulative in a way that 
seems mercilessly machine-tooled for maximum effect, particularly towards the 
end.

But it works. And looking back, it laid the groundwork for Affleck’s career as 
a director producing compelling thrillers such as Argo and The Town that use 
tension as shamelessly as Good Will Hunting uses emotion, pleasingly calling to 
mind the crime dramas of the 1940s and 50s in which taciturn men find 
themselves forced into intractable situations, weighing up dilemmas about love 
and corruption and morality. Which, come to think of it, doesn’t sound a bad 
template for theBatman film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/ben-affleck-batman-robin-ryan-potter-big-hero-6>
 Affleck is currently writing.
 