
People tend to be snobby about Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, and they tend to be 
particularly snobby about the cultural things it produces: the overly 
commercialised songs, movies and TV ads. The excess and sentimentality of it, 
the inclusive, populist spirit, seem designed to bring out the Ebenezer Scrooge 
in even the most uncommitted of cultural snobs.

I will never join them. Yes, I know Christmas can be a pain. When I was 
suffering from serious depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/22/men-do-cry-depression-matt-haig-reasons-to-stay-alive>
, the whole season became a tormenting joke, my own misery highlighted by the 
contrast with the jollity of my surroundings. But Christmas was also one of the 
things that helped get me out of that depression. It helped as a marker of 
progress, since it was always easier to remember Christmases in a way that you 
can’t remember, say, Octobers.

And, for not particularly religious people – people like me – who veer between 
being atheist, agnostic and vaguely “spiritual” (depending on the day of the 
week and the level of hangover), the essence of Christmas generally isn’t found 
in a church, but rather on a screen or a stage or in the pages of a novel. 
Because, ever since 1843, when Dickens publishedA Christmas Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/16/christmas-carol-charles-dickens-bookclub>
, there has been a new kind of Christmas, a parallel Christmas that defined it 
as a feeling, rather than a date or a biblical narrative. Pinning down that 
feeling is hard, since it is a magical feeling, and magic can’t be explained. 
It is – as Dickens’s Scrooge suggests when he says: “I will honour Christmas in 
my heart, and try to keep it all the year” – beyond the season itself.

So, I would like to defend Christmas against the Christmas snobs. We need the 
collective bonhomie it can inspire, especially in 2016, this terrible joke of a 
year. And I would like to defend it, too, against the people who frown at the 
commercialisation or secularisation of the festival. I have only ever known 
Christmas as a commercialised, secularised affair, and yet I have still found 
magic and inspiration in it. I always have.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29aa7f508cd68a6065122039b7ed650d51731e7e%2F0_0_3521_2738%2F3521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Haig%20on%20Christmas%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20an%20anchor%20at%20the%20bottom%20of%20the%20year.%20It%20fixed%20my%20childhood%20in%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Haig%20on%20Christmas%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20an%20anchor%20at%20the%20bottom%20of%20the%20year.%20It%20fixed%20my%20childhood%20in%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29aa7f508cd68a6065122039b7ed650d51731e7e%2F0_0_3521_2738%2F3521.jpg>
 ‘A kind of emotional central heating’ – 1970’s Scrooge, starring Albert 
Finney. Photograph: Cinema Cente/Rex/Shutterstock 
When I was growing up, in the 80s, the supreme pre-Christmas highlight was the 
day the new Radio Times came out. Along with millions of other semi-losers, I 
would rush out to WH Smith to buy the two-week bumper issue, weighty with 
promise. Then I would rush home to study the listings like a monk reading 
psalms, carefully highlighting everything I was going to watch.

I wasn’t always a happy child, but I was always happy at Christmas. I moved 
school a lot. My parents switched my junior school because I was having a bad 
time, then, when I started secondary school, I struggled to fit in. I would sit 
on the stairs each morning crying, not wanting to go. Christmas was an escape 
from all that. It was an anchor at the bottom of the year. It fixed my 
childhood in place.

When I was 11 years old, a rather irresponsible teacher told the school 
assembly the “truth” about Father Christmas. I didn’t believe it. I pretended 
to, because everyone else seemed to, even my younger sister. But a part of me 
never quite stopped believing. Around that time, I remember walking my springer 
spaniel, Murdoch, in the park and thinking that molecules of Christmas magic 
hovered in the air. It was something you could feel. That is the point of 
Christmas, and a theme of most Christmas stories: hope against the odds.

That year, I saw the film Scrooge, – (thank you, Radio Times), which stars 
Albert Finney. I was gripped by the then unfamiliar story of a rich old miser 
who, after seeing three Christmas spirits, changes his ways on Christmas 
morning. Only ET had had such a profound, positive psychological effect on me. 
The scene near the end in which Scrooge dresses up as Father Christmas and 
delivers turkey and toys to the Cratchits worked on me like a kind of emotional 
central heating; the song Thank You Very Much was so unabashedly happy and 
sentimental that it reminded me of the child I was. It was one of the most 
moving experiences of my life and – don’t laugh – I think it made me a better 
person. It helped me to understand the age-old festive lesson that giving 
presents makes you happier than receiving them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a77146037bd491e1ecab39d51978c43a3cf9eab%2F0_0_2576_1949%2F2576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Haig%20on%20Christmas%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20an%20anchor%20at%20the%20bottom%20of%20the%20year.%20It%20fixed%20my%20childhood%20in%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Haig%20on%20Christmas%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20was%20an%20anchor%20at%20the%20bottom%20of%20the%20year.%20It%20fixed%20my%20childhood%20in%20place%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmatt-haig-christmas-anchor-bottom-year-fixed-my-childhood-place%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a77146037bd491e1ecab39d51978c43a3cf9eab%2F0_0_2576_1949%2F2576.jpg>
 ‘It was in books that I found the most Christmas magic’ – the 1982 film 
adaptation of Raymond Briggs’s The Snowman. Photograph: TVc/Rex/Shutterstock 
It wasn’t just films, either. My mother went to the theatre a lot and used to 
drag me to see Henrik Ibsen plays when I really wanted to be at home watching 
Beverly Hills Cop. But then, at Christmas time in 1985, she took me to the 
National Theatre to see The Nativity, one of Tony Harrison’s famous 
reinventions of medieval mystery plays. I loved it, because it was very 
immersive – and I got to dance on stage withBrenda Blethyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/23/brenda-blethyn-vera-family-values>
 – but it was in books that I found the most Christmas magic. Not only A 
Christmas Carol, which I finally read when I was about 12, but also in tales 
such as The Snowman,Susan Cooper’s The Dark is Rising sequence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/dec/25/darkness-the-dark-is-rising-susan-cooper>
 and Hans Christian Andersen’s The Little Match Girl. All have a darkness to 
them, as do all the great Christmas stories. In The Little Match Girl, the 
saddest of all Christmas tales, a poor, homeless girl lights matches to keep 
herself warm and sees visions of Christmas in the flame. The power of a 
Christmas story, like the power of Christmas itself, acts like that light in 
the dark.

I suppose I know this as well as anyone, because, after spending a year writing
Reasons to Stay Alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/31/reasons-to-stay-alive-matt-haig-review-depression>
, a book about my life-threatening experience of depression and anxiety, I 
needed to write something that would cheer me up. I had been searching for ages 
for ideas for a happy book – possibly a children’s book – and then my 
seven-year-old son, Lucas, asked me what Father Christmas had been like as a 
child. That got my brain whirring. I didn’t have an answer to hand, so I 
decided to write him (and his younger sister, Pearl) my imagined version of 
Santa’s childhood.

Truthfully, though, I was also writing it for myself. It made absolutely no 
business sense to follow up a book about mental health with a Christmas book, 
but I was starting to feel fragile again and I needed to do something I would 
enjoy. Writing about the young Nikolas and elves and Blitzen made me so happy I 
decided to make it the first part of a series.

But I knew from my own enjoyment of Christmas books and films that I had to 
add a tiny bit of darkness to the “ho ho ho”. Every Renaissance painter knew 
that to make light brighter you have to contrast it with shadow. I was also 
determined to ignore the fact that it would be a children’s book. The best 
Christmas stories are for all ages, or rather act as a thread, helping us 
connect ourselves to the children we once were.A Boy Called Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/21/boy-called-christmas-matt-haig-review>
 was my attempt to enter this tradition, to make a book for kids that can also 
be enjoyed by adults.

In the sequel, The Girl Who Saved Christmas, I tried to acknowledge the 
originator of this tradition by makingCharles Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> a key character – he helps 
Father Christmas and the eponymous girl, Amelia, in their quest to save 
Christmas. And even though I set out with these books to write the opposite of 
Reasons to Stay Alive, they ended up, in a strange way, being very similar. 
They are about trying to find an authentic candle-flicker of hope where there 
seems to be none.

And so, for me, Christmas has become a magical time again. I once thought this 
would be impossible, just as I thought recovering from depression would be. But 
if Christmas is about anything, it is about believing in the seemingly 
impossible. And that is, ultimately, the purpose of a Christmas story: to help 
us believe in magic as easily as we once did.

Of course, there are some terrible Christmas films and books. But the good 
ones are as good as anything. They encourage us, as Dickens put it, “to open 
our shut-up hearts freely” and loosen the cynicism that can surround us 
throughout the working year. Yes, the messy realities of Christmas can be a 
grind, but the stories provide a map that leads us away from cynicism and 
towards hope, optimism and even – if I can use the most old-fashioned and 
Christmassy word of all – joy.

And thank God – or, at least, Dickens – for that.

Buy A Boy Called Christmas 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-called-christmas.html> and The Girl Who 
Saved Christmas <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-who-saved-christmas.html>
 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=matt+haig&order=relevance&dir=desc>
.


My Christmas

Jenni Murray
As a child, I used to love going to pantos. My parents would take me to the 
theatre in Sheffield and Leeds on Boxing Day. When I had my own children, I 
always took them and they absolutely loved it. What I think is so interesting 
about panto is that it gets children into the theatre. It’s live, the actors 
are there in front of you - it doesn’t involve a phone or a computer. As a 
little girl, I adored Cinderella, and I remember seeing this girl’s rags 
transform into the most glamorous dress. Being practically minded, though, I 
was always conscious of her glass slippers and thought that they must be really 
uncomfortable. Christmas is always a precious time when my rather small family 
gets together, and what is lovely is that it is just the four of us. The boys, 
who are 33 and 29, still expect pillowcases as stockings, although they have 
become incredibly good cooks and so often take over from me. We always take the 
dogs for a walk and then we flop in front of the telly. Morecambe and Wise used 
to dominate Christmas when I was younger, but now we watch whatever is good – 
or bad. I can’t wait.

The Woman’s Hour Power List 2016 will be revealed on 14 December at 10am on 
BBC Radio 4.

John Cooper Clarke
My parents attempted to alter the culture of Christmas once. They told me they 
were going to get a leg of pork. It was too extreme a departure from the usual 
turkey or chicken and I had to protest, so they presented me with a whole capon 
– a castrated male chicken that has achieved a level of plumpness no chicken 
should ever achieve. It was a bit botoxy … just layers of subcutaneous fat. It 
was the one time I ate a whole bird in one sitting. We used to go to the panto 
a lot, too – I used to particularly love it when an over-the-hill TV actor was 
playing. I’ve seen some good Buttons in my time – David Nixon and Tommy Steele 
to name a couple. As an adult, your favourite Christmas is always the first 
Christmas you have with your own kid. This year will be the same as ever – at 
home hanging with the family. It’s just a small occasion – if someone did come 
round, I would let them in – but it has never come up so far!

John Cooper Clarke and Hugh Cornwell’s album This Time It’s Personal is 
available now on CD and vinyl.

Alexander McCall Smith
Most of us have a strong yearning at this time of year to experience something 
purer, less materialistic, less frantic. And what better than Bach to clear the 
palate? The disciplined notes, the soaring, perfect structure of the music 
reminds us what this season is all about: kindness to others and healing. So, a 
firm date in my Christmas diary is the annual performance by Ludus Baroque of 
Bach’s Christmas Oratorio. Ludus Baroque is one of the finest chamber 
orchestras and choirs in the UK and is conducted by a friend, Richard 
Neville-Towle, who gathers the best baroque singers and instrumentalists and 
brings them to Canongate church in Edinburgh. It is a perfect setting for Bach: 
steeped in history, beautiful in the simple, unpretentious way of Scottish 
architecture of the time. Bach sounds perfect there, and at the end we will go 
out into the night, perhaps reminding ourselves that the following day, the 
winter solstice, things get lighter – and better, we hope.

Alexander McCall Smith will be reading festive stories on BBC Radio 4 this 
Christmas.


Katherine Jenkins
My favourite Christmas event from my childhood would have to be midnight mass 
at our local church. I was a chorister at St David’s, in Neath, south Wales, 
from the age of seven, and one of the best things was being able to stay up 
late enough for midnight mass. By the time I was 10 I was starting to have 
solos. Going to midnight mass is still the most important part of Christmas for 
me. There were months and months of practice, so nerves were pretty high. I was 
always much more excited about the service than about the presents. Our 
Christmas is the same every year – my mum helps with the Sunday school, and I 
like to go with her.

Last year, I took my daughters there for the first time. All the family come 
on Christmas morning, and on Christmas Day we go to my auntie’s and play 
Trivial Pursuit. One of my favourite things about Christmas is definitely the 
carols, especially O Holy Night and In the Bleak Midwinter.

The Celebration tour runs from 1-27 December, katherinejenkins.co.uk 
<http://katherinejenkins.co.uk/> 


Phoebe Waller-Bridge
For the past 10 years, I’ve read ridiculous Christmas poems at the Charlie 
Waller Memorial Trust’s annual carol service, which raises money for and 
awareness of young people struggling with depression. It’s always packed to the 
rafters with a hilarious lineup of people, and it’s for a fantastic charity. 
The event always kickstarts the season for me. I also like shivering through 
the winter market on the South Bank, London.

Fleabag, Soho theatre, London, 5-16 December, sohotheatre.com 
<http://sohotheatre.com/>


Bettany Hughes
My dad is an actor, and he was often the panto dame. So, our Christmas 
involved my father dressing up as a woman. I have powerful memories of hanging 
up the big white-and-red stockings Dad had worn on stage. I always loved going 
backstage to his dressing room and meeting everyone. My godmother was a field 
mouse to his toad. As an ancient historian, I know we are creatures of memory 
and need habit and ritual. Despite this, physiologically, our brains crave 
disturbance. A panto has familiarity, but it also presents the audience with 
things they don’t normally experience. The hilarity and delight in the crowd is 
tangible – both the kids and parents get real satisfaction. If you go back to 
ancient Babylon, there were always fire-eaters, sword-swallowers – we were at 
it right from the start.

One thing I would love to see this year is Peter Pan at the National – a woman 
is playing Captain Hook and Peter Pan is my age. That is what theatre is about: 
the unexpected. My husband used to run circuses and sometimes has his circus 
friends over for Christmas dinner. One couple used to do this act where the 
girl would cut off the man’s cigarette with a chainsaw and once cut off his 
nose. Our big thing is to try and fit as many people around the table as 
possible.

Istanbul: A Tale of Three Cities by Bettany Hughes is published by Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson in January. Order a copy atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/istanbul-460241.html>

 