
I am sitting opposite Matt Damon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mattdamon> 
and he is saying he’s sorry for being a bad movie star. He can’t help it, he 
says. He’s simply too dull.

“I think people just leave a room I’m in and they’re like: Well that guy 
wasn’t a movie star,” he explains. “Jesus! Anybody could do that.”

We are sitting in a gloomy hotel room, at a large round conference table which 
is too big for the two of us. Damon is dressed like a father on the school run: 
sensible navy blue polo shirt, trousers with practical pockets down the side. 
He has a smattering of facial hair. The most film-starry thing about him is his 
muscle tone: he has arms that look like they’ve been drawn by a Popeye animator.

Other than this, Damon insists he’s entirely normal. He has a wife, Luciana, 
whom he met while filming in Miami in 2003 when she was working behind a bar, 
and the couple have four daughters ranging in age from four to 16 – Alexia, 
from Luciana’s previous relationship, Isabella, Gia and Stella. Damon is a 
self-confessed family man. He has a rule that they will never be apart for more 
than two weeks while he’s filming. His daily life is so average even the 
paparazzi have decamped from outside his home in Los Angeles because he never 
does anything that merits a photograph.

“You know, a guy who’s married happily with four kids is not quite a story,” 
Damon says with a sorry-but-what-can-you-do smile. “And so they’ll come back 
and they’ll take an occasional picture… but it’s kind of just updating the 
file.”

I’m not entirely buying this. At 44, Damon is smart enough to know that his 
supposed “normality” is his stock in trade. His approachability on-screen, 
combined with a sense of nuance and depth, has lent his performances a 
likeable, everyman-ish quality that has proved to be box-office catnip.

In 2007, Forbes magazine named Damon as Hollywood’s most bankable actor, 
averaging $29 in takings for every dollar he earned in a movie. FromGood Will 
Hunting <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/69596/good-will-hunting>(which 
Damon co-wrote with Ben Affleck, winning the 1997 Oscar for best screenplay) and
Saving Private Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Observer/0,4267,36480,00.html>
 to the big-budget Bourne movie franchise or the dystopian sci-fi fantasyElysium
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/22/elysium-review>, he has a 
capacity to hint at a character’s inner complexity without ever veering into 
pretension. According to Manohla Dargis of the New York Times, Damon’s power 
lies in his ability“to recede into a film while also being fully present” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/10/movies/moviesspecial/10darg.html?pagewanted=print>
.

When he runs out of food, he simply starts growing potatoes in his own 
vacuum-packed faecal matter

His latest project is no exception. In The Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/08/the-martian-matt-damon-ridley-scott>
, directed by Ridley Scott and co-starring Jeff Daniels, Chiwetel Ejiofor and 
Kristen Wiig, Damon plays Mark Watney, a Nasa astronaut who finds himself 
stranded on Mars after he is injured in a fierce storm and presumed dead by his 
crew.

Admittedly, an astronaut is hardly your average kind of Joe, but Damon manages 
to imbue the role with his classic down-to-earth sensibility. When Watney is 
confronted with a problem, he solves it through the power of science and 
logical thinking. Despite forever teetering on the verge of an existential 
crisis, Watney remains quick-witted and optimistic. When he runs out of food, 
he simply starts growing potatoes in his own vacuum-packed faecal matter. That 
kind of thing.

I wonder if filming The Martian made Damon contemplate his own 
resourcefulness. Would he be good in a similar situation?

“Probably not, no. I have too many connections that matter to me. It might be 
fun for a day, you know, but no. I’d probably go a little bonkers.”

Even as a small boy, he never wanted to be an astronaut, preferring instead 
the world of superheroes. When he was growing up in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
with his older brother Kyle, his mother would put out a dressing-up box and he 
would choose either a red or blue floral towel, safety-pinning it round his 
neck like a cape. The red towel was for Superman. Blue was for Shazam, the 
teenage hero of a 70s TV series who could transform into Captain Marvel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443024983901%2Fe2980837-a57c-46ff-af36-0f398ef60c5d-966x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Damon%3A%20'You're%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Damon%3A%20%27You%27re%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443024983901%2Fe2980837-a57c-46ff-af36-0f398ef60c5d-966x2040.jpeg>
 Family man: with his wife, Luciana, whom he met while filming in Miami in 
2003. Photograph: Taylor Hill/FilmMagic 
“That was how I broke my ankle,” Damon recalls. “When I was three, I climbed 
to the top of the jungle gym in my Shazam cape and I shouted ‘Shazam!’ And I 
tried to fly and I fell.”

He remembers his stockbroker father, Kent, running across from the other side 
of the playground to come to his aid and what stuck in Damon’s mind was not the 
pain in his ankle but the way his father was running – like an athlete, with 
pumping arms and a long, fluid pace.

“I remember afterwards, when I healed, months later, trying to jog [like him]. 
So I would jog pumping my fists to the ground. I was trying to ape the 
movement, but I wasn’t quite pulling it off.” He shakes his head, laughs.

He was three, he’d just broken his ankle, but Damon’s focus was already on how 
another person was behaving and how he could best mimic it.

His parents later divorced and the boys lived with their mother, Nancy 
Carlsson-Paige <http://www.nancycarlssonpaige.org/>, a university professor 
specialising in early education. Apparently, she always knew he was going to be 
an actor because of his love of costume and role-playing, and his ability to 
entertain himself for long stretches of time.

But Damon found fame as one-half of a long-term collaboration. Ben Affleck was 
his childhood best friend – the two of them met when they were eight and 
attended the same high school. Damon went to Harvard, Affleck to the University 
of Vermont, but both dropped out before getting their degrees and worked 
together on the script for Good Will Hunting, which drew on their own 
experiences growing up in Cambridge. The script was bought by Castle Rock in 
1994. Three years later it became a huge critical and commercial success 
starring Damon as undiscovered genius Will Hunting, with Affleck as his 
childhood friend, and Robin Williams as the psychologist who helps Hunting come 
to terms with his talent.

“I laughed the entire time we wrote,” Damon says now. “It was a really joyful 
experience.” He was less enamoured of his sudden celebrity. “You wake up one 
morning and the world is entirely the same and you know, actually, all the 
things that mattered yesterday are the same today, except the world is forever 
going to be a totally different place for you,” he says.

“That’s the mind-fuck and it takes a few years to even get your head around 
what’s happening… I remember my brother said: ‘How are you doing?’ And I was, 
like, ‘I’m the fucking same, but everyone else is different.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025348713%2F9356e7da-aa22-4239-a4c2-869bc18f94a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Damon%3A%20'You're%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Damon%3A%20%27You%27re%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025348713%2F9356e7da-aa22-4239-a4c2-869bc18f94a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘I laughed the entire time’: with Ben Affleck, his Good Will Hunting 
co-writer. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
He credits his “really solid childhood” with getting him through. But for 
people who lack a support network, or whose fame reaches absurdly overblown 
levels, it is a different story. We are meeting almost exactly a year after his 
Good Will Hunting co-star, Robin Williams, took his own life. Williams suffered 
from severe depression. I ask Damon if he worries about the pressures fame can 
put on an individual’s mental health.

“Of course,” he says quietly. “Peter Farrelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/29/movie-43-peter-farrelly-twitter>, 
who is a friend of mine, the director, he was talking about suicide and he said 
something really lovely, which was: ‘Whenever that happens to a friend of mine 
[suicide], I feel like they’re just in a house on fire and they have to get 
out.’ I hoped that it [Williams’s death] could lead to a wider discussion about 
mental health because if somebody that incredible and wonderful – just such a 
light – could be living with that, hopefully it could give other people 
permission to talk about this to people around them. So that at least something 
positive came out of something so horrible.”

It’s nice, talking to Damon. Unlike many actors, he answers questions with a 
reflective openness. There is a feeling that nothing is out of bounds. He is 
politically engaged – a Democrat, but also a critic of Barack Obama (he has 
spoken out about Obama’s education policies and questioned the legality of 
drone strikes) and says he’s deeply worried about the chasm between rich and 
poor in America in the aftermath of the economic crisis.

When I was three, I climbed to the top of the jungle gym in my cape and 
shouted ‘Shazam!’ I tried to fly and I fell

“That anger did not go away because none of these guys [the bankers] got 
prosecuted and they all have our money, and these houses in the Hamptons they 
live in – that they claim to have earned – are paid for with our money. I mean, 
that’s what happened! And so, I don’t know what the consequences for that kind 
of thing are.”

He maintains a steady eye contact and has a dry sense of humour. When I ask, 
in the middle of a discussion about directors, whether he would ever consider 
being directed by Affleck, he replies deadpan: “Sure, if the right thing came 
along.” Pause. “I mean, he usually gives himself the main role in the thing 
he’s directing, so it would need to probably be a two-hander.”

He says that when picking projects, he is entirely guided by the quality of 
the director: “That’s all that matters in film. The rest of it is utter 
bullshit. A mediocre director will ruin a great piece of material.” Has he 
worked with mediocre directors in the past? “Yes.”

He won’t name names. But for every big-budget blockbuster he has been attached 
to, Damon has put in a quieter, more complex performance in films like Anthony 
Minghella’s The Talented Mr Ripley or The Good Shepherd, directed by Robert de 
Niro, or Martin Scorsese’s The Departed. In 2013, he starred as Liberace’s 
lover, Scott Thorson, in the Steven Soderbergh television drama film Behind the 
Candelabra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025570210%2F4ac5f6ba-4164-4346-b32f-69f098ca6f02-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Damon%3A%20'You're%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Damon%3A%20%27You%27re%20a%20better%20actor%20the%20less%20people%20know%20about%20you%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmatt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025570210%2F4ac5f6ba-4164-4346-b32f-69f098ca6f02-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘Such a light’: On Robin Williams, pictured above with Damon in Good Will 
Hunting. Photograph: Allstar 
Damon was a straight man playing gay. Is it harder for actors to be openly gay 
in Hollywood? “I’m sure. When Ben and I first came on the scene there were 
rumours that we were gay because it was two guys who wrote a script together.”

Really?

“I know. It’s just like any piece of gossip… and it put us in a weird position 
of having to answer, you know what I mean? Which was then really deeply 
offensive. I don’t want to, like [imply] it’s some sort of disease – then it’s 
like I’m throwing my friends under the bus. But at the time, I remember 
thinking and saying, Rupert Everett was openly gay and this guy – more handsome 
than anybody, a classically trained actor – it’s tough to make the argument 
that he didn’t take a hit for being out.”

He thinks attitudes are changing, and welcomes the introduction of same-sex 
marriage in California in 2008. “I think it must be really hard for actors to 
be out publicly,” he continues. “But in terms of actors, I think you’re a 
better actor the less people know about you period. And sexuality is a huge 
part of that. Whether you’re straight or gay, people shouldn’t know anything 
about your sexuality because that’s one of the mysteries that you should be 
able to play.”

So is Matt Damon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mattdamon> just a normal 
guy, adept at pretending to be mysterious? I don’t think so. He’s cleverer than 
that: he’s worked out that the appearance of averageness affords the greatest 
opportunity for privacy and creative space.

How would he describe himself as an actor? There is a long pause. “I don’t 
know,” he says. “Subtle, hopefully.”

The arms though. The arms give him away.

The Martian is out in the UK on 30 September 
 