
Home is at the heart of our most enduring and powerful tales: it's where 
Odysseus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/30/odyssey-soldier-afghanistan-military-homer>
 sails back to and it's why Dorothy follows the Yellow Brick Road. I found it 
at 28 Barbary Lane: a fictional address as resonant to many as 221b Baker 
Street, in a fantasy house that feels real, peopled by characters so beloved 
they're family – better than family.

Armistead Maupin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/09/fiction.armisteadmaupin> began 
Tales of the City in 1976 – the year I was born. Told from multiple 
perspectives at a breathless pace it was first published as a newspaper serial, 
and featured real news: the Jonestown massacre, the rise (and fall) of the 
Moral Majority and even the Queen's visit to San Francisco in 1983. It was 
among the first fiction to tackle Aids. Nine novels later, Maupin has written
The Days of Anna Madrigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/22/days-anna-madrigal-armistead-maupin-review>
 – what he claims is the last instalment (he's said that before – please let 
him be fibbing again). Heart-warming and heart-breaking,Tales takes us from 
1976 to 2012, from shared landlines to Facebook, from Quaaludes to Molly 
(MDMA), from the fringe to the mainstream. If you've somehow missed the 
multi-million-selling seriesturned mini-series 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4R9CbBUoViY> turned musical by the Scissor 
Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/02/armistead-maupins-tales-of-the-city-review>
 let me tell you how very jealous of you I am.

You're about to meet the most fascinating people in the most fantastical 
place. Situated at the top of some wooden stairs on a fairytale lane in Russian 
Hill, 28 Barbary Lane is a boarding house ruled by the mysterious Mrs Madrigal. 
It's here that all the central characters live, love, grieve and from where 
they eventually leave. Mrs Madrigal calls her tenants her "children", her 
"logical family". To read the books is to join that family – doubly appealing 
for anyone escaping their own.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4R9CbBUoViY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4R9CbBUoViY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4R9CbBUoViY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading on mobile? Watch Tales of the City Part 1/Chapter 1 here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4R9CbBUoViY>

It all begins with Mary Ann Singleton, the blond Cleveland refugee played to 
Panglossian perfection in the mini-series by Laura Linney. She is innocence 
personified in a pleated sailor dress, a midwestern secretary seduced by San 
Francisco. Let's just say she changes – a lot. The first character she meets is 
Michael "Mouse" Tolliver, a romance-addicted gay boy-next-door, and one of the 
truest gay characters ever written. Then there's the studly, liberal straight 
man Brian Hawkins, who quit law when he ran out of good causes and became a 
waiter while working the city's odds to his favour: a tameable fox. The 
ringleted far-out Mona Ramsey is on a quest to find herself when the answer is 
right beneath her coke-dusted nose. Finally, there is the kaftaned all-seeing 
mother – Mrs Madrigal. Her "Wedgwood blue eyes" keep watch on all comings and 
goings, yet she hides more than anyone. Seemingly incidental characters include 
the married-socialite-turned-lesbian-communist Ms Dede Halcyon-Day, the 
terrifyingly normal Norman Neal Williams and Jon Fielding, fiction's hottest 
speculum-slinger. And now, withThe Days of Anna Madrigal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/26/armistead-maupin-days-anna-madrigal-review>
, it's all coming to an end.

Or is it? Consider this your spoiler alert. Our old favourites, and some new 
ones too, decamp to the Burning Man festival in the Nevada Desert. Mouse, who 
dubs it "a Fellini carnival on Mars", has grown from twink to bear, as all gay 
men must. Now a settled sixtysomething, he's married to a much younger man 
called Ben and fears Burning Man won't have sofas, but goes anyway because he's 
Mouse. Even as a thirtysomething I identify with his move from all-night 
dancing to all-night box sets. Mrs Madrigal, now 92, warns: "Your regrets, my 
dear, are all about the things you didn't do." She's there, of course, getting 
more like Blithe Spirit's Madame Arcati by the minute. This orgy of 
self-discovery is the perfect place for yet more secrets to out. I sobbed for 
the last 30 pages but not, perhaps, for the reason you'd expect. My favourite 
scene is a very hot and very sweet threesome with Mouse, Ben and a beautiful 
youth dressed as a satyr. It is Mouse finally accepting, and getting off with, 
his younger self, but it is somehow not as narcissistic as it sounds.

Handing a newbie the keys to 28 Barbary Lane is one of life's simplest joys – 
like Mrs Madrigal taping a joint to Mary Ann's door on her first night. It's a 
way of reaching out, of saying "You're not alone" and also asking "Are you like 
me?"  

"The house was on Barbary Lane, a narrow, wooded walk-way off Leavenworth 
between Union and Filbert. It was a well-weathered, three-story structure made 
of brown shingle. It made Mary Ann think of an old bear with bits of foliage 
caught in its fur. She liked it instantly."
 Damian Barr at home in Glasgow 
So did I. Shingle seemed impossibly exotic to a 14-year-old in a pebble-dashed 
council house in a village outside Glasgow. Then I was terrified of being 
myself, of being different, of being the only one. If this thing called Aids 
didn't get me then my Granny Mac would find out what I was up to with my best 
pal Mark and that would be that. I grew up not just gay but tall, speccy and 
scarecrow-skinny, the child of divorced parents from opposing sides of a 
sectarian divide. We all have our differences to bear, Maupin knows that. He 
celebrates them for us – especially when we can't.

I will never forget chancing on Tales in a Virgin Megastore in Brighton – 
Britain's answer to San Francisco. In life, as in the book, coincidences are 
never just that. Flicking through, I felt a flash of recognition that drove me, 
flushed with shame, to snatch it up lest it disappear. Over six million readers 
have done the same since the first title was published in 1978, making Maupin's 
series one of the bestselling ever. I've yet to meet the person who doesn't love
Tales – though there are envious critics who dismiss them as froth and bigots 
who condemn them as filth. It would be like meeting the person who doesn't like 
chocolate.

Tales features all kinds of minorities and in the later titles gender-queer 
characters take up the reins of radicalism let go by Mouse and co as they 
win the big battles while growing older and comfier. But the books aren't 
minority interest. "Tales is inclusive," says novelist Patrick Gale 
<http://www.galewarning.org>, one of Maupin's close friends and author 
of a biography of him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/16/my-hero-armistead-maupin-patrick-gale>
. "Other books were written in the ghetto for the ghetto and were all sex, sex, 
sex and if they aspired to be literary it was sex then suicide. Maupin's gay 
characters were among the first to have jobs and friends and lives."

Pity the poor gay fledgling that first walks into James Baldwin's Giovanni's 
Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/17/1000-novels-gay-lesbian-fiction>
. To avoid funny looks from the village librarian, I got on a bus to find a 
copy ofEdmund White's A Boy's Own Story 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/97/09/14/reviews/1355.html>, which I'd heard 
about on something I shouldn't have been watching on BBC2 late one night. 
White's coming-of-age novel thrilled me – but it was dark. It didn't offer much 
hope. I occasionally stumbled across gay sex in the horror books I devoured but 
if the characters enjoyed it they were the first to get 
slashed/bitten/possessed. It wasn't looking good for me in fiction.

"Fiction is about trying on different identities," says Gale. "Tales invites 
you to be straight or gay or a bit of both, or even a 93-year-old transsexual. 
To live another life."

Long before the idea of a gay best friend became a cliche, Maupin explored the 
unique friendship between straight women and gay men. Mona's greatest fear is 
becoming a fag-hag. Maupin acknowledges the mutual ambiguities. Either could 
meet their Prince Charming and abandon the other but, even when he comes along, 
they choose to stay. InMary Ann in Autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/20/mary-ann-autumn-armistead-review>
, the penultimate book in the series, it's a much older, wiser Mouse that a 
divorced, moneyed Mary Ann turns to when she gets cancer. He is HIV positive 
but has been saved by the cocktail of drugs that came too late for so many. 
Together they survive. Heather, my high-school girlfriend, held my hand through 
my first gay breakup and gave a reading when I finally married my boyfriend 
Mike last summer. Together we survive.

In Further Tales of the City <http://www.armisteadmaupin.com/BooksFTOTC.html>, 
published in 1982, Maupin maps amity between gay men and straight men – terra 
incognita still. In a typical moment, just when you think it'll all be ok, 
Michael and Brian are gay-bashed and Brian is stabbed three times. For all 
their sunny outlook the books are full of shadows. In hospital Michael cries: 
"They had even less reason to attack him than me. But he got the worst of it." 
His boyfriend Jon counters: "'Goddammit, Michael! How dare you talk like that? 
Brian doesn't think that. Mary Ann certainly doesn't. You're the biggest 
homophobe in the family. What the hell does gay have to do with anything? You 
taught me everything I know about being happy with myself.'"

And so I learned that I didn't deserve to be bullied either. Maybe men like 
Brian aren't always the enemy. Maybe I would find a friend, or even a 
boyfriend, to love and help me love myself.

"Mary Ann Singleton was 25 years old when she saw San Francisco for the first 
time. She came to the city alone for an eight-day vacation. On the fifth night, 
she drank three Irish coffees at the Buena Vista, realised that her Mood Ring 
was blue and decided to phone her mother in Cleveland."

That's how it all started when a new daily serial was launched in the San 
Francisco Chronicle. ButTales of the City did have an earlier incarnation. "The 
Serial", as it was first called, actually started two years before in 
the Pacific Sun, with an episode headlined "Social Hour At the Marina Safeway" 
in which a newly arrived Mary Ann meets a handsome local called Michael 
Huxtable. It ran for five whole weeks before the paper folded but Maupin was 
hooked, as were his readers. Two years later the Chronicle's editor was 
overheard at a cocktail party saying Maupin's serial was just the sort of 
"vulgar crap" needed to lure readers. The paper's society columnist rang 
Maupin, who braved the hard-drinking hard-faced editor and got hired. Other 
mooted titles included "San Francisco Stories", but Maupin chose Tales of the 
City saying: "It had a definite Dickensian ring to it." Indeed Christopher 
Isherwood exclaimed: "I love Maupin's books for very much the same qualities 
that make me love the novels of Dickens". 

He wrote six weeks ahead in chunks of about 400 words, which is what makes 
Tales, like A Tale of Two Cities, so addictive. Maupin is a master of the 
cliffhanger – quite literally in the first book, when Mary Ann is left holding 
Norman's clip-on tie as waves crash below. Once you start, you can't stop.

The serial went "viral" long before the term existed. Friends faxed clippings 
to those outside the circulation area. In 1985 British Customs seized aTales 
shipment destined for the Gay's the Word bookshop in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/01/favourite-bookshop-gays-the-word>
. I read the first books in secret and watched the mini-series with the volume 
turned down for fear of getting caught. Now I discuss the books with my mum. 
When Maupin tweeted me after reading my memoir,Maggie & Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408838068&guni=comp:%20r2:%20factbox%20trackable-component%20book:Position3>
: "Happy to have been there for you, kiddo!" I almost burst. Like Mouse, I 
couldn't imagine a happy ending: living in Britain's San Francisco with a cast 
of true friends, married to a man, in a society that no longer seems to hate me 
just for being myself.
 'Nobody goes to San Francisco hoping to stay the same' … Marcus D’Amico and 
Laura Linney as Mouse and Mary Ann in the mini-series of Tales of the City. 
Photograph: c.PBS/Everett/REX 
"Now they're beloved classics but to start they were hugely controversial," 
says Ken White, manager ofBooks, Inc in the Castro 
<http://www.booksinc.net/SFCastro>, still the gayest place on the planet. "I 
remember finding them shocking – I mean, nuns on roller-skates! I binge on 
every new title. We can't sell enough." Who's buying? "Mainly straight people 
because most gay people here have read them already – they're a rite of 
passage. Newbies send them to the folks back home as a kind of shorthand."  

White previously managed A Different Light 
<http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/A-Different-Light-gay-bookstore-in-Castro-closing-2374151.php>
, a gay bookstore just along from Harvey Milk's camera shop. It closed in 2011: 
"In a sense, our goal was always to put ourselves out of business – once you've 
created a market, then inevitably it becomes mainstream. Gay content just isn't 
a barrier any more." 

Not so in 1976. There are lots of coded references, such as Michael's 
insistence that his "friend" Robert, who Mary Ann tries to pick up, is "awful 
at hollandaise". I thought hollandaise was a sex act. Aged 14 I didn't yet 
speak the language of camp, but with Maupin's help I was learning fast. The 
dreaded diagnosis – "homosexual" – doesn't appear for well over a hundred 
pages. In the serial Michael didn't appear properly for six weeks. "His editor 
kept tabs with a wall chart," explains Gale. "There were two columns: one for 
heterosexuals and one for 'the others'. Armistead wanted to be entrenched 
before he took risks." 

Maupin, who turned up for the job interview in a blue blazer with brass 
buttons, hadn't come out at work or to his blue-blood southern family. A virgin 
until 26, he was closeted all through college where he studied, for a while, 
law. In the navy Maupin toured Vietnam, which would have pleased his great 
grandfather, the Confederate general whose statue still keeps watch in the 
square of his hometown of Raleigh. Maupin's father led the entire family out of 
church when the minister preached for integration and Martin Luther King. 
Maupin Junior then went to work for the notorious racist Jesse Helms.

He sums it up best himself: "When I dragged guys home from Polk Street to my 
little place on Russian Hill some of them were quite horrified to see a photo 
of me shaking hands with Richard Nixon. But soon after I arrived here, I 
started to put my flimsy conservative politics against the kind hearts and 
generous spirits in San Francisco and began to change. Once I'd forgiven 
myself, everybody else got a pass." Maupin later denounced Helms from the steps 
of the North Carolina State Capitol on Pride Day saying: "I've changed and he 
hasn't."

Maupin finally came out 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/books/2012/mar/12/armistead-maupin-tales-of-the-city> to 
his parents and the world in the Chronicle, when Mouse wrote a letter to his 
mother, who was crusading with Anita Bryant against "the homosexuals" back in 
Florida. Thousands have since used the "Dear Mama 
<http://paxromano.blogspot.co.uk/2006/06/for-gay-pride-month-armistead-maupins.html>
" template. Including me.

"Being gay has taught me tolerance, compassion and humility. It has shown me 
limitless possibilities of living. It has given me people whose passion and 
kindness and sensitivity have provided a constant source of strength. It has 
brought me into the family of man, Mama, and I like it here. I like it."

More recently, Maupin has said: "My only regret about being gay is that I 
repressed it for so long. I surrendered my youth to the people I feared when 
I could have been out there loving someone. Don't make that mistake yourself. 
Life's too damn short."

It's this compassion and openness to change that makes Maupin and Tales 
so special. And it is San Francisco that makes it all possible. The city isn't 
just a setting – it's a character.

As it is also in the new HBO drama Looking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/27/looking-hbo-recap-episode-two>
, which follows a group of friends, mostly gay men, looking for better work, 
nicer apartments and a reason to delete Grindr. Maupin loves the city and he 
loves Hitchcock, whose films famously plumb its darker side. The Tales 
mini-series is scored with spooky music. Watch that first opening sequence and 
it's easy to mistake Mary Ann for Kim Novak's character inVertigo. Maupin, like 
Hitchcock, is fond of a cameo and is featured writing at his desk, celebrating 
Mass in Grace Cathedral and leaving The Glory Holes.

A flock of green parrots honours us with a squawking fly-by on Telegraph Hill. 
"Right on cue," says Larry Rhodes, leader of the Tours of the Tales. "This city 
always gets it right."
 Damian Barr (bottom right) on the Tour of the Tales. 
I've finally come on a pilgrimage to 28 Barbary Lane, something I've wanted to 
do since I was 14. The end of the series seems a good time go back to the 
beginning. It's an unseasonably warm January day. There are 10 of us on today's 
tour, eight men and two women, of various sexualities. We've been walking up 
and down hills since meeting at the Buena Vista for Irish coffees at 9am. It's 
Larry's 60th and he has a walking stick but he's undeterred, running a couple 
of tours a year. We each have our own tale of theTales.  

"I'm so grateful to them," Larry says. "I knew I was gay when I was five but 
it took me 30 years to come to terms with it. One day a friend gave this book 
to me and that was that. Michael is kind of the gay everyman. He has the 
insecurities, the wishes, the victories. He gave me courage."

Rick Miller, Maupin's twinkly-eyed webmaster, is helping lead today's tour. He 
has the number 28 tattooed on his arm: "I identify with Mary Ann leaving the 
midwest and developing her 'logical' family. I feel her naivety and awkwardness 
and finally her confidence. I went to San Francisco shortly afterwards on the 
look-out for them all." As do thousands of others – the city recently awarded 
Maupina Silver Cable Car award 
<http://www.sanfrancisco.travel/media/San-Francisco-Travel-Association-presents-Silver-Cable-Car-Award-to-Armistead-Maupin.html>
 for tourism.  

It turns out one of the women on our tour could actually be Mary Ann 
Singleton. "I grew up in the midwest," says Catherine Heenan, the cheerfully 
blonde anchor-woman for San Francisco's kron4 TV channel. "Moving here from 
Milwaukee, the first inkling I had of what a colourful, quirky, fun place it 
was came when a friend handed meTales. I thought, 'If it's anything like this, 
I'm a happy woman'. That was 20 years ago. I've lured a lot of people here with 
those books."

But to where exactly? "That San Francisco has largely gone," says Don 
Romesburg, curator of the city'sLGBT Museum  <http://www.glbthistory.org/>and 
an associate professor at Sonoma State University. "For so many peopleTales is 
San Francisco, it captures this golden era dense with nostalgia. But the tech 
booms mean Mary Ann couldn't now just arrive with no savings or job and find an 
apartment on Russian Hill." Back then Maupin rented his little red pentshack 
atop 1138½ Union Street for just $175 a month. Now Mrs Madrigal has sold up to 
stockbrokers who've made 28 Barbary Lane look like "a five star B&B". The city 
of free love has passed laws banning public nudity, which men get around with a 
carefully hung sock.

"The city has always marketed itself as 'wide-open'," says Romesburg. "Until 
the 1990s bus tours took tourists to see the exotic Orient in Chinatown, 
Beatniks in North Beach then a drag show at Finocchio's Club. TheTales books 
are a valuable historical source but they don't just reflect the city and wider 
culture, they've helped change them."

Mary Ann's mother's reaction in that very first chapter tells us all we need 
to know:

"'You can't just … run away from your family and friends to go live with a 
bunch of hippies and mass murderers!' … Her mother began to cry. 'You won't 
come back. I just know it.' 
'Mom … please … I will. I promise.' 
'But you won't be … the same!' 
'No. I hope not.'"  

Nobody goes to San Francisco hoping to stay the same. "People, like Mary Ann, 
still come here to find themselves, to make themselves," says Ken White. 
"That's what San Francisco is." "It's Armistead's version of the city but it 
feels real," says Gale. "I always think if I just go into the right bar or cafe 
I'll suddenly fall into this circle of wonderful friends."

The Tour of the Tales  <http://www.toursofthetales.com/>takes us all over 
Russian Hill and Telegraph Hill from Dede's penthouse to Beach Blanket Babylon, 
from real-life locations to places in our imagination. The most important stop 
on our pilgrimage is Macondray Lane – the inspiration for Barbary Lane. You'll 
find it between Leavenworth and Taylor streets. You'll know it when you get 
there because you've been there before.

I'm almost out of breath as I arrive at the foot of those wooden steps. Up and 
up they stretch, reddish new planks contrasting with faded silver ones. As 
I ascend they creak – just a little. From the first landing I glimpse Alcatraz. 
Up another flight and I'm in a leafy urban canyon where lacy tree ferns tower 
and ivy clambers. Up ahead I can hear old friends laughing. They're waiting for 
me. Just a few more steps and I'm there, I'm home.

As Mrs Madrigal says: "You didn't choose Barbary Lane. It chose you."

• The Days of Anna Madrigal 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857521286>
is published by Doubleday. Damian Barr is the author ofMaggie & Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408838068>
(Bloomsbury, £14.99). He will be interviewing Armistead Maupin at his Literary 
Salon at the St Pancras Renaissance Hotel on 17 February. Amistead Maupin will 
be the guest at theGuardian Review Book Club 
<http://www.tabernaclew11.com/whats-on/events/15-feb-14-guardian-review-book-club-with-armistead-maupin-the-tabernacle/>
 at 6pm on 15 February at The Tabernacle, 35 Powis Square, London W11. Tickets: 
£12.
 