 Alan Clark liked to think of himself as the rakish cad - irresistible to 
women, politically astute, a man who, if not honest in his public life, was 
always honest in the scurrilous pages of his diary.
But a new TV documentary will this week paint a very different image of the 
politician who once admitted in court to being 'economical with the actualit√© 
'. The RealAlan Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> reveals 
a man who had a complex about his mother, told half-truths in his infamous 
diaries and was not rated by his closest political allies.

'He created a wonderful fiction that was called Alan Clark,' said his friend 
and Eton contemporary Anthony Blond. 'Totally honest, totally convincing, 
totally lovable. But he wasn't really any of these things.'

The most damaging parts of the programme centre on Clark's diaries, which were 
a publishing sensation when the first part was released in 1993. The second 
volume was published after his death last year at the age of 71.

Clark's brother, Colin, says one of the supposedly most moving passages in the 
diaries was embellished by Clark to cast himself in a better light. Friends and 
colleagues say that, far from being a brutally honest account of his feelings, 
the diaries were deliberately manipulated in the knowl edge that they would be 
published.

The disputed extract concerns the death of his father, Sir Kenneth Clark, who 
presented the seminal Sixties television series Civilisation .

In his diaries, Clark says he visited his father in hospital. 'I got hold of 
his wrist and said "Papa, I think you are going to die very soon. I've come 
back to tell you how much I love you and to thank you for all you did for me 
and to say goodbye".'

Colin Clark, who describes his brother as 'an upper-class Alf Garnett', says 
that in fact his brother, far from being tender and loving, was deliberately 
rude. 'Alan walked up to him and said "You're dying, Papa". My father looked up 
in a mournful way. "I've come to say goodbye", he bellowed at my father. I 
suppose to some extent there might have been an element of triumph. That was 
the end of that old threat.'

Close friends admit that the diaries are flawed. 'There is no doubt in my mind 
that these diaries were written to be published, so I expect that some of the 
bits were neatly trimmed up by Alan,' said Nicholas Soames, the Conservative MP.

His views are echoed by Robin Butler, the former Cabinet Secretary and one of 
the most powerful people when theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> were in government. 'I 
knew there were gaps,' Butler said. 'I knew from the very outset that the diary 
was selective.'

Clark's political career also comes in for attack. Soames dismisses efforts by 
Clark to write a report on the future of Britain's defence spending in 1990 as 
'based on some daft German plan from before the war'. Archie Hamilton, the 
Armed Forces Minister at the time, reveals that Margaret Thatcher thought the 
document was 'loony'.

Charles Powell, Thatcher's private secretary between 1983 and 1990, said 
Clark's efforts to flirt with Thatcher and prove that he was a loyal servant 
came to nothing. 'I don't think Margaret Thatcher ever gave a moment's 
consideration to putting Alan Clark in the Cabinet,' Powell says. 'Now, that's 
not what he believed, but I know that for a fact.'

A close friend of Clark, Enna Rudd, said he was obsessed by his mother, with 
whom he only had a distant relationship. She explains why Clark asked his wife, 
Caroline, to change her name to Jane. 'I thought it was a mother complex 
because his mother's name was Jane.'

Rudd confirms that Clark had a difficult relationship with his father. 'He was 
nervous of being with his father,' she said. 'He felt his father was more 
attractive to girls.'
 'RUDE': His brother, Colin, said Alan was 'an upper-class Alf Garnett' who, 
far from being tender and loving, was deliberately rude to their dying father.
 'LOONY': Margaret Thatcher is said to have branded Clark's 1990 report on 
defence spending 'loony'. Nicholas Soames said the report was 'based on some 
daft German plan from before the war'.
 'MOTHER COMPLEX': A friend claims Clark was obsessed by his mother and asked 
his young wife, Caroline, above, to adopt his mother's name, Jane

kamal.ahmed@observer.co.uk <mailto:kamal.ahmed@observer.co.uk>
 