
Theresa May adopted one of Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>’s slogans promising a country 
that works for everyone rather than a privileged few, as she made a one-nation 
pitch to be the new Conservative prime minister.

 Speaking just minutes before her rival, Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>, pulled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/conservative-leadership-andrea-leadsom-pulls-out-of-race>
 of the leadership contest, May echoed several of Miliband’s central themes 
from the2015 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015> about wanting to 
reduce inequality, crack down on tax avoidance and get tough on corporate 
irresponsibility. She said she wanted to speak to the country and not just the 
Conservative members who would vote for her.

Britain needs 'bloody difficult women', says Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/09/britain-needs-bloody-difficult-women-says-theresa-may-ken-clarke>
 In the hardest-hitting passage of the speech, she said: “We need a government 
that will deliver serious social reform – and make ours a country that truly 
works for everyone. Because right now, if you’re born poor, you will die on 
average nine years earlier than others. If you’re black, you’re treated more 
harshly by the criminal justice system than if you’re white. If you’re a white 
working-class boy, you’re less likely than anybody else to go to university. If 
you’re at a state school, you’re less likely to reach the top professions than 
if you’re educated privately. If you’re a woman, you still earn less than a 
man. If you suffer from mental health problems, there’s too often not enough 
help to hand. If you’re young you’ll find it harder than ever before to own 
your own home.”

 Her comments implicitly criticise the government of David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> for failing to do enough to 
deal with those areas of inequality, while contrasting with his andGeorge 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>’s relentless focus 
on the need for economic competence. “We don’t just maintain economic incidence 
and steer the country through challenging times but we make sure that everyone 
can share in the country’s wealth,” she said.

 However, it also chimes with Cameron’s intention to set out a new “life 
chances” strategy before heresigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
 following theEU referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>
 result.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-rise-of-theresa-may-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20of%20Theresa%20May%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-rise-of-theresa-may-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20of%20Theresa%20May%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-rise-of-theresa-may-video-profile&media=>
The rise of Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/11/the-rise-of-theresa-may-video-profile>
 May’s decision to tack to the centre was received as a risky strategy, given 
that herselectorate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/09/may-v-leadsom-could-tory-members-deliver-shock-to-westminster>
 of Tory members were older, more rightwing and pro-leave than the general 
public. However, within the hour, Leadsom had withdrawn on the grounds that 
there should be a prime minister in place as soon as possible, meaning May’s 
policies would never be put to the membership.

 After diagnosing problems with inequality of wealth and opportunity, job 
insecurity and high costs of living, May said the UK needed to improve its 
productivity, lower its energy costs, build more housing, start a new 
industrial strategy and help all of the country’s regional cities. She also 
backed more Treasury project bonds for new infrastructure projects.

 Moving on to the need to make businesses more responsible, May said she 
wanted employee representatives on company boards and to make shareholder votes 
about remuneration for bosses legally binding. “It is not anti-business to 
suggest that big business needs to change,” she said.

 May also attempted to reach out to those who voted to leave the EU. After an 
introduction by Liam Fox, a leading leave campaigner, she said: “I couldn’t be 
clearer. Brexit means Brexit. And we’re going to make a success of it.”
 