
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> says Donald’s 
Trumps comments about women are unacceptable, although she insisted she was 
“optimistic and positive” about the future of the special relationship between 
the US and UK.

The prime minister was asked to respond to a recording that emerged during the 
US election campaign of Trump bragging about using his fame to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
grope women without waiting for their consent.

Trump’s presidential campaign was plunged into crisis after a 2005 tape 
recording came to light, in which he bragged to TV host Billy Bush about 
groping women and that he could “grab them by the pussy” because of his 
celebrity status.


May was asked how the comments made her feel as a woman during an interview on 
Sky News. May said: “I think that is unacceptable but in fact Donald Trump 
himself has said that and has apologised for it.”

She went on to say that she was “optimistic” about her government’s 
relationship with the incomingTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>. “The special 
relationship we have with the US is an important relationship … I am optimistic 
and positive about the relationship.”

On Sunday, Trump confirmed he will meet May in the spring, praising the UK as 
a “very special” ally.

In a tweet <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805>, 
the US president-elect said he was looking forward to meeting the prime 
minister in Washington.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I look very much forward to meeting Prime Minister Theresa May in Washington 
in the Spring. Britain, a longtime U.S. ally, is very special!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> January 8, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> 
The comments follow speculation about the future of the “special relationship” 
between the UK and US once Trump is sworn in later this month.

After Trump won the US election in November, May was behind 10 other world 
leaders that he spoke to. The first UK politician he met was Ukip’s former 
leader Nigel Farage, who was picturedalongside the president-elect at Trump 
Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/12/nigel-farage-arrives-in-new-york-to-meet-president-elect>
 only days after the result was announced.

Negotiating a favourable trade deal with the US will be crucial as Britain 
leaves the European Union and tries to forge a new place in the global economy.

Last week, it emerged that May’s two closest aides, Fiona Hill and Nick 
Timothy, had visited Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
 to pave the way for a meeting between the May and Trump later this year.

Trump gave no further details of the proposed meeting but both sides have 
confirmed it will go ahead.
 