
McDonald’s is to scrap its controversial Luxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> tax structure in a corporate 
shakeup that means $1bn (£800m) of income from fast-food restaurants across 
Europe will flow through the UK instead.

The move comes 12 months after Brussels competition officials announced a 
state aid inquiry <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6221_en.htm> into 
the fast-food chain’s arrangements in Luxembourg, where franchise and royalty 
fees from across Europe have been pooled for the past seven years.


In a statement, McDonald’s said: “The change will result in the creation of a 
unified structure located in the UK with responsibility for the majority of 
royalties received ... outside the US.”


The reorganisation comes as European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> investigators continue 
to look into allegations that the group received a sweetheart deal from the 
Grand Duchy’s tax office in 2009. They are examining whether the deal amounted 
to illegal state aid, generating huge tax savings for the US group.

McDonald’s and Luxembourg have denied suggestions the restaurant group 
received special treatment. Nevertheless, the US multinational has decided to 
unwind its Luxembourg tax structure.

At the heart of the controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/03/eu-confirms-major-investigation-into-mcdonalds-tax-deals>
 is a Luxembourg subsidiary called McDonald’s Europe Franchising Sarl (MEF). 
From 2009, this became the group’s lucrative royalties-earning business in 
Europe. Independent franchisee firms and other companies within the McDonald’s 
group pay MEF more than $1bn a year for “the right to use McDonald’s restaurant 
system and related intellectual property”.


Latest accounts for MEF show it made a pretax profit of $536m last year, but 
paid tax of just $3.8m. That is an effective rate of 0.7% – well below 
Luxembourg’s headline tax rate of 29%.


Among the largest payments to MEF come from McDonald’s own restaurant 
operating companies across Europe. Last year, McDonald’s main UK businessearned 
revenues of £1.53bn from its restaurants 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/01002769/filing-history>, but was 
also charged royalties of £123m – equivalent to a third of its operating profit.


These royalty fees dramatically lowered UK taxable profits so that the 
company’s eventual tax charge for 2015 was £56m.

In a statement on Thursday, McDonald’s said Britain’s exit from the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> was not a factor in the US group’s 
decision to return its European royalties business to the UK, where it had been 
before 2009.

“The reasons for changing the location ... were sound before Brexit and remain 
so beyond it,” the company said. “These strengths are unlikely to change.”

How much tax the new UK business is expected to make is not yet known and may 
depend heavily on how much it is charged by other companies in the McDonald’s 
group for loans or the use of intellectual property.


The fast-food group’s tax structure in Luxembourg uses some of the complex 
cross-border arrangements that have attracted widespread criticism from 
politicians around the world. In October last year,G20 leaders agreed a radical 
overhaul of international tax rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/oecd-hopes-reforms-will-end-era-of-aggressive-tax-avoidance>
 designed to stamp out such loopholes.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, a thinktank for 
developed economies responsible for drawing up the revisions, has estimated 
that, even on conservative assumptions, large global businesses were shifting 
profits and eroding the tax receipts of economies around the world at a cost of 
$100bn-$240bn (£65bn-160bn) a year – equivalent to between 4% and 10% of global 
corporation tax revenues.

Luxembourg was exposed as one of the most popular jurisdictions for tax 
avoidance planning two years ago after hundreds of confidential tax deals it 
had awarded to big businesses were leaked. These revelations, known as the 
LuxLeaks scandal, laid bare the extent to which the Grand Duchy was helping 
firms access tax rates of 1% or lower.

Two former employees of accountancy firm PwC were convicted last year of theft 
and violating Luxembourg’s professional secrecy laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/luxleaks-pwc-antoine-deltour-avoids-jail-but-is-convicted-of-theft>
over the document leak. They received suspended sentences, but prosecutors are 
pursuing an appeal against that decision, which will be heard next week.

The whistleblowers have also lodged an appeal, arguing the trial judge had 
failed to properly consider how their actions had been taken in the public 
interest. They are asking the appeal court to overturn the convictions.

 