
Corporate multiplex weepies can do strange things to your emotions. The 
effective ones – andMe Before You (Warner, 12) is certainly one of those – 
tickle your tear ducts without mercy for the two hours you sit with them. The 
second they’re over, however, you care not a whit about the plastic people 
you’ve just watched love, cry and/or die, and you’re principally thinking about 
what to have for dinner. Thea Sharrock’s vastly popular film provedmildly 
controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/me-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied>
 for its sympathetic view of euthanasia in the face of disability, but it’s not 
an issue film. For better or worse, it’s entirely wrapped up in the subjective 
personal yearnings of its petal-faced young lovers, so dewily played bySam 
Claflin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/25/sam-claflin-interview-i-hate-being-offered-heart-throb-roles>
and Emilia Clarke that you wind up rooting for their prettiness in the absence 
of other clear human dimensions. There’s scarcely a thing I believe about the 
contraption, yet there I was, wiping salt water from my face anyway: it’s been 
crafted, timed and scored to sell out your better instincts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F453902c637db24e3597888c06c635680d20aeec6%2F0_280_5146_3087%2F5146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F453902c637db24e3597888c06c635680d20aeec6%2F0_280_5146_3087%2F5146.jpg>
 ‘A big deal on the festival circuit’: Mediterranea. Photograph: Rex 
Shutterstock 
My head can more easily back up the feelings that Mediterranea (StudioCanal, 
15) stirred in me. Among the finest and flintiest in the recent spate of films 
tackling the European migrant influx, Jonas Carpagnino’s serenely confident 
debut (not a documentary, though there’s little narrative varnish here) tracks 
two friends from Burkina Faso as they make a new life in Italy, sparing us no 
complication or point of frustration in the adjustment process. It’s not 
expressly political film-making: Carpagnino invites viewers to consider his two 
subjects (beautifully played by Koudous Seihon and Alassane Sy) not as symbols 
or statistics, but as lively, imperfect people in even less perfect 
circumstances: amid the broader crisis, they bicker, bruise and rock out to 
Rihanna. Deservedly a big deal on the festival circuit last year, it’s quietly 
slipping straight to DVD here.

StudioCanal’s giving the same low-key treatment to Shelley (StudioCanal, 18), 
also well worth rescuing from the shelf: Iranian director Ali Abbasi’s 
Danish-set film is a refreshingly humane, slow-simmering spin on the often 
lurid pregnancy-horror genre. Soberly following the eerie fallout when a 
wealthy liberal couple employ their immigrant maid as a surrogate, the film 
adds all manner of complex social stitching to its velvety atmospherics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5e707a3f8b7d0972f75ec99d71b507675aa0944%2F269_0_2503_1502%2F2503.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5e707a3f8b7d0972f75ec99d71b507675aa0944%2F269_0_2503_1502%2F2503.jpg>
 ‘Turgid corned-beef hash’: Duncan Jones’s Warcraft: The Beginning. Photograph: 
AP 
It’s already among the bigger flubs of a bleak summer for blockbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/aug/09/summer-blockbuster-season-bad-box-office-suicide-squad>
, so I shan’t spend too much time telling you what you’ve already heard about 
Duncan Jones’s optimistically titled video-game adaptationWarcraft: The 
Beginning(Universal, 12): a turgid corned-beef hash of multiple familiar 
fantasy realms and aesthetics, it might just be the most biliously ugly film 
ever to cost £125m. I’m not going to make any great claims forRace (Spirit, 
PG), but it’s a film with some time for beauty. A diverting if overly 
smooth-sanded Wiki-biopic of trailblazing Olympic athlete Jesse Owens, the film 
gazes in gilded awe upon his aesthetic prowess, though invites more questions 
than it perhaps expects to answer when a half-formed subplot semi-celebrates 
Hitler’s favourite film-maker Leni Riefenstahl for doing the same at the 1936 
Munich Olympics.

Two of this week’s re-releases are rather special. The Criterion Collection’s 
latest addition is a double bill:The Emigrants/The New Land (Sony, 15) gives 
bright new life to Swedish director Jan Troell’s ravishing yet largely 
unromanticised 19th-century family saga of a Småland clan journeying to 
Minnesota. Though they met with Oscar-approved crossover success in the 1970s, 
the films seem to have fallen out of fashion a bit among cinephiles, but their 
stately muscularity has aged very well. Meanwhile, the Quay Brothers, the most 
spookily singular force in stop-motion animation, get the Blu-ray retrospective 
they deserve in the short film omnibus setInner Sanctums – Quay Brothers: The 
Collected Animated Films 1979-2013 (BFI, 15) – which includes, beyond the 
obvious and treasured content, a new, short Christopher Nolan documentary on 
the duo’s curious workings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe000027b77744801187a6ca70fe7fbbb6b12915d%2F0_269_2650_1591%2F2650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Me%20Before%20You%3B%20Mediterranea%3B%20Shelley%3B%20Race%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fme-before-you-mediterranea-warcraft-the-beginning-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe000027b77744801187a6ca70fe7fbbb6b12915d%2F0_269_2650_1591%2F2650.jpg>
 Max von Sydow and Liv Ullmann in Jan Troell’s The Emigrants. Photograph: 
www.ronaldgrantarchive.com 
Netflix’s drive towards having 50% original content 
<http://variety.com/2016/digital/news/netflix-50-percent-content-original-programming-cfo-1201865902/>
 is gathering pace. This week saw the online release not just of Ava DuVernay’s 
eagerly awaited race-relations study13th – see below for Wendy Ide’s take on 
that – but also the premiere ofThe Siege of Jadotville, which dramatises the 
eponymous colonial-era siege in the Congo, as Irish UN troops battled Katangese 
rebels in 1961. Richie Smyth’s film offers a light grounding of measured 
political context before launching into rousing gung-ho territory – anchored 
sturdily by Jamie Dornan who, after this and the recentAnthropoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/anthropoid-review-jamie-dornan-cillian-murphy-ss-general>
, has probably had his fill of bullet-pocked standoffs for a while. Thinly 
scripted but technically hale-and-hearty, it’s a slab of action history that 
looks entirely cinema-ready.
 