
So closely are some of the giants of 20th-century literature associated with 
alcohol that modern readers might be forgiven for thinking a serious booze 
habit was once the equivalent of a degree in creative writing from the 
University of East Anglia. It’s not surprising that alcohol permeates the work 
of writers such asKingsley Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis>
,Ernest Hemingway <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway> and 
Dorothy Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/08/dorothy-parker-international-womens-day-deidre-sullivan>
. They were writing about what they knew.

In many of the short stories in Shaken and Stirred: Intoxicating Stories 
(Everyman Pocket Classics), a drunken incident is the motor of the narrative. 
For example inAlice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>’s “An 
Ounce of Cure” a lovestruck teenager gets paralytic while babysitting and 
becomes an outcast at school, “but there was a positive, a splendidly 
unexpected, result of this affair: I got completely over Martin Collingwood”. In
Frank O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/23/brief-survey-short-story-frank-o-connor>
’s “The Drunkard”, a boy’s disastrous encounter with a pint of porter prevents 
his father going on a long-anticipated drinking spree. Both stories pivot on 
alcohol: the effect in Munro’s is cathartic; in O’Connor’s, it’s a reversal of 
fortune (peripeteia, if you want to get all technical.)

Fictional detectives spend time in bars not because they like drinking but 
because that’s where they find information

Shaken and Stirred also features an extract from The Lost Weekend by Charles R 
Jackson, another one of literary America’s great boozers. Drink enables Jackson 
to show us the innermost thoughts of the protagonist, Don Birnam, a failing 
writer. After a few glasses of rye consumed in a bar, he starts to daydream of 
literary success. He veers between giddy optimism and neurotic self-doubt. 
Without the drink, it would seem clunky, but having his thoughts come out in a 
progression of alcoholic intoxication draws the reader in. “Suddenly, 
sickeningly, the whole thing was so much eyewash” he thinks after another 
drink. Something all writers and daydreamers can sympathise with, not just 
drunks.

Alcohol <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> is particularly useful 
for crime writers. Fictional detectives spend a lot of time in pubs and bars 
not just because they like drinking but because that’s where they pick up 
information, and one of the novelist’s problems is finding something for 
characters to do when they are thinking or engaged in conversation. Giving them 
a drink and a cigarette makes it appear natural. Drink oils the cogs of the 
plot.

A good example occurs in Raymond Chandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondchandler>’s The Long Goodbye. Private 
investigator Philip Marlowe meets a character called Lennox in a bar. Lennox 
explains his problems with his wife and we learn that she is terrified of 
something. Soon afterwards she is found dead. If they had this conversation on 
the street, it would look staged. In a cafe it wouldn’t work either. Alcohol 
has to be around so that it seems natural when characters open up and tell 
stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f13068bb57f8c82f7559c4bd128d74d8baa7d9%2F0_0_1862_1340%2F1862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Measure%20for%20measure%3A%20a%20history%20of%20booze%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Measure%20for%20measure%3A%20a%20history%20of%20booze%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f13068bb57f8c82f7559c4bd128d74d8baa7d9%2F0_0_1862_1340%2F1862.jpg>
 ‘Like the last unicorn’ … Jeremy Irons and Anthony Andrews try to outdo each 
other in ITV’sBrideshead Revisited (1981). Photograph: Allstar/Granada 
Part of the reason fictional detectives have drink problems is because it 
gives them an air of mystery. Think of Rebus inIan Rankin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianrankin>’s novels or Sam Spade in Dashiell 
Hammett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/dec/16/reading-group-dashiell-hammett-maltese-falcon>
’s. Cocaine serves a similar purpose in theSherlock Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/11/sherlock-holmes-exhibition-museum-london-dispelling-myths>
 stories. Detectives solve crimes but they are also trying (and always failing) 
to solve themselves. Addiction is outward evidence of their inner turmoil.

In Hangover Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/06/patrick-hamilton-hangover-square-world-slide-abyss-rereading>
 by Patrick Hamilton, drink is synonymous with mental illness. Written in the 
1930s, it is set in a grim, smoky Earl’s Court. The hero, George Harvey Bone, 
is hopelessly in love with Netta, one of the great monsters of English 
literature. The more he drinks, the more he is prone to moments where a switch 
flips in him and he sees clearly that he must murder her and move to 
Maidenhead. When these episodes strike, the narrative on the page is disrupted, 
reflecting Bone’s mental disintegration: “He still had the gin bottle in his 
hand. Watching her carefully, he held it by the neck behind his back. Now! Now!
Now! he thought.”

The drink of choice in Hangover Square is gin, which is a byword for a 
particular kind of British frustration. It’s tied up with boarding houses, 
borrowing money, dead ends, broken dreams and unhappy pubs. Think of the works 
ofGraham Greene <https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene> or Julian 
Maclaren-Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/07/dj-taylor-rereading-julian-maclaren-ross>
. The gin-soaked colonial type is a fixture of English fiction. Here is Flory, 
the hapless hero of George Orwell’s novelBurmese Days 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/15/t-magazine/myanmar-george-orwell.html>: “I 
can never get it into my servant’s head thatsome people can exist without gin 
before breakfast.” Orwell’s description of the taste of Victory gin inNineteen 
Eighty-Four is a masterclass in squalor:

It gave off a sickly, oily smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured 
out nearly a teacupful, nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a 
dose of medicine. Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of 
his eyes. The stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one 
had the sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. The 
next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world began to 
look more cheerful.

Alcohol can also perform the opposite function, however. In Hemingway’s A 
Farewell to Arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/26/farewell-to-arms-hermingway-adaptations>
, the constant listing of drinks such as marsala, cinzano, asti spumante and 
martini, serves as a reminder that there was a normal life before the war and 
will be afterwards. For Charles Ryder in Evelyn Waugh’sBrideshead Revisited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/27/evelynwaugh.fiction>, “this 
Burgundy seemed to me, then, serene and triumphant, a reminder that the world 
was an older and better place …”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0026715c7b87b41859faa440c0851c6c43452fa6%2F0_1237_4000_3877%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Measure%20for%20measure%3A%20a%20history%20of%20booze%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Measure%20for%20measure%3A%20a%20history%20of%20booze%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fhistory-booze-books-brideshead-revisted-james-bond-orwell-wodehouse-poe-fleming-hamilton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0026715c7b87b41859faa440c0851c6c43452fa6%2F0_1237_4000_3877%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘Reminder of normal life’ … Ernest Hemingway pouring himself a gin in 1948. 
Photograph: Archivio Cameraphoto Epoche/Hulton Archive 
In the same novel, alcohol plays a less benevolent role, as a weapon in the 
snob’s arsenal during a scene in which Ryder has dinner in Paris with Rex 
Mottram, an arriviste Canadian businessman and his love rival. Ryder orders a 
cognac that is dismissed by Mottram as “the sort of stuff he puts soda in at 
home. So, shamefacedly, they wheeled out of its hiding place the vast and 
mouldy bottle they kept for people of Rex’s sort. ‘That’s the stuff,’ he said, 
tilting the treacly concoction till it left dark rings round the sides of his 
glass.” Waugh wants us to see Mottram as a vulgarian and Ryder as a man of 
taste, but also reveals his own prejudices.

Of course, the ultimate boozy status‑seeker is James Bond. This is from Casino 
Royale <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/26/features.review2>:

Bond insisted on ordering Leiter’s Haig-and-Haig “on the rocks” and then he 
looked carefully at the barman. “A dry martini,” he said. “One. In a deep 
champagne goblet. Three measures of Gordon’s, one of vodka, half a measure of 
Kina Lillet. Shake it very well until it’s ice cold, then add a large thin 
slice of lemon peel. Got it?”

Here’s a man who knows what he wants and how to get it. We’re meant to admire 
Bond, I think, for his discernment but you could just see him as a bit of bore. 
It’s only a short leap to the horrendous characters in Bret Easton Ellis’s
American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
:

“Van Patten,” I say. “Did you see the comp bottle of champagne Montgomery sent 
over?”
“Really?” Van Patten asks, leaning over McDermott. “Let me guess. 
Perrier-Jouët?”
“Bingo,” Price says. “Non-vintage.” 
“Fucking weasel,” Van Patten says.

In Poe's story, Montresor lures his rival down to a deep cellar and bricks him 
up behind a wall

Wine connoisseurship features in two stories in Shaken and Stirred. In Edgar 
Allan Poe’s 1846 story“The Cask of Amontillado” 
<http://xroads.virginia.edu/~hyper/poe/cask.html>, Montresor lures a rival, 
Fortunato, down to a deep cellar with the promise of old amontillado sherry, 
much prized in the 19th century. Along the way, Montresor gets Fortunato drunk 
and bricks him up alive behind a wall. The plot ofRoald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>’s short story “Taste”, meanwhile, 
hinges on identifying a rare Bordeaux, but the real amusement comes from the 
pretensions of the wine taster: “a prudent wine … rather diffident and evasive 
but quite prudent”, he says. In a famous scene inBrideshead Revisited, Ryder 
and Sebastian Flyte try to outdo each other with their descriptions of a wine:

“It is a little, shy wine like a gazelle.”
“Like a leprechaun.”
“Dappled, in a tapestry meadow.”
“Like a flute by still water.”
“… And this is a wise old wine.”
“A prophet in a cave.”
“… And this is a necklace of pearls 
on a white neck.”
“Like a swan.”
“Like the last unicorn.”

The miseries of the morning after are even richer ground for comedy. Though PG 
Wodehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>’s description of the 
aural pain of the hangover in “The Man Who Gave Up Smoking” will surely never 
be bettered: “The noise of the cat stamping about in the passage outside caused 
him quite exquisite discomfort.” But the best hangover description in 
literature comes from Kingsley Amis’sLucky Jim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/15/lucky-jim-kingsley-amis-classic>:

The light did him harm, but not as much as looking at things did; he resolved, 
having done it once, never to move his eyeballs again. A dusty thudding in his 
head made the scene before him beat like a pulse. His mouth had been used as a 
latrine by some small creature of the night, and then as its mausoleum. During 
the night, too, he’d somehow been on a cross-country run and then been expertly 
beaten up by secret police. He felt bad.

Whatever you want to do in fiction, alcohol can help: move the plot forward, 
or provide comedy, tragedy, explication, or a window into a character’s soul. 
Chandler once wrote that, if you’re stuck writing a novel, “have a man come 
through a door with a gun in his hand”. But having a drink in his hand might 
work even better.

• Empire of Booze: British History Through the Bottom of a Glass 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/empire-of-booze.html> by Henry Jeffreys is 
published by Unbound.
 