
Thousands of deaths from heart disease and stroke could be prevented if 
everybody ate a Mediterranean diet, a major study of the UK’s eating habits has 
shown.

The health benefits of the Mediterranean diet, rich in olive oil and fruits 
and vegetables, are well-known, but the study is the first to look at it in the 
real world of the UK. Gathering data about eating habits among nearly 24,000 
people in Norfolk over an average of 12 to 17 years, the researchers found that 
12.5% of heart attack and stroke deaths that occurred could have been 
prevented. In the context of the UK as a whole, that would be 19,000 deaths 
averted out of the 155,000 that occur as a result of heart disease every year.

Dr Nita Forouhi, lead author from the Medical Research Council epidemiology 
unit at the University of Cambridge, said: “We estimate that 3.9% of all new 
cardiovascular disease cases or 12.5% of cardiovascular deaths in our UK-based 
study population could potentially be avoided if this population increased 
their adherence to the Mediterranean diet.”

What actually is the Mediterranean diet – and does it work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/02/mediterranean-diet-obesity-health-way-of-eating>
In spite of the name, the Mediterranean diet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/02/mediterranean-diet-obesity-health-way-of-eating>
does not have to feature squid, anchovies, hummus and pitta bread. It is 
descriptive, not prescriptive – taken to mean a diet that includes a lot of 
fruit and vegetables, olive oil, nuts, legumes, some fish and dairy and little 
red and processed meat. It usually includes a small amount of red wine.


The difficulty for the researchers was in pinning down how much of the diet of 
the participants in the study, which began in the 1990s, qualified as 
“Mediterranean”. After a considerable amount of work searching the literature, 
and with reference to theMediterranean diet pyramid produced by the 
Mediterranean Diet Foundation 
<http://mediterradiet.org/nutrition/mediterranean_diet_pyramid>, they worked 
out a way to score the food families consumed. The top possible score would be 
a diet with 15 Mediterranean elements. They found the maximum score among their 
participants was 13.1 and the lowest score was 3.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmediteranean-diet-could-prevent-19000-uk-heart-attack-stroke-deaths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816a87aee40cb4dba2ded1124fa0f90bdadd1288%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mediterranean%20diet%20'could%20prevent%2019%2C000%20deaths%20a%20year%20in%20UK'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmediteranean-diet-could-prevent-19000-uk-heart-attack-stroke-deaths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mediterranean%20diet%20%27could%20prevent%2019%2C000%20deaths%20a%20year%20in%20UK%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmediteranean-diet-could-prevent-19000-uk-heart-attack-stroke-deaths%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816a87aee40cb4dba2ded1124fa0f90bdadd1288%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 In spite of the name,the Mediterranean diet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/02/mediterranean-diet-obesity-health-way-of-eating>
does not have to feature squid, anchovies, hummus and pitta bread. Photograph: 
Teodora Djordjevic/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
They found that those with higher scores – more elements of the Mediterranean 
diet in their daily meals – were less likely to get heart disease and to die as 
a result of it after taking into account other problematic factors such as 
smoking, weight and physical activity.

Forouhi said one of the messages from their work was that the “superfoods” 
approach often promoted by society, advocating kale or certain types of berry 
for greater health, was not the answer. Nor was a focus on reducing single 
dietary elements like sugar or fat. “It is very much more a balance across the 
range of foods available to us,” she said.

Internal 'clock' makes some people age faster and die younger – regardless of 
lifestyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/28/internal-clock-makes-some-people-age-quicker-and-die-younger-regardless-of-lifestyle>
People who have have heart disease are already recommended to follow a 
Mediterranean diet in the UK. The new study shows it is helpful for everyone 
else as well, said Forouhi.

Dr Louis Levy, head of nutrition science at Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England, said: “The 
Mediterranean-style diet in this study is in fact similar to official UK 
advice, as shown in the Eatwell Guide. We also recommend cutting back on 
sugary, fatty and salty food and drinks and being mindful of calories to help 
protect your heart and general health.”
 