
Sri Lanka

Sarah Soysa: ‘Young feminists are considered to be an evil, scary threat’

Feminism is needed for teenage girls in Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srilanka>. Women, young people and 
transgender people are harassed and disempowered. Opportunities are taken away 
from them.

Sri Lanka has a particularly high teenage pregnancy rate. A Unicef study found 
that 6% of 14- to 19-year-olds in school and 22% of out-of-school adolescents 
have had sexual experiences. In response to this, and despite the fact that 
abortion is highly restricted in Sri Lanka,we launched the first ever safe 
medical abortion hotline, Ask Us 
<http://womenhelp.org/en/blog/561/new-safe-abortion-hotline-launched-in-sri-lanka>
. We share information on abortion-related issues through print materials, 
photo and postcard campaigns, research and blogging. We advocate for sexual 
rights at all levels, including within the school system.

I am a feminist because I believe all people have a right to make decisions 
and become leaders, and yet society is still controlled by patriarchal values.
 Sarah Soysa 
This problem was obvious at this year’s United Nations Commission on the 
Status ofWomen <http://preview.gutools.co.uk/lifeandstyle/women>. States 
decided upon policies affecting women, young people, and the queer community 
without consulting them.

Young feminists are considered to be an evil, scary threat; as a result we are 
completely excluded from decision making. Feminists are necessary to improve 
conditions for everyone. We should be respected and taken seriously.

Sarah Soysa is an advocate for safe abortion and a Frida adviser 
<http://youngfeministfund.org/2014/08/meet-our-new-advisors/>.

Romania


Mihaela Dragan: ‘Some Roma girls have to marry as young as 14’

Roma women and girls have to deal with the double discrimination of racism and 
sexism.
 Mihaela Dragan 
Some Roma girls from traditional communities have to marry as young as 14 or 
even earlier. Their virginity represents the honour of the whole family, and 
after marriage they are forced to abandon school and get pregnant.

If Roma feminists attempt to promote the idea of choice to teenage girls, 
leaders argue that early marriage is traditional, authentic and specific to 
Roma culture. They promote early marriage as a protective reaction against an 
anti-Roma discourse from outside. Some girls are leaving their communities and 
have to face a racist society that rejects them for being Roma.

For me as a Roma woman it was difficult to have a voice both in society and in 
the Roma community that I am part of. We need feminism because Roma women and 
girls are suffering abuse, and we need a larger movement to offer them 
solidarity and support.

Mihaela Drăgan is an actor and activist <https://delduma.wordpress.com/about/> 
who is based in Bucharest.

Kenya


Catherine Tito: ‘Patriarchal culture is deeply-rooted’
 Catherine Tito 
As a survivor of female genital mutilation (FGM), my personal experience has 
shaped my commitment to fight for the rights of girls. I have been labelled as 
an outcast because I have decided to reject patriarchal culture, but I have no 
regrets.


Young girls from the Maasai community still face the risk of undergoing the 
female genital mutilation ritual. This barbaric act has denied the young Maasai 
girls their bodily rights; their autonomy and integrity. Patriarchal culture is 
deeply-rooted and it is a huge struggle to change it.

Girls Re-defined, is a girls-led, girls-driven organisation that works in 
Narok County ofKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>. Our mission is 
to empower girls aged between 12 and 18 who are at risk or have survived FGM to 
rediscover and celebrate their wholeness, develop their self-confidence, and 
become agents of change within their own communities. We have slowly recorded a 
change in attitudes among traditional leaders in our community with regard to 
the abandonment of FGM practices.

My goal is to see more and more girls going to school and achieving their 
dreams. If the girls in my community can translate their dreams into a 
fulfilling life, then that is my joy. As a feminist, I believe that both boys 
and girls need to be given equal opportunities in society.

Catherine Tito works with Girls Re-defined 
<http://youngfeministfund.org/grantee-partners-2/grantees-sub-saharan-africa/>, 
an organisation which supports teen survivors of FGM.

Cambodia

Monyvann Nhean: ‘Families depend on young women for their income’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fmeet-the-global-feminists-changing-the-world-for-girls-from-kenya-to-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428929605237%2F1a092ace-9d64-48db-a108-8a56da5caae3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20feminists%20changing%20the%20world%20for%20girls%20from%20Kenya%20to%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fmeet-the-global-feminists-changing-the-world-for-girls-from-kenya-to-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20feminists%20changing%20the%20world%20for%20girls%20from%20Kenya%20to%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fmeet-the-global-feminists-changing-the-world-for-girls-from-kenya-to-egypt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428929605237%2F1a092ace-9d64-48db-a108-8a56da5caae3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Monyvann Nhean 
Cambodian teenage girls suffer from a lack of confidence when it comes to 
making life plans and choosing careers. Society does not empower them to pursue 
their goals. Girls need role models to encourage them, and access to 
information that can help them make the right decisions for their futures. This 
is why I started organising feminist talks and career mentoring sessions for 
teenage girls in high schools – I want girls to embrace their full potential 
and build leadership skills.

I want to ensure that girls in Cambodia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia> are not valued just for their 
virginity but as independent human beings. I want them to have the strength to 
make their own decisions and to shape their own destinies.

I invest a lot of my energy on teenage girls, especially with regards to their 
careers and safe migration. These are important issues for young women in 
Cambodia: families depend on them for the lion’s share of their income. When we 
can’t find jobs in our own country, we migrate in our hundreds of thousands to 
neighbouring countries. This has put many young women in unsafe working and 
travel conditions. Traffickers target us specifically.

I want to see the better implementation of policies protecting women’s rights 
to ensure we have the right to say yes or no to sex; have reproductive rights; 
freedom of choice; the right to political participation; and equal pay.

Monyvann Nhean is a member of Cambodia’s Young Women’s Leadership Network 
<https://newwaveskhmer.wordpress.com/2015/03/24/feminist-talk-on-respectful-on-womens-right/>
.


Armenia

Elvira Meliksetyan: ‘We are smeared as immoral women’
 Elvira Meliksetyan 
It is not easy to be a feminist in Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>. We are smeared as immoral women 
who are determined to destroy the nuclear family. The stigmas we have to deal 
with are not just annoying but dangerous: we constantly fear attack from 
extremists.

In Armenia, teenage girls are not given the opportunity to explore their 
desires and interests because our patriarchal society has already decided who 
they should love and what they should care about. They are expected to be 
modest and obedient daughters, who will go on to become caring mothers and 
obedient wives. This means teen girls are only exposed to a small set of ideas 
regarding what their futures should look like. They suffer from low 
self-esteem, a lack of self-awareness and are frequently stressed.

After surviving psychological abuse within a relationship, I decided to be 
part of the effort to stop gender-based violence going unpunished. But when 
girls try to break free from narrow stereotypes and do something different, we 
face opposition from both our families and communities. As with all women in 
Armenian society, exerting your rights comes at a cost.

We will continue our struggle for equal rights and opportunities for women and 
girls in Armenia, even though it can mean jeopardising our personal lives and 
well-being.

Elvira Meliksetyan is the communications and PR manager at Women’s Resource 
Centre Armenia <http://www.womenofarmenia.org/en/>.

Indonesia

Firliana Purwanti: ‘The pressure for girls to remain virgins does not allow 
open discussions about sex’
 Firliana Purwanti 
Sexual repression in Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> 
causes many problems for teenage girls around unplanned pregnancy, sexual 
violence, unsafe abortion and high maternal mortality rates. The pressure for 
girls to remain virgins until marriage does not allow open and honest 
discussions between parents and children about sex; let alone discussions about 
consent and how to negotiate with partners around using contraception.


According to the Indonesia Health and Demography Survey of 2012 
<http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR275/FR275.pdf>, the teen pregnancy rate is 48 
per 1,000 pregnancies. Approximately2 million Indonesian women undergo 
abortions and 30% of them are teenagers 
<http://indonesia.unfpa.org/application/assets/publications/Executive_Summary_WPD_2013_(English).pdf>
. In 2010,unsafe abortion made up between 5% and 11% of Indonesia’s maternal 
mortality rate 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/08/24/why-indonesia-should-legalize-abortion.html>
. In Indonesia, safe abortions are highly restricted – permitted only for women 
in great danger or those who have survived rape, and even then abortion is only 
allowed when the pregnancy is less than 40 days old.

I question why Indonesian girls have to be virgins before they are married, 
when nobody cares about male virginity. I am a feminist because I question 
inequalities.

Firliana Purwanti is the author of The Orgasm Project 
<http://www.theorgasm-project.com/en/>.

Egypt

Ghadeer Ahmed: ‘Young girls have no right to make their own decisions’
 Ghadeer Ahmed 
In January 2012, the first anniversary of the 25 January revolution, I founded 
a feminist page on Facebook called Girls’ Revolution. It started as a Twitter 
hashtag, which I used to encourage girls to share their experiences of 
discrimination based on gender. I realised I was not the only girl who has 
discriminatory experiences.


In Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, once a girl reaches 
puberty she is forced to undergo FGM, forced to be veiled, and she starts to 
experience social stereotyping. Young girls are treated like dependants who 
have no right to make their own decisions. This prevents girls from being 
themselves and forces them to satisfy social expectations instead of pursuing 
their own dreams.

Until I made that Facebook group I had no idea about feminism. I decided to 
call myself a feminist because women have no freedom of choice, no authority 
over their own bodies, and are dominated by patriarchy. Sexual violence – in 
both public and private spaces, economic inequality between the sexes, social 
stereotyping and the political oppression of women are still huge problems in 
Egypt.

Ghadeer Ahmed is the founder of Girls Revolution 
<https://www.facebook.com/EgyGirlsRev>. 

Ruby Johnson and Devi Leiper O’Malley are co-directors at Frida/The Young 
Feminist Fund <http://youngfeministfund.org/>.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 