
Our story last week about the big changes to Radio National in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
 has sparked a great deal of anger from fans of the ideas network who fear 
management is dismantling the public broadcaster’s intellectual heart with cuts 
to specialist programming. This week there were emotional scenes at a meeting 
between staff and management as the changes – including giving a second program 
to conservative Tom Switzer and cutting most of the music programming – were 
discussed. Management team members were jeered when they claimed there was 
still music on RN because Fran Kelly played music on Breakfast. On Thursday 
staff passed a no-confidence motion against management – namely the architect 
of the changes, director of radio Michael Mason.

“The continuing erosion of specialist programming in music, features and 
religion is a serious breach of the ABC charter and a disservice to the 
Australian audiences that the ABC is funded to serve,” the motion said. “A 
systemic failure on the part of the senior radio management to genuinely engage 
or listen to the professional advice of Radio National staff about major change 
including the recently announced cuts to ABC jobs and programs.” The staff also 
slammed Mason’srecent introduction of a new layer of management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/veteran-broadcasters-condemn-abc-radio-restructuring-plan>
 with its “preposterously named executives” while reducing the number of actual 
program makers. A spokesman for the ABC said the changes to the line-up were 
made “to reinvest in new content rather than to cut costs” and staff 
consultation was continuing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmeet-fran-kelly-disc-jockey-abc-bosses-defend-their-music-cuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cc9dbf4a8cf48cb5911dbcc5320cf1846aab92%2F0_0_942_1280%2F942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Fran%20Kelly%2C%20disc%20jockey%3A%20ABC%20bosses%20defend%20their%20music%20cuts%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmeet-fran-kelly-disc-jockey-abc-bosses-defend-their-music-cuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Fran%20Kelly%2C%20disc%20jockey%3A%20ABC%20bosses%20defend%20their%20music%20cuts%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmeet-fran-kelly-disc-jockey-abc-bosses-defend-their-music-cuts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cc9dbf4a8cf48cb5911dbcc5320cf1846aab92%2F0_0_942_1280%2F942.jpg>
 Photograph: Crinkling News 
Crinkling catches on

 Since launching in April, Australia’s only national newspaper for children, 
Crinkling News <http://www.crinklingnews.com.au>, has enjoyed strong growth and 
an even stronger response from families and schools who have watched children 
fight over the weekly copies ($4.50) when they arrive in the mail and enjoy 
reading the news which is presented in a non-scary and non-boring format. The 
ABC’s long-runningBehind The News <http://www.abc.net.au/btn/> TV program is 
already operating in this space. As evidence it is here to stay, on Friday 
Crinkling News will become the first children’s publication to become a member 
of the Australian Press Council. Editor Saffron Howden, a former Fairfax Media 
journalist, says Crinkling News is a labour of love she set up to inspire kids 
to be involved in the world and to foster a love of reading and learning and 
writing. But this week came news that the Murdoch empirehad spotted an 
opportunity 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/special-features/news-in-education/kids-news-by-herald-sun-brings-news-into-the-classroom/news-story/f0960a4cc1bbfa279228945c15cd8a76>
 and was starting up something similar, launching a free online newspaper in 
2017. Howden is not deterred by the competition. “I am so proud our 
groundbreaking national newspaper for children has prompted a huge 
multi-national corporation to dabble in the same space,” she told Weekly Beast.

Keeping up with Karl

 If you keep an eye on the tabloids you may have noticed an inordinate amount 
of interest in the personal life of Today show co-host Karl Stefanovic. When 
news broke of his separation from his wife of more than 20 years, Cassandra 
Thorburn, it unleashed a seemingly endless stream of stories about the 
television journalist in the tabloids, the women’s magazines and of course in 
the insatiable Daily Mail. In what is an unusual trend for Australia it seems 
Stefanovic can’t move without it prompting a story: Karl Stefanovic’s 
impressive weight loss; Cassandra Thorburn is joining Sunrise; Sofia Levin 
denies romance with Karl Stefanovic and “The moment Cass found Karl’s phone” 
are just some of the recent headlines in Woman’s Day. Co-host Lisa Wilkinson 
has noticed this recent obsession with her TV partner, and labelled it lies. 
“There’s a lot of rubbish out there at the moment, a lot of lies,” shetold 
women’s news site Mamamia 
<http://www.mamamia.com.au/lisa-wilkinson-on-karl-stefanovic-divorce/>. “It’s 
been really interesting looking at weekly women’s magazines and seeing the way 
they operate in 2016. And seeing some of the online sites and seeing some of 
the lies they are happy to write.”

First Noel 

The Australian, under editor-in-chief Paul Whittaker, is proving itself no 
less enthusiastic a cultural warrior than under the paper’s veteran boss Chris 
Mitchell, who retired at the end of last year. This week Rupert Murdoch’s 
conservative broadsheet reporteda Noel Pearson speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/noel-pearson-says-abc-a-racist-broadcaster-that-is-willing-the-wretched-to-fail>
 in which he accused the ABC of being racist and then the day after assigned to 
the follow-up three reporters and a photographer to snap ABC chief Michelle 
Guthrie. Plus former ABC chairman Maurice Newman in a comment piece to reveal 
thatit wasn’t just the ABC that was racist 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/abc-sbs-guardian-and-fairfax-racist-says-maurice-newman/news-story/fb27d932f3155fcf4bb0bb05363959fa>
 but SBS, Fairfax Media, Crikey and Guardian Australia.

Even raisin toast is racist in Australia! First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/even-raisin-toast-is-racist-in-australia>
“It’s not just the ABC, it’s the left media, it’s the commentariat, it’s the 
elites who feel morally superior and think simply by throwing money at people 
that somehow or other they’re going to be cared for,” Newman wrote. In an 
editorial agreeing with Pearson’s claims, the Oz pointed to its infamous Bill 
Leak cartoon as evidence the paper took a different approach to all these 
racist outlets. “The ABC, while heavily focused on a human ‘rights’ agenda, 
tends to pay little attention to the importance of personal responsibility,” 
the editorial said.

Guthrie hit back, telling staff in her regular newsletter that while Pearson 
was a “respected spokesman” his comments were “incorrect and misplaced”. “The 
ABC is proud of its record in engaging with Indigenous communities and in 
delivering stories from these communities to the rest of the nation,” she said. 
The MD pointed to the cadet journalist program, the Indigenous staff summit and 
Indigenous leaders Sally Riley (drama), Stan Grant (news) and Lorena Allam 
(radio) as evidence of its ongoing commitment.

Before Four Corners

Kate Wild, the ABC’s former Northern Territory correspondent, won two 
much-deserved gold awards – one for excellence in Indigenous reporting and one 
for campaigning journalism –at the Northern Territory Media Awards on Friday 
<https://www.meaa.org/nt-media-awards/>. As we reported in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/26/abuse-of-teenage-prisoners-in-nt-detention-how-four-corners-got-the-story>
, long before Four Corners’ shocking vision of Don Dale sparked a royal 
commission, Wild had been reporting on the brutality of the Northern Territory 
juvenile detention system for years, including the gassing of children and the 
use of restraint chairs. “Her work truly generated palpable change which has 
resonated around the country,” the award judges said. Wild is also writing a 
true crime book about a young man with a mental illness who was shot dead by 
police.

Guardian Australia’s Northern Territory correspondent, Helen Davidson, who won 
best print/text news coverage at the awards, was similarly praisedfor her 
investigation on the crisis within the NT juvenile detention centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
– which also began well before the Four Corners expose. “Told through the eyes 
of an inmate, it demonstrated creative flair and a deep understanding of the 
issue, as did her ensuing pieces following the Four Corners footage outcry,” 
the judges said.

Pay (Weather)up 

 The Australian has been ordered to pay $100,000 to former Townsville Bulletin 
journalist Malcolm Weatherup whom the paper’s media diary editors, Sharri 
Markson and Darren Davidson, in 2014 referred to as “always under the 
Weatherup”.The long court case 
<http://archive.sclqld.org.au/qjudgment/2016/QSC16-266.pdf> was a particularly 
colourful one with the Oz calling witnesses in an attempt to show there was 
truth in their article’s imputation that Weatherup was “habitually 
intoxicated”. Appearing for the plaintiff, Bulletin journalist Simon Price told 
the court Weatherup was not always intoxicated and he was a good journalist. 
Price said he “never heard the plaintiff referred to as “Malcolm always under 
the Weatherup” and he never saw the plaintiff at work “apparently intoxicated 
or affected by alcohol”.

 The judge said the defence had not proved its case: “The evidence led by the 
defendant of the plaintiff’s consumption of alcohol fell well short of proof of 
a loss of control over physical or mental powers in the context of a 
disposition or tendency to be habitually so grossly affected.” He said 
Weatherup was “entitled to be compensated for the harm done to his personal 
reputation, for consolation for the personal distress and hurt caused by the 
publication and vindication to his reputation in light of the defamation. In 
the view I take the plaintiff is entitled also to be compensated by an award of 
aggravated damages.” Sources say with the combined legal costs, the defamatory 
paragraph is set to cost News Corp close to $1m.
 