
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> asked for 
Tony Blair’s help to overcome European commission opposition to a £800m TV 
deal, contradicting the media mogul’s assertion this week that “I have made it 
a principle all my life never to ask for anything from any prime minister”.

The minutes of a 1998 meeting between Murdoch and the then Labour prime 
minister while the former was working on a joint venture between Sky and BT 
reveal how Blair was urged to take action to help the deal proceed; and how the 
leader appeared keen to do so.

Rupert Murdoch: 'I've never asked any prime minister for anything'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/19/rupert-murdoch-ive-never-asked-any-prime-minister-for-anything>
Murdoch told Blair that “a concerted effort by the prime minister and [the 
then German chancellor, Helmut] Kohl could rein in the commission in this 
case”, according to the memo. The businessman added: “Sky’s own investment was 
very significant (£800m so far) and the success of the venture was crucial to 
their overall plans for developing digital services.”

Blair, the minutes show, said he was “instinctively sympathetic to what 
Murdoch was trying to achieve” and “offered to reflect on how best to approach 
the commission”. He added that he “would get our experts in Brussels to look 
into it and might take it up with Kohl”, according to the records written by 
Blair’s private secretary, Angus Lapsley.

Blair’s chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, and communications director, Alastair 
Campbell, as well as the Downing Street adviser James Purnell, who went on to 
become secretary of state for culture, media and sport, also attended the 
meeting.

Murdoch said on Monday, in a rare direct letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/19/rupert-murdoch-i-have-never-asked-for-anything-from-any-prime-minister>
, that he had never asked any prime ministers for anything on a point of 
principle.

He also denied ever having said: “When I go into Downing Street, they do what 
I say; when I go to Brussels, they take no notice” 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/anthony-hilton-stay-or-go-the-lack-of-solid-facts-means-it-s-all-a-leap-of-faith-a3189151.html>
. The remark was originally attributed to him by Anthony Hilton, the Evening 
Standard columnist who used to work closely with Murdoch when he was at the 
Times.

Murdoch’s attempt to claim he does not lobby prime ministers came after his 
US-based media empire,21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox>, launched a new bid for 
control of Sky. The merger will face the scrutiny of the British government and 
possibly the European commission.

Asked about the apparent contradiction, a spokeswoman for Murdoch’s News Corp 
said: “We’re not adding any comment.”

The minutes of the 1998 meeting were released under the Freedom of Information 
Act in 2008. They record Murdoch explaining to Blair that Sky’s joint venture 
with BT to offer interactive digital services was being investigated by the 
European commission and that the then European competition commissioner, Karel 
Van Miert, “had come up with a long list of complaints and the project was 
being delayed at huge cost”.

Murdoch told Blair “it would be useful to know more about the timescale for a 
likely commission decision”. After the meeting, Blair asked British diplomats 
in Brussels “to look into the current situation in the commission ASAP, and to 
advise on tactics”.

More than £11bn for Sky? Now that really is a premium package
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/18/sky-tv-11bn-premium-package-rupert-murdoch>
Finally, Murdoch told Blair “he was surprised that the UK regulators were not 
at one on the issue” of the joint venture and Blair responded by saying he 
would “look into what Oftel were saying to the commission”.

Murdoch is facing political opposition to his latest £11.7bn bid for full 
ownership of Sky. The pay-TV broadcaster is currently 39% controlled by Fox, in 
which the Murdoch family has a controlling interest.


Speaking in parliament on Tuesday, the former Labour leader Ed Miliband urged 
the government to block Murdoch’s bid, after a similar approach had to be 
withdrawn at the height of the phone-hacking scandal in 2011.

“The Murdochs are seeking to turn the judgment of this house, regulator and 
the country on its head. If it was wrong for them to own the whole thing in 
2012, it is wrong today.”

When the bid is formally tabled with the government, the culture secretary, 
Karen Bradley, will have a “quasi judicial” role and must decide whether to 
refer it to media and competition authorities.

Rival broadcasters have expressed concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/murdoch-sky-bid-competition-complaints-rights-deals>
 that Sky will dominate bidding for top-flight sporting events, TV shows and 
movies.

Murdoch’s 1998 meeting with Blair was not the first between the 
Australian-born Murdoch and a prime minister to discuss a major deal. It took 
30 years for details of a 1981 lunch between him and Margaret Thatcher at 
Chequers to emerge from the archives.

Murdoch requested the lunch, held on 4 January, to brief the prime minister on 
his bid for Times Newspapers. But he told the Leveson inquiry into the ethics 
and practices of the press in 2011 and 2012 that he could not recall the 
meeting.


Lord Justice Leveson concluded <http://leveson.robertsharp.co.uk/I/chapter5/> 
it was “perhaps a little surprising that he does not remember a visit to a 
place as memorable as Chequers, in the context of a bid as important as that 
which he made for Times Newspapers. However, perhaps that is all I need to say.”

Leveson commented on how “perceptions at the time and since of collusive 
arrangements between the prime minister and the preferred bidder are corrosive 
of public confidence”.

He said the note of the meeting, written by Thatcher’s press secretary, 
Bernhard Ingham, “is careful to record that Baroness Thatcher did no more than 
wish Mr Murdoch well”.

“Why then did Mr Murdoch seek an invitation to Chequers?” Leveson asked. “The 
prospective deal was plainly of great importance to him. He no doubt believed 
that there was real value in meeting the prime minister face-to-face, to inform 
her of his bid and his plans in the event that it was successful, and 
importantly, to form a personal connection. He would have expected to make a 
good impression on Baroness Thatcher; he would have known of her respect for 
risk-taking entrepreneurs and that they would have thought alike on the merits 
of turning around a troubled newspaper company with industrial relations 
problems.”

In 1976, Murdoch went to see Harold Wilson, the then Labour prime minister, to 
complain about a deal with unions on wage controls that was hampering him from 
switching to high-speed presses for the Sun and the News of the World.In a 
letter to Wilson, he said 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9707000/9707154.stm>: “Your good 
offices in this matter will be greatly appreciated.”

Theresa May met Murdoch in New York in September. The prime minister arranged 
to see him while she was visiting the United Nations general assembly.
 