
There’s one thing about Megyn Kelly’s move from Fox News to NBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/03/megyn-kelly-leaving-fox-news-to-join-nbc-news>
 that ought to alert news anchors all over the world. Kelly is famous for 
standing up to Donald Trump (and the allegedly roaming hands of her old boss, 
Roger Ailes). She’s no zealot. But what does that buy you in the TV world? 
Maybe a boost from $15m a year to something north of $20m. Certainly a leap in 
the dark from around 3 million viewers a night to an unquantifiable guesstimate 
on a daytime television magazine show. It’s enough to turn Lorraine, Sophy et 
al green with envy. But at least Megyn’s got a cast-iron reason for moving that 
no parent could question. She wants to spend more time with her children – and 
get paid royally for it.

Takeaway removes any news at 10

Think Saturday Night Takeaway meets James Corden’s Late Late Show. Then 
perhaps wonder what happened to ITV’sNews at Ten. Answer, for at least a trial 
run of weeks early this year: it will be shunted to 10.30pm asThe Nightly Show, 
Saturday’s roughTakeaway clone, goes Monday to Friday. More entertainment and 
audience-wooing in primetime. Less of Tom Bradby’s rather good impersonation of 
an American news anchor.

But one, ostensibly temporary move on ITV sets the tumbrils rolling elsewhere 
– notably on BBC2, where you can sense the old ambition to shuntNewsnight to 
11pm to make space for a “fun”, audience-holding riposte. Which, if it 
transpires, may be the first test of Ofcom regulation, not to mention the will 
of the BBC’s unitary board.

What’s the point of running the biggest newsgathering operation on the planet 
if there’s no prime spot for explaining the news day by day? It’s bad enough 
when Syrian peace breaks out over Christmas and there’s noNewsnight to set it 
in context – but why nag on about one of your reasons to exist as a public 
service if reacting to every ITV twitch is still the name of the game?
 