
Mel Gibson is to direct his first movie in eight years, the second-world-war 
drama Hacksaw Ridge,according to The Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/mel-gibson-andrew-garfield-talks-739221>
. The Amazing Spider-Man’s Andrew Garfield looks set to star in a film based on 
the true story of a conscientious objector who was ostracised for his refusal 
to carry a weapon, but won a US congressional medal of honour for his heroic 
actions on the battlefield.

Hacksaw Ridge <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hacksaw-ridge>, which Gibson 
hopes to shoot next year, is based on the life story of Desmond T Doss, a 
private in the US army who was drafted in 1942 and worked as a medic in the 
Pacific theatre. He was credited with saving the lives of 75 men during the 
battle of Okinawa after braving enemy fire while evacuating wounded soldiers 
near the front line. The Seventh-day Adventist was the first conscientious 
objector to receive the medal of honour, and was also handed two bronze stars 
and three purple hearts for his heroics. Doss was wounded by a grenade and shot 
by a sniper while working on the battlefield.

The project looks a perfect fit for the religiously minded Gibson. The 
Oscar-winning director’s 2004 film The Passion of the Christ was an enormous 
box office hit, taking more than $600m worldwide after attracting huge numbers 
of Christian filmgoers in the US. However, the film also drew accusations of 
antisemitism, charges that have dogged Gibson ever since.

The one-time Lethal Weapon star’s most recent film as a director was 2006’s 
Apocalypto. Since then, he has struggled to be taken seriously in Hollywood 
following an arrest the same year for drink driving which led to an antisemitic 
outburst towards the arresting officer. Two years ago the Hollywood 
screenwriter Joe Eszterhas accused Gibson ofsabotaging a planned film about a 
famous second-century-BC Jewish revolt for antisemitic reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/12/mel-gibson-jews-joe-eszterhas>, 
andthere have been a number of other alleged incidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/17/winona-ryder-mel-gibson>.

However, Gibson has since received support from high-profile friends Jodie 
Foster and Robert Downey Jr, respectively a two-time Oscar winner and the 
highest-paid actor in the world. He recently appeared as the villain in The 
Expendables 3, the latest instalment in Sylvester Stallone’s 80s-throwback 
action saga.
 