
John Fryer was the first journalist to drive through the Dartford Tunnel. 
Roddy Gilchrist watched a sub-editor wipe his nose with his copy. Trevor Bond 
wrote one of the all-time great headlines. Jill Palmer was sent home by her 
news editor for wearing thigh-high white boots. Ken Chandler got on well with
Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>... until he 
was fired.

Memories of journalistic days past came flooding back at last week’s reunion 
lunch for former staffers of the once-thriving, now defunct, east London weekly 
newspaper, the Stratford Express.

I was an interloper, given that I worked for a neighbouring title, the Barking 
Advertiser, but I did attend West Ham College along with Gilchrist, Fryer and 
Palmer.


I also spent several laughter-filled, drink-fuelled evenings in the Stratford 
Express’s “office pub”, the also defunct Two Puddings*, although I recall one 
very sad one: the night of 21 October 1966, when news of the Aberfan disaster 
reached us. No laughter. Little drink.

Reunions can be tricky affairs. This one was anything but. There wasn’t a 
single moment of silence as we looked back to carefree days on local papers 
before we went on to prosper on national newspapers in what turned out to be 
Fleet Street’s final era.

Sadly, two of the expected guests - Barrie Keeffe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barrie_Keeffe>, who left journalism to write 
plays and screenplays, such as The Long Good Friday, and Alan Pike, long-time 
Financial Times staffer - were unable to make it.

If they had, they would surely have found it as difficult as four us did to 
get a word in edgeways between Gilchrist and Bond, booming tellers of the best 
tales (some, possibly, even true).

It is more than 50 years since we first met each other and it was impossible 
for us not to lament the passing of the titles we worked for and, just as 
importantly, the superb training we had.

The Stratford Express, which covered a swathe of the East End, was renowned 
for its professionalism and produced countless numbers of journalists who went 
on to work for national papers.

It sold 80,000 copies a week at its zenith, moving Bond to claim that it was 
then the second highest-selling weekly in the UK. Sadly, its demise in 2011 
after being acquired by the rival Recorder group, passed without much notice.

The paper lives on only in the memories of its former staff and, as the 
stories tumbled out over lunch, it is clear they retain great affection for it.

It was particularly strong on sport, meaning football. When Bond, always 
Bondy, was appointed as sports editor he followed three luminaries:Norman Giller
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Giller>, Harry Miller 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-harry-miller-1469614.html> 
and Peter Lorenzo, who became a BBC sports commentator and then head of BBC 
Sport.
 Stratford Express, special edition, 31 July 1966 Photograph: Wilson & 
Whitworth 
West Ham was the major local team and it was Bond who was responsible for the 
iconic Stratford Express headline after England’s 1966World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> victory.

In recognition of the fact that the goals were scored by two West Ham players, 
Geoff Hurst and Martin Peters, and the team was captained by another Hammer, 
Bobby Moore, Bond’s headline said: “West Ham 4, W. Germany 2”.

Sure, nostalgia is always a comfortable form of relaxation. It is also very 
exclusive. If you weren’t there to share it, then there’s no real point to it.

But I am putting this lunch on the record not simply as a self-indulgence but 
to make a point about the value of a newspaper that trained so many journalists 
so well that they all went on to great things.

For the record, here’s what happened to the Stratford Express quintet after 
they had left the paper.


Gilchrist joined the Daily Sketch, which was merged in 1971 with the Daily 
Mail. On that title, he was successively reporter, New York correspondent, show 
business editor, news editor and, after a few more executive posts, became the 
Mail on Sunday’s deputy editor. He was also a schoolboy track star, becoming 
national junior 400m champion. He is now a travel writer.

Bond, who edited the Stratford Express 1965-69, then spent 12 years as sports 
editor of theSunday Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-telegraph> followed by 12 years as 
associate sports editor of the Mail on Sunday.

Fryer reported for both the Stratford Express and its sister title, the 
Romford Times, before subbing on the Daily Sketch andLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>. He then spent 13 
years as labour correspondent/editor with the Sunday Times before joining the 
BBC’s news division as labour correspondent, later business and industrial 
correspondent. He remains a media consultant.

Palmer, who joined the Stratford Express in 1964, left four years later to 
become a reporter with the London Evening Standard. In 1976, she joined the
Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>. Its news editor, 
Alan Shillum, had worked with her in Stratford and had promised, should he ever 
become news editor of the Mirror, he would give her a job. He stuck to his word 
and she spent eight years as a general news reporter followed by 19 years as 
the paper’s medical correspondent. She left in 2003.

Chandler spent five years at the Stratford Express. After a brief spell on the 
Singapore Herald, he subbed on the Sun until 1974, when he helped to found the 
National Star, a US title launched by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation. Eight 
years as managing editor of theNew York Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-post> were followed by four years 
as editor-in-chief of the Boston Herald. He returned to the Post in 1993, first 
as its editor-in-chief and then its publisher, leaving in 2002. He is now 
executive editor of Newsmax, a US-based news and marketing group.

*Tales of The Two Puddings  
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Tales-Two-Puddings-Eddie-Johnson/dp/0957209002>by 
Eddie Johnson (published in 2012 by Fifty First State Press) includes many 
references to the Stratford Express.

 