 I remember the very last interview I ever did of Alan Clark, shortly before he 
died. We were talking about what kind of people reached the top in politics. 
'Nice guys always finish last, don't they?' he drawled. 'That's what makes 
politics so irresistible.'
No one ever accused Alan Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-clark> of being a nice guy. And he 
would go out of his way to provide ammunition for his enemies.

But I wanted our documentary to reflect some of the sides of Clark that were 
not normally on public display. One device which I have used in other 
biographical programmes was to show him television film of his earlier life. 
Most politicians have strong views on television, but they rarely watch it. And 
there is nothing that stimulates natural reactions more than seeing one's 
younger self on the screen.

The first film we could find was a newsreel - which he had never seen - of his 
wedding. It had been taken because he was the son of Lord Clark, who had made 
the famous television series Civilisation. It was 1959 and Alan Clark was 30 
and was marrying someone much younger than he.

He was immediately captivated as he watched his slim bride emerge from her 
limousine: 'Oh, Jane looks absolutely lovely. I'm amazed at my luck in getting 
such a beautiful girl to marry me. Her dress is cut with a deliberately very, 
very narrow waist - because everybody assumed that we were getting married 
because she was pregnant age 16. And we thought we'll jolly well show them 
otherwise. God, that's me! I do look a dreadful prat - what a great waste of a 
beautiful girl.'

I had also done an interview with Jane, when Clark was not present and she had 
revealed that on their honeymoon in Positano, his former girlfriend had turned 
up. 'She was called Christina and she was quite nice actually,' said Jane. 'All 
the rest of his girlfriends have been pretty good rubbish since then. But I 
liked her. We could have had a Bu√±uel situation on the honeymoon and just done 
away with him. He was then and he is now an S-H-one-T, but I still think he's 
lovely.'

I had never made a film when my jaw would drop open so regularly in surprise 
at the interviewees' candour. Normally with politicians one has the opposite 
problem. I wondered what they would make of the film. As we were going to 
preview it to the press, the producer David Pearson and I agreed to show it to 
Clark before transmission. But only if he accepted he could make no changes.

He agreed and he came along with Jane to watch it in our Soho cutting room. No 
one made any comments during the viewing and we waited tensely for his 
reaction. But at the end he just sat there in silence - for seven minutes. None 
of us talked - we all instinctively knew he had to be the first person to 
speak. At last he said: 'Jane was the star of that, it wasn't me; she's never 
said any of that to me. It was like watching yourself naked on the screen for 
50 minutes.'

Some months later, Clark told me that he had been stopped in the street by 
what he called 'a dear old lady' who said she had seen the programme. Ah, Alan 
had said, Jane was the star, I was just the chief supporting actor: the dear 
old lady had replied 'chief supporting bastard you mean'.

Jane had not intended to appear in the programme at all. But on our first day 
of filming at Saltwood, the Norman castle where they lived, there was no sign 
of Alan. He had rung to tell Jane that he been delayed in London and might be 
down by lunchtime. She reluctantly agreed that we could film anything she 
happened to be doing in the castle grounds.

Eventually she emerged carrying an old cocoa tin full of grain to sprinkle on 
the lawns to feed their peacocks. She could see us filming her and we started 
chatting to her in the hope that she would agree to talk about her husband. I 
asked her about the peacocks. 'Oh, they're upper class vandals,' she replied. 
'Alan has a whole collection of vintage cars which he keeps highly polished and 
sometimes the peacocks see the reflection of their tail feathers in the car and 
they think it's a rival and they take off and attack the car. So all our cars 
get covered in blood and feathers. Whenever anyone asks about it I just make a 
joke about it and say we've driven through a charity cycle race.'

I could see that she had a nice black sense of humour so I suggested to her 
that Alan had certain peacock-like qualities - and that was the moment. Here 
was a woman who had met Alan when she was 14 and he was 28. He used to come in 
one of his vintage cars to take her out from the convent. And for the next 
three decades no one seemed to have asked for her views of him. And she started 
talking about him, leaning against a well and looking into the middle distance.

'Al sometimes says to me "would you like to be married to an old buffer?" And 
I say, "no, but I just wish you wouldn't have so many girlfriends". And he 
says: "you should be more French - French politicians have girlfriends and 
mistresses". So I say: "I am not French".

'I could quite cheerfully throttle him sometimes,' Jane went on, 'but I throw 
things instead. I did actually throw an axe at him once. As it whizzed through 
the air, I hoped it would cleave his skull in two. But it missed and I was 
quite glad my aim was very bad - because I do still love him.'

When I asked Alan Clark how he thought his wife had put up with his behaviour 
over the years, he replied: 'I suppose it's easier if you know the person loves 
you.'

People's reactions to the Clark film were more divided than over any other 
programme I've made. Women were particularly partisan. Some of them thought 
Jane was a disgrace to her sex and allowed herself to be a male chauvinist's 
doormat: others admired the way she had carved out her own life in the castle 
with the man she loved. One woman said to me: 'I suppose if I'd met Alan Clark 
I would have had an affair with him because he was funny and self-confident, 
but I would have hated myself for doing so.'

But Alan Clark was more than just a just a right-wing Tory cad. He had an 
original political mind - and his views were often unpredictable. For instance, 
he loved the Russians, yet hated the Americans. He was passionate campaigner 
against cruelty to animals and banned hunting on his estates.

As a Minister, Clark would greatly enjoy enraging both his political masters 
and his civil servants by stating the case for something in the most extreme 
terms. This was the only way, he felt, to force his colleagues to think outside 
the boxes of convention. And he consciously tried to give himself a sense of 
perspective about Westminster politics.

Eriboll, his estate in the far north of Scotland, helped provide it. Here he 
would climb the mountains and talk to the animals. 'Everything in politics is 
so instant, but here in the Highlands you can realise that we are all just 
grains of sand,' he told me. 'And it is here that I would like to have my heart 
attack - doing the ascent.'

Unlike most other people, Clark would talk openly about death and hideous 
illnesses. It was not that he was unafraid of death - it was his superstitious 
way of trying to ward it off. The last time I saw Alan Clark was just few weeks 
before he died nearly three years ago.

I complimented him on how spruce he was looking. He told me: 'I'm going to 
have lunch after this interview with Anji Hunter.' She was Tony Blair's top 
female adviser in No 10. And Clark was quite proud to be the only right-wing 
Tory with good connections to the New Labour Government. And no doubt Clark's 
own political indiscretion made him in turn a useful source of intelligence 
about the Tories for Anji Hunter.

When Alan Clark died, among those who paid tribute to him were Tony Blair's 
press secretary Alastair Campbell, who had once played the bagpipes on the 
battlements at Saltwood Castle. 'Labour spin doctors aren't meant to like Tory 
MPs,' said Campbell, 'but Alan Clark was an exceptional man.'

He was certainly not like the new generation of MPs, most of them umbilically 
linked to their pagers. Upper-class Tories with cruel good looks and rampant 
political incorrectness are now virtually extinct. But the political world is 
much less fun now that among the many Clarks in the Commons today, none is 
called Alan.
 