
I do my best, I really do, to avoid wallowing in nostalgia. But it is hard to 
avoid sometimes, especially when attending yet another memorial service at St 
Bride’s Church.

Yesterday, I was among the packed congregation that celebrated the life of 
Steve Turner, subeditor and union leader, whoI wrote about when he died, aged 
80, in May this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/16/steve-turner-the-man-who-founded-a-journalists-union>
.

Former Mirror group colleagues Dick Derwent and Andrew Golden spoke in their 
addresses of his remarkable qualities as a principled negotiator. Before each 
of their readings, Alastair McQueen and Pat Welland also paid handsome tributes 
to Steve.

During his favourite song, Part of the Union 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Part_of_the_Union>, which was beautifully sung 
by the choir, I noticed his widow, Debbie, singing along.

There were many veteran journalists at the reception in Fleet Street’s Punch 
Tavern afterwards and just by mingling with each other it was bound to stir 
memories.

I met a man I hadn’t seen since we were on the subs’ desk at the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> in Manchester in 1968. It 
transpired he had worked in the Far East and, after returning to Britain, had 
become a local newspaper publisher (he has since disposed of his titles).

Naturally, most of the throng were former staffers from the Daily Mirror, 
Sunday Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaymirror> and Sunday 
People. Wine and beer flowed, as did the reminiscences about a bygone age of 
hot metal, heavy drinking, light discipline, high expenses and low cunning.

We know the current generation of dry digital revolutionaries yoked to their 
computer screens are bored by our stories of a golden age. It can’t be anything 
other than irritating to hear of the antics of the retired cohort of former 
Fleet Streeters who benefited from a period of management largesse and 
effective union solidarity. But we can hardly apologise for that, can we?

For those who wish to share memories of Steve, and read what others have said, 
there is a book of remembrance atsteveturnermemorial.com 
<http://steveturnermemorial.com/remembrance/>.

Those were the days, part two...

By chance, when I got home from Steve’s memorial, I turned to the latest issue 
of The Oldie and came across a further reminder of theDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> of yesteryear and its 
influential editorial director, Hugh Cudlipp.

Conscious of the gap between the ruling elite and the working class, he was 
always eager to poke fun at the former while giving the latter - his paper’s 
readers - a chance to thumb their noses at their supposed elders and betters.

Cudlipp was especially delighted at the chance to embarrass Tories and 
following the Suez debacle in 1956, he found a way to ridicule the prime 
minister, Anthony Eden, who had decamped to Jamaica to lick his political 
wounds.


So the Mirror ran a “paradise holiday” competition. Whoever was adjudged to 
write the best 500 words on how to solve the Suez crisis would enjoy two weeks 
in Montego Bay.

There were 7,000 entries and the winner, Susanna Johnston, had described 
herself as a £6-a-week typist. True... up to a point, Lord Copper.

In fact, she was anything but a typical Mirror reader because Susanna was the 
21-year-old daughter of Sir Christopher Chancellor, general manager of the 
Reuters news agency.

Aware that her contest win had already been published on the front page 
Cudlipp allowed her to accept the holiday and, as she tells the tale in The 
Oldie, her exotic holiday exploits - water-skiing, surfboarding, fishing for 
tuna and so on - were recounted each day in the paper.

Anything Eden could have, so could a “humble” Mirror reader (although, unlike 
the prime minister and his wife, she did not get to stay with Ian Fleming, 
creator of James Bond).

On Eden’s final day on the island, the resourceful Mirror reporter, Barry 
Harding, smuggled Susanna on to the tarmac at Kingston airport and “had me 
snapped within inches of the pale prime minister and his glacial wife, as he 
gave me a toothy smile.”

Susanna was later joined by her 16-year-old brother, Alexander, who was then 
at Eton (as Eden had been). And, of course, Alexander is now editor of The 
Oldie.

In yet a further Fleet Street twist, when a calypso band serenaded him with 
“Happy birthday to you” to mark his 17th birthday in the dining room of the 
Sunset Lodge hotel, “scowling at the next table” was none other than theDaily 
Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> owner, Lord 
Beaverbrook.
 