
More than 100 members of the European parliament have signed a letter of 
support for two whistleblowers convicted by aLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> court of leaking information 
about secret tax rulings to journalists.

Antoine Deltour and Raphaël Halet were both convicted of theft earlier this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/29/luxleaks-pwc-antoine-deltour-avoids-jail-but-is-convicted-of-theft>
 after providing journalists with evidence that the rulings had helped 
multinational corporations slash their corporation tax bills to 1% or less.

Revelations from the so-called LuxLeaks prompted demands for reform of the 
international tax system following their publication in 2014 by media 
organisations,including the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
 and the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists.

However, Luxembourg pursued criminal charges against Deltour and Halet with 
the support of their employer, the accountancy firm PwC, which had arranged the 
agreements.

The MEPs used the letter to call for greater protection for whistleblowers at 
national and international level. “We can only but agree with judge Marc Thill 
who stressed in his deliberations that both of you should be considered as 
‘whistleblowers’ and that the facts which you exposed are of crucial public 
interest by virtue of their contribution to a more transparent and fairer tax 
system,”the letter reads 
<http://www.fabio-de-masi.de/kontext/controllers/document.php/215.9/d/1baa71.pdf>
.

Labour plans radical overhaul at HMRC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/labour-radical-overhaul-hmrc-tax-avoidance>
Tax rulings, also known as “comfort letters”, are a practice whereby national 
tax authorities issue guidance to companies on how their corporation tax will 
be calculated.

Although legal, the use of such rulings has become controversial following 
both the LuxLeaks reports and the revelation thatIreland allowed Apple to 
reduce its corporation tax liability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 for decades through its use of subsidiaries in the country. In 2014, the 
company paid a corporation tax rate of just 0.005%, according to Margrethe 
Vestager, the EU competition commissioner.

Fabio De Masi, the German MEP who organised the letter and vice-president of a 
committee investigatingthe Panama Papers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> criticised the 
Luxembourg authorities for also appealing against the acquittal of Edouard 
Perrin, a French investigative journalist accused of helping Halet.

“It’s absolutely absurd that a journalist who covered Luxleaks is being 
brought to court,” said De Masi. “This is a fundamental threat to press 
freedom. It’s his job to cover these issues.”
 