
La La Land and Streep dominate Globes

La La Land continued its seemingly unstoppable Oscars charge by winning a 
record-breaking seven awards at the ceremony in Los Angeles Sunday. Ryan 
Gosling and Emma Stone both took home awards for acting and Damien Chazelle won 
best director for the film. Moonlight took home best picture drama. One of the 
night’s biggest moments, though, sawMeryl Streep deliver a searing and 
emotional speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
, in which she criticized Donald Trump for imitating a reporter with 
disabilities and called on the press to hold power to account. “Disrespect 
invites disrespect, violence invites violence. When the powerful use their 
position to bully others, we all lose,” she said. Trump responded on Twitter, 
calling Streep a“Hillary flunky” and “one of the most over-rated actresses in 
Hollywood” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>
, before denying he mocked the reporter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&media=>
Meryl Streep attacks Donald Trump in Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
La La Land wins record seven Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-moonlight-meryl-streep>

Trump calls Streep ‘over-rated’ after Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/donald-trump-calls-meryl-streep-over-rated-golden-globes-twitter>

Trump ‘not denying Russia was behind hacking’

Trump no longer denies that Russia orchestrated a cyber-attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/russia-us-election-hacking-uk-intelligence>
 against Hillary Clinton’s campaign and her party, according to Reince Priebus, 
Trump’s incoming White House chief of staff. Priebus told Fox News Sunday the 
president-elect “is not denying that entities in Russia were behind this 
particular hacking campaign”. A declassified version of an FBI, CIA and NSA 
report on Russian interference in the election wasreleased on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
, asserting that Vladimir Putin “ordered” the operation to get Trump elected. 
Trump has not said whether he accepts the report’s “high confidence” 
conclusion. During the election, Trump sometimes contradicted and rejected 
statements made on his behalf by advisers. Priebus blamed Democrats for the 
breach; senior aide Kellyanne Conway falsely characterized the testimony of an 
intelligence chief to Congress, saying James Clapper, the director of national 
intelligence, testified “that any aspiration to influence our elections failed”.

Trump ‘not denying Russia was behind hacking’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>

‘A sad legacy for our hope and change candidate’

“The reign of Obama did not produce the nightmare of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” Cornel West writes for the 
Guardian. “But it did contribute to it. And those Obama cheerleaders who 
refused to make him accountable bear some responsibility.” In a searing op-ed, 
West discusses the outgoing president’s legacy regarding Wall Street, drone 
strikes, Black Lives Matter and education.

Pity the sad legacy of Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/barack-obama-legacy-presidency>

Native Americans fight Texas pipeline

Indigenous activists have set up camps in the Texas desert to fight the 
Trans-Pecos pipeline, the latest sign that the North Dakota Standing Rock 
“water protector” movement is inspiring Native American-led environmental 
protests across the US. The Two Rivers camp has attracted dozens of 
demonstrators in its first week to protest the the 148-mile project, which is 
on track to transport fracked natural gas through the Big Bend region to 
Mexico. “We’re going to follow the same model as Standing Rock,” said Frankie 
Orona, executive director of the Society of Native Nations and an organizer at 
Two Rivers. In an email, a spokesperson for the pipeline said construction was 
90% complete and defended its safety.

Native Americans fight Texas pipeline using ‘same model as Standing Rock’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/trans-pecos-pipeline-texas-protest-two-rivers-standing-rock>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Kim Kardashian West robbery: 16 arrested

French police have arrested 16 suspects in connection with the robbery of the 
reality TV star Kim Kardashian West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/03/kim-kardashian-west-robbed-at-gunpoint-in-paris-video-report>
 in Paris in October. The suspects, some reportedly well known to detectives, 
were picked up in coordinated early morning raids, most in the Paris region but 
also in Normandy and the French Riviera. Two were identified from fingerprints 
left at the apartment where Kardashian West was staying, after which they and 
their associates were put under surveillance.

Kim Kardashian West robbery: 16 arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/09/kim-kardashian-robbery-at-least-15-people-arrested>

Cyprus reunification talks enter ‘final stages’

A historic effort to end the division of Cyprus has begun in earnest as Greek 
and Turkish leaders resume reunification talks before a high-stakes 
multilateral conference, the first since the island’s partition 43 years ago. 
After 18 months of intensive negotiations to settle inter-ethnic divisions, 
Nicos Anastasiades and Mustafa Akıncı will attempt to finesse the details of a 
peace deal in Geneva by poring over maps and discussing territorial tradeoffs 
before tackling the potentially explosive issue of security. Because peace 
talks have floundered so many times, however, there is consensus that if they 
do so again reunification efforts could collapse once and for all.

Cyprus talks enter ‘final stages’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/talks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages>

Danger of exclusion in cashless society

More shops and transportation networks moving towards contactless card and 
touch-and-go mobile technology raises the possibility of humans no longer 
carrying cash. But what might the rise of the cashless city mean for street 
vendors, small merchants and the poorest inhabitants? Some experts fear a 
two-tier urban realm in which those on the lowest incomes become disconnected 
from mainstream commercial life by their dependence on traditional forms of 
currency.

The rise of the cashless city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/09/rise-cashless-city-contactless-payments-exclusion-cashfree-society>

NFL playoffs: Packers to face Cowboys

The Green Bay Packers beat the New York Giants 38-13 on Sunday, moving on to 
face the Dallas Cowboys. Aaron Rodgers, the Packers’ quarterback, overcame a 
sluggish start to finish with four touchdown passes – including one 42-yard 
Hail Mary pass to Randall Cobb at the end of the second quarter.

Packers headed for Cowboys after victory over Giants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/nfl-playoffs-green-bay-packers-new-york-giants-game-report>

... and finally: Shkreli suspended from Twitter

Martin Shkreli, the “pharma-bro” widely reviled for drastically raising the 
price of an HIV drug, has been suspended from Twitter for the alleged “targeted 
harassment” of journalist Lauren Duca. Shkreli messaged Duca asking her to be 
his “+1” at the presidential inauguration, made his cover photo a collage of 
photos of the journalist and changed his profile image to a doctored image 
appearing to show him sitting with Duca on a couch.

Martin Shkreli suspended from Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/martin-shkreli-suspended-from-twitter-for-alleged-harrassment-of-lauren-duca>


 