
In August, the day after Arsenal dazzled in defeating Manchester City 3-0 in 
the Community Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/10/arsenal-manchester-city-community-shield>
, Mesut Özil posted a selfie with Lukas Podolski and Per Mertesacker, the trio 
grinning in their new training kits. “The holiday was fantastic,” wrote Özil, 
“but finally back to Arsenal.”

The snapshot depicts the club’s three World Cup winners, high on life after 
the most memorable of summers. Arsène Wenger had given them an extended break 
followingGermany’s triumphant campaign in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 but reality would soon bite. The subsequent months were not kind to any of 
them.

Mertesacker has found the defensive going extremely tough to the point where 
he has been mauled by the critics. Podolski seldom played and his frustration 
propelled him towards a loan move to Internazionale. Özil endured a handful of 
lacklustre weeks and just as his poor form was becoming a cause célèbre he 
sufferedruptured ligaments at the beginning of October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/08/mesut-ozil-arsenal-injured-12-weeks>
.

He reappeared in the red and white jersey last weekend. The new year brought a 
new-look Özil. He trotted on to the pitch withArsenal in cruise control against 
Stoke, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/11/arsenal-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 3-0 up, and looked noticeably beefier. Wenger’s praise for the endurance work 
that marked his three-month rehabilitation – “he pushed his body to the limit 
of what you can absorb physically,” said his manager – appeared well-founded.

Could this bulked-up physique have a real impact on his game? A cameo at the 
end of a 3-0 home win that was fizzling out was not the ideal outing to judge 
but the question is a critical one in terms of perceptions of Özil theArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> player. After a curious 18 
months in England, which has left a lot of observers gently pushing him towards 
the pigeon hole where expensive disappointments are filed, he remains an 
enigmatic talent. Reconciling the subtle touches and graceful movement with 
that nonchalant body language and indifference to tracking back makes it tricky 
to weigh up his contribution.

Arsenal lose Mikel Arteta and Mathieu Debuchy to injury for three months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/15/arsenal-mikel-arteta-injury-three-months-out>
He had a strange year in 2014. It was sweet and sour. The German schemer is 
entitled to use the medals on the table argument but 2014 was also a year in 
which Özil’s game, and whether he is yielding the best from his skillset, came 
under scrutiny.

Last January, his honeymoon period after joining Arsenal for a club record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/02/mesut-ozil-arsenal-real-madrid>
 fee from Real Madrid was waning. In February he missed a penaltyagainst Bayern 
Munich in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/19/arsenal-bayern-munich-champions-league-matchreport>
 that had a traumatic effect and dented his confidence. Wenger felt compelled 
to speak out in defence of a player whose effort levels were under the 
microscope. “He’s not a guy who doesn’t care,” Wenger said. “His style can 
sometimes look like that but he’s really the opposite character.”

Arsenal have not yet seen Özil at his finest for a prolonged spell. He has 
decorated more games than he has designed but what now? Is he, as Wenger 
suggested last week, ready and hungry to become more fundamentally important to 
the way Arsenal play?

Part of a possible answer may lie with the player who has become Arsenal’s 
beacon. Alexis Sánchez is at the opposite end of the body language scale to 
Özil. Sánchez is like watching Action Man while Özil steps delicatelyout of 
Merchant Ivory <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merchant_Ivory_Productions>.

No one in their right mind should be expecting Özil to suddenly chase lost 
causes like a dervish but watching how Sánchez has thrown himself into the 
Premier League has provided an example. Özil needs to make it happen, rather 
than wait for it to happen for him in England. Wenger certainly hopes his more 
powerful physique is the key to that.

If a bolder, bulkier, perhaps even braver Özil can try to muscle in on the 
Premier League in a way he previously could not, even more chances could be 
coming Sánchez’s way. Not for nothing was Cristiano Ronaldo sorry to see Özil 
leave Real, grateful as he was for the multiple assists which came his way. If 
the frantic energy of Sánchez and the languid technique of Özil can be 
harnessed, the blend of qualities has the potential to make a big impression.

Strange though it seems, this £42.5m World Cup winner still has something to 
prove to the Premier League.
 