
Metro, the newspaper given away in British cities on weekdays, has climbed to 
second place in the circulation league by overtaking its stablemate, theDaily 
Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>.

ABC figures show Metro <https://www.theguardian.com/media/metro> achieved a 
Monday-to-Friday average of 1,480,187 copies in October, some 171,000 greater 
than the Mail and about 88,000 below the top-selling Sun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmetro-climbs-to-second-place-in-the-circulation-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1e759b685327b1218807670a6d0471b63e060bb%2F0_27_3264_1957%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metro%20climbs%20to%20second%20place%20in%20the%20circulation%20league&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmetro-climbs-to-second-place-in-the-circulation-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metro%20climbs%20to%20second%20place%20in%20the%20circulation%20league&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fmetro-climbs-to-second-place-in-the-circulation-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1e759b685327b1218807670a6d0471b63e060bb%2F0_27_3264_1957%2F3264.jpg>
 Moving up to second spot in the circulation table. Illustration: RG 
In all three cases, these are weekday figures. If the bumper Saturday sales 
achieved by the paid-for titles were included, Metro’s margin would vanish. But 
there is no denying its success.

It has been achieved because of the boost in distribution following its deal 
with bus companies. Thousands of copies were available on buses in the mornings 
aroundLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> last month, taking the 
total up to 896,845 in the capital.

That’s about the same as the number given away by the London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>. Clearly, if a free 
paper is available at the right moment - going into and coming home from work - 
there remains an appetite for print.

Despite Metro’s 9% fall in revenues and 12% drop in profits, as reported today 
by its owner, DMG Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/daily-mail-profits-print-mail-online-elite-daily-dmgt>
, its £15m profit looks rather healthy compared to many a national title. 
Advertising, as we all know, has fallen off a cliff this year.

The interesting feature of Metro’s content in a newspaper landscape dominated 
by opinion is its reliance on old-fashioned tabloid virtues: brevity, 
simplicity, readability.

It covers the news, but it does so without hectoring. It isn’t vulgar. It 
packs in several short, entertaining items. Sure, there is a lot of trivia and 
it isn’t the least bit intellectually challenging. But Metro doesn’t pretend to 
be anything it isn’t.

And, as a bonus, the occasional punning front page headlines are often much 
better than those in its red-top rivals.

It cannot be long, given the downward sales trend at the Sun, before Metro 
becomes the most read morning newspaper in Britain on weekdays. And that, of 
course, will improve its prospect with advertisers... if there are any left by 
then with enough faith in newsprint.


*In the original posting, it said the figures were unpublished. In fact, they 
were available on 17 November
 