
The Mexican president is under pressure to explain why a company associated 
with the country’s first high-speed rail contract owns a mansion apparently 
designed for the presidential family and described by his actor wife as the 
“real family home” in a society magazine interview.

The revelations, published on Sunday on the website of leading Mexican 
journalist Carmen Aristegui, have opened a new front againstEnrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enrique-pena-nieto>, who is already 
struggling to deal with the fallout from the disappearance and probable 
massacre of 43 students six weeks ago. Many observers claim the government’s 
long-standing tolerance of corruption is part of the background to the current 
security crisis.

The modernist white mansion boasts seven bedrooms, marble floors, a spa, a 
lift, an underground garage and mood lighting that can bathe the building in 
pink, violet and orange. Located in an exclusive neighbourhood ofMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City, it has been valued it at about 
$7m (£4.4m).

The crux of the investigation rests on the discovery that the mansion is 
registered under the name of Ingenieria Inmobiliaria del Centro, a company 
owned by Grupo Higa, which is also associated with the Chinese-led consortium 
that was awarded a $3.7bn contract on 3 November to build a high-speed rail 
link between the capital and the city of Queretaro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415649296321%2Ff284648a-7ae8-44a2-a853-69f7a70d0631-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexican%20president%20Enrique%20Pe%C3%B1a%20Nieto%20faces%20outcry%20over%20%C2%A34.4m%20mansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexican%20president%20Enrique%20Pe%C3%B1a%20Nieto%20faces%20outcry%20over%20%C2%A34.4m%20mansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415649296321%2Ff284648a-7ae8-44a2-a853-69f7a70d0631-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mexico’s president is embroiled in a scandal over a mansion with links to a 
Chinese-led consortium awarded the contract to build the first high-speed train 
in Mexico. Photograph: Hector Guerrero /AFP/Getty Images 
The government stunned investors last Thursday when it rescinded the contract, 
citing the need to address existing accusations of favouritism. These included 
complaints about the participation of Grupo Higa, which is headed by a personal 
friend of the president and, according to the Aristegui report, benefited from 
contracts worth $652m while Peña Nieto was governor of Mexico State between 
2005 and 2011.

The president’s office responded quickly to the revelations with a statement 
claiming that the president’s wife, Angelica Rivera, was in the process of 
buying the property from the company for an unspecified price. The house, it 
notes, is built on two adjacent lots that back on to a house already owned by 
Rivera, a popular telenovela actor who met Peña Nieto when she was contracted 
to promote his administration in the State of Mexico as he was preparing his 
presidential bid. The couple married in November 2010.

The statement said Rivera made a down payment of 30% in January 2012, almost a 
year before her husband became president and that “the objective” was “to 
increase the space of her own home.” The statement stresses that Rivera “is 
economically solvent and has sufficient resources to buy the properties”.

The statement cites a 2013 article in Hola magazine as proof that there has 
never been any attempt to hide the house. Hola photographed Rivera in the 
mansion she refers to as the “real home” to which the family will return when 
they leave the presidential residence at the end of Peña Nieto’s term in 2018.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415649393032%2F6a4da53c-2abd-4d77-ac6e-1718d2f129e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexican%20president%20Enrique%20Pe%C3%B1a%20Nieto%20faces%20outcry%20over%20%C2%A34.4m%20mansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexican%20president%20Enrique%20Pe%C3%B1a%20Nieto%20faces%20outcry%20over%20%C2%A34.4m%20mansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fmexico-president-enrique-pena-nieto-mansion-explain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415649393032%2F6a4da53c-2abd-4d77-ac6e-1718d2f129e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The mansion at the centre of the political spat borders property already owned 
by Angelica Rivera, the wife of the Mexican president. Photograph: Hector 
Guerrero/AFP/Getty Images 
These answers have not satisfied critics. “The response of the presidency is 
full of gaps, holes and lacunae that need to be clarified,” political analyst 
Denise Dresser told said on Arisegui’s breakfast radio show on Monday. “The 
central point is that the house belongs to a company that has again and again 
received benefits from the Peña Nieto government.”

Critics said the statement ignored the report’s allegations that the house was 
specifically designed for the couple and their six children – three each from 
previous marriages.

This was confirmed by the building’s architect, Miguel Angel Aragones. In a 
television interview in October 2013, he said it had been “a real delight” 
working directly with Peña Nieto, who he described as “a first rate guy; 
intelligent, sensitive, respectful, and friendly”.

Aristegui’s website said it was refused an interview with the architect 
because a confidentiality agreement meant he was unable to discuss the house.
 