
According to Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
Mexico’s leaders are smart, sharp and cunning. His election gives them a chance 
to prove it.


The Republican is not yet in the White House and already a sense of crisis 
envelopesMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>. If Trump follows 
through on campaign promises he could shred Mexico’s economy, stability and 
dignity. Will its leaders rise to the challenge?

Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, like the rest of the world, 
must wait to see what President Trump does in office. But this nation of 122 
million people has special reason for dread.


In addition to branding Mexican immigrants rapists and criminals, candidate 
Trump made specific threats that would humiliate and bankrupt the US’s southern 
neighbour.


The top three: seal it off with a 2,000-mile wall and make it pick up the tab; 
rip up the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta); intercept remittances 
that sustain millions of families. Any one of those events would be a disaster 
– all three, a catastrophe.


“The export sector is completely dependent on the US market and Trump knows 
it,” said Ernesto Carmona, of the University of the Incarnate Word, a Texas 
business university with campuses in Mexico. “If he closes the door to Mexican 
exports, it will bankrupt the economy.”


Mexico’s central bank raised interest rates last week to try to shore up the 
country’s currency, the peso, which has plunged since 8 November. The Banco de 
México warned that the global outlook had become “more complex”.


Mexicans might be reassured to know their government is “much smarter, much 
sharper, much more cunning” than US leaders – except that it was Trump who said 
this. It was an outsider’s jibe against the supposed Washington beltway dummies 
being outwitted by Mexico’s machiavellian masterminds.


Whether they are that smart – or whether Trump is as smart as he claims – 
remains to be seen.


At Mexico's border, President Trump is just the latest unfunny gringo joke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/mexico-border-nogales-president-trump-joke>
In Nogales, an industrial city bordering Arizona, residents have found wry 
solace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/mexico-border-nogales-president-trump-joke>
 in the notion that the former reality TV star may be dumber than Enrique Peña 
Nieto, a president not famed as cerebral. “You have to laugh, right?” said 
Audón Salazar, a taxi driver.


“It’s been joke after joke after joke,” said Alma Cota de Yáñez, who runs 
Fundación del Empresariado Sonorense, a civil society group. “Not that the 
situation’s funny. We’re stunned.”


The mood in Los Pinos, Mexico’s version of the White House, is reportedly 
sombre, not panicky. But there is little sense of a strategic plan to deal with 
Trumpism.


Few governments, if any, possess one. The casino owner-turned-insurgent 
populist, after all, had been expected to lose to Hillary Clinton. Plus he has 
diluted some campaign pledges, leaving his intentions murky.


Mexico’s leaders can only guess if it will be business as usual, a 
Trumpocalypse, or somewhere in between.


Four big challenges

1 The peso. It has rallied slightly but remains volatile and weak – the most 
liquid currency of the emerging countries. Inflation remains relatively stable 
and there have been no drastic price hikes.


“So far the markets are responding to expectations and speculations rather 
than actual declines in exports or investment flows,” said Jaime Serra Puche, a 
former business minister and Mexico’s chief Nafta negotiator.


“The government is right to let the market adjust rather than entering into a 
pissing contest of buying and selling dollars, otherwise you’re dead. If we 
start to see structural changes, then they’ll have to rethink the issue.”


Trump's Nafta threats would severely harm US, Mexican chief negotiator says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
2 Trade. Since Nafta took effect in 1996, the value of exports to the US has 
jumped sixfold to $320bn last year. Annual trade between the two neighbours is 
worth more than half a trillion dollars,equalling $11.2bn every week 
<https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/americas/mexico>.


If Trump renounces Nafta, trade would in theory revert to pre-existing World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) tariffs, which are less than 3% for Mexican products 
but higher for US exports. But Trump has also pledged to slap taxes as high as 
35% on Mexican imports, violating WTO rules and throwing Mexico into uncharted 
territory.


The finance minister, Ildefonso Guajardo, has said Mexico will try to persuade 
the new US leader thatNafta benefits all North America  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
and makes it globally competitive. No date has yet been set for talks but Peña 
Nieto hasfloated a meeting with Trump 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-mexico-idUSKBN1352N0> before 
his 20 January inauguration.


3 Remittances. The $24.8bn Mexican emigrants sent home last year overtook oil 
revenues for the first time as a source of foreign income 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/doliaestevez/2016/05/16/remittances-supersede-oil-as-mexicos-main-source-of-foreign-income/#43c6a75f703b>
. Most was sent by Mexicans in the US – a lifeline for rural families which 
Trump has threatened to cut or curb. “Any restriction to this income would 
affect the country’s poorest families,” said Serra. A dramatic restriction 
could, ironically, spur migration to the US, which has been steadily falling in 
recent years amid better economic prospects at home.


4 Migration. The record numbers fleeing Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador – 
which aresuffering from war-zone levels of violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/central-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder>
 – present acute humanitarian and logistical challenges for Mexico, which is 
under pressure from Washington to stem the flow.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=3%20million%20'criminal'%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=3%20million%20%27criminal%27%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&media=>
3 million ‘criminal’ immigrants to be deported, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
An estimated 450,000 undocumented migrants and refugees will cross into Mexico 
from Guatemala in 2016. While many seek asylum in Mexico, most still try to 
reach the US to join friends and relatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/central-america-violence-refugee-crisis-gangs-murder>
.


Carlos Bartolo Solís, director of the migrant shelter in Arriaga, Chiapas, 
where the freight train known as the Beast begins its journey northwards, said 
Trump’s victory had created uncertainty. “The shelter is empty. Everyone left 
after the [election] result to try and push on to the border. They’ve no idea 
what will happen next year, but do not see the future as promising.”


Mexicans on Trump's election: 'The power he has over us is terrifying'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/mexicans-on-trumps-election-the-power-he-has-over-us-is-terrifying>
Bartolo fears migrants desperate to reach the US before Trump’s inauguration 
will take even greater risks to avoid border patrols. “Unfortunately, it’s 
obvious they will take more risks with coyotes [people smugglers] and look for 
other more dangerous routes.”


One such migrant was José, a 28-year-old Honduran in Nogales 
<https://twitter.com/rorycarroll72/status/796873946054303744/photo/1> who was 
planning to cross the Sonoran desert before Trump reached the Oval Office. “I 
want to try now before he’s there, while there’s still time.”


Padre Flor María Rigoni, director of the Belén migrant shelter in Tapachula, 
near Mexico’s Guatemalan border, said Trump’s proposed wall would not deter 
those desperate to reach the US. “The majority of migrants don’t know who Trump 
is and they don’t care. For decades, migrants have successfully defied the 
United States, and those who want to will continue crossing with wings above 
the wall or with tunnels under the wall or using other strategies that will be 
invented.”

 