
Maria was just 12 years old when she arrived at the Marie Stopes clinic in 
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City. Raped by her 
grandfather, she was already 19 weeks pregnant.

Frightened and overwhelmed, she had been hospitalised for five days with no 
resolution and time was ticking to safely end the pregnancy. The problem wasn’t 
the law – in Mexico access to abortionis legal in cases of rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/oct/01/mexican-women-high-price-abortion-laws>
. The stumbling block was that there was no one comfortable with performing the 
procedure. Later abortions require a certain level of skill and experience and, 
at the general hospital, doctors were unsure how to care for such a young girl.

Working closely with her family and the authorities, my team at Marie Stopes 
transferred her to our clinic in Mexico City. I sat with her in the recovery 
room and held her hand. We both cried as I told her: “You are safe. Everyone 
you see is here to care for you and help you heal. You are very important to 
all of us.”

Abortion in Morocco: will the king approve a progressive law?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/05/abortion-in-morocco-will-the-king-approve-a-progressive-law>
Children exposed to violence and rape bear both emotional and physical scars, 
and we as a healthcare community are obligated to help them in any way we can. 
With the help of a psychologist Maria was able to start to move on with her 
life after the end of her traumatic and life-threatening pregnancy.

Today another child in Paraguay faces a much bleaker future. Just 10 years 
old, she was a victim of sexual assault by her stepfather. Now pregnant with 
her rapist’s baby, she is a victim of a system that isdenying her access to a 
life-saving abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/04/paraguay-pregnant-10-year-old-abortion>
.

As the mother of a 10-year-old girl, it is heart-breaking. I feel at a loss 
for words at the pure torture this young girl is enduring. This child doesn’t 
understand what being pregnant means but is nonetheless being forced to carry 
to term. Now, with her mother imprisoned after being accused of failing in her 
duty of care, her main source of support has been taken away, leaving her to 
face this horror alone.

Meet the feminists changing the world for girls from Kenya to Egypt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/13/meet-the-global-feminists-changing-the-world-for-girls-from-kenya-to-egypt>
As the country director of Marie Stopes Mexico, it’s enraging. Healthcare 
providers have a duty to serve all, especially the most vulnerable women in the 
direst circumstances, not compound their trauma. The WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation is clear that 
pregnancy poses a risk to young girls whose bodies are not fully developed. 
Yet, in this case and many others, access to safe abortion has not yet been 
provided – and what is worse, machismo on the part of Paraguay’s male 
decision-makers may be the biggest stumbling block.

Our message to them is this: if you don’t know what to do, let us help. Base 
your decision on what is best for this little girl and pay for her and her 
mother to come to Mexico. Your response to this girl’s plight will be heralded 
as intelligent and brave, and we can help her, just like we helped Maria.

In Mexico, the numbers speak for themselves. In 2006, nearly 150,000 women 
were hospitalised for abortion-related complications 
<http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/journals/3415808.pdf> – the country’s fourth 
leading cause of maternal mortality. But since 2007, whenMexico City legalised 
abortion <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/25/world/americas/25mexico.html?_r=0>, 
not a single death has been recorded.

Let pregnant school girls back into the classroom in Sierra Leone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/11/let-pregnant-school-girls-back-into-the-classroom-in-sierra-leone>
It is simple: access to safe abortions saves lives. Yet while the change in 
the law in Mexico City – to decriminalise abortion care – was a monumental step 
forward, it has only benefited women lucky enough to live here or who have the 
money to travel.

Restricting services does not prevent or even decrease the need for, or rate 
of, abortions. It simply ensures a two-tiered system under which women with 
money have options, while a little girl fromParaguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paraguay> is forced to have her rapist’s 
baby.

* Names have been changed to protect identities.


Carla Eckhardt is director of Marie Stopes Mexico 
<http://www.mariestopes.org.mx/>. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 