
Mexico’s beleaguered president Enrique Peña Nieto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/enrique-pena-nieto> has once again become 
the target of public anger after attempting to defend a 20% hike in gasoline 
prices that has provoked a wave of violent demonstration and looting across the 
country this week.

At least 987 people had been arrested after the fifth day of unrest, which has 
spread to at least 14 of Mexico 32 states, according to theAnimal Politíco 
<http://www.animalpolitico.com/2017/01/enfrentamientos-marchas-saqueos-detenidos/?utm_source=Hoy+en+Animal&utm_campaign=058490a108-ga&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_ae638a5d34-058490a108-392978041>
 news site.

Officials said three people were killed amidst looting in the eastern state of 
Veracruz on Thursday and a police officer was killed on Wednesday while trying 
to prevent robberies at a gas station inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City.


Angry protests erupt across Mexico after 20% hike in gasoline prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/gasolinazo-mexico-gasoline-price-hike-protests-petrol>
In a televised address to the nation on Thursday night, Peña Nieto insisted 
that there was no alternative to the hike announced on 1 January as part of 
government deregulation of the energy sector.

“Allowing gasoline to rise to its international price is a difficult change, 
but as president, my job is to precisely make difficult decisions now, in order 
to avoid worse consequences in the future,” he said. “Keeping petrol prices 
artificially low would mean taking money away from the poorest Mexicans, and 
giving it to those who have the most.”


Peña Nieto, who took office in 2012, has the lowest approval ratings of any 
Mexican president in over two decades and has been widely criticised over his 
handling of corruption scandals,the 2014 disappearance of 43 student teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/20/mexico-43-killed-students->, and 
Mexico’s sluggish economic performance, despite having passed reforms that he 
promised would bring lower energy prices.

The gasolinazo –  as the hike has become known – has made him the target of 
further sustained public anger. During his speech – in which he also vowed to 
“build a positive relationship” with the incoming Donald Trump administration – 
Peña Nieto asked the Mexican public “what would you have done?” in his 
situation.

The phrase quickly became a trending topic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Qu%C3%A9HubieranHechoUstedes?src=hash> on Twitter 
as furious members of the public and opposition leaders offered the president 
their advice. “I wouldn’t have betrayed Lázaro Cárdenas and his legacy,” said 
Guadalajara mayor Enrique Alfaro, referring to the former president who 
nationalised Mexico’s oil industry in 1938. “I wouldn’t have lied to the 
Mexican people.”

Peña Nieto also announced that high-ranking federal officials would take a 10% 
pay cut, but that is unlikely to assuage the concerns of the public after the 
peso hit a record low against the dollar this week.

The petrol hike is also expected to have a knock-on effect on consumer goods, 
public transport and other services. Uber announced on Thursday that it was 
raising its rates by 7.5 to 18.2% across different Mexican cities after 
analysing the rise in petrol prices.

Protesters have responded to the hikes by blocking highways and petrol 
stations across the country, while a major public transport strike in 
Guadalajara on Wednesday led the police and members of the public to pull 
together by offering lifts to stranded commuters.

Demonstrations in the northern city of Monterrey turned violent on Thursday 
when protesters tried to force their way into the government palace, reportedly 
smashing stained glass windows and setting off fireworks and pepper spray.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmexico-gasoline-protests-four-dead-and-hundreds-arrested-during-mass-looting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49ba78bd43bda1a37404467ea12b604227b87b2%2F0_110_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexico%20gasoline%20protests%3A%20president%20insists%20there's%20no%20alternative%20to%20price%20hike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmexico-gasoline-protests-four-dead-and-hundreds-arrested-during-mass-looting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexico%20gasoline%20protests%3A%20president%20insists%20there%27s%20no%20alternative%20to%20price%20hike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmexico-gasoline-protests-four-dead-and-hundreds-arrested-during-mass-looting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49ba78bd43bda1a37404467ea12b604227b87b2%2F0_110_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Demonstrators hold up placards during a protest at the Macroplaza in Monterrey 
on Thursday. Photograph: Daniel Becerril/Reuters 
The sense of chaos and panic has been heightened by legions of bots 
encouraging looting and spreading disinformation on social media. Humberto 
Lozano, president of the National Chamber of Commerce, Services and Tourism in 
Mexico City, said in a press conference that false rumours of looting spread 
via social media led 20,000 small businesses to close in the capital on 
Wednesday, causing losses of 52 million pesos ($2.4m).

Mexico City’s cyber-police force said it was investigating the false rumours 
and had identified over 1,500 accounts responsible for causing incendiary 
phrases like “ransack a Walmart 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SaqueaUnWalmart?src=hash>” to trend on Twitter.

Alberto Escorcia, a blogger who specialises in investigating the use of bots 
in Mexico, warned that there was a danger that the propagation of threats and 
misinformation could discredit and distract from the many legitimate protests 
occurring across Mexico. “They’re encouraging people to commit violent acts and 
to loot shops. They’re calling on people to take Congress on Monday,” he said. 
“These are criminals who are practically promoting terrorism, this has nothing 
to do with social protest.”

Escorcia warned that further violence was possible over the coming days and 
lamented that Peña Nieto’s message had done little to reduce the tensions 
caused by the hike and exacerbated by the bots. “I can’t be sure who’s behind 
this because they cover their tracks very well,” he added. “We’ve had five very 
difficult days and it seems like someone wants the situation in Mexico to boil 
over.”
 