
Michel Faber’s haunting tale of a missionary who travels to a strange planet 
trillions of miles away,The Book of Strange New Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/23/the-book-of-strange-new-things-michel-faber-review>
, has been shortlisted for the UK’s top science fiction prize, the Arthur C 
Clarke award.

The prize-winning novelist, who was previously shortlisted for the Whitbread 
for his story of an alien who preys on men, Under the Skin, will compete with 
five other writers for the prestigious award set up by Clarke almost 30 years 
ago. This year’s line-up runs the gamut from more literary works by Faber and 
Canadian writer Emily St John Mandel, picked for her vision of a world 
decimated by a flu pandemicStation Eleven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/station-eleven-review-emily-st-john-mandel>
, to MR Carey’s zombie novel The Girl With All the Gifts, called “as original, 
thrilling and powerful a novel as anything I’ve read in a long time”by James 
Smythe in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/15/girl-with-gifts-mr-carey-review>.

Finnish writer Emmi Itäranta makes the cut for her debut, Memory of Water, in 
which a girl is given the secret of the spring hidden near her village on her 
17th birthday. Originally published in Finnish, the novel was translated by the 
author herself into English. The shortlist, chosen from 107 submissions by 
judges, is completed with Claire North’s story of a man who lives his life 
again and again,The First Fifteen Lives of Harry August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/13/best-science-fiction-novels-june-review-roundup>
, and Dave Hutchinson’s Europe in Autumn, described as “the love child of John 
le Carré and Franz Kafka” by its tiny publisher Solaris. Set in a future Europe 
which has divided into myriad tiny states, novelistAdam Roberts called it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/05/best-science-fiction-books-2014> 
“one of the best novels I’ve read in a long time” in his Guardian review.

Award director Tom Hunter described the line-up as a “quintessentially Clarke 
award kind of a shortlist”, featuring six writers who have never been nominated 
before. “While the subject matter may often be dark, when we think about what 
this list says about the strength of science fiction literature itself, I see a 
future that’s full of confidence, creativity and diversity of imagination,” he 
said.

The announcement comes just days after major US science fiction awards the 
Hugos unveiledtheir own shortlist 
<http://www.thehugoawards.org/hugo-history/2015-hugo-awards/>. Voted for by 
fans, rather than selected by judges, the line-up has stirred controversy after 
ablock-voting campaign by a group of writers 
<https://bradrtorgersen.wordpress.com/2015/02/01/sad-puppies-3-the-2015-hugo-slate/>
 set out to halt what they described asthe awards’ growing tendency 
<https://bradrtorgersen.wordpress.com/2015/01/07/announcing-sad-puppies-3/> to 
“skew more and more toward literary (as opposed to entertainment) works”, and 
to “skew ideological … giving Hugos because a writer or artist is (insert 
underrepresented minority or victim group here) or because a given work 
features (insert underrepresented minority or victim group here) characters”.

Addressing the issue, Hunter said that diversity in science fiction was “the 
big topic” for the genre today. “Diversity for us means starting with as broad 
a range of voices and books as possible so we can pick a shortlist that we 
think really is the best of science fiction literature,” he said, adding that 
“an award actively seeking controversy is really missing the point and that 
goes double for any group seeking to artificially create controversy around an 
award for its own ends”.

“In other words, it’s not a battle of competing ideologies – left versus right 
– it’s a simpler matter of constructive versus destructive attitudes,” said 
Hunter, pointing to Clarke’s own remark that “the only way to discover the 
limits of the possible is to go beyond them into the impossible”.

“It’s interesting that the only kind of book Sir Arthur never wanted to see 
shortlisted for this award was a book with his name on it. After that, he 
wanted to be surprised, he wanted to be challenged and, above all, he wanted to 
experience the impossible in the way only the best science fiction can 
deliver,” said the award director. “A good shortlist isn’t a statement about 
what you should like, it’s an invitation to go beyond the limits of what you 
already know so you can experience and enjoy something new. Why limit an 
appreciation of a literature that’s built on the power of human imagination?”


The judges for this year’s Clarke prize, which comes with a cheque for £2,015 
and entry on 6 May into a hall of fame that ranges from inaugural winner 
Margaret Atwood to China Miéville and Lauren Beukes, are Duncan Lawie and 
Nicholas Whyte from the British Science Fiction Association, Sarah Brown and 
Lesley Hall from the ScienceFiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> 
Foundation and Leila Abu El Hawa from the Sci-Fi-London film festival, with 
Andrew M Butler as chair.

The shortlist:

The Girl With All the Gifts by MR Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/15/girl-with-gifts-mr-carey-review> 
(Orbit)
The Book of Strange New Things by Michel Faber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/23/the-book-of-strange-new-things-michel-faber-review>
 (Canongate)
Europe in Autumn by Dave Hutchinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/10/science-fiction-roundup-review> 
(Solaris)
Memory Of Water by Emmi Itäranta  <http://www.emmiitaranta.com/memory-of-water>
(HarperVoyager)
The First Fifteen Lives of Harry August by Claire North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/13/best-science-fiction-novels-june-review-roundup>
 (Orbit)
Station Eleven by Emily St John Mandel  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/station-eleven-review-emily-st-john-mandel>
(Picador)
 