
Today’s film-makers are a navel-gazing bunch. Often, they seem less concerned 
with each project’s individual worth than with its place along some grand 
career trajectory, or “umbilical cord” as Quentin Tarantino refers to the 
connecting thread of his mighty canon. It’s a mindset that says every film must 
represent a step forward from the last or else be stricken from the record like 
so many formative JJ Abrams projects (remember Filofax with Jim Belushi?) 
Still, if there’s one director you can’t accuse of such preciousness, it’s
Michel Gondry <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michel-gondry>.

Since his 2004 breakthrough film Eternal Sunshine Of The Spotless Mind, Gondry 
has made nine entirely dissimilar features, among them a French surrealist 
comedy, a concert film in collaboration with Dave Chappelle, a $120m superhero 
movie, a documentary about his aunt, and an animated conversation withNoam 
Chomsky <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/noam-chomsky>, enigmatically titled
Is The Man Who Is Tall Happy?That last one will be available to stream from 
Monday, tossed on to iTunes by its production company after UK distributors 
failed to see the percentage in an hour-and-a-half-long chat between an 
octogenarian linguist and the director of Be Kind Rewind, set to the latter’s 
wobbly doodle animations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzex7yxN4GW0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzex7yxN4GW0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzex7yxN4GW0&media=>
In other words, the film is a niche prospect, and one in which Gondry himself 
seems only intermittently confident. For each of its electric deep-dives into 
Chomsky’s philosophical worldview, there’s a self-reflexive pause in which the 
director seems to question the wisdom of the entire project. His doubts are 
understandable: though the film is based on just a handful of casual 
interviews, it took nearly three years to complete, thanks to an intensive 
animation process undertaken almost singlehandedly by the delightful French 
oddball.

Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy? - Berlin 2014: first look review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/is-the-man-who-is-tall-happy-review-noam-chomsky-michel-gondry>
The contrast between the film’s rollicking conversational style and its 
gruelling stylistic approach is the creative spark that lifts Is The Man Who Is 
Tall Happy? into the realm of Gondry’s best work. Any motion picture with even 
a hint of structural invention to it will inevitably be likened to jazz, but 
here’s a film whose dichotomous blend of spontaneity and precision actually 
justifies the comparison.

Bridging the divide between order and chaos is, of course, Chomsky himself. 
It’s his writings that first inspired this utterly singular little film, and 
his increasing years that motivated its director to hurry up and finish the 
thing, before – in Gondry’s words – “eh, well, he’s dead”. As artistic 
motivations go, it’s as good a reason as any.
 