
Michael Fassbender will play Austrian serial killer Jack Unterweger, known as 
the “prison poet” and the “Vienna Strangler” in new thriller Entering Hades,
reports Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/michael-fassbender-starring-entering-hades-1201764933/>
.

Based on John Leake’s true crime novel of the same title, the story is 
currently being adapted by the Oscar-winning co-writer of Birdman, Alexander 
Dinelaris, from an original script by Bill Wheeler.

Unterweger became a cause celebre of the Austrian literary scene in the 
mid-1980s as the author of short stories, poems, plays, and an autobiography,
later made into a film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxMERcqtceI>. These 
were all written while Unterweger was in jail for the sexually aggravated 
murder of an 18-year-old woman, in 1976. Among the famous figures campaigning 
for his release were the celebrated poet, author and artist Günter Grass and 
playwright and novelist Elfriede Jelinek.

Eventually released in 1990 at the end of his 15-year sentence, Unterweger was 
initially considered an example of successful rehabilitation. He went on to 
work as a journalist across Europe and in the US, but began killing again 
within months of his release. The Häfenpoet (prison poet) murdered at least 11 
women over the next two years in multiple European countries and the US. As a 
journalist for Austrian state broadcaster ORF, he sometimes reported on the 
very murders he had just committed.

Following his arrest in Miami, Florida in 1992, Unterweger was convicted of 
nine murders and sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of 
parole. He committed suicide by hanging at Graz-Karlau prison in Graz, Austria, 
before an appeal could be heard.

The project is being set up at Broad Green Pictures (makers of critically 
acclaimed drama99 Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/24/99-homes-review-chillingly-topical-eviction-drama>
, as well asTerrence Malick’s Knight of Cups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/02/knight-of-cups-has-terrence-malick-lost-the-plot>
), along with Storyscape Entertainment.
 