
Wales: Epic Views of a Small Country by Jan Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janmorris> 472pp, Viking, Â£20

Poor Wales. It is grimly appropriate that the setting up of its Assembly 
should have been clouded by the Ron Davies affair. No matter how hard Wales 
tries to turn itself into a serious, quasi-autonomous political entity, 
circumstances conspire against it.

 Peter Hain was on Radio 4 the week after the Davies debacle, describing what 
the Labour Party in Wales might do to fill the vacancy. You couldn't help 
laughing when he envisaged a 'team of all the talents'; he appeared to be 
referring to Alun Michael and Rhodri Morgan.

 Jan Morris's book - a revision of The Matter of Wales, which was published in 
1984 - was completed after the 1997 referendum and before the incident on 
Clapham Common. Morris believes the narrow vote in favour of devolution 
'changes everything'; one hopes, for Wales's sake, that she is right. Welsh 
politics, Welsh Labour politics in particular, have been devoid of talent and 
purpose for decades.

 Morris's subtitle is 'epic views of a small country'. No Bryson-esque 
resonance is intended; hers is the opposite of his stroppy worldview. She is 
lyrical, effulgent, adoring: of the land, the language, the people, the poetry, 
the very soul of the nation. One example will suffice, her paean to the 
language: 'The language is the truest badge of Welsh identity . . . it gives 
notice to all-comers that Wales is still a separate place. It is, as everyone 
agrees, a poetic language - even those who do not understand a word of it 
marvel at its strength and resonance.' But everyone doesn't agree. Welsh is 
seen as the talisman of Welshness by some, the protector from centuries of 
anglicisation and cultural absorption; but others in Wales see its influence as 
divisive - setting Welsh speakers against non-Welsh speakers, rural Wales 
against urban Wales, north against south, nationalist Wales against Labour 
Wales. One-fifth of Welsh people speak the language, bask in its cultural glow; 
where does that leave the four-fifths who do not? To stress the language as the 
litmus test of Welshness is to deny the majority their Welsh identity, to leave 
them caught between two cultures, awash somewhere in the Bristol Channel.

 Morris's unremitting, at times unquestioning, pro-Welshness made me turn, as 
an antidote, to Kingsley Amis's The Old Devils, with its portrait of hemmed-in, 
drink-sodden (embittered?) lives and its satire on the stage Welshness of 
writer and TV celebrity Alun (note the bogus spelling) Weaver. When he returns 
to live in Wales after a long exile in England, he is asked how it feels. His 
reply is well rehearsed: 'Many things grave and gay and multi-coloured but one 
above all: I'm coming home. That short rich resounding word means one simple 
thing to a Welshman such as I, born and bred in this land of river and hill. 
And that thing, that miraculous thing is - Wales.' Morris of course doesn't 
write in those cliches, but is her view of Wales really so different? 'I see it 
[the matter of Wales] not as a continuum, but timeless, one kind of Welshness 
blurred into another, one influence absorbed into the next, the whole bound 
together, often unconsciously, by the age, strength and fascination of the 
Welsh tradition and the spell of the Welsh language.' Throughout the book 
Morris identifies with Owain Glyndwr (Owen Glendower to the politically 
incorrect), the 15th-century Welsh landowner who rose against the English and 
briefly gave Wales a separate political identity. She calls him 'the patron of 
my book': he is hero and mentor; a voice, a will echoing across the centuries. 
Her sense of identification with past, present, future, with the spirit of 
Welshness, is total: 'I am all Wales in one! The peasants are me, the miners, 
Rebecca's horsemen are me . . . the princes and their ladies, the bards, the 
priests - I am Owain himself, and the divine Dafydd, and Nest, and Hywel Dda, 
and before them too I inhabited the ancient mysteries of stone and seer - 
myth-maker, shape-changer, there go I!' There is a desperation in the attempt 
to convince us that Wales is a great nation. Frank Lloyd Wright is claimed as a 
Welsh architect; the list of Welsh firsts include lawn tennis, the Sealyham 
terrier and buying by mail order; and the Eisteddfod is described as if it were 
an event of global significance.

 I was born in Wales but in Newport, Monmouthshire (aka Gwent), in that corner 
of Wales where the English influence is most pervasive, the Welsh language 
least widespread, and where for almost two centuries heavy industry dominated 
the culture.

 Owain Glyndwr was not a hero, but Gareth Edwards was, and the great Welsh 
rugby teams of the seventies, and Glamorgan's 1969 Championship-winning cricket 
side, and the thousands of miners and steelworkers who lost their jobs in Mrs 
Thatcher's experiment in social engineering, and the teachers who taught me 
brilliantly but were starved of funds in the eighties and nineties and saw the 
successful comprehensives they had established wrecked by government 
ineptitude, and a population that adapted to deindustrialisation and 
rationalisation and reskilling and downsizing without blowing up the smugly, 
ugly white civic centres in their towns. They were, and are, heroes too.

 I don't recognise Jan Morris's Wales. She is sharp on the national 
characteristics of the Welsh, adores Wales, feels the presence of its past, is 
optimistic than it can express itself fully in the future. But what about the 
here and now; what about its people? All the photographs in the book are of 
timeless Welsh landscapes - waterfalls, lakes, rocky outcrops. But where is the 
other Wales, of rundown estates, rising drug use and social dislocation; the 
Wales that has lost its industrial heart and is unconvinced by talk of its 
timeless, mystical soul? Let the new Assembly and the 'team of all the talents' 
embrace that Wales. In the name of Glyndwr - and Gareth Edwards.
 