
Mitchells & Butlers has warned of problems ahead as the pubs group reported a 
dip in full year revenues and profits.

The Harvester and All Bar One owner said like for like sales fell 0.8% 
although they showed an improvement in the most recent eight weeks, with 
profits dropping from £328m to £318m. Chief executive Phil Urban said:

Sales growth in the first eight weeks was impacted by the Rugby World Cup in 
the prior year, but I’m encouraged by the underlying momentum which has seen 
recent weeks return to the levels seen in the summer.

 In the next year, as previously announced, we face external cost headwinds, 
notably from further wage inflation, the recent business rates review and 
exchange rate movements. We are working hard to mitigate these headwinds 
wherever possible, both through building on our sales momentum and active 
management of our cost base.

On the Brexit vote specifically, the company said the slump in sterling since 
the referendum would increase food and drink costs:

We believe it is too early to predict with any certainty what the impact of 
Brexit on the economy might be, particularly without clarity on exit terms. 
However there are broadly three areas in which Brexit may affect us in the 
medium to long term: changes in consumer confidence and behaviour; changes to 
employment and immigration laws; and changes to input costs. The first two of 
the three are largely unknown at present, and therefore our approach is to stay 
close to developments whilst continuing to support all our 43,000 employees.

 Input costs will be impacted by the value of sterling, which has fallen 
significantly since the EU referendum. We have a small number of sites trading 
in Germany, but otherwise our international trade is defined by our supply 
chain. The net effect of a weaker sterling is therefore profit dilutive due to 
the food and drink which is purchased in foreign currency, although this is 
partially mitigated in the next financial year by existing contracts.

The downbeat tone has sent the group’s shares 14.9p lower to 258.6p. Investec 
analyst Karl Burns said:

Mitchells & Butler has announced 2016 results to the end of September, with 
the results in line with our forecasts and consensus. However, unsurprisingly, 
management have provided cautious guidance around margins looking ahead to 2017 
due to the negative impact of the Living Wage, business rates and movement in 
foreign exchange, all likely to result in downward pressure on margins. We 
retain our forecasts, which are around 4% below consensus, and retain our 174p 
price target and sell recommendation.

Numis said the impact of business rate rises was higher than it expected:

Mitchells has quantified the impact of the business rate review at £18m, with 
£5m in 2017. We had estimated a total impact of £12m in our recent sector note. 
The total will have a 90 basis point impact on margin by year five.

We are cautious on the outlook for M&B as we do not expect like for like sales 
to cover mounting cost headwinds and see a risk of the majority of free cash 
flow being required for the pension deficit recovery plan (to be announced in 
2017).

But Canaccord Genuity was more positive:

Mitchells & Butlers reported prelims a fraction below our expectations but 
there’s a fragile but improving trend developing. The fine summer weather has 
been helpful but it’s only part of the story, like for likes have been 
recovering for six months and the positive momentum has continued into the new 
year. We don’t anticipate material revisions to forecasts and reiterate our buy 
recommendation. The stock is oversold in our view and our 350p target price 
implies 28% potential upside. 

 