
My eyes welled up twice while watching Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana>. Once was exactly when you’d expect in 
a Disney film, around the beginning of the third act when emotions are running 
high. But the other instance caught me by surprise, in that it happened before 
the movie had even started.

Moana review – sail of the century from Disney
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/moana-review-disney> 
Since 2009, Disney has begun each of its films with a unique introduction 
catered to that film’s themes and score. I’ve only seen Frozen once, but I 
still vividly remember the opening sequence. Moana was no different – except it 
wasn’t until I heard the first cries of “tulou!” (meaning “pardon/excuse me” in 
Samoan and other Pacific languages) that I realised how rare and wonderful it 
was to hear such familiar sounds over such a familiar, but distinctly 
different, Disney introduction. It’s the same choked-up wave of emotion I got 
the first time I saw my sister acting on stage.

That proud, slightly teary feeling is what a lot of Pacific islanders and 
Maori will experience as they watch Moana for the first time. Not because we 
know anyone in the movie, but because the movie is us.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM5dnZKrUpdA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM5dnZKrUpdA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM5dnZKrUpdA&media=>
This sense of proud familiarity is stirred almost immediately: the whole first 
act taking place on the fictional, but instantly recognisable, island of 
Motunui. Moana is in line to be chief – a point that isn’t questioned or 
dwelled upon because women often hold higher positions on the islands and were 
great pioneers throughout history.

Moana’s family is introduced; her father, mother and Gramma. I looked at her 
father, with his pe’a (traditional Samoan tattoo), and saw my cousins. I looked 
at her Gramma and saw my great-aunty Tu’utu’u. Somehow, seeing animated 
characters that looked like family I love was much more affecting than seeing 
them in live action films. I now realise that’s because of how much I loved 
almost every Disney character growing up; the idea that children worldwide will 
be introduced to, and love, these characters in the same way feels incredible.

When Moana eventually leaves Motunui, it’s with sadness that we say goodbye to 
the beautiful island full of noise, love and laughter, to set sail on the ocean 
– a comparatively barren setting that the Pixar animators did well to bring to 
life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7023ff6c69e192f89845568a86571f0f2f8e78c2%2F0_0_1920_804%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moana%20is%20a%20rare%20and%20wonderful%20celebration%20of%20the%20Pacific%20islands%20%E2%80%93%20this%20movie%20is%20us%20%7C%20%20Madeleine%20Chapman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moana%20is%20a%20rare%20and%20wonderful%20celebration%20of%20the%20Pacific%20islands%20%E2%80%93%20this%20movie%20is%20us%20%7C%20%20Madeleine%20Chapman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7023ff6c69e192f89845568a86571f0f2f8e78c2%2F0_0_1920_804%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘I loved almost every Disney character growing up; the idea that children 
worldwide will be introduced to, and love, these characters in the same way 
feels incredible.’ Photograph: Disney 
The story itself is a common one: a child is born on an island and is raised 
happily within the community. Then one day that young man or woman has to make 
a choice: leave their home to seek better opportunities that will hopefully 
benefit their family in the long term, or stay and help in tangible but 
short-term ways.

Every Polynesian immigrant has had to make that decision, the same decision 
Moana makes when she sets off on her voyage across the ocean.

Moana: progressive paean to Polynesia – or another of Disney's cultural 
blunders?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/26/moana-polynesia-disney-cultural-blunders>
She teams up with the demigod Maui, a character who has already had more 
screen time than the othersthanks to complaints that he was too “obese” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/disney-depiction-of-obese-polynesian-god-in-film-moana-sparks-anger>
 and played into negative stereotypes. Put simply, Moana’s dad looks exactly 
how I would expect a Samoan chief to look – and he’sbig. Maui, meanwhile, is a 
demigod: to depict him as anything but larger than life would neglect the 
strength and stature of the Polynesian people.

 I expected to love Maui, but instead found myself wishing he would go away. 
It wasn’t the character himself, voiced by The Rock, Dwayne Johnson; I would 
simply rather have spent more time with Moana and her family. Disney films 
usually provide a supporting character who becomes a fan favourite – Mushu in 
Mulan, Olaf in Frozen – but in Moana, Moana herself is by far the strongest, 
funniest and most lovable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13588d013abe5b9cd176e4bbaa6a16d8064f15ac%2F0_0_1920_804%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moana%20is%20a%20rare%20and%20wonderful%20celebration%20of%20the%20Pacific%20islands%20%E2%80%93%20this%20movie%20is%20us%20%7C%20%20Madeleine%20Chapman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moana%20is%20a%20rare%20and%20wonderful%20celebration%20of%20the%20Pacific%20islands%20%E2%80%93%20this%20movie%20is%20us%20%7C%20%20Madeleine%20Chapman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmoana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13588d013abe5b9cd176e4bbaa6a16d8064f15ac%2F0_0_1920_804%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘Disney films usually provide a supporting character who becomes a fan 
favourite, but Moana herself is by far the strongest, funniest and most 
lovable.’ Photograph: Disney 
Moana doesn’t have a love interest – a creative decision that most people have 
applauded and some have regarded with suspicion. By not giving Moana a love 
interest, some suggest, she is desexualised and therefore othered, reinforcing 
the difference between white characters and minorities. Is it a coincidence 
that the two “cultural” Disney heroines – Merida in Brave and Moana – are the 
only two who don’t have a romantic relationship? As Kadeen Griffiths wrote for
Bustle 
<https://www.bustle.com/articles/176407-moana-kicking-the-love-interest-storyline-to-the-curb-may-not-be-something-to-celebrate>
: “When it comes to characters of colour, having a love life is something of a 
luxury in mainstream media.”

While I can understand this concern, in watching Moana I simply saw the same 
story that so many Pacific women have lived. Very rarely, if ever, is the 
decision to leave their island spurred by a love interest; love for family and 
culture, absolutely, but not so much romantic love. And in this way, Moana 
managed to capture the very real and true motivations that are embedded in so 
many Polynesian women and the decisions they make.

It would be remiss of me to not mention the incredible soundtrack. The 
dialogue is not as clever or funny as Zootopia or other recent animated films, 
but the visuals and soundtrack more than make up for it. I can’t wait to hear 
little kids, brown and white alike, singing along to the songs – and probably 
mispronouncing every second word.

At the very, very least, Moana is a celebration of the Pacific islands that 
will make Disney a lot of money – and probably boost the tourism economies in
Samoa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/samoa>, Fiji and Tonga. But what 
Disney has also achieved is a film that educates the world on the beauty and 
troubles facing the south Pacific, while also uniting sometimes rival islands 
in the realisation that the water between doesn’t separate us – it connects us.
 