
The final jape carried out by the trickster demigod Māui sounds more like the 
stuff of horror movies than a Disney children’s animation.According to Māori 
mythology 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=EP4DnCdbB1cC&pg=PA209&lpg=PA209&dq=maui+death+teeth+vagina&source=bl&ots=X0K2wH_BPO&sig=EcBEhCBOMPhPxBiWj1L0XFcKGng&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwivl_X35KzPAhWIKMAKHVjnC7gQ6AEIKDAC#v=onepage&q=maui%20death%20teeth%20vagina&f=false>
 (and Māui is a figure across many cultures with Polynesian roots, so the story 
differs depending on who’s telling it) the shapeshifting hero was crushed 
between a set of obsidian teeth in the vagina of the goddess of death, 
Hine-nui-te-pō, while in the form of a worm. He had been trying to travel 
through the body of the deity while she slept in an attempt to bring 
immortality to mankind.

Disney has naturally gone in a different direction with its depiction of the 
mythological figure in its forthcoming filmMoana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana>, at least going by the 25 minutes of 
footage presented to journalists in London last Friday. Here, Māui (voiced by 
Dwayne Johnson) appears to have retained his famously mischievous disposition 
and ability to change into different creatures. The rest is absent. But there 
are still teeth in the tale, as the studio has discovered following a run of 
negative publicity ahead of the film’s November release.

Disney depiction of obese Polynesian god in film Moana sparks anger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/disney-depiction-of-obese-polynesian-god-in-film-moana-sparks-anger>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLKFuXETZUsI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLKFuXETZUsI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLKFuXETZUsI&media=>
In June, reports from New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/disney-depiction-of-obese-polynesian-god-in-film-moana-sparks-anger>
 suggested that some public figures of Polynesian background were less than 
impressed with the depiction of Māui as a bulky and oversized figure. New 
Zealand MP Jenny Salesa, who is of Tongan heritage, shared a picture on her 
Facebook account describing the film’s hero as “half pig, half hippo”. Then 
last week,Disney confirmed it would stop selling a boy’s Māui costume 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/disney-pulls-maui-childrens-costume-amid-claims-it-is-offensive>
 that some Pacific Islanders had compared to blackface, because the outfit was 
designed to resemble Māui’s heavily tattooed, musclebound bare torso.

It’s perhaps unsurprising then that producer Osnat Shurer was keen to flag up 
Disney’s careful research into Polynesian myth ahead of making the film, with 
directors John Musker and Ron Clements (known for hand-drawn Disney classics 
such as The Little Mermaid and Aladdin) having visited Fiji, Samoa, and Tahiti 
in 2012 in order to immerse themselves in local culture. Moana also features 
actors of Polynesian heritage in several of the main roles, including Johnson 
himself, Jemaine Clement of Flight of the Conchords, Temuera Morrison of Once 
Were Warriors and 14-year-old Hawaiian-American Auli’i Cravalho as the title 
character.

Disney pulls Maui children's costume amid claims it is offensive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/disney-pulls-maui-childrens-costume-amid-claims-it-is-offensive>
In the film, Moana is the determined teenage daughter of a chief, who 
discovers that her people’s history as ocean navigators has been hidden from 
her and sets out to find the author of their single-island entrapment, Māui. 
When they do finally meet, it’s instantly clear the demigod has an elevated 
view of his own importance and expects Moana to bow down and treat him like a 
Polynesian rock star. Instead, Moana admonishes the oversized braggart for 
trapping her people for centuries after losing his magical fish-hook.

On screen, Johnson’s character appears more powerful than obese: there is 
certainly no wobbling flesh on show, merely a remarkable sense of dexterity and 
elastic grace for such an enormous fellow – but then he is a god. Moana,as 
Shurer has remarked 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/lifestyle/going-out/film/next-disney-film-moana-defy-8913849>
, also has a healthy body shape, Disney perhaps learning from thebacklash 
against the tiny waists of Frozen’s Anna and Elsa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/28/frozen-disney-female-body-image>
. We’re also told our hero will not be given a romance in the new film, which 
seems like another vital step in the studio’s march towards developing an 
empowered vision of young women.

Moana’s songs are co-written by the Lin-Manuel Miranda, the Pulitzer, Emmy, 
Tony and Grammy-winning composercurrently winning plaudits for Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/25/lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem>
. But we’ll have to wait until November to find out if there’s another Let It 
Go lurking on the soundtrack.

It would be a pity, in some ways, if the controversies over Māui and cultural 
appropriation were to overshadow Moana, because Disney appears to have dipped 
its toes into Polynesian mythology and come away with a refreshingly vibrant 
and neoteric take on the animated fantasy. The demigod’s tattoos come 
thrillingly to life, gorgeously hand-drawn 2D animation slotting cleverly into 
the CGI visuals, as he regales his young companion with tales of past glories. 
From journeys into the underworld to battles with giant fire monsters and 
coconut-armoured pirate creatures known as Kakamora, the pair’s adventures also 
represent a liberating shift away from the traditional basis of these films in 
northern European legend.

Not to mention that the very concept of cultural appropriation is a tangled 
one. Did, for instance, Dreamworks Animation “steal” eastern martial arts for 
the Kung Fu Panda movies? And if so, why are those films so popular in the 
world’s most populous nation thatChina has rejigged its entire film industry to 
try to produce its own equivalent 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/07/11/AR2008071103281.html>
? Should Disney be held to account for borrowing liberally from Japanese 
culture on the recent Big Hero Six?

Perhaps the studio simply needs to be a little more careful when borrowing 
stories from foreign cultures, especially as this is the company that oncegave 
us the savage, pidgin English-speaking subhuman “Red Indians” in 1953’s Peter 
Pan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y_at9dOElQk>, and Sebastian the workshy 
Caribbean crab <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GC_mV1IpjWA> in 1989’s The 
Little Mermaid.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGC_mV1IpjWA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGC_mV1IpjWA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGC_mV1IpjWA&media=>
It will be interesting to see what the reaction to Moana is from people of 
Polynesian backgrounds when the movie itself hits UK cinemas on 2 December (23 
November in the US). Only then may the rest of us know whether Māui’s 
adventures are a guilt-free experience, or require viewing with gritted teeth 
and through the slits in our fingers.
 