
Plans by mobile phone operators to block adverts for customers across their 
networks are in doubt after the EU said they breached net neutrality 
legislation.

Updated guidelines issued by the Body of European Regulators for Electronic 
Communications (Berec) this week state that advertising should not be blocked 
by networks, something that mobile operator Three has already trialled in the 
UK.

Net neutrality <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/net-neutrality> is the 
principle that internet service providers should treat all online content 
equally without blocking or slowing down specific websites on purpose, or 
allowing companies to pay for preferential treatment.

The EU ruling could eliminate a looming threat to publishers who are already 
struggling with the commercial consequences of growing numbers of people using 
software to block ads on their PCs or smartphones.

Berec’s new guidelines say that providers “should not block, slow down, alter, 
restrict, interfere with, degrade or discriminate advertising … unless the 
conditions of the exceptions … are met in a specific case.”

It is the responsibility of UK regulator Ofcom to implement and interpret the 
guidelines. However, the UK government has previously indicated it is 
sympathetic to publisher complaints about ad blocking. In March, the then 
culture secretary John Whittingdaledescribed ad blocking as a “modern-day 
protection racket” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
.


Three would not comment on the new guidelines but has argued that it does not 
fall foul of net neutrality rules because it offers consumers a choice about 
whether or not to block advertising.

However, a response to consultation on the guidelines issued by Berec rules 
out that argument. It says: “Berec does not consider that end-user consent 
enables ISPs to engage in such practices at the network level.”

The intervention by the European commission on behalf of publishers comes just 
days afterreports of proposals to allow news organisations to charge search 
engines such as Google for using snippets from articles in search results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/eu-proposals-could-see-news-publishers-paid-by-google-and-facebook>
.

Germany’s Axel Springer, one of Europe’s most powerful media companies and 
publisher of the continent’s largest tabloid, Bild, has been vocal inpushing 
for clampdowns on ad-blocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/13/axel-springer-bans-adblock-users-from-bild-online>
 andgreater regulation of the way Google and others use its content online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/16/google-building-digital-superstate-german-media-dopfner>
.

Three has not revealed the results of its 24-hour trial, and has not said when 
or if it plans to roll out an ad-blocking product for its customers.

The company, which also operates in Italy, is using technology provided by 
Israeli company Shine, which already provides blocking across the Digicell 
network in Jamaica owned by Irish tycoon Denis O’Brien.

One of Shine’s investors is Li Ka-shing, boss of Three parent company CK 
Hutchison and also a major investor in Facebook.

Facebook v Adblock: the anti-ad empire strikes back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/facebook-advertising-changes-adblockers-strike-back>
Facebook itself is engaged in a battle with ad blockers, and earlier this 
month introduced technology to combat them. However, it has been suggested that 
the move – which has already been partially countered by ad-blocking software 
companies – could fall foul of EU privacy legislation. These EU rules require 
websites to ask users for permission to have cookies, which store data about 
website visitors, installed on their machines.
 