
God I’m exhausted, are you watching The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>? It’s amazing, you’ve got 
such a treat in store, I wasn’t going to, because I’m still finishing season 
four ofOrange Is The New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black>, can you 
believe? I think it’s definitely the best, I heard five is out next June – you 
know whoPiper Chapman <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piper_Chapman> is, right? 
But I thought I’d look and Matt Smith is so brilliant. You completely get that 
Prince Philip was actually incredibly good-looking, there was this real 
attraction, then we binge-watched the rest, totally addictive. Don’t talk to me 
about Matt Smith’s bum, you know his, I mean Prince Philip’s, mother was 
actually this nun, well, do have a look.

 If you start now, you’ve only missed 10 hours, we actually think it’s the 
best thing sinceHouse Of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>. OK, maybe The 
Sopranos <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos>. Or Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, until season 
three. Seriously? I mean just for Don Draper? I know it’s tricky finding time, 
but if it’s any good, we watch all night. We just re-binged onThe Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, for the dialogue. Honestly? You have 
to,David Simon <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-simon> is a genius – I 
wouldn’t watch anything until I’d seen The Wire. Same withGame Of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>. None of it? So what 
do you do when people talk about Tyrion Lannister, OK, he’s this dwarf, and 
basically everyone wants the iron throne of the seven kingdoms. It’s 
unbelievably violent – don’t be put off, I can’t believe I held off until 
season three. 

Modern tribes: the discerning dater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/05/modern-tribes-the-online-dater>
That’s the brilliant thing about box sets, you can catch up: we’re still 
alternatingSuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/01/suits-box-set-review> with
The Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall> – Scully from the 
X-Files meets British Scandi noir? Well, you must have seenThe Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-bridge>. Maybe you’re more Borgen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/borgen>, totally addictive – we 
preferred it toThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>, but you have to 
commit, don’t you, to be part of the conversation, likeLost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/lost> and Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>. But how will you follow
Better Call Saul <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/better-call-saul> if 
you haven’t watched Breaking Bad? OK, there’s Walter White – he’s this 
chemistry teacher who gets cancer then… actually, no, why don’t you start with 
the The Crown before there are too many spoilers? All I’ll say is, it’s about 
the Queen, I can’t wait to see how it turns out.
 