
Ridley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> has said that he 
is “done” with “xenomorphs”, the slimy, acid-haemorrhaging monstrosities from 
the Alien movies, prompting speculation that the hideous creatures will not be 
back in his forthcoming sequel to 2012’s Prometheus.

Prometheus was billed as a film “featuring the DNA” of Scott’s earlier film 
Alien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien>, the 1979 slasher-in-space that 
first introduced the xenomorphs. It featured what many took to be a biological 
predecessor of xenomorphs, christened the “deacon” by Scott, which was also 
revealed to have human DNA. However, the veteran film-maker indicated that full 
xenomorphs, which were originally based on designs by the Swiss surrealist 
artist HR Giger, were unlikely to return in future instalments.

“The beast is done. Cooked,” said Scott, speaking to Yahoo movies 
<https://uk.yahoo.com/movies/ridley-scott-updates-us-on-prometheus-2-and-blade-98235330841.html>
. “I got lucky meeting Giger all those years ago. It’s very hard to repeat 
that. I just happen to be the one who forced it through because [the studio] 
said it’s obscene. They didn’t want to do it and I said, ‘I want to do it, it’s 
fantastic.’

“But after four [Alien films], I think it wears out a little bit. There’s only 
so much snarling you can do. I think you’ve got to come back with something 
more interesting. And I think we’ve found the next step. I thought the 
Engineers were quite a good start.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411656656619%2F40e1ea30-cbc5-4df4-bc7a-02a3804db628-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Monster%20fuss%3A%20Ridley%20Scott%20alienates%20xenomorphs%20from%20Prometheus%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Monster%20fuss%3A%20Ridley%20Scott%20alienates%20xenomorphs%20from%20Prometheus%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F25%2F1411656656619%2F40e1ea30-cbc5-4df4-bc7a-02a3804db628-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A scene from 2012’s Prometheus. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Scott said viewers could expect to see Prometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/prometheus> 2 follow Noomi Rapace’s Elisabeth 
Shaw and Michael Fassbender’s decapitated android David in their mission to 
find the Engineers’ home world and find out why the human-like creatures want 
to destroy mankind. “[We’ll] find out how he gets his head back on,” he joked, 
adding that several drafts of the screenplay had been written.

Scott, who is currently promoting his forthcoming biblical epic Exodus: Gods 
and Kings, also confirmed that he had met with Harrison Ford to discuss plans 
for a long-mooted sequel to 1982’s Blade Runner – though he noted that the 
actor is currently busy with Star Wars: Episode VII.

“It’s on the charts,” said Scott. “I can’t say when that would be yet, because 
of his thing with Star Wars. It’s a sequel – it’s what happens next. It’s quite 
surprisingly clever.”
 