
Montreal police launched raids on Friday against illegal cannabis stores that 
had been opened one day earlier by the self-proclaimed “Prince of Pot”, Marc 
Emery, and his wife Jodie.

Emery and his wife were among 10 people arrested in Friday’s raids. Police 
said that all but one person, who refused to sign release documents, were 
released on a promise to appear in court.

Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> is moving to legalize 
marijuana, but it remains illegal.

In 2010, Marc Emery was extradited to the US, where he pleaded guilty to 
selling marijuana seeds to American clients from his Vancouver-based store and 
was sentenced to five years in prison.

Should you worry about marijuana edibles in your kid's Halloween treats? | 
Jodie Emery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/30/worry-marijuana-edibles-kids-halloween-treats>
He was released early in August 2014 on good behavior and flown from a 
facility in Louisiana to Detroit, before crossing the border into Windsor, 
Ontario.

He has become a prominent advocate for marijuana legalization in North America.

Jodie Emery, who has written for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/30/worry-marijuana-edibles-kids-halloween-treats>
, tweeted on Saturday about her arrest, saying: “I was arrested at our hotel in 
Montreal last night, released hours later with no charges. Under investigation. 
My first time in handcuffs!”

She also tweeted that her husband “should be getting out of jail in Montreal 
today”.

Marc Emery has been expanding his chain of dispensaries across Canada, despite 
the fact that the drug is still illegal there.Cannabis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cannabis> Culture, the brand owned by the 
Emerys, already has a dozen shops.

Hundreds of customers lined the street throughout the day on Friday to make 
their first pot purchases at the Mount-Royal, Montreal, location. The store 
reportedly sold out its stock, leaving only cash for police to find.

Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau told reporters in Montreal on Friday 
that “until we’ve changed the law, the current laws exist and apply”.

Ottawa was moving “properly and responsibly” to legalize marijuana, Trudeau 
said.
 