
Denmark’s hopes of qualifying for the 2018 World Cup were dealt a hammer blow 
when they lost 1-0 at home toMontenegro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montenegro> following a superb poacher’s 
goal by Fatos Beciraj.

The hosts made all the running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/11/germany-northern-ireland-slovakia-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-clockwatch-live>
 in the Group E game but they were stunned in the 32nd minute when Beciraj, who 
plays for Dynamo Moscow, lifted the ball home after Stefan Jovetic twisted and 
turned to create an opening before chipping a pass to his strike partner.

Denmark created a slew of chances in the second half and had several penalty 
appeals turned down, but the Montenegro rearguard held firm. Montenegro, who 
have never qualified for the finals of a tournament since being recognised by 
Fifa in 2007, top Group E on seven points, ahead of Poland on goal difference 
withRomania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania> third on five. 
Denmark are fourth on three points after three games.

Germany v Northern Ireland, Slovakia v Scotland and more: World Cup 2018 
qualifier clockwatch – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/11/germany-northern-ireland-slovakia-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-clockwatch-live>
In Warsaw, Robert Lewandowski proved once again to be Poland’s lethal weapon, 
scoring deep in stoppage time to earn a 2-1 win against 10-manArmenia. The 
Poland captain struck in the 95th minute at the National Stadium, scoring for 
the eighth consecutive qualifier and three days after his hat-trick secured a 
3-2 win againstDenmark <https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark>.

Armenia’s Gael Andonian was sent off in the 30th minute after he received two 
yellow cards in two minutes, but the hosts struggled to use the numerical 
advantage until Lewandowski’s goal.

Armenia’s Hrayr Mkoyan scored an own goal to put the hosts 1-0 up in the 48th 
minute and Marcos Pinheiro’s answer was quick, levelling the score two minutes 
later.

With only the group winner qualifying automatically, Poland are tied for first 
place with Montenegro. Romania trail by two points while Denmark are another 
two points behind.Armenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> are at 
the bottom without a point.

Romania dropped two points in a goalless draw in Kazakhstan. It was the second 
home draw forKazakhstan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kazakhstan>, who 
drew 2-2 with Poland before being thrashed 5-0 in Montenegro in the previous 
round. It was the eighth winless home match for the Kazakhs since September 
2014. Romanian TV reported money and other valuables had been stolen from 
players and staff at the team’s hotel before the match.

In Group F, Lithuania collected their first win – a 2-0 victory against Malta 
– thanks to goals by Fiodor Cernych and Arvydas Novikovas, from the penalty 
spot, in the final 14 minutes. Malta have lost all three of their games in the 
group including England and Scotland.
 