
A second ratings agency has warned it will take a keen interest in fiscal 
consolidation in the new parliament asMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> returned to 
Canberra for incoming government briefings.


The Moody’s rating agency said on Monday the likelihood of the Coalition 
forming government had provided “some clarity” about the direction of policy in 
Canberra. But it warned it would be watching keenly for indications that the
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> could not work 
with the new Senate.

Any difficulties in passing deficit-reduction measures through parliament 
would be “credit negative” for the commonwealth.

Conversely, Australia’s credit position would improve if it looked as though 
the deficit was starting to come down substantially, and if government debt 
began to stabilise.

Scorn for Morrison's numbers triggers Standard and Poor's negative outlook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/07/scorn-for-morrisons-numbers-triggers-standard-and-poors-negative-outlook>
“Moody’s expects fiscal consolidation to remain a key policy objective of the 
government,” said Marie Diron, Moody’s Investors Service senior vice president.

“Economic momentum is likely to remain robust. The positive effects of the 
weaker Australian dollar on services exports, and the resilience of private 
consumption in an environment of stable unemployment and low interest rates, 
will support GDP growth.

“Indications that under a Coalition government with a split Senate, little 
agreement can be reached on fiscal consolidation and macroeconomic policy 
measures would be credit negative.”

After declaring victory in the election on Sunday, the prime minister returned 
to Canberra on Monday for government briefings with his departmental head, 
Martin Parkinson.


The Nationals party room will meet in Canberra on Tuesday to resolve its 
collective stance on a new Coalition agreement that will need to be negotiated 
between Turnbull and the Nationals leader, the deputy prime minister, Barnaby 
Joyce.


Turnbull and Joyce are expected to meet on Wednesday, but it is already clear 
the junior Coalition partner will push for more representation within the 
ministry on the basis that its parliamentary representation has increased.

Behind the scenes there is also jockeying ahead of Liberals returning to 
Canberra for their party room meeting next Monday.

Internal pushback on the government’s superannuation policy was a feature of 
the recent election campaign, and it is emerging as something of a proxy war, 
with budget implications.

On Sunday the cabinet secretary, Arthur Sinodinos, said the government had a 
mandate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/10/coalition-should-stick-with-2016-budget-and-super-reforms-arthur-sinodinos-says>
 for key budget measures and he would “continue to argue the importance and the 
merit of those superannuation changes”.

Arthur Sinodinos flags post-election superannuation changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/arthur-sinodinos-flags-post-election-superannuation-changes>
But the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, has warned the government should 
not have a “tin ear” about issues that cost the Coalition support 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/peter-dutton-delivers-warning-to-liberal-party-about-superannuation-reforms/news-story/cf8a1afff74258b7c002cd900ebb4569>
, including superannuation changes.

Tony Abbott’s former chief of staff, Peta Credlin, has warned Malcolm Turnbull 
should drop the retrospective $500,000 limit 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/opinion/peta-credlin-how-pm-malcolm-turnbull-failed-and-how-he-can-succeed-again/news-story/ee2883e29ef2005fb671708ab8907d75>
 on non-concessional super contributions, arguing there is “no way this will 
get through the party room in its present form”. That measure delivers $550m in 
savings to the budget over four years.

During the campaign, Labor said it would not support government super changes 
that had retrospective effect, but would support changes to the system 
equalling the value of the revenue raised by the government’s proposals.

Bill Shorten said on Monday: “I think it’s probably appropriate to get an 
independent expert review to examine whether or not the changes are 
retrospective.”

Moody’s commentary follows Standard & Poor’s warning last week that it might 
lower Australia’s AAA credit rating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/scott-morrison-digs-in-behind-corporate-tax-cuts-despite-standard-poors-credit-warning>
 within two years.


It said the chances of pushing tough reforms through parliament over the next 
three years were slim, so the chance of a credit downgrade had increased.

It said there was a one-in-three chance that it would lower the credit rating 
for Australia within the next two years.
 