
It’s been a year dominated by a much-needed conversation about diversity 
within popular culture. Despite what straight white Brobusters might have to 
counter, the importance of representation on screen has led to a greater 
awareness of the stories Hollywood hasn’t been telling.

Moonlight review – devastating drama is vital portrait of black gay 
masculinity in America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
No film justifies the need for such variety quite so convincingly as 
Moonlight, a soulful drama from director Barry Jenkins about the life of a 
black gay man growing up in Miami, told in three heartbreaking chapters. Tipped 
as an Oscar favorite, it’s breaking thrilling new ground yet away from the 
glamorous red carpet premieres it’s received at Telluride, Toronto, New York 
and London festivals, the true story at its core is something far removed. 
Based on the autobiographical play InMoonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moonlight> Black Boys Look Blue from 
award-winning playwright Tarell Alvin McCraney, it tells of a boy struggling 
with an addict mother and a school rife with homophobia.

Given the long journey that your story has taken from the stage to screen, how 
much do you still recognize from your own experiences?

The original script was different in form, in terms of the three chapters were 
told simultaneously so in that way it was different. However there’s a lot in 
it that is the same. Barry worked really hard to preserve some of the original 
voice and I think what he also did is work hard at putting a lot of space 
between it. It feels ultimately personal, even the parts that I didn’t write 
feel personal because I feel like they are connected to the same story, the 
same struggle, the same questions. It doesn’t feel foreign at all, in fact 
sometimes it feels too close.

Was it a difficult experience finally watching the film?

The first time, no. I think I was just so excited to see something that looked 
exactly like memories to me. Then the glee of that wore off – and I did 
remember feeling very depressed and very heartbroken about a lot of it. Mostly 
because these are not things that I have found the answers to and understand 
how they work. I actually ended up feeling that these are still looming 
questions in my life, questions about my own identity and my own self-worth 
that I’m still trying to figure out. Then seeing the film again, I was like 
shit, these are still here and they’re not going anywhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ffb07ee36d3fdd476aaf107dc20077658951e45%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight's%20Tarell%20Alvin%20McCraney%3A%20'I%20never%20had%20a%20coming%20out%20moment'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%27s%20Tarell%20Alvin%20McCraney%3A%20%27I%20never%20had%20a%20coming%20out%20moment%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ffb07ee36d3fdd476aaf107dc20077658951e45%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Ashton Sanders in Moonlight. Photograph: David Bornfriend/AP 
It is about the big issues like identity and homophobia but also, I don’t know 
if I’ll ever be done trying to suss out the trauma of growing up with an 
addictive parent. I don’t know if that will ever go away but I wish like hell 
that it would. It is difficult to watch and re-engage with but ultimately 
necessary because it’s brought to bear some very serious questions for me. 
Also, even in my career, why aren’t I telling more intimate stories? I feel 
like I tell intimate stories in plays but why am I not telling stories like 
this that lay me bare. Not exploitative but just getting at the sort of hard 
truths of things.

There are so many important LGBT stories that have been straight-washed on the 
big screen. Even though many of the themes are universal, how reticent were you 
to hand the project over to a straight writer/director?

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
Barry had tremendous respect for what the piece was. He never came in trying 
to turn it into something else. In fact, he dug his heels in about certain 
things that were not going to go away. There was no reticence with Barry. He 
also didn’t ask any of the actors if they were GLBT-identifying, he just cast 
them. We were telling a coming of age story that was dealing with queer 
identity and nobody tried to sideswipe that. It’s happened in other instances 
but not here. We knew that there were not going to be any white characters in 
it. There were no white characters in the original script. It’s just very 
difficult for you to see white people in Liberty City (the area shown in the 
film). They knew that and they were more than cool with it. My reticence was 
more about how much to say and how much is necessary in order to make the story 
as authentic as possible.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc&media=>
The film’s had universal acclaim, but there have been some negative comments 
about the film being an offense to black masculinity by commenters on YouTube 
and I know Barry was trolled a bit on Twitter about it. Why do you think this 
very specific type of homophobia is still such a problem?

First of all, I know that there’s homophobia that is essentially misogyny 
masked as homophobia in all of American culture no matter how much we try and 
pretend there is not. That anti-feminism is rampant and I think when it comes 
to someone’s notion of what a black man should be like, it again is tying back 
into this understanding and it’s people who feel like there is a way to be 
masculine and that masculinity means a kind of superiority which is just 
misogyny. So I think that’s endemic in all parts of American society and it 
just comes out in different ways. I don’t think it’s particular to black 
culture. It may show itself differently but it’s all part of the same thread.

As well as regulating your behavior as a gay man, do you also feel like you 
have to be careful of your behavior as a black man in America? That you need to 
perform in different situations to survive?

My gayness doesn’t give me any pass. I’ve still had the police pull me out of 
a car, put guns to my head, lock me in handcuffs and leave me face down in the 
pouring rain for no reason. Until they go into my back pocket and see some sort 
of white privilege in there, which is probably a university card or something 
and then they’re like “oh maybe we’ve got the wrong person”. There’s no gay 
card that gets you off the hook. People suggest that there is but I know, with 
empirical evidence, that there isn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc99e0577d8458dc7a4bdc5fdc573d19b583b26b%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight's%20Tarell%20Alvin%20McCraney%3A%20'I%20never%20had%20a%20coming%20out%20moment'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%27s%20Tarell%20Alvin%20McCraney%3A%20%27I%20never%20had%20a%20coming%20out%20moment%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmoonlight-film-tarell-alvin-mccraney-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc99e0577d8458dc7a4bdc5fdc573d19b583b26b%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Trevante Rhodes in Moonlight. Photograph: David Bornfriend/AP 
In the film, we see a moment when Chiron’s guard comes down and he seems more 
comfortable with his sexuality. Was there something similar for you when you 
came out?

It’s interesting because I never had a coming out moment. Especially because, 
like in the film, people were telling me I was gay from the off. There was 
never a moment when I had to sit everybody down and have a conversation. There 
were these small moments when I would be with my boyfriend and have to explain 
to my brother that this is my boyfriend, he’s not my friend or my partner but 
he’s my boyfriend. My brother was like “oh cool” and we moved on. There was a 
moment when I was being intimate with women and intimate with men and something 
happened where I realized I wanted to be more than just intimate, I want to be 
in a relationship and who I want to be in a relationship with is men. That’s 
what being gay is to me. So then I was like OK that’s cool and I understand why 
they’re calling me gay.

You were also coming to terms with your sexuality at a time when there was a 
dearth of gay people in the media, especially gay black men. Do you think that 
kids coming out now will have a different experience because they can identify 
more easily with characters and figures within popular culture?

Black films matter – how African American cinema fought back against Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/do-the-right-thing-how-black-cinema-rose-again>
I think so but I often don’t like to put the burden of total representation 
within art. Art is there to reflect. The problem is that we’re not being 
totally representational within life. Like you said, when I grew up there was a 
dearth of gay people in the media but there were gay people within my 
neighborhood. There were transgender people within my neighborhood. The way in 
which the community interacted with these people was so peripheral and 
marginalizing that I didn’t get a chance to know how they could be integrated 
into the world around us. That’s on us as a community and us as people. It’s 
important for us to be representational as people in communities and not get 
this xenophobic idea of living in this homogenized world.

Even within those representations we see, there is still often a more 
“acceptable” definition of what a gay man is seen as by society, in terms of 
either masculinity or femininity.

That’s equally problematic on both sides. Often in America we get accused of 
only showing the masculine, normalized heteronormative gay and then there are 
people who are feminine, male or female, because gender has nothing to do with 
masculinity or femininity, and we marginalize them so much that people only see 
that life for themselves. There are feminine straight men and there are 
masculine straight women. In terms of allowing ourselves to be more fluid in 
our day-to-day lives, we can’t just rely on universality within art to happen. 
That’s crazy. Although that doesn’t give us a pass. We have to be thinking 
about it because we have the ability to make the world we want.

Moonlight is out now in New York and Los Angeles with a UK release to be 
announced.
 