
January feels like a long time ago. During the month, in the lead-up to 
Sundance <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundance-2016> and the Oscars, there 
was a constant stream of articles about #OscarsSoWhite and the fact that for 
the second year in a row there were no actors of color nominated for the main 
awards. Step forward Nate Parker and his passion project The Birth of a Nation, 
a film that took him seven years to make and isa far from historically accurate 
portrayal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/hollywood-truth-better-fiction-birth-of-nation-nat-turner>
 of the rebel slave Nat Turner. It quickly became an award winner and a record 
setter when it was bought by Fox Searchlight for $17.5m. Amid the five-star 
reviews and the fever that surrounded the film – including a standing ovation 
before it had even been screened – it seemed this film would solve the 
problems. It wouldn’t.

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
At Sundance, it was the toast of the festival, serving as a convenient palate 
cleanser to take away the bad taste that #OscarsSoWhite had brought to the 
event. It was easy for critics to overlook the fact the filmjust wasn’t that 
good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
 in order to use it as an instant rebuttal and quick fix for a problem that is 
much more ingrained. But when the revelations about Parker’srape case from 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/30/nate-parker-birth-of-a-nation-rape-allegation-60-minutes-interview>
 began to be reported, suddenly supporters stepped away from the film and 
reviews at the time of its release became lukewarm at best. It was no longer 
the buzzy Oscar contender it had been in January. Now it was a hubristic 
cautionary tale about what happens when guilt drives critical faculties.


These films serve a purpose for Hollywood, and the reception The Birth of a 
Nation received pulls that into sharp focus. There’s the same complacency and 
eye-rolling undercurrent to some of the coverage accompanying Barry Jenkins’ 
filmMoonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
. A hastily changed headline for one outlet originally ran: “Academy members 
looking to address OscarSoWhite will be all over Moonlight 
<http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/mahershala-ali-barry-jenkins-moonlight-film-review/Content?oid=24128010>
”, while another took the time to point out thatwhite people can also relate 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/moonlight-is-about-a-poor-black-gay-teen-but-heres-why-it-relates-to-everyone/2016/10/27/01dcca6c-9b7b-11e6-9980-50913d68eacb_story.html>
 to a film about black gay love. The former shows that for many within the 
industry, films from ethnic minorities or about issues outside the few 
Hollywood mainly focuses on are still seen as token. Others made the case that 
any push toward a more diverse Hollywood could leave everyone’s favorite stars
out in the cold 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/uh-oh-older-white-male-contenders-are-piling-into-a-diverse-awards-season-1201839292/>
.

Moonlight absolutely deserves its five-star reviews; it is an incredible piece 
of film-making with a complex narrative that shifts between time, location and 
feel to create something completely unique. It’s a film that has triggered some 
ofthe best cultural writing this year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/10/30/magazine/black-male-sexuality-last-taboo.html?_r=0&smid=pl-share>
 (as well as some of the aforementioned worst), brought a world few have ever 
seen on the big screen to the forefront, and is well on its way to becoming the
most successful independent film of the year 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/moonlight-gimme-danger-oasis-weekend-specialty-box-office-1201845224/>
. If it doesn’t get Oscar nominations, there will be outcry, but if it does 
there’s the potential that it will becomethis year’s black film 
<http://nypost.com/2016/10/28/moonlight-is-the-black-film-hollywood-desperately-needs/>
: a useful example for critics of the #OscarsSoWhite hashtag to hold up as 
evidence of how far the industry has come in only 12 months. Indeed, for some, 
Moonlight has clearly filled that inconvenient hole as the one black film that 
needs to be in the running. All this while films by or starring Asian or 
Hispanic talent are nowhere to be found in the race.


Oscars whitewash: why have 2015's red carpets been so overwhelmingly white?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/19/the-great-awards-whitewash-diversity-loses-out-on-the-red-carpets>
Recently, there’s been an incredible run of movies produced by directors and 
actors of color.Ava DuVernay’s 13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
 eloquently laid bare the racism at the heart of the US prison system;Fences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/27/fences-trailer-denzel-washington-viola-davis>
 will bring August Wilson’s Pulitzer-winning play to the big screen; whileLoving
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
 tells the story of mixed-race marriage and those states which opposed it.
Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/hidden-figures-trailer-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
 shines light on a forgotten story from the Space Race era,OJ: Made in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/19/oj-simpson-made-in-america-espn-documentary>
 reminded everyone about who OJ Simpson was (and what made him that way), and
I’m Not Your Negro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-am-not-your-negro-review-james-baldwin-raoul-peck>
 gives James Baldwin some of the attention he deserves. But don’t forget that 
last year people were equally hopeful for Creed, Concussion, Straight Outta 
Compton and Beast of No Nation.


Will Hollywood make room for these films this time around or will movies about 
Tinseltown itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, American triumphalism or somethingas vanilla as Brooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
 win out, again? Thechanges the Academy has made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/oscars-academy-new-members-small-step-diversity>
, led by Cheryl Boone Isaacs,to bring in twice as many 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/09/2017-diverse-oscars-awards-season-loving-fences-birth-of-a-nation-1201730500/>
 new voters as last year, many of whom are women and people of color, has an 
eye on the future of the institution’s voting habits. It’s been fought all the 
way, too. But bringing that change to an organization so set in its ways and 
traditions is a long-term project. Regardless of what happens this year, the 
real measure of success will be when the industry and Academy recognizes these 
projects consistently and where more than one “non-mainstream film” has a place 
at the table.
 