
The film Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
 is extraordinary for many reasons, but to me it is most so for two. First, it 
considers black boys to be precious, at a time when news stories perpetually 
make it seem as if the United States considers them to be utterly expendable. 
Second, it acknowledges the effects that the stalking ghosts of premature death 
and incarceration have upon gay black masculinity – and it manages to do so 
without ever diminishing the lives full of complex humanity that black gay men 
still manage to have in America while navigating that reality.

So often, gay lives in America are coded as white, and the forces that shape 
the lives of queer people of color – say, how immigration affects being Chicano 
and gay in Calfornia, or how police surveillance affects being black and gay in 
the New York – are ignored, as gay identity is usually swept up into whiteness.
Moonlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moonlight> eschews this reductivism 
entirely, brilliantly portraying in a lyrical story how love and connection 
attempt to take hold.

Moonlight review – devastating drama is vital portrait of black gay 
masculinity in America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
The fact that there are about a million and a half black men disappeared 
<https://myaccount.nytimes.com/auth/login?URI=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.nytimes.com%2Finteractive%2F2015%2F04%2F20%2Fupshot%2Fmissing-black-men.html%3F_r%3D1>
 from American society by early death and incarceration is not a side issue to 
black gay men. It’s certainly no side issue to Chiron, Moonlight’s hero, who 
successfully seeks out a father figure, Juan (Mahershala Ali), only to lose him 
to an early death. And yet, Moonlight also shows how creative and brilliant 
black humanity is at being so much more than its pain. DirectorBarry Jenkins  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/15/why-i-love-barry-jenkins-bim-adewunmi>
doesn’t dwell on Juan’s death as much as he does on the beauty of his embrace 
of Chiron in his arms in the sea, on his smile, on his joyful proclamation that 
you can find black people wherever you go in the world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9NJj12tJzqc&media=>
Another gift Jenkins gives not just to American cinema, but to American 
culture, is that he depicts black boyhood as something worthy of rooting for to 
succeed. It is not especially difficult to make white boyhood precious. In the 
2014 movieBoyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/boyhood-selma-american-sniper-race-part-one>
, director Richard Linklater encouraged the audience to hold as precious and 
unique Mason, a banal and totally average white American child who existed in 
an imaginary nearly all-white Texas. Mason and his friend engage in petty 
vandalism, and also drink and drive – and yet, Mason, “no angel”, was excused 
and held dear in a way a black child never would be.

Lately, I have been thinking a lot about a Yale study 
<http://news.yale.edu/2016/09/27/implicit-bias-may-help-explain-high-preschool-expulsion-rates-black-children>
 where pre-school teachers were asked to watch videos of very young children to 
look for signs of trouble, and eye-tracking software revealed their eyes went 
for the black boys first and watched them the most. And why wouldn’t they? As 
consumers of non-fiction media in America, we are always being told that black 
boys are suspicious and that violence against them is justifiable.

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
The same week Moonlight opened, a sign commemorating Emmett Till, murdered for 
whistling at a white woman, 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/22/us/mississippi-emmett-till-sign-bullets/> was 
riddled with bullet holes – a 14-year-old still considered suspect, six decades 
after being lynched. But white boys, like Boyhood’s Mason, are considered 
innocent by default. As we saw the same actor, Ellar Coltraine, grow up on film 
over 12 years, we were encouraged to see him as the future of America, worth 
protecting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45822785bda0210278c8c0aa7224587ab528242%2F0_0_3072_1728%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45822785bda0210278c8c0aa7224587ab528242%2F0_0_3072_1728%2F3072.jpg>
 Jharrel Jerome as Kevin and Ashton Sanders as Chiron in Moonlight’s second 
act. Photograph: David Bornfriend/film company handout 
In Moonlight, we also see a boy, Chiron, turn into a young man over many 
years, though we only see him at three stages, each time played by a different 
actor. Jenkins and the actor who plays “Little” Chiron, Alex R Hibbert, are 
extraordinarily effective at melting your heart. We root for Little Chiron and 
his watchful eyes, whether he is avoiding bullies or tepidly checking out his 
friends as they compare penises. When he poured boiling water into the tub, my 
heart was in my throat that he could be hurt.

But what is more extraordinary, perhaps, is that Jenkins continues to retain 
our sympathies as Chiron develops into a less passive and more complex person

The breadth of Moonlight’s ambitions, and the deft way it deals with 
complexity is captured at the end of its second chapter, when something happens 
that chilled me both times I’ve seen it. Chiron (now portrayed by Ashton 
Sanders) approaches Terrel, a bully who had ordered Chiron’s friend Kevin to 
beat Chiron up, and smashes a chair over his head. The scene is stunning, not 
just as a surprise act of revenge from a character whom the audience has 
experienced as sensitive and sweet, but of how visually reminiscent it is of 
something that happened in real life. In 2015, a black man namedBayna El-Amin  
<https://mic.com/articles/147556/what-bayna-el-amin-s-assault-case-says-about-racism-in-the-lgbtq-community#.gRCkNzilQ>
smashed a chair over a white gay couple in a BBQ restaurant in New York’s 
Chelsea neighborhood.

When a video of the attack went viral without context, it led to calls for an 
investigation into whether the“thug” 
<http://joemygod.blogspot.com/2015/06/report-accused-fugitive-in-chelsea.html> 
El-Amin had committed a hate crime against the white gay men. But the story was 
more complex. El-Amin identified as queer in some way, and claimed that the act 
was in retribution for a fight started by the white gay men he hit with the 
chair.

Gay advocacy groups were interested in the case when it could have been about 
two white gay men hit by a straight black man, but lost interest when it turned 
out to be about a black queer man hitting back against white gay men who had 
started a fight. In different ways, the fictive, slight Chiron and the real 
life, brawny El-Amin show that it is possible to be black, gay and able to 
exact revenge against the person who is causing you pain by hitting them with a 
chair. These narratives muddle a clean victim-perpetrator narrative, do not go 
well for anyone involved, and are so human.

The person I saw Moonlight with (another queer person of color) cheered aloud 
when Chiron hit Kevin, then sighed when the police showed up, because he knew 
Chiron’s decision to defend himself was going to cost him dearly. (It also cost 
El-Amin, who was sentenced tonine years 
<http://www.advocate.com/crime/2016/9/15/nine-year-sentence-man-convicted-chair-attack-nyc-restaurant>
.) By the end of the scene, we don’t know for how long Chiron is going away for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac7729663077f00fc54124c3a9497a6bbbc0d93%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac7729663077f00fc54124c3a9497a6bbbc0d93%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Heart-melting: Alex Hibbert as little Chiron. Photograph: David Bornfriend, 
courtesy of A24 
In Moonlight’s third and final chapter, we do know that Chiron has gone away 
for some time (during which he meets someone who has now put him out on the 
block to sell drugs); that his friend Kevin was also incarcerated; that his 
father figure has died prematurely, and that his mother, Paula (Naomie Harris) 
lives under some kind of supervised control in a rehab center. When Chiron 
reconnects with Kevin, he is still on parole, and the experiences of 
confinement have heavily affected everyone – especially Paula, who is so broken 
by it she chooses to stay in the rehab center when she could leave because she 
can’t survive outside.

Even in the film’s uplifting moments, it is depressing that everyone in 
Chiron’s life is either dead or living under some form of state surveillance. 
Jenkins deals with this deftly, without being heavy-handed or dismissive, and 
makes the characters no less worthy of our support.

The first time I saw Moonlight, I was worried that it could create a dangerous 
takeaway message: that if black gay men want to lead full lives, they should 
try to escape from the violence of other black men and into the arms of 
whiteness. A reading of the film to that point could be saying that Chiron’s 
precious boyhood could not be trusted to other black boys and men and might 
better be nurtured elsewhere.

As the 1989 film Tongues Untied <http://www.pbs.org/pov/tonguesuntied/> – 
still so relevant today – points out, it is common for black gay men to 
internalize a fear of one another and to buy into a push that we ought to flee 
into the arms of a white gay man. Like worshipping a Brad Pitt-like portrait of 
Jesus Christ in church, it is easy for black gay men to internalize society’s 
pressure to idealize white men and believe that salvation can be had by being 
closer to whiteness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64a659145a70e5a7df73b5b480ca26f03db5b585%2F0_0_5640_3760%2F5640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moonlight%20portrays%20black%20gay%20life%20in%20its%20joy%2C%20sadness%20and%20complexity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fmoonlight-movie-barry-jenkins-black-gay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64a659145a70e5a7df73b5b480ca26f03db5b585%2F0_0_5640_3760%2F5640.jpg>
 Alex Hibbert and Mahershala Ali as Juan: a model of gay acceptance. 
Photograph: David Bornfriend, courtesy of A24 
Since the shootings of mostly Latino queer people at the Pulse nightclub, I 
have consciously been trying to spend time in queer communities of color, 
meeting likeminded folks who also desire queerness in skin that looks like 
theirs. But even among us, it has been sad to learn how often black gay men 
tell me that out in the world, those like them won’t give them the 
acknowledging head nod on the street. Brothers have also shared their sadness 
that they think black gay men won’t date them because they’re waiting for a 
white boyfriend. So the first time I saw Moonlight, I worried the bullying 
Chiron received could fit into a flight towards white narrative.

But on a second viewing, my fears were allayed for three main reasons. First 
and most obviously, Chiron doesn’t flee into the arms of a white man, but to 
his friend Kevin. (Significantly though, like Juan’s partner Teresa, played by
Janelle Monáe <https://www.theguardian.com/music/janelle-monae>, Kevin is also 
light-skinned, teasingly calls Chiron “black” and only acted under the orders 
of the dark-skinned Terrel.) Second, Juan, Chiron’s father figure in the first 
chapter, lovingly deflects any sense of shame little Chiron could feel when he 
asks what a “faggot” is and whether he is one. Juan embodies some of the 
hardest masculinity in the film and is also a model of gay acceptance, slaying 
the canard that black people are more homophobic than white people.

Finally, Moonlight is an all-black world, devoid of respectability politics. 
While it tells the story of ambiguous sexuality, it does so with unambiguous 
blackness and without shame. When stories eschew the white gaze and exist 
entirely inside of blackness, the protagonists and antagonists are all black. 
When Marvel’s Luke Cage faces oppression from other black opponents and not 
from white people, this is not a denial of white supremacy. Similarly, seeing 
black kids beat each other up in Moonlight is not a call to abandon black 
masculinity as insufficient to cope with black homosexuality, but to wrestle 
with the reality of black gay men in its totality.
 