
It's a trailer you might not have had the pleasure to see in the UK - mainly 
because there's no release date fixed to it yet - but because it would be 
dreadful to think of you missing out on the experience, we thought we should 
endeavour to bring it to you.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlnHllNDcv4A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlnHllNDcv4A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlnHllNDcv4A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
.
A group of valiant celebrity conservatives, you see, tired of being 
downtrodden and voiceless in the well-known liberal enclave of Hollywood, have 
banded together to make a film. And that is what we find here. Which is nice.

"HE'S AMERICA'S MOST INFAMOUS FILM-MAKER"

A large man with a beard and baseball cap addresses the camera. "Here I am in 
the island paradise of Cuba," he says, holding a cocktail while sick people 
queue to get into a hospital behind him. You see that? That's because they have 
socialised medicine. Which is baaaaaaaad, you see? But this man likes it, 
because he is a crazy liberal. He'sMichael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michaelmoore>, let's face it. No, sorry, 
"Michael Malone".

"TOTALLY ARROGANT"

"I love America," says the big chap eating a doughnut. "That's why it must be 
destroyed."

"COMPLETELY CLUELESS"

Kelsey Grammer, dressed as some kind of iconic general - let's say Patton, 
because I can't think of any other American generals right now - is explaining 
to the fat film-maker that he's the biggest slave-owner in the south. "Don't 
worry Master Malone," chips in Gary Coleman from Diff'rent Strokes. "We got 
them bacon stains out of the upholstery!" Which is, of course, undoubtedly 
hilarious in context.

But this time...

"HE'S FINALLY GONE TOO FAR" says the voiceover and the words on screen. Are 
they referring to Michael Moore's current anti-Bush election-based movie 
screening for free on the internet in an attempt to exercise young people into 
getting off their arses and voting (as long as they promise not to vote 
Republican)? Oh, no, that would be silly, of course. Because this is not real. 
This is about the completely fictional fat film-maker MichaelMalone ... who 
wants to abolish July 4th, he says.

Of course he does. And the ghosts of three fine upstanding American icons - 
including General Patton, so full marks to me - are going to haunt him, 
Christmas Carol style, until he sees the light, gives up his ridiculous leftist 
ideas and becomes a real patriot, presumably. This seems to involve punching 
him in the face a lot.

And that's it. The rest of the trailer passes unsurprisingly, with a scene in 
a portable toilet, some more punching in the face and many of the zany madcap 
activities one might expect from the producer of Airplane. In fact, he gets his 
own special onscreen mention at some point:

"From David Zucker," says the voiceover man. "The master of movie satire."

And a pullquote comes up on the screen. "THE MASTER OF MOVIE SATIRE," it says, 
so at least it's attributable fact. Attributed to ... oh. David Zucker, it 
says. I'm not sure it counts if you say it about yourself, does it?

I'm sure it's an intentional gag. But it's so hard to tell in such a brief, 
trailer-esque context, what might be an intentional gag and what isn't. 
Especially as this moment follows a solemn plea to teach him "the true meaning 
of patriotism" and a rousing country rock number with the lyrics, "This is the 
greatest country in the whole wide world". With fireworks. And troops.

Other standout points include a particularly classy suicide bombing joke, a 
gag about women who look like men (and possibly lesbians too, why not?) and 
something equally enlightened about how difficult it is for rebel troops to 
corral their forces because they're all called "Muhammad".

And apart from that, it's just a long list of all the actors who have lent 
their redoubtable services to this masterful satire. It's so hard to tell 
whether the rest of the film will live up to the promise shown in this 
startling 100-second glimpse. And yet, AND YET, until there's a release date 
for anywhere apart from the US, there's a fair chance that UK and European 
readers might never get to see the rest of this film.

But fear not - if this is what the creatives of the conservative Hollywood 
minority can achieve when they band together with their comrades in arms and - 
no, wait, not comrades; they wouldn't like that at ALL - if this is what can be 
achieved (a single issue diatribe against a documentary film-maker they 
disagree with, with added booby jokes) then you might see a whole lot of movies 
from the same team. And with exactly the same cast. There aren't that many of 
them, you know.

And thank God for that. Because seriously, the last time I saw a trailer this 
stinky, it was a special YouTube Scratch'n'Sniff presentation, "Poo: The 
Musical".

That's why I just had to show you it. It's like that person in a restaurant 
that says: "Hey! This tastes HORRIBLE! Try it!" Sorry.
 