
Democracy is drowning in fake news. This is the latest reassuring conclusion 
drawn by those on the losing side of 2016, from Brexit to the US elections to 
the Italian referendum.

Apparently, all these earnest, honest and unfashionably rational grownups are 
losing elections because of a dangerous epidemic of fake news, internet memes 
and funny YouTube videos. For this crowd, the problem is not that the Titanic 
of democratic capitalism is sailing in dangerous waters; its potential sinking 
can never be discussed in polite society anyway. Rather, it’s that there are 
far too many false reports about giant icebergs on the horizon.

The problem is not fake news but a digital capitalism that makes it profitable 
to produce false but click-worthy stories

Hence the recent surfeit of misguided solutions: ban internet memes (proposed 
by Spain’s ruling party); establish commissions of experts to rule on the 
veracity of news (a solution floated by Italy’s antitrust chief); set up 
centres of defence against fake news while fining the likes of Twitter and 
Facebook for spreading them (an approach suggested by German authorities).

This last proposal is a great way to incentivise Facebook to promote freedom 
of expression – the same Facebook that has recentlycensored a photo of the nude 
statute of Neptune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/facebook-blocks-nude-neptune-statue-bologna-italy>
 in the centre of Bologna for being too obscene! A tip for authoritarian 
governments: if you want to get away with online censorship, just label any 
articles you do not like as fake news and no one in the west will ever complain 
about it.

Will the fake news crisis be the cause of democracy’s collapse? Or is it just 
a consequence of a deeper, structural malaise that has been under way for much 
longer? While it’s hard to deny that there’s a crisis, whether it’s a crisis of 
fake news or of something else entirely is a question that every mature 
democracy should be asking.

Our elites are having none of it. Their fake news narrative is itself fake: 
it’s a shallow explanation of a complex, systemic problem, the very existence 
of which they still refuse to acknowledge. The ease with which mainstream 
institutions, from ruling parties to thinktanks to the media, have converged 
upon “fake news” as their preferred lens on the unfolding crisis says a lot 
about the impermeability of their world view.

The big threat facing western societies today is not so much the emergence of 
illiberal democracy abroad as the persistence of immature democracy at home. 
This immaturity, exhibited almost daily by the elites, manifests itself in two 
types of denial: the denial of the economic origins of most of today’s 
problems; and the denial of the profound corruption of professional expertise.

The first type manifests itself whenever phenomena like Brexit or Donald 
Trump’s electoral success are ascribed primarily to cultural factors such as 
racism or voter ignorance. The second type denies that the immense frustration 
many people feel towards existing institutions stems not from their not knowing 
the whole truth about how they operate but, rather, from knowing it all too 
well.

Blinded by these two denials, policymakers prescribe more of what alienates 
voters in the first place: more expertise, more centralisation, more 
regulation. But, since they can’t think in terms of political economy, they 
inevitably end up regulating the wrong things.

The moral panic around fake news illustrates how these two denials condemn 
democracy to perpetual immaturity. The refusal to acknowledge that the crisis 
of fake news has economic origins makes the Kremlin – rather than the 
unsustainable business model of digital capitalism – everyone’s favourite 
scapegoat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fblaming-fake-news-not-the-answer-democracy-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed79337276e40253261f9cb44756f9c0a9354fd%2F0_73_5342_3205%2F5342.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democracy%20is%20in%20crisis%2C%20but%20blaming%20fake%20news%20is%20not%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Evgeny%20Morozov&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fblaming-fake-news-not-the-answer-democracy-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democracy%20is%20in%20crisis%2C%20but%20blaming%20fake%20news%20is%20not%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Evgeny%20Morozov&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fblaming-fake-news-not-the-answer-democracy-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ed79337276e40253261f9cb44756f9c0a9354fd%2F0_73_5342_3205%2F5342.jpg>
 Donald Trump has challenged US intelligence to provide evidence of Russian 
hacking during last year’s election. Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
But isn’t it obvious that no amount of foreign interference – by Russia or any 
other government – could produce viral news at scale? There have always been 
crazy movements (rememberLyndon LaRouche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/may/19/features11.g24>?) that 
lived and breathed fake news. What they lacked was not the political and 
financial cover from Russia but, rather, today’s powerful digital 
infrastructure, lavishly subsidised by online advertising, for making their 
crazy theories go viral.

The problem is not fake news but the speed and ease of its dissemination, and 
it exists primarily because today’s digital capitalism makes it extremely 
profitable – look at Google and Facebook – to produce and circulate false but 
click-worthy narratives.

To recast the fake news crisis this way, however, would require the 
establishment to transcend one of their denials and dabble in the political 
economy of communications. And who wants to acknowledge that, for the past 30 
years, it has been the political parties of the centre-left and centre-right 
that touted the genius of Silicon Valley, privatised telecommunications and 
adopted a rather lax attitude to antitrust enforcement?

The second type of denial turns a blind eye to the corruption of today’s 
expert-based knowledge. When thinktanks gladly accept funds from foreign 
governments; when energy firms fund dubious research on climate change; when 
even the Queen – what a populist, she – questions the entire economics 
profession; when the media regularly take marching orders from PR agencies and 
political spin doctors; when financial regulators and European commissioners 
leave their jobs to work on Wall Street – could anyone really blame the 
citizens for being sceptical of “experts”?

It only gets worse when charges of fake news come from the media, which, due 
to the dismal economics of digital publishing, regularly run dubious “news” of 
their own. Take theWashington Post, that rare paper that claims to be 
profitable these days. What it has gained in profitability, it seems to have 
lost in credibility.

Having recklessly described many serious online outlets as Russian propaganda 
– based in part on areport by the anonymous organisation PropOrNot 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/russian-propaganda-effort-helped-spread-fake-news-during-election-experts-say/2016/11/24/793903b6-8a40-4ca9-b712-716af66098fe_story.html?utm_term=.1c71efaa165e>
 – it has recently warned about damaging Russian cyberattacks on a power grid 
in Vermont (in a report followed in other media outlets,including the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/31/russia-hacking-malware-vermont-electric-obama>
). It seems that those attacks didn’t happen and that theWashington Post didn’t 
even bother to check with the grid operator 
<http://digital.vpr.net/post/botched-washington-post-report-launches-burlington-electric-national-spotlight#stream/0>
. Apparently, an economy ruled by online advertising has produced its own 
theory of truth: truth is whatever produces most eyeballs.

To hear professional journalists complain about this problem without 
acknowledging their own culpability further undermines one’s faith in 
expertise. Democracy may or may not be drowning in fake news, but it’s 
definitely drowning in elite hypocrisy.

Caught between the two denials, the elites will never stop searching for 
innovative solutions to the problem of fake news – much as they never stopped 
searching for innovative solutions to climate change. The two issues do have a 
certain similarity: just as climate change is the natural byproduct of fossil 
capitalism, so is fake news the byproduct of digital capitalism.

It won’t take long for some genius policy entrepreneur, fed up with the 
authoritarian nature of current proposals, to unleash the genius of free 
markets on this problem. Why not, say, establish a post-truth emissions trading 
scheme, where news organisations could trade their government-issued fake news 
permits? Ridiculous, yes; ineffective, yes – but the scheme would surely 
receive major social innovation prizes.

The only solution to the problem of fake news that neither misdiagnoses the 
problem nor overpowers the elites is to completely rethink the fundamentals of 
digital capitalism. We need to make online advertising – and its destructive 
click-and-share drive – less central to how we live, work and communicate. At 
the same time, we need to delegate more decision-making power to citizens – 
rather than the easily corruptible experts and venal corporations.

This means building a world where Facebook and Google neither wield much clout 
nor monopolise problem-solving. A formidable task worthy of mature democracies. 
Alas, the existing democracies, stuck in their denials of various kinds, prefer 
to blame everyone but themselves while offloading more and more problems to 
Silicon Valley.
 