
Depression and anxiety have risen among teenage girls in England, with more 
than a third reporting symptoms of distress, although the rates are stable 
among teenage boys, according to amajor survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/540563/LSYPE2_w2_research_report.pdf>
 of 14-year-olds carried out for the Department for Education.

Among the girls, 37% reported feeling unhappy, worthless or unable to 
concentrate, more than twice the percentage of boys reporting such feelings, a 
rise since a study in 2005, which was described by the researchers as “an 
important and significant trend”. The figure for the girls had risen by nearly 
four percentage points since 2005, while the figure for boys, 15%, had fallen 
slightly.

The rise was pronounced in young people living in single-parent households or 
with stepfamilies, and those with a long-standing illness or disability 
affecting their education. Poor sleeping patterns, including sleeping for less 
than the recommended amount, were reported among many of those reporting other 
problems, and will be followed up in later reports.

Social media is harming the mental health of teenagers. The state has to act | 
June Eric Udorie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/16/social-media-mental-health-teenagers-government-pshe-lessons>
A spokesman for the Department for Education said the mental health of the 
young was a priority area.

“Children’s mental health is a priority for this government and we know that 
intervening early can have a lasting impact,” he said. “We are putting a record 
£1.4bn into transforming the dedicated mental health support available to young 
people across the country and are working to strengthen the links between 
schools and mental health services.

“We are also driving forward innovations to improve prevention and early 
support, by investing £1.5m on peer-support networks in schools so children 
feel empowered to help one another.”

There was some good news in the report, which found that the teenagers were 
more serious than their predecessors, less likely to be play truant, more 
convinced of the importance of hard work, and “markedly” less prone to risky 
behaviour including smoking, drinking and drug-taking. In 2005, 30% admitted to 
drinking alcohol, but this had fallen to 12%. Reported drug-taking was also 
down, and truancy had fallen from 21% to 11%. There was a sharp fall – from 23% 
in 2005 to 16% in 2014 – in teenagers reporting that their parents had kept 
them out of school for reasons other than illness.

 The situation outlined in the report, based on in-depth interviews with 
thousands of teenagers in year 10 in England, was described by Marjorie 
Wallace, chief executive of the mental health charity Sane, as “a slow-growing 
epidemic”.

Wallace told The Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/teenagers-struck-by-depression-epidemic-gnc05fht8>
 that her charity had been contacted by worried school heads. “There definitely 
does seem to be something happening – it’s a slow- growing epidemic,” she said. 
“Over the period covered by the report we have seen a very disturbing change in 
admissions to hospital for self-harm in under-16s that have gone up by 52%.”

Teenage girls' mental health overlooked by parents, survey finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/24/teenage-girls-mental-health-overlooked-parents-survey>
 The report found the problems were more marked among both girls and boys of 
parents educated to degree level, which the researchers said could be partly 
due to peer pressure and pushy parents. There had also been “a small but 
statistically significant” worsening in young people’s belief that they could 
influence their own destinies – more marked in households where at least one 
parent was out of work.

 The researchers – who will continue to follow up the group of teenagers 
interviewed – said there appeared to be less stress, possibly because of lower 
expectations, among those from more disadvantaged social backgrounds.

 “There may be some ways in which having lower social status may be associated 
with lower levels of expectation for school success and lower levels of 
associated pressure. Another possible explanation is that young people from 
disadvantaged backgrounds may be more resilient in the face of [stress factors] 
associated with a more challenging economic and school environment.”
 