
More than 300 major post offices will be hit by a 24-hour walkout on Thursday 
as workers protest against branch closures, job cuts and pension changes.

'Pushed to breaking point': Post Office workers on today's strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/pushed-to-breaking-point-post-office-workers-on-todays-strike>
About 4,000 members of the Communication Workers Union 
<http://www.cwu.org/media/news/2016/september/08/national-post-office-strike/>, 
which represents postal workers, and about 700 members of Unite, which acts for 
managers, are to picket around the country throughout the day.

The action comes despite talks through Acas, the arbitration service, earlier 
this week which are expected to continue next week.

Workers voted to strike after the government-owned service confirmed plans to 
transfer more than 60 of its largest outlets to the private sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/post-office-to-move-up-to-61-branches-to-wh-smith>
. Along with other cost-cutting proposals, the closures will lead to the loss 
of around 2,000 of its 6,600-strong workforce in crown branches, back office 
and cash handling.

About half the Post Office’s 7,000-strong workforce is also being forced to 
shift from a final salary pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/post-office-pension-benefits-cut-defined-contribution>
 to a defined contribution scheme, which unions say could cut retirement 
benefits by 30% or more in some cases.

Post Office to move up to 61 branches to WH Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/post-office-to-move-up-to-61-branches-to-wh-smith>
Jeremy Corbyn, whose bid to hold on to the Labour leadership is being backed 
by CWU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/01/jeremy-corbyn-denies-he-surrounds-himself-with-sycophants>
, will also host a meeting of Post Office workers in parliament at lunchtime on 
Thursday.

Corbyn released a video supporting the strikers 
<https://www.facebook.com/ThecommunicationsUnion/videos/1128428663903278/> and 
describing Post Office workers as loyal public servants.

“I’m struck by the strategy of the Post Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> to get rid of them, close 
the Crown Post Offices, franchise out and privatise the service and bring in a 
group of people on lower wages, worse conditions, not as skilled, not as 
experienced in many cases and not as able to deliver that public service,” he 
said.

“We have the Post Office network for a reason. It is part of the social fabric 
of this country. It was set up to give a good post office in every high street 
in every town and I find it beyond sad the way it’s been treated.”

The Post Office said that the vast majority of its 11,600-strong network would 
be open for business as usual on Thursday.

More than 11,000 branches – 97% of the Post Office network – are run by 
independent businesses and the 50,000 people who work in these branches are not 
involved in the strike action.

Kevin Gilliland, the Post Office’s network and sales director, said the 
service had contingency plans in place to ensure that it could operate normally 
with sufficient cash and stock.

“The Post Office is a national institution that is successfully adapting to 
change and we are safeguarding the future of the network,” he said. He said the 
changes to the Post Office’s pension arrangements were “the responsible thing 
to do both for members of the plan and for the long-term financial health of 
the business.”
 