
While 85% of Australians rate their health as “good”, “very good”, or 
“excellent”, the majority do not eat enough vegetables, almost half do not do 
enough exercise and the proportion of overweight and obese adults is increasing.

The findings come from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare’s (AIHW) 
biennial report on the nation’s health released by the health minister,Sussan 
Ley <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley>, on Tuesday.

The report found life expectancy rates were at a record high, with a boy born 
between 2012 and 2014 expected to live to 80.3 years and a girl to 84.4 years. 
But although they’re living longer, 50% of Australians are living with a 
chronic disease such as cardiovascular disease, arthritis, diabetes or a mental 
illness, while 25% are living with two or more chronic health conditions.

Five health myths reinvestigated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/04/five-health-myths-reinvestigated>
While smoking rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/28/indigenous-health-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-smoking-rate-drops-below-40>
 and infant mortality rates among Indigenous Australians have fallen, the 
report found their life expectancy was one decade shorter on average than 
non-Indigenous Australians, at 69.1 years for men and 73.7 for women.

In 2014–15, 45% of adults aged between 18 and 64 were inactive or 
insufficiently active for health benefits. Meanwhile 93% of adults did not eat 
the recommended five daily serves of vegetables and 50% did not eat the 
recommended two daily serves of fruit. The proportion of overweight or obese 
adults also increased from 56% to 63% between 1995 and 2014–15, an average gain 
of 4.4kg for both men and women.

Of the estimated 11.2m adults who were overweight, 4.9m were obese. Among 
children aged between five and 14, 26% were overweight or obese, rising to 37% 
of 15- to 24-year-olds.

“Australians continue to put themselves at risk of developing 
lifestyle-related chronic illnesses that are generally associated with risk 
factors that we can do something about,” the report found.

“These risk factors include smoking, physical inactivity, poor nutrition and 
the harmful use of alcohol.”

AIHW’s director and chief executive, Barry Sandison, said while it was 
concerning that preventable lifestyle factors were contributing to rates of 
disease, socioeconomic disadvantage was also influencing the health of 
Australians.

“Compared with people living in the highest socioeconomic areas, people living 
in the lowest socioeconomic areas generally live about three years less, are 
1.6 times as likely to have more than one chronic health condition, and are 
three times as likely to smoke daily,” he said.

For the first time, the number of deaths due to all types of cancer combined – 
44,100 deaths – surpassed the number of deaths due to cardiovascular disease, 
including coronary heart disease, stroke and heart failure – 43,600 deaths. 
However coronary heart disease continues to be the leading specific cause of 
death; it caused 19,800 deaths in 2013.

The report also examined health spending, including money spent by 
governments, individuals and non-government funders, such as private health 
insurers. Over recent decades, health expenditure has tended to grow from year 
to year but in the past two years that growth has been relatively slow, the 
report found.

'How could this happen?': Indigenous health tragedies spark search for answers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/12/how-could-this-happen-indigenous-health-tragedies-spark-search-for-answers>
The real growth rate was 1.1% from 2011-12 to 2012-13, and 3.1% from 2012-13 
to 2013-14, lower than the average 5% annual growth over the preceding decade, 
the report found. In 2013-14 an estimated $155bn was spent on health in 
Australia, of which $145bn was recurrent spending. Almost 68% of total health 
expenditure during 2013-14 was funded by governments, with the federal 
government contributing 41% and state and territory governments nearly 27%.

Ley said about a quarter of total government revenue was attributed to health 
spending. Total commonwealth investment in health would reach $71bn in 2015-16 
increasing to $79bn within four years, she added.

“Our government’s priority is to ensure the high performance and 
sustainability of our health system over the long term,” she said. “This is why 
the Turnbull government is working closely with stakeholders to progress a 
range of health system reforms.”
 