
One of my maxims as a university teacher of literature was: “A great novel not 
only enhances our understanding – more crucially it understands us.” When I 
later trained as a psychoanalyst I annoyed my tutors with my refrain that one 
could learn more about the subtleties of human psychology from literature than 
from the works ofFreud <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sigmundfreud>, Adler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/mar/08/five-titans-psychology-freud-beck>
 orJung <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carl-jung>. This was not to decry 
the pioneering wisdoms of those great psychologists, but years of teaching 
literature convinced me that fiction trumps theory in its illumination of the 
hidden recesses of our consciousness.

Therapy wars: the revenge of Freud | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/therapy-wars-revenge-of-freud-cognitive-behavioural-therapy>
There is now good evidence for the therapeutic effects of reading. The Shared 
Reading project, organised bythe Reader Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/jun/27/reader-organisation-mutual-improvement-society-modern>
, suggests that reading in groups – in their case they bring together groups of 
people with mental health issues for example, but the findings apply as well to 
the local book club’s monthly gathering with added wine – significantly 
“improves self-confidence and self-esteem, builds social networks, widens 
horizons and gives people a sense of belonging, preserving the mental and 
physical health of those who are well and building mental resilience”.

Chronic loneliness and isolation are now prevailing social problems, but it is 
not necessary to be part of a group reading project for a book to have a role 
in ameliorating this social malaise. As the shrewd and alienated Holden 
Caulfield says in JD Salinger’sThe Catcher in the Rye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/02/100-best-novels-catcher-in-the-rye-jd-salinger-holden-caulfield>
: “What really knocks me out is a book that, when you’re all done reading it, 
you wish the author that wrote it was a terrific friend of yours and you could 
call him up on the phone whenever you felt like it.” I think many of us can 
count some books as close friends (my particular friends are Henry James’sThe 
Portrait of a Lady and Patrick White’s Riders in the Chariot). And it is by no 
means a trivial good that, at a fundamental level, reading confers a benefit by 
entertaining us. To “entertain” means to “admit, cherish, receive as a guest” 
and books can, and do, dissolve social isolation, as the estranged and damaged 
Caulfield exemplifies, by inviting in the reader to become involved in an 
imaginal world. Immersion in a fictional society seems to promote many of the 
rewards of immersion in actual society: among other benefits, it encourages 
escape from the self, by no means always escapist. To get outside the confines 
of our individual egos is a liberating experience, and entry into another 
universe, by way of the written word, may be a safer, or more practically 
possible, route for some – for the elderly, the incarcerated or the emotionally 
fragile, for instance – than by personal physical encounter. Among the Shared 
Reading successes is its work in psychiatric hospitals and prisons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d93308a5e6cfde222c0497857282348d2a3cb66%2F0_138_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Freud%3A%20literary%20fiction%20is%20the%20best%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Freud%3A%20literary%20fiction%20is%20the%20best%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d93308a5e6cfde222c0497857282348d2a3cb66%2F0_138_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 ‘Each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way’ … a scene from the 2012 film 
adaptation of Anna Karenina. Photograph: Focus Features. 
I suspect what is most fruitful about the encounter with a literary landscape 
is the intimate knowledge it encourages of other human beings, albeit fictional 
ones, often surprisingly like ourselves. It is here that the “understanding” 
granted by great literature becomes therapeutic. The opening pronouncement of 
Tolstoy’sAnna Karenina, “All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is 
unhappy in its own way” applies to more than families. All unhappy individuals 
are unhappy in their own way, too. This is partly because self revelation is 
far from easy and self understanding, and the vocabulary for it, is rare. But 
it can often be apprehended helpfully in the accounts of fictional 
sensibilities.

How we got to The Girl on the Train – the rise of the psychological thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/08/how-we-got-to-the-girl-on-the-train-moonstone-the-rise-of-the-psychological-thriller>
Take Charlotte Brontë’s Villette, for example (a novel which, in my view, 
surpasses the more celebratedJane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre>). Its 
hero, the emotionally repressed Lucy Snowe – plain, lonely, angry and 
desperately striving to be self-sufficient – suffers a painful breakdown as a 
result of weeks of friendless solitariness during her time as an English 
teacher in a Belgian school. From my professional knowledge of breakdowns, 
Brontë’s account is pin-sharp accurate and not only conveys a depth of 
experience (whether actual or imaginative) in its author, but acts as an 
objective correlative for those who have suffered in similar silence, 
conferring a critical lifeline, in the sense of not being quite alone in the 
world. Similarly, anyone who has undergone the wounding experience of family 
discord and alienation will find resonances inKing Lear or Marilynne Robinson’s 
Home.

Perhaps more surprisingly, and more radically, we may discover in a book 
shadow aspects of ourselves we have failed to acknowledge or recognise. Few of 
us imagine we are potential murderers: yet few readingCrime and Punishment can 
fail to enter the tortured consciousness of Raskolnikov, who believes in 
committing a murder he is acting justifiably, or fail to empathise with his 
anguished punishment of guilt. Dostoevsky illuminates, through the example of 
his character, what we might otherwise be too defended to comprehend: that our 
civilised selves may conceal a lethal armoury, potentially capable of 
atrocities, and that those who justify killing in the name of ideology are not 
as alien as we might care to believe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8572894d74a9eff3d04af7ebcbc0e902ae2b00%2F0_337_2642_1585%2F2642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Freud%3A%20literary%20fiction%20is%20the%20best%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Freud%3A%20literary%20fiction%20is%20the%20best%20therapy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmove-over-freud-literary-fiction-is-the-best-therapy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8572894d74a9eff3d04af7ebcbc0e902ae2b00%2F0_337_2642_1585%2F2642.jpg>
 Exploring dark psychology … the film adaptation of Lolita. Photograph: Ronald 
Grant Archive/Ronald Grant archive 
So reading is not merely a diversion or distraction from present pain; it is 
also an enlarging of our universe, our sympathies, wisdom and experience. The 
act of entering into the consciousness of another being, another sex, or sexual 
preference, social group, political outlook or religious persuasion, allows a 
respite from private and parochial preoccupations. That widening of our 
concerns may entail entering another location, or period in history – or an 
arena of which we would otherwise be ignorant. Education, as people are never 
tired of repeating, is a process of leading out, which suggests another 
benefit: that in being led by reading into previously unknown territory, we 
learn.

• Salley Vickers’ latest novel Cousins 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cousins-445379.html> is published by Viking.
 