
Three Republican senators have introduced a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/us-embassy-israel-jerusalem-republican-bill>
 to recognise Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and move the US embassy there, 
challenging US president-elect Donald Trump to fulfil his pledge to do so as 
soon as he gets into office.

Republican senators introduce bill to move US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/us-embassy-israel-jerusalem-republican-bill>
However, while other presidential candidates, including Bill Clinton and 
George W Bush, also promised to move the US embassy to Jerusalem, they backed 
away once in office and deferred implementation of the 1995 congressional
Jerusalem Embassy Act 
<https://www.congress.gov/104/plaws/publ45/PLAW-104publ45.pdf>, which 
recognises Jerusalem as Israel’s “undivided” capital and calls for relocating 
the US embassy there.

In fact, the world does not recognise Israeli sovereignty over either west or 
East Jerusalem. This is why not a single country has an embassy in there. If it 
did, it would be violating international law as well asUnited Nations security 
council resolution 478 
<http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/RES/478(1980)>. The 
resolution confirmed that Israel’s1980 “basic law” 
<https://www.knesset.gov.il/laws/special/eng/basic10_eng.htm> which declared 
East and west Jerusalem “complete and united” as the capital of Israel, is “a 
violation of international law”.

My father’s family was forcibly expelled 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTpbghFF8A0> in 1948 from three houses they 
built and owned in the al-Baqa’a neighbourhood in the western part of Jerusalem 
– just a few minutes away from the Talbiyeh neighbourhood. This is whereDavid 
Friedman, Trump’s nominee for US ambassador to Israel 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/david-friedman-trump-embassy-israel/510905/>
, has acquired a house. As a result of my family’s expulsion, I was raised in 
East Jerusalem. In the Palestinian territories, including the West Bank, East 
Jerusalem and Gaza, Palestinians have been living under Israeli occupation and 
control for almost 50 years. This means that more than two generations of us 
were born under occupation, of whom more than 75% are my age or younger.

By moving the US embassy to Jerusalem, the Trump administration would not only 
be violating international law, it would also be denying the Palestinian right 
to self-determination and freedom. Since 1967, Israel has been transforming 
Jerusalem from a multi-religious and multicultural city into a “reunified” 
Jewish city under its exclusive control. It has accelerated Jerusalem’s “
Judaisation 
<http://www.haaretz.com/group-judaizing-east-jerusalem-accused-of-withholding-donation-sources-1.233668>
” through policies that specifically aim to minimise the number of 
Palestinians. Such policies have included the revocation of the residency of 
Palestinian Jerusalemites under the pretext of “breach of allegiance 
<https://al-shabaka.org/commentaries/israels-dangerous-new-transfer-tactic-in-jerusalem/>
”, restrictions on family unification,discriminatory urban and zoning policies 
<https://al-shabaka.org/briefs/in-jerusalem-religious-war-is-used-to-cloak-colonialism/>
, the construction of thewall that slices through Jerusalem and the West Bank 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/3111159.stm>, starting in 2002, 
and the closure of major Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem.

The embassy move would also embolden Israel to further expand its illegal 
settlements throughout Palestine

These policies have been accompanied, as I set out in a recent policy brief 
<https://al-shabaka.org/briefs/economic-collapse-east-jerusalem-strategies-recovery/>
, by a deliberately engineered economic collapse of East Jerusalem, as seen in 
the deterioration of the tourism sector and the commercial markets of the Old 
City.

The relocation of the US embassy sends the message that the fate of the nearly 
300,000 Palestinians in East Jerusalem is of no importance. This is especially 
alarming since almost82% of Palestinians 
<http://jerusaleminstitute.org.il/.upload/yearbook/2016/shnaton_F0116.pdf> in 
East Jerusalem already lived below the poverty line in 2014, compared with 
around 28% of the Jewish population. We also face an acute housing crisis, 
since we have access to only 13% of the land of East Jerusalem, whileillegal 
settlements are being built on 35% of this land 
<https://www.palestinecampaign.org/resources/factsheets/jerusalem/>.

The embassy move would also embolden Israel to further expand its illegal 
settlements throughout Palestine. The US administration has reaffirmed its – 
rhetorical – opposition to the settlements over the past five decades, both in 
secretary of stateJohn Kerry’s latest speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
 and with its abstention from the UN security council resolution 2334 
condemning Israel’s settlement activities. However, the incoming Trump 
administration’s position seems to be that the settlements are not “an obstacle 
for peace 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/top-trump-adviser-says-israeli-settlements-are-not-an-obstacle-to-peace/2016/11/10/8837b472-5c81-49a3-947c-ba6a47c4bc2f_story.html?utm_term=.8848b1e8119c>
”.

Friedman himself heads the American Friends of Bet El Institutions, which has 
raisedtens of millions of dollars for the illegal settlement 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.759484> of Bet El, located to 
the north of Jerusalem.Trump donated $10,000 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.759738> to institutions based in 
the settlement in 2003, and Bet El also receives funds from the family of Jared 
Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law. Even more alarming, Friedman’s recognition of 
Jerusalem as the “eternal capital of the Jewish people” andhis claim that 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.759480> “the holy city of 
Jerusalem belongs forever to the Jewish people” would give the green light to 
more incursions by rightwing Israeli Jews into the al-Aqsa mosque compound, 
further inflaming tension in the region.

Trump must ask himself whether he really wants to terminally damage any 
prospect of peace between Israelis and Palestinians and prevent an entire 
people from enjoying their freedoms and rights. If not, he should back away 
from recognising Israel’s claims to Jewish sovereignty over Jerusalem and the 
rest of the Palestinian land it occupied in 1967, and work toward a just 
solution that will bring a lasting peace.

 * This article was amended on 11 January 2017. While the United Nations, many 
individual countries and Gazans themselves regard it as still occupied by 
Israel, Israel withdrew all its forces and Jewish settlers from Gaza in 2005, 
while maintaining strict border control.  