
Whitehall’s spending watchdog could investigate the deal to keep Nissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> making cars in north-east 
England, following a demand from the chair of an influential parliamentary 
committee. Andrew Tyrie, chair of the Treasury select committee, has written to 
the National Audit Office (NAO) asking for an inquiry into any assurances 
offered by the government to the Japanese car giant.

Boris Johnson denies privately supporting principle of free movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/boris-johnson-denies-privately-supporting-principle-of-free-movement>
If follows a refusal by the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to say how much the 
commitments made toNissan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> would 
add to the public finances and will increase pressure on the government to give 
the details of any deal.

Tyrie said on Thursday he had written to Sir Amyas Morse, the head of the NAO, 
asking for auditors to get to the bottom of whether it might cost the taxpayer 
money. “The chancellor has not answered the crucial question: whether an 
assurance was given to Nissan which could constitute a contingent liability, or 
support consistent with the provisions of the Industrial Development Act 1982.

“So I have written to Sir Amyas, asking him to examine whether contingent 
liabilities have arisen as a result of government commitments, and/or 
assurances made to Nissan,” he said.

In October, Nissan said it was extending the production of two new vehicles in 
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sunderland> amid rising speculation 
that it could leave the UK following the country’s decision to quit the 
European Union.

Can the UK adopt the 'Norway model' as its Brexit solution?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/can-the-uk-adopt-the-norway-model-as-its-brexit-solution>
The move secured 7,000 jobs in the Brexit-backing city, but prompted questions 
over whether a so-called “sweetheart deal” had been struck between the carmaker 
and the government.

The chancellor said promises made to the Japanese firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/nissan-in-uk-treasury-refuses-to-tell-obr-if-cost-attached>
 avoided weighing down the Treasury with significant extra subsidies in the 
wake of the Brexit vote. But in a letter to Tyrie, he refused to elaborate, 
saying only that any subsidies were “entirely within state aid and WTO rules”.

The government has refused to disclose to the Office for Budget Responsibility 
whether it made any financial promises to Nissan ahead of the autumn statement.


The OBR’s economic outlook report, released alongside the mini-budget, 
revealed that the fiscal watchdog “asked specifically whether any contingent 
liabilities had been created in respect of assurances provided to Nissan” and 
that the Treasury declined to say.


A spokesman for the NAO said a response would be released in due course. 

 