
MPs have raised the prospect that Sir Philip Green’s multimillion-pound 
superyacht and other assets could be seized to help plug the hole in theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension fund.

The chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions committee, Frank Field, 
has written to the pensions regulator (TPR) 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/work-and-pensions/Correspondence/Letter-from-Chair-to-Lesley-Titcomb-re-powers-of-pensions-regulator-21-11-2016.pdf>
 seeking clarification as to its powers following the store chain’s collapse.

In particular, he asked whether it was possible to settle claims “through 
acquiring assets other than cash from a person or company from which payment is 
being sought”.

The Pension Regulator v Sir Philip Green – what happens next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/sir-philip-green-bhs-v-pension-regulator-what-happens-next>
The committee published Field’s letter on its website as it prepared to take 
further evidence on BHS at a hearing on Wednesday with the TPR chief executive, 
Lesley Titcombe.

Green fuelled the anger over the demise of BHS, which he sold for just £1, 
when he was filmed over summer cruising the Mediterranean in his yacht 
Lionheart – reportedly worth £100m – while pensioners were left facing an 
uncertain future.

In a letter to the committee, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/pensions-regulator-sir-philip-green-arcadia-bhs>
 Titcomb disclosed TPR had been “monitoring” the pension scheme for another arm 
of Sir Philip’s retail empire – the Arcadia group, which includes Topshop, 
Dorothy Perkins and Miss Selfridge.

“We continue to monitor the Arcadia scheme on an ongoing basis,” she wrote. 
“We will of course consider the impact of our discussions and investigation 
concerning the BHS pension schemes on the employer covenant and position of the 
Arcadia pension schemes.”

Field said: “We are pleased to see that the pensions regulator has used its 
powers to demand information from Arcadia about yet another of Sir Philip 
Green’s pension funds that is going deep into deficit, but it is a terrible 
concern that it has got to this stage again. Is Sir Philip going to ‘sort’ this 
one too?”
 