
Sir Philip Green is clearly desperate to keep his gong. The Topshop tycoon 
would not betelling ITV viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video>
 about his “horrible, horrible, horrible” summer, or recounting his heart 
trouble, if the knighthood didn’t matter. We assumed as much, which is why the 
interview was mostly interesting for what Green, on the eve of aparliamentary 
debate about BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-criticises-mps-report-bhs-collapse>
 and whether or not he should lose his knighthood, did not say about the mess 
at BHS.

First, he did not indicate clearly when he thinks agreement will be reached 
with thePensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator. 
Instead he said: “I am hopeful that we have some light in the tunnel to a 
solution,” which has been his vague line for many months. The regulator’s 
account was blunter: “We are yet to receive a comprehensive and credible 
written proposal and have made clear what we require.”

Second, Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> did not say 
if BHS pensioners will receive the pensions they expected. He said he wants to 
get to a position where the Pensions Protection Fund (PPF), the industry-wide 
rescue scheme, is not required. But since the PPF rules mean basic-level 
pensioners must suffer 10% haircuts, BHS retirees could still take a hit. If 
such an outcome is in Green’s mind, it would be better if he was frank.

Those MPs who have followed this saga closely may also have been annoyed by 
Green’s insistence on quoting a figure of £600m for what his family “put back” 
into BHS after taking £300m in dividends in the early years of ownership. His 
“put back” number includes £350m of “investment” that may cover the everyday 
costs of running a chain of department stores. A more useful figure in this 
context is net investment after depreciation: it was negative in 10 out of 14 
years of ownership by the Green family, the select committee’s report showed, 
quotingBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> accounts.

Add it all up, and one suspects Green’s plea for mercy will achieve little. It 
is odds-on that MPs will recommend that the knighthood be annulled, assuming 
the speaker allows a vote.

Yet the attempt to put pressure on the honours forfeiture committee feels as 
if it has come too soon. Yes, Green is an unsympathetic character, his answers 
can be slippery and his attempts to shift blame onto his advisers are 
irritating. Yes, the sale of BHS to a thrice bankrupt individual whose outfit 
was described as a “shambles” by the two select committees was legal but 
shocking – or, as Green now admits, a mistake. And, yes, the delay in “sorting” 
the pension deficit, which is Green’s declared ambition, has become tiresome. 
If he had acted firmly when he owned the business, the funding position might 
not have deteriorated so severely.

Yet, at the end of the process with the Pensions Regulator, Green will be 
presented with a bill and be expected to pay. If he refuses, the knighthood 
should be removed – no question. But if he pays up, what are the grounds for 
degonging? Green, albeit after faffing around for ages, would have met the 
demands of a regulator that enjoys the support of parliament. It would be 
better if MPs set a deadline for Green to do the right thing for BHS pensioners 
and then returned to the question of the knighthood.

There’s no need to kick the can any further down the runway
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fmps-debate-about-sir-philip-greens-knighthood-is-premature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235d77c1c844542a33cbcf54da4c6ac72ae19025%2F0_903_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs'%20debate%20about%20Sir%20Philip%20Green's%20knighthood%20is%20premature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fmps-debate-about-sir-philip-greens-knighthood-is-premature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%27%20debate%20about%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%27s%20knighthood%20is%20premature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fmps-debate-about-sir-philip-greens-knighthood-is-premature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235d77c1c844542a33cbcf54da4c6ac72ae19025%2F0_903_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of proposed Gatwick expansion by architect planner Sir 
Terry Farrell. Photograph: Gatwick Airport/PA 
Change is coming, Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
 told us many times a few weeks ago. Only up to a point at Heathrow, it seems. 
Like her predecessors, May senses trouble on the runway.

At a push, we could agree that is an advance on the previous indecision if the 
government will next week indicate a preference for a third runway at Heathrow. 
But retreating from a parliamentary vote on expansion until winter 2017-18 is 
feeble. The couple of Tory MPs who would resign their seats will presumably 
still be in a resigning mood a year from now.

Cameron aide said government was ‘exposed on Heathrow’ over air quality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/19/cameron-aide-said-government-was-exposed-on-heathrow-over-air-quality>
This column has always argued that Gatwick is the logical option for a new 
runway (it would be cheaper and more likely to happen) but Heathrow is a 
respectable choice from a political perspective since it had the backing of the 
Airports Commission, the body David Cameron formed to kick the can down the 
road and avoid his “no ifs, not buts” rejection of a third runway.

Sir Howard Davies, as chair of that commission, is not a disinterested party 
but he is right when he saysMay should put expansion at Heathrow to a vote in 
the Commons without delay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/call-for-immediate-parliamentary-vote-on-heathrow-third-runway>
. The pros and cons have been debated for ages. There are no fresh facts to 
unearth. Opponents aren’t going to be converted in the next 12 months.

Finance chiefs welcome workers to the boardroom

Surprising news: the boss class is coming round to the idea of having workers 
in boardrooms. A majority in an FT poll of 60 corporate chiefs and policymakers 
came out in favour of the prime minister’s flagship governance reform. 
Supporters include Nigel Wilson, chief executive of Legal & General, and Martin 
Gilbert, his counterpart at Aberdeen Asset Management.

If replicated more widely, the shift in mood is significant. But, if they 
really want to blaze a trail, Wilson and Gilbert should remember that a 
volunteer is worth 10 pressed men. There is no obligation to wait until company 
law changes.
 