
Major changes to the state pension that are days away have been so poorly 
communicated to the public that even those who will end up better off may not 
know it, according to a select committee report.

The government has failed to explain the complexities of the new state 
pension, which will come into effect from 6 April, according to the House of 
Commons work and pensions select committee in a report released on Sunday. This 
has resulted in many people – even those set to benefit from the changes – 
being left confused about what the effects will be.

The new state pension will replace what the Department of Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> (DWP) has called a “mindblowingly 
complicated” existing system. Those reaching state pension age on or after 6 
April 2016 will get the new regular payment, which has been set at £155.65 a 
week. Although aims to simplify the system have been welcomed, concerns have 
been raised that poor communication has led to confusion about the value of 
retirement pots and the age at which payments will begin.

The report says the impacts on different groups – among them people with less 
than 10 years of contributions and some women – have been poorly communicated 
and oversimplified. As a result, many people believe they will get the flat 
rate of £155.65 a week when in fact the majority will not in the first year.

“Over time, more and more pensioners will receive a single flat rate. During 
transition however, the majority will not. This has not been made sufficiently 
clear in government communications that have focused on the full flat rate of 
£155.65, contributing to confusion about the new system,” the report says.

In January, the committee warned the new system was widely misunderstood and 
called for urgent changes to be made to the information provided.

In today’s report, the committee calls on the DWP to contact those who are 
expected to receive less in the early years of the new state pension than 
previously or have gaps in their contribution record and set out the ways of 
improving their situation.

Osborne’s pension U-turn shows the Treasury has been hijacked | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/08/osborne-pension-u-turn-treasury>
“There is no way that communicating changes which affect different groups very 
differently, over different timelines, should ever have been left to general 
awareness campaigns or happenchance. The oversimplified message about the 
flat-rate amount has left many people unprepared and confused,” the committee 
chair,Frank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, said.

Kate Smith, the head of pensions at Aegon UK, called for the government to 
issue statements setting out what people will be entitled to. “Effectively 
there’s a new state pension age every month for women as it gradually equalises 
at age 65 for men and women in 2018, then moves to age 66 by 2020, and many 
people won’t realise this. In addition, most people don’t know how much new 
state pension they will get, particularly given complicated transition 
arrangements to the new flat rate pension,” she said.

A statement from the DWP said it was committed to making sure the public fully 
understand the changes and that a multimedia campaign launched in 2014 would 
continue for the coming years. It said the department would respond to the 
committee recommendations “in due course”.
 