
MPs have voted to strip Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> of his knighthood in a 
symbolic move that adds to the pressure on the retail tycoon over the BHS 
scandal.

The businessman’s reputation was dealt a further blow following a debate in 
which he was labelled a “billionaire spiv” who should never have received his 
honour in the first place.


The approval of the parliamentary motion carries no official weight but it 
intensifies the pressure on Green, who has been criticised for foot-dragging in 
negotiations with the pensions regulator over the £571m hole in theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension fund.

Green was pilloried during a more than two hour-long debate in which the once 
feted entrepreneur, who was knighted for services to the retail sector, was 
lambasted by MPs from across the political spectrum for his family’s role in 
the downfall of the high street chain. The fall ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> triggered 11,000 job losses and left 
thousands of pensioners facing cuts to their benefits.

“[Green is a] billionaire spiv who should never have received a knighthood, a 
billionaire spiv who has shamed British capitalism,” said Labour MP David 
Winnick during a debate that, without a single Green sympathiser in the room, 
turned into a character assassination. MPs labelled Green an “asset stripper” 
and “corporate raider”, who was likened in the chamber to Napoleon and the 
former Mirror Group owner Robert Maxwell.

The Labour MP Frank Field <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>, 
chair of the work and pensions committee, whose role in the MPs’ inquiry into 
the collapse of BHS has put him into the role of Green’s nemesis, said the 
businessman appeared willing to lose his reputation rather than “surrender a 
modest part of his mega-fortune” to aid BHS pensioners. Field said Green, who 
is worth an estimated £3.2bn, had promised to “sort” the pension issue back in 
June but that there was still no concrete proposal on the table.


Questioning whether Green had been a deserving recipient of a knighthood, 
Field said: “There was nothing the committee could find that showsSir Philip 
Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> is the king of the 
high street. He was a very, very, successful asset stripper.” Green was 
honoured by the Blair government in 2006.

Also speaking in parliament, Iain Wright, who co-chaired the select committee 
investigation with Field as chair of the business, innovation and skills select 
committee, told MPs that the failure of BHS was “one of the biggest corporate 
scandals of modern times”.

“Green took the rings from BHS’s fingers, beat it black and blue, starved it 
of food and water, put it on life support, and then wanted credit for keeping 
it alive,” said Wright, referring to the £400m in BHS dividends paid to the 
Green family in the early years of their stewardship.

Wright also questioned whether Green deserved acclaim for his skills as a 
retailer, suggesting his prowess lay in cutting costs and financial engineering 
with the bosses of rival chains such as John Lewis and Zara more deserving of 
plaudits. “Green can’t be described as a short-term corporate raider, but raid 
the company he did,” he said, adding that the Green family had sought to enrich 
itself at “the expense of long-term and sustainable growth for the company”.

“Certainly, profits were made, but they were more akin to a short-term sugar 
boost rather than a nutritious diet that aided the long-term health and 
strength of the business [BHS],” concluded Wright.

MPs voted in favour of the motion by acclamation, meaning that there was no 
opposition from parliamentarians on the chamber floor when the speaker put it 
to them. Despite the strong signal sent by the vote, the power to rescind a 
knighthood rests with the honours forfeiture committee, a group of civil 
servants and dignitaries chaired by Sir Jonathan Stephens, a permanent 
secretary.

Richard Fuller, the Tory MP who tabled the amendment calling for Green’s 
knighthood, said that although MPs could not remove the honour they were able 
to reflect the views of their constituents. “We do not make the final decision 
but it is worthy and honourable for this house to have a view about Sir Philip 
Green,” he said.

“Over the summer, he has had the opportunity to find his moral compass and do 
the right thing. In the absence of that, the house has no option but to support 
the amendment and the motion.”

The parliamentary inquiry into the collapse of BHS has strained relations 
between Green and MPs to breaking point, with a war of words between the tycoon 
andField <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/frank-field>. The Labour MP for 
Birkenhead has riled the businessman by telling him to “stop messing around and 
write a big cheque”.

Green sold BHS for £1 in 2015 to investors led by Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/bhs-inquiry-hears-of-theft-and-death-threats-in-dramatic-day-of-testimony>
, who had previously been declared bankrupt. The administrators were called in 
April this year but with no white knight willing to take on the loss-making 
chain, the last of its 170 stores shut at the end of the summer.

'Billionaire spiv' debate about Sir Philip Green was entertaining but absurd | 
Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/20/billionaire-spiv-debate-about-sir-philip-green-was-entertaining-but-absurd>
Green’s business reputation was savaged in the BHS postmortem report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 published by MPs on Field and Wright’s committees. The report found that BHS 
was subject to “systematic plunder” by Green and Chappell and concluded there 
was “little to support the reputation for retail business acumen for which 
[Green] received his knighthood”. Field told the chamber that the time had come 
for Green to face up to his “mega, mega, mega-moral responsibility”.

In the wake of the damning BHS report Theresa May has promised to “reform 
capitalism” and stamp out irresponsible corporate behaviour. But the prime 
minister’s spokesman said Green’s knighthood was a matter for the forfeiture 
committee: “It’s a completely independent body and it doesn’t give us any 
guidance on what it is looking at. MPs have had their say but it’s a matter for 
the committee.”

At the start of this week Green had made a fresh appeal to his former 
employees, stating he was“very, very, very sorry” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-hints-bhs-pension-deal-close-in-bid-to-save-knighthood>
 for the collapse of BHS and claiming that his advisers are close to brokering 
a deal with the Pensions Regulator that would avoid a rescue by the pension 
protection fund (PPF). However earlier this week the Pensions Regulator issued 
a statement that indicated a deal was still some way off as it was “yet to 
receive a comprehensive and credible written proposal” from the Green camp.
 