
Parliament launches a series of hearings on reforming British boardrooms on 
Tuesday, as MPs pledge to ensure Theresa May fulfils her promise to clean up 
big business.

The business, energy and industrial strategy (BEIS) committee is collecting 
evidence for its own investigation into corporate governance, while the 
government’s own consultation is expected to start before Christmas.

 In her brief campaign to become Conservative party leader, May hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/11/andrea-leadsom-apologises-to-theresa-may-politics-live>
 out against the gap between directors’ pay and the wider workforce, while 
raising the idea of putting workers on boards.


Iain Wright, chair of the BEIS committee, said: “I hope she’s not rolling 
back.”

The submissions to the committee’s corporate governance probe offer ideas to 
tackle executive pay – the average boss earned £5.5m in 2015, up from just 
under £5m the year before – and provide clues to the other topics that will be 
debated in the months ahead.

Scrap the current rules

Pay directors in cash and scrap all the complicated bonuses paid in shares is 
the radical idea put forward in one submission by the Institute of Business 
Ethics 
<http://www.ibe.org.uk/userassets/otherpdfs/ibe_beis_parl_comm_corpgov.pdf> 
(IBE), a charity set up 30 years ago. It calls for cash to be the main basis 
for pay. Directors should use some of their cash to buy shares which they must 
hold onto after they leave. Receiving dividends on their shares will make them 
focus on the long-term health of the company.

Cap pay

Fund managers traditionally shy away from setting out how much directors 
should be paid but there are signs that some are ready to intervene. Hermeshas 
suggested a limit could be achieved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/scrap-bonuses-fund-manager-reforming-executive-pay-hermes-investment-management>
 by requiring companies to set out the maximum the chief executive could 
receive each year. The UK Shareholders’ Association, which represents private 
investors, suggested any bonuses should be limited to 50% of salary. 
<http://www.uksa.org.uk/sites/default/files/BIS_Committee_Oct2016UKSA_submission.pdf>
 The TUC also suggests bonuses should be 10% of the total pay package.

Pay ratios

Legal & General Investment Management (LGIM), a big City investor, has backed 
publishing the ratio between the chief executive’s pay and that of the median 
employe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/legal-general-warns-firms-over-bonuses-executive-pay>
e but does not set an ideal gap. The High Pay Centre is setting up a “40 times” 
club, referring to a specific ratio of executive pay to the wider workforce. 
Trade union Unite wants a 10:1 maximum pay ratio and also calls for a ratio to 
be published for the lowest paid employee.

Workers on boards

Arguments against this proposal include creating a two-tier board where 
sensitive matters are discussed by a core group and introducing a special 
interest on to the board. LGIM favoured making a director a so-called employee 
advocate. The British Bankers’ Association was most dismissive, arguing for 
surveys and employee forums. Helena Morrissey, chair of Newton fund managers, 
said she had met workers who could be “fantastic” board members. She liked the 
idea of a worker on boards’ pay committees. John Lewis went further, as one 
would expect for an employee-owned company, and advocated worker ownership of 
businesses.


Binding pay vote

Shareholders get two votes on pay: one on the current year’s pay amount which 
is advisory and one on a three-year pay policy which is binding, which means 
the company has to revise the policy if it loses the vote. May has advocated 
another binding vote which the UK Shareholders’ Association said was needed for 
the system to work. Morrisseywas also in favour 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/business-energy-and-industrial-strategy-committee/corporate-governance/written/41651.html>
. The CBI argued shareholders would be less willing to oppose a pay deal if the 
vote was binding and that such votes should only apply to repeat offenders. The 
IBE was most radical, calling for no payment under schemes that cannot be 
understood when the payment is awarded.

Diversity

A read through the submissions to the committee so far shows that breaking 
free from white, middle-aged male groupthink is almost universally popular. The 
Institute of Directors criticises companies for rejecting alternative voices at 
the risk of stagnation and calls for younger directors. LGIM opposes quotas but 
wants the chairman to push for a greater mix of ethnicity, skills and 
background. The TUC calls for mandatory quotas for women. TheCampaign for Merit 
in Business has a different view 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/business-energy-and-industrial-strategy-committee/corporate-governance/written/41577.html>
, asserting the diversity drive is “anti-male” and asking why the government 
does not encourage more women in sewage work and bomb disposal.

BHS question

The IoD argued no new rules are needed in the wake of the BHS scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 and that imposing burdens on small companies would be bad for the economy. But 
the IBE said private companies should state their commitment to the law 
requiring directors to look out for employees, suppliers, customers and wider 
society.


Fill pension deficits


The collapse of BHS also exposed concerns about how companies deal with 
pension deficits. The IBE suggested that when a company has a shortfall in its 
pension scheme, any bonuses and salary increases to directors should be blocked 
unless there is an agreement in place with the Pensions Regulator on how the 
deficit will be closed.

Succession planning 

Sorting out the next boss well in advance could be one way to keep pay under 
control. “An executive director can claim they have received a better offer 
elsewhere, and boards might feel vulnerable when they know that several 
companies in their sector are looking for a finance director or a CEO,” LGIM 
said.
 