
Britain's multilateral aid review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/multilateral-aid-review> (MAR) did 
not compare the effectiveness of one development agency with another, and any 
suggestion that it did misunderstands the nature of the review, a development 
minister told MPs on Tuesday.

Alan Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan>, minister for 
international development, said the review assessed each agency on a set of 
objective questions to determine their effectiveness.

The MAR, which was announced in 2010 and reported back the next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jun/09/aid-review-targets-multilateral-agencies>
, assessed "the efficiency or effectiveness of each organisation" according to 
its "bespoke purpose", Duncan told an evidence session of the international 
development committee. The UK was the first donor to assess the value for money 
of multilateral organisations such as the Asian Development Fund, the World 
Bank's International Development Association and the International Labour 
Organisation.

The review assessed 43 organisations that accounted for Â£3.6bn in 2011-12, 
judging which agency provided good or poor value for money. Updated assessments 
of the first set of agencies will be published next month. A full report will 
be published at the end of the year.

The Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 pointed to successes under the review. These include the introduction of open 
membership hearings with presidential candidates at the International Fund for 
Agricultural Development, a UN agency, and pushing the Asian Development Bank 
to address the needs of women and girls in projects.

Duncan said the MAR had "empowered people at the top of organisations to bring 
about changes", a reference to the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO), which is sharpening its focus on results and strengthening country level 
performance. The FAO was rated poor value for money under the 2011 review.

Daniel Gustafson, deputy director-general at the FAO, told MPs that although 
aspects of the review were unfair, it did highlight the organisation's 
weaknesses and proved a watershed moment in helping to bridge differences 
between rich (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD) and 
poor (G77 <http://www.g77.org/>) members.

"The review framed discussions in a new way and was influential and helpful," 
said Gustafson. "It aided our thinking on managing for results, including how 
we judge success in country offices and programmes, 'what good looks like', and 
on topics like value for money and our theory of change. We don't see 
eye-to-eye on a number of things, but the dialogue that the MAR engendered was 
undoubtedly helpful and led to changes."

The MAR has itself come under review from the National Audit Office (NAO) and 
the parliamentary public accounts committee. The NAO said the review 
contributed significantly to improved transparency and achieving value for 
money in the UK's aid effort.

But the NAO warned of duplication as other donors seek to emulate the MAR. 
Separate donor reviews create administrative burdens and costs for multilateral 
organisations, the NAO cautioned, so they should be used as a stepping stone to 
joint assessments. The NAO said the review's focus on demonstrable impacts put 
"standard-setting" organisations such as the World Health Organisation at a 
disadvantage, since they found it more difficult to provide the evidence to 
score well.

DfID said these points are being taken into account. It said the assessment 
framework has been tailored to apply more readily to standard-setting agencies 
to include questions on the formulation of "policy advice that is world-leading 
in terms of originality, significance and rigour", and whether the agency is 
able to translate the impact of its work to results in the field. DfID said its 
review of the MAR in 2015 will address other issues, such as the way in which 
evidence and experience on the ground can be used, in particular in countries 
where DfID is not present, and comparing the effectiveness of multilateral and 
bilateral aid.

DfID said it recognised the dangers of imposing an ever greater burden on 
multilateral agencies as other donors conduct their own reviews. The main 
vehicle for co-operation is themultilateral organisation performance assessment 
network <http://www.mopanonline.org/>, a network of 17 bilateral donors, which 
has a permanent secretariat hosted by the OECD.

The secretariat is creating a data bank to hold all available data on 
multilateral performance that is easily accessible to donors. This would reduce 
the burden on multilateral agencies, which often have to answer the same query 
from different donors.

Alison Evans, an external reviewer of the original MAR and former director of 
the Overseas Development Institute, said: "The biggest challenge for the MAR is 
how to stay relevant as the aid architecture changes so rapidly and becomes 
increasingly complex."
 