
James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/29/james-murdoch-sky-chairman-rupert-murdoch>
’s continued role in his father’s media empire is sufficient reason for the
proposed takeover of Sky by 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
 to be blocked, sayEd Miliband and Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/no-to-sky-deal-murdochs-cant-be-trusted>
.

No to the Sky deal. The Murdochs can’t be trusted | Ed Miliband and Vince Cable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/no-to-sky-deal-murdochs-cant-be-trusted>
Allegations were heard in the high court against News International in which 
the role of Murdoch’s son in the alleged deletion of incriminating emails was 
raised in evidence, the two men say. Miliband and Cable also point out that a
2012 Ofcom report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/mar/08/ofcom-james-murdoch-fitness-bskyb>
 was “withering about the conduct of James Murdoch” when it examined the last 
attempted take over of Sky, and they urge theculture secretary, Karen Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/16/petition-ofcom-rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-fox-karen-bradley>
, to immediately refer the issue to the watchdog again.

James, the younger son of Rupert Murdoch, stood down as chairman of BSkyB in 
2012 as Ofcom escalated its investigation into whether he was a “fit and proper 
person” to be in charge in the wake of thephone hacking scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/24/phone-hacking-scandal-timeline-trial>
. In a joint article published in theObserver, the former Labour leader and the 
former Liberal Democrat business secretary write: “The question as to whether 
100% ownership is right now when it was not four years ago can be answered 
emphatically: no.

“James Murdoch, despite what the 2012 report said, is now back as chairman of 
Sky and is chief executive of21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> as it seeks to take over 
Sky. There are crucial – unanswered – issues around the culture and competence 
of what went on at Murdoch-owned newspapers which have not been satisfactorily 
resolved or answered.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmurdochs-sky-deal-blocked-miliband-cable-james-murdoch-media-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e77a9e190f4a4abd846177de8437d31e59cc063%2F0_135_4304_2582%2F4304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murdoch%E2%80%99s%20Sky%20deal%20must%20be%20blocked%2C%20say%20senior%20opposition%20figures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmurdochs-sky-deal-blocked-miliband-cable-james-murdoch-media-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murdoch%E2%80%99s%20Sky%20deal%20must%20be%20blocked%2C%20say%20senior%20opposition%20figures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmurdochs-sky-deal-blocked-miliband-cable-james-murdoch-media-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e77a9e190f4a4abd846177de8437d31e59cc063%2F0_135_4304_2582%2F4304.jpg>
 Ed Miliband and Vince Cable have urged Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, 
to refer the takeover back to Ofcom. Photograph: Mark Thomas/Rex/Shutterstock 
They add: “The Murdochs may claim that editorial independence could be 
guaranteed by ringfencing Sky news, and impartiality protected by Ofcom, the 
regulator. But the answer to this and the deeper questions at the heart of this 
bid depend on trust and the conduct of the Murdoch organisation and family does 
not inspire trust.

“If it was inappropriate for the Murdochs to take 100% control of Sky even 
before the multiple convictions of their former employees, it must be 
inappropriate now.

“Promises that might be made to the regulators that there will be a specified 
proportion of independent non-executive directors cannot overcome the reality 
of total ownership and control.”

Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox, which owns Fox News and a Hollywood studio, 
made aformal bid to take full control of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/murdoch-sky-bid-competition-complaints-rights-deals>
, owner of Sky News and pay-TV operations in the UK, Germany, Austria and 
Italy, on Thursday.
 