
A group of Sky shareholders has called for “robust” safeguards to protect its 
“future probity” under full ownership by Rupert Murdoch’s21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox>.

The Local Authority Pension Fund Forum, an association of 71 funds that 
control about 0.7% of Sky, also called forregulator Ofcom to be called in to 
examine potential media plurality issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/12/pressure-grows-to-refer-rupert-murdochs-sky-bid-to-ofcom>
 beforeFox’s £11.2bn takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
 is given the green light.

The proposed deal, which could be formally tabled as early as this week, will 
result in Murdoch owning 100% of Sky through 21st Century Fox as well as the 
Times, Sunday Times, Sun and radio station TalkSport through separate newspaper 
and book publishing company News Corp.


Sky should hold out for more from Rupert Murdoch | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/12/sky-should-seek-better-offer-from-rupert-murdoch>
Murdoch’s previous bid to take full control of Sky was derailed in 2011 at the 
height of the phone-hacking scandal that engulfed the now-closed News of the 
World.


“Any recommendation by the board in favour would have to be based on an 
appropriate premium as well as safeguards for future probity given the past 
track records of the businesses controlled by the Murdochs,” said LAPFF. 
“Further clarity may also be needed so that public shareholders have full 
confidence that proposals are not being unduly influenced by the well-known 
relationships between Sky and 21st Century Fox.”


LAPFF has in the past challenged the independence of board members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/04/sky-investors-fox-board-21st-century-fox-john-nallen>
 and raised governance issues at Sky, most recently in January following the 
controversial reappointment of James Murdoch as chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jan/29/james-murdochs-return-as-sky-chair-is-a-major-concern-says-investor>
.


Assuming Fox moves to formally table a bid for Sky then Karen Bradley, the 
culture secretary, then has 10 working days to decide whether to ask Ofcom to 
investigate the deal to assess any media plurality issues.


Most observers expect Bradley to call for a public interest test. Her 
predecessor, Jeremy Hunt, did so with the result that Sky News was offered up 
to be split off to address plurality concerns and avoid a full competition 
investigation.


“The role of Ofcom would be helpful in bringing its expert scrutiny on a deal 
that will have a broader impact on the future of the broadcasting and print 
media marketplace in the UK,” said Kieran Quinn, chairman of LAPFF.


LAPFF also became the latest shareholder to question whether Fox’s proposed 
offer undervalues the company.


A committee of independent Sky board directors, led by Martin Gilbert, the 
deputy chairman and chief of Aberdeen Asset Management, tentatively recommended 
shareholders accept the Fox offer.

“All directors of Sky have a duty not to disadvantage the public 
shareholders,” said Quinn. “The position of the non-executives will need to be 
robust to ensure that the premium paid is appropriate and that shareholders are 
not disadvantaged by any temporary low in the share price.”


Fox has agreed to pay a premium of 36% on Sky’s closing price on Thursday, the 
day before the proposed bid was announced. However, Sky’s shares were trading 
above that level as recently as February.

Investors including Royal London Asset Management and Jupiter Asset Management 
have already queried the offer price.


Crispin Odey, who as head of Odey Asset Management owns a Sky stake, said that 
he does not believe that Fox will pay more than its existing offer.


However, Thomas Singlehurst, an analyst at Citi, said there is a chance of a 
bump up in the offer price.


“Our own view is that the bid is opportunistic in nature and the price offered 
– and tentatively agreed by the independent directors – does not represent fair 
value for the shares, which we see at at least £13.50 per share,” he said.

“The reality is, however, that it is a significant premium to the undisturbed 
price and our discussions with investors (as well as the high trading volumes) 
suggest that many may be willing to take the offer. This does not exclude the 
potential for a small sweetener, but this is far from guaranteed.”

 