
Broadcasters opposed to 21st Century Fox’s proposed £11.7bn takeover of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
 are preparing to lodge complaints with regulators in the UK and Europe after 
expressing concerns that the pay-TV broadcaster will dominate bidding for 
top-flight sport, TV shows and movies.

Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox, which owns Fox News and a Hollywood studio, 
made a formal bid to take full control of Sky, owner of Sky News and pay-TV 
operations in the UK, Germany, Austria and Italy, on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
.

In the past year Sky, which is 39% controlled by Fox, has started to flex its 
muscle as a pan-European broadcaster. It has signed its first exclusive 
continent-wide dealswith US networks HBO 
<https://corporate.sky.com/media-centre/news-page/2015/sky-atlantic-will-be-the-home-of-hbo-for-21-million-sky-customers-across-europe>
 andShowtime 
<https://corporate.sky.com/media-centre/news-page/2016/sky-and-cbs-corporation-announce-long-term-pan-european-agreement-for-showtime-portfolio-of-programming>
, and the film-making arm ofSony 
<https://corporate.sky.com/media-centre/news-page/2016/sky_and_sony_pictures_television_announce_first_major_pan_european_movies_agreement>
, for content that includes Westworld, The Young Pope, Game of Thrones, 
Billions, Twin Peaks and Ghostbusters. Broadcasters in the UK, Germany, Austria 
and Italy are concerned that they will be locked out of future rights 
competitions by such blanket deals.

Petition calls for Ofcom to investigate Rupert Murdoch's Sky bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/16/petition-ofcom-rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-fox-karen-bradley>
One concern among broadcasting rivals is that Fox could enable Sky, which has 
found its resources stretched with the costly rollout of its advanced Sky Q box 
and an upcoming launch into mobile, to dominate in bidding for sports, film and 
drama rights.

“When you effectively have one shareholder [Fox] you have the freedom to be 
more long term, more ballsy,” said the chief executive of a broadcaster that 
competes with Sky for rights deals.

“In the case of Sky it could mean it will never again lose out to BT on sports 
rights. Essentially, if you have Murdoch in the background saying ‘do whatever 
it takes, don’t lose those rights – they are integral to the business’, that is 
much simpler than having to propel and justify multibillion-pound bids with 
large numbers of shareholders.”


Fox believes there will be no competition hurdles and is buoyed by the 
precedent set in 2010, when the European commission – the EU’s executive arm – 
cleared a bid for Sky by Fox’s predecessor, News Corporation, although the 
phone-hacking scandal ultimately derailed the transaction. Fox is also 
encouraged by the green light from Brussels for Sky’s takeover of its sister 
operations inGermany and Italy in 2014 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-1004_en.htm>.

Rivals disagree, however, arguing that the Fox/Sky combination needs to be 
given tough scrutiny regardless of favourable decisions in recent years. They 
are expected to lodge their concerns with Brussels and the Competition and 
Markets Authority in the UK.


“Compared to six years ago this is a very different environment,” said a 
second top executive at a major TV group. “The 2010 bid was about [Murdoch 
buying Sky in the] UK and Ireland. This is multi-market and there are issues of 
[pay TV viewing] share and dominance.”


In the UK, there is the possibility that the media regulator, Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, could be asked to conduct a public 
interest test. This would determine whether a successful bid would give Murdoch 
too much control of UK news media. As well as bringing together Fox News and 
Sky News under the same ownership, the takeover would see Sky being fully 
controlled by a media tycoon who also owns the Times, the Sunday Times and the 
Sun newspapers through a separate group, News Corp.

Once Fox notifies authorities about the formal bid, the culture secretary, 
Karen Bradley, will have 10 working days to decide whether to trigger the Ofcom 
test. A spokesman for the Department of Culture, Media and Sport said it had 
not yet received notification from Fox or Sky about the offer, so Bradley’s 
quasi-judicial process is yet to start.

In 2010, Murdoch was forced to table a plan to spin off Sky News to satisfy 
media plurality issues raised by Ofcom, a deal that was accepted by the 
government. Fox believes the industry landscape has changed so much in the past 
six years that media plurality issues will not be a concern this time and it is 
not planning to sacrifice Sky News.

If a public interest test takes place, Sky is expected to point to factors 
including the decline in newspaper sales and rise in the plurality of news 
provision through players including Facebook, Google, Vice, BuzzFeed, Mashable 
and the Huffington Post.

“We do think that this [deal] passes regulatory muster,” said James Murdoch, 
chief executive of Fox and chairman of Sky, as he announced the formal offer 
this week. “We think as the relevant authorities look at the fact set around 
both the competition and potential UK intervention issues that no meaningful 
concessions will need to be made.”
 