
I remember the first time I heard the words Sex Pistols. It was 1977 and we 
were visiting my Nana Elsie in a small pit village in County Durham. Pretty 
Vacant came on the radio and I overheard the words Sex Pistols in a 
conversation between the grownups over tea and ham and piccalilli sandwiches. I 
was a few months shy of my fourth birthday, my unreliable memory suggests, but 
something about the coming together of these two words, "sex" and "pistols", 
carried a whiff of danger and illicit expectation. My parents tell me I threw 
myself around the room with the abandon of a Toddler Rotten for the next three 
minutes, but I don't remember being impressed by Lydon's sneer or Jones's 
riffing. It was the name that seared itself on to my impressionable and 
expanding consciousness.

Ten years later I had the same experience with Beastie Boys, only this time I 
was 13 and three-quarters: a veritable Adrian Mole returning from a school 
exchange (and my first kiss) in France. One of our group came back to the deck 
of the ferry with a copy of the Sun, which with typical hysteria reported the 
latest vandalism epidemic ripping its way through the country from Liverpool to 
Lewisham: the theft of VW badges from vehicles large and small. Mike D of New 
York hip-hop group Beastie Boys (though I'm sure at this point the Sun would 
have referred to them as "rappers") was the originator of this klepto-fashion 
statement and it had spread, virus-like, across the ocean when Beastie Boys 
arrived in late spring 1987 to tour their already infamous debut, Licensed to 
Ill, of which Rolling Stone had said, "Three idiots create a masterpiece". The 
soundtrack to our school discos that summer wasFight for Your Right 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eBShN8qT4lk> and No Sleep Till Brooklyn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68Se3JzYZV4>. In a small, conservative north 
Yorkshire market town Beastie Boys sounded like nothing I'd heard before: 
snotty, urban, aggressive and more than slightly dysfunctional – every teenage 
boy's dream. But again, it was the name that really made a racket in my 
adolescent mind. Like the siren call of acid house a year later, the 
conjunction of two words seemed to spark those embryonic rock'n'roll synapses.

It wasn't until Paul's Boutique hit my turntable that Beastie Boys were 
anything more than a curiosity to me. A maelstrom of improbable and sometimes 
plain ludicrous samples, it arrived after Public Enemy had released their own 
masterpiece,It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LK8sxngSWaU>, and just before the D.A.I.S.Y. Age
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f3VT1ml6lxw> of De La Soul. Twenty years ago, 
epochal pop historical moments used to congregate around albums rather than 
songs, and within five years of its release Paul's Boutique was acclaimed the 
Pet Sounds of hip-hop. It's still hard to argue with this stataement now, 
though in Check Your Head, Ill Communication and Hello Nasty, Beastie Boys made 
other records of comparable greatness, always navigating a path between their 
hardcore roots and their funk/hip-hop leanings.

Beastie Boys have soundtracked many a party and many a New York subway journey 
for me over the years. We welcome them on to the Faber list, where their 
no-doubt eclectic, inspired and colourful vision for a "memoir" will be 
published in late 2015. To celebrate, I've put together my own 10 favourite
Beastie Boys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys> tracks. I could 
have chosen another 20, but today if I were riding the F train downtown into 
Brookyln, these are the tracks I'd reach for and want to hear as I remember 
that frisson of excitement and fear I felt some 25 years ago when I first heard 
the words "Beastie Boys".

Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen via Spotify 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/fabersocial/playlist/2Xfe5BRJUgvA2ePjtPoHqb>

• Lee Brackstone is the creative director of Faber Social 
<http://www.fabersocial.co.uk/>. Faber will publish the book by Beastie Boys in 
autumn 2015.
 