
As an Indonesian, I am embarrassed that our society is debating the relevance 
of the hymen for becoming a police officer, or even graduating from high school.

An Arab spring of love matters – Al Hubb Thaqafa defies sexual taboos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/20/love-matters-al-hubb-thaqafa-sex-education-defies-sexual-taboos>
Two-finger virginity tests are still applied in the recruitment of female 
officers 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/11/17/indonesia-virginity-tests-female-police> by 
the Indonesian National Police. Inspector General Moechgiyarto confirmed that 
virginity tests are conducted under “health condition requirements” for female 
police candidates. He argues virginity tests are necessary to prevent sex 
workers entering the police academy. This test does not apply to male 
candidates. Virginity tests are also imposed by the military to ensure women 
who marry military men are virgins.

The city council in Jember, East Java, recently announced that virginity 
should be one of the requirements for girls to pass high school 
<http://rt.com/news/229975-java-lawmakers-virginity-test/>. Following a public 
debate, including outrage from Islamic leaders, theplans were dropped last month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/12/plan-to-force-schoolgirls-to-have-virginity-tests-scrapped-in-indonesia>
.

Given such conservative public discourse, are Indonesian women subdued into 
silence on the issue? No, some are fighting back.

Nihayatul Wafiroh, MP and member of Indonesian Islamic organisation Nahdlatul 
Ulama, has spoken out against virginity tests.She said 
<http://www.ucanews.com/news/student-virginity-exam-proposal-sparks-outcry-in-indonesia/72970>
: “If people have concerns about free sex among students, don’t just blame 
them. It’s a complex issue.” She added on her Facebook page that she is asking 
the ministry of health to abolish virginity tests because they are irrelevant, 
degrading, and havebeen condemned by the WHO 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/12/01/un-who-condemns-virginity-tests>. Health 
minister, Nila Moeloek, has avoided the issue, saying it’s a police matter. But 
she did say: “You could lost your virginity because of accidents, or being 
raped, and because of these [circumstances] women cannot pursue their dreams to 
become police?”

Many Indonesians are campaigning against virginity tests through social media 
with the hashtags#TolakTesKeperawanan 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TolakTesKeperawanan&src=typd> and 
#TesKeperawanan <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TesKeperawanan&src=typd>. The 
National Commission on Violence Against Women also released a public statement 
urging police to stop the practice.

Girls and media: how TV chat shows and soaps can have a positive influence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/girls-and-media-how-tv-chat-shows-and-soaps-can-have-a-positive-influence>
A group of young LGBT feminists, Bites, ran a public discussion on virginity 
tests at the end of last year. I was one of the speakers, together with Sri 
Rumiati, a female police officer, Dr Ramona Sari, a medical doctor, and Andreas 
Harsono, theIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> researcher 
for Human Rights Watch.

I have been advocating sex pleasure for women through my book The Orgasm 
Project <http://www.theorgasm-project.com/> since 2010. I interviewed 14 
Indonesian women from Aceh to Sulawesi about their orgasms. My fear was they 
would be too shy to answer my questions. I was surprised that they were happy 
to talk. Most laughed a lot while discussing their orgasms. Nobody had ever 
asked them about this, not even their partners. They loved answering my 
questions because, finally, someone cared about their pleasure.

I do this work because I think Indonesian society is a hypocritical. We need 
to be honest to resolve our issues around teen pregnancy, sexual transmitted 
diseases, sex workers and discrimination against LGBT people.

Is there hope for the child bride accused of murder in Nigeria?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/22/is-there-hope-for-the-child-bride-accused-of-in-nigeria>
Second, I want to offer an alternative and fun way of campaigning for women’s 
rights. More men than women read my book; finally we are engaging men to talk 
about women’s issues.

From my research I’ve discovered that women who have orgasms have equal 
personal relationships, are able to express themselves and, most importantly, 
are free from violence. I believe women who reach orgasm are empowered and can 
make decisions about their own bodies, with or without a hymen. Pleasure is a 
human right. My ambition is for all women to have orgasms, because that’s the 
ultimate indicator they are empowered.

Firliana Purwanti is the author of The Orgasm Project 
<http://www.theorgasm-project.com/>. Follow @TheOproject 
<https://twitter.com/TheOproject> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 