
I’ve been with my boyfriend for nearly a year, and a few months ago he told me 
he has intense and (to him) shocking feelings that he may be gay. I’d read 
about types of OCD that can zone in on thoughts about sexuality, and thought it 
sounded like that. He’d been to a GP a few years before and been given the same 
diagnosis, but he refused CBT and didn’t take the medication offered. It seems 
to me that he thinks that the truth is that he is gay, but is supressing that 
truth and feels anxious and stressed. I’ve tried to encourage him to speak to 
his doctor again but he feels embarrassed. The main trigger seems to be that, 
if he’s walking down a street, men stand out to him more. My feeling is that 
counselling would be helpful. Does this seem like the best option and how can I 
convince him it’s a good idea? I’m also worried that OCD can be slightly 
misunderstood.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
 