
It was a real thrill, aged 16 and seeing Blow-Up 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83231/blow-up>, with its depiction of 
sex, drugs and rock'n'roll, swinging London style. My enjoyment of the film's 
celebrated sex scenes was, however, considerably tempered by the presence of my 
mum and dad. Still, I was grateful to my parents for introducing me to the film 
– their knowledge of which revealed an uncharacteristic hipness hitherto 
concealed from me. It was the most sophisticated film I'd ever seen. Though I 
couldn't claim to have understood it, I knew I was on to something.

Blow-Up gave me kudos the next day at school, because all the coolest kids had 
seen it too. Even better, it turned out the "murder" scene was filmed atMaryon 
Park in Charlton 
<http://www.greenwich.gov.uk/Greenwich/YourEnvironment/GreenSpace/ParksGardens/Charlton/MaryonPark.htm>
, south-east London, a couple of miles or so from school – though I was an 
unadventurous boy, and sadly Blow-Up didn't inspire me to immediately visit the 
park and track down the filming locations. But while this was recognisably the 
same city, it was a different London from the staid, predictable one I'd grown 
up in.

On first viewing, the London of Blow-Up seemed to be full of secrets just 
waiting to be discovered, of beautiful and creative young people at the centre 
of the cultural universe. In the actual city where I lived, it was possible to 
have a fabulously glamorous life, to live in a converted warehouse, drive a 
sports car, watch the Yardbirds – and yes,cavort with naked would-be models 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TiZC12NAYXc>.
 Blow-Up 
But the film itself was also troubling. Did David Hemmings's David 
Bailey-esque photographer witness a murder? If he did, what happened to the 
killers? Blow-Up is inconclusive on the subject. The film's surreal touches –
the mime troupe playing tennis with an invisible ball 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tcaev66ed0>, the grass painted green in the 
park, Stockwell Road's maroon shops – give proceedings an air of unreality that 
undermines the seriousness of the crime.

I was too young to experience swinging London, but that hardly mattered – it 
didn't swing for everyone. Many people's lives in the 60s were just as dreary 
as the one they'd had in the 50s. In fact, it doesn't really swing in Blow-Up: 
early on, young revellers are juxtaposed with down-at-heel men filing out of a 
gate. For Blow-Up's Italian director,Michelangelo Antonioni 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michelangeloantonioni>, too, Swinging London 
wasn't real – it was as intangible as that tennis ball. Its denizens are cruel, 
self-regarding and amoral. Hemmings's character isn't amused by his good 
fortune. Hefights to retrieve a piece of Jeff Beck's guitar after an 
auto-destructive performance of Stroll On 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YHNL5_2LspE>, then outside the club discards 
this precious pop artefact as worthless junk. It's his ennui that leads him to 
Maryon Park, and the ensuing murder mystery the only thing that motivates him 
or gives his life meaning. His indifference to the crime and hiscruelty to women
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b8ArHxmELYg> are symptomatic of society's 
degeneration.
 Blow-Up 
Blow-Up is a film about a particular moment in the capital's history. It was 
made in London in 1966, which aficionados of 60s pop culture will recognise as 
the absolute perfect place and time. Imagine walking into a small club and 
witnessing thatincendiary performance by the Yardbirds 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_zeza1xeWKM>. Astonishingly, the Who, Tomorrow 
and even the Velvet Underground had been considered for the role. And look – 
the audience includes a young Michael Palin, andJanet Street Porter in a 
homemade silver dress 
<http://media.photobucket.com/image/janet+street+porter+blow+up+/cornershop15/WWTT/JanetStreet-PorterwithDavidHemmings.jpg>
.

But it also has enduring appeal, thanks to the music (Herbie Hancock 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/herbie-hancock>'s groovy jazz deserves a 
special mention), the director's ambivalence towards the subject matter and the 
"beautiful people", who are also repellent. It also reveals an enduring truth 
about London, my home town: it's never truly knowable. Who knows what goes on 
in the park hedgerows, in the converted warehouses, behind that nightclub door, 
where there's always someone hipper than you?
 