
I love Just William. Not because he is a reminder of my childhood – I only 
read about him three years ago. I love him as a new discovery. It is, of 
course, a love tinged with enormous relief that I don't actually know him – 
that he has not, say, rifled through my drawers to make my best underwear into 
hats for his mad plays. Which, incidentally, always star him.

The stories make me laugh – that kind of laughing you can't stop and everyone 
wants to kill you. Then – gadzooks! – William's creator, Richmal Compton, turns 
out to be a girl. A comedy-genius-type girl. And she was writing when girls 
were mostly fainting or covered in net. (That, by the way, is my thumbnail 
sketch of the 1920s.)

William stayed as an 11-year-old from 1922, when the first collection of 
stories came out, until 1970, whenWilliam the Lawless, the last book, was 
published posthumously – in it, he gets a Beatles LP as a birthday present 
(John Lennon was a fan).

I know that I am a "girl" and therefore William would not have had much use 
for me. But I do agree with him on so many things. On parents, for example: why 
aren't we given more of a say in who we get as parents? William would like his 
father to be a clown. There is a bit in the story "The Circus" when he is 
desperate to see the clowns. But when he asks his father if he can go by 
himself (at nighttime), his father merely says: "Don't speak with your mouth 
full." And William thinks: "A clown would not have said this."

I suspect a clown father would have better things on his mind than table 
manners. Big shoes, for instance. The books are full of this kind of thing: 
clowns, adventures, selling twins as slaves, and so on.

Funny writing (Crompton, Dahl, Wodehouse) is underestimated. People still say 
to me: "When are you going to write a proper book and stop messing about?" And 
I always think: "A funny person would not say that."
 