
I am 49 and have been married for 28 years. My husband suffers from major 
depression and chronic pain. Recently, we introduced various toys to arouse 
him. After I achieved orgasm and attempted to satisfy him, he told me to stop, 
so I did. But now he is angry with me, insisting that I did not try hard enough 
and it was just about me.

It is never easy to be in a relationship with someone struggling with 
depression and chronic pain. Your efforts seem sterling, but stepping out of 
your comfort zone can also create your own resentment. Set boundaries, and 
calmly insist that you do not become the brunt of his frustration.

When trying to bolster sexual experience for someone who suffers from chronic 
pain, erotic stimulation from aids such as sex toys – although often useful – 
needs to be combined with an awareness of the ebb and flow of pain.Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> should only be attempted at 
times when his pain is lowest and when pain medication is at its peak.

Of course, this puts a burden on you to be ready and available according to 
his timetable, and there is no denying this is hard. Perhaps you might have a 
heartfelt discussion with him about what would work best for both of you. Many 
couples with similar challenges find that mutual satisfaction is 
near-impossible within one lovemaking session, and instead take it in turns to 
be the receiver of pleasure from one time to the next.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 