
The man whose signature in effect dissolved the Soviet Union 25 years ago on 
Thursday has admitted that was not his intention as he travelled to the fateful 
meeting.


'Democracy was hijacked. It got a bad name': the death of the post-Soviet dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/central-asia-tajikistan-kazakhstan-kyrgyzstan-uzbekistan-turkmenistan>
The Belavezha Accords, which were signed in Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> on 8 December 1991, broke up the 
Soviet Union and launched its constituent republics on the path to statehood.

But Stanislav Shushkevich, then chairman of the Belarus supreme soviet, had no 
plans “to bring up the question about what the Soviet Union is and how it 
should exist” as he went to meet Russia’s Boris Yeltsin and President Leonid 
Kravchuk ofUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> at a state 
resort in the Belavezha forest, he told the Guardian.

He had invited Yeltsin to a hunting trip there to try to secure Russian oil 
and gas supplies for Belarus during the impending winter. In the end, both the 
hunting and the energy talks gave way to more serious matters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ac523be715ee65c887e2956efb89368f3bec6de%2F32_822_6457_3874%2F6457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ac523be715ee65c887e2956efb89368f3bec6de%2F32_822_6457_3874%2F6457.jpg>
 Boris Yeltsin denounces the 1991 coup. Photograph: Diane Lu-Hovasse/AFP/Getty 
Images 
As the delegations gathered, they realised the political crisis would have to 
be solved first. After the August 1991 hardliner coup against Mikhail 
Gorbachev’s attempts at reform, the Soviet Union had become “essentially 
ungoverned”, Shushkevich said.


The agreement they signed started the Commonwealth of Independent States, a 
loose alliance of 11 of 15 former Soviet republics. But its greatest 
achievement was dissolving the USSR after 70 years without large-scale 
violence, Shushkevich said. Western leaders had feared that a Soviet breakup 
would lead to civil war in the nuclear power.

“The important result of the appearance of the CIS was that the divorce [from 
the Soviet Union] happened without scandal or a drop of blood,” Shushkevich 
said. “Countries made declarations of independence and started considering 
themselves independent.”

The legacy of the agreement and its intention to “build democratic, 
rule-of-law states” in the former Soviet Union remains mixed. After heady 
democracy and huge economic inequality in the 1990s, Russia under Vladimir 
Putin has experienced a rise in living standards but a drop in pluralism. 
Georgia attempted to turn towards the west and make reforms, but a 2008 war with
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> cemented Moscow’s control 
over the Georgian breakaway republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

Ukraine’s own turn towards to the west led to Russia’s annexation of Crimea 
and a separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine, while the rest of the country 
remains mired in corruption.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f85d528a3bd77a42e4bf746db16540d9b870140%2F0_80_2120_2648%2F2120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f85d528a3bd77a42e4bf746db16540d9b870140%2F0_80_2120_2648%2F2120.jpg>
 Stanislav Shushkevich in 2006. Photograph: Sergei Grits/AP 
In Uzbekistan on Sunday, the late ruler Islam Karimov’s right-hand man, 
Shavkat Mirziyoyev, won 88.6% of the vote in a presidential election that 
monitors said was “devoid of genuine competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/uzbekistan-elects-shavkat-mirziyoyev-president-islam-karimov>
”. Moldova recently elected areactionary pro-Russia president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/pro-russia-presidential-candidates-tipped-to-win-in-bulgaria-and-moldova>
.

Shushkevich blamed the resurgence of Soviet-style political trends on Russia 
spreading “imperial thinking” that “positions Russia as a big brother”. While 
he insisted he wouldn’t have done anything differently at Belavezha, he did 
admit some regrets over what had happened since.

“I’m disappointed because the Belavezha Accords opened big opportunities, but 
Putin wants to turn this around,” Shushkevich said. “He said the breakup of the 
Soviet Union was a tragedy, but this is an unacceptable statement, because tens 
of millions died for this communist order. We need to make a government for the 
people, not sacrifice the people for the state.”

During the discussions at Belavezha, the seed for a wide-ranging agreement was 
planted when the then Russian secretary of state, Gennady Burbulis, 
unexpectedly asked whether the others would be willing to sign a statement that 
“the USSR as a geopolitical reality and subject of international law ends its 
existence”.

Shushkevich jumped on the idea, and the group began hashing out the accords. 
To avoid the appearance they were “creating a Union of Slavic Republics”, 
Shushkevich called Kazakhstan’s Nursultan Nazarbayev to invite him to sign. He 
promised to come but was held up by “technical reasons” in Moscow; later it 
emerged that Gorbachev had offered him the position of chairman of the supreme 
Soviet in the renewed USSR.

Shushkevich denied rumours that the group went drinking that night in the banya
, a kind of Slavic steam bath, saying they had only enjoyed a long steam and 
massage.

“Yes, it was customary to drink at meetings in the Soviet Union, ‘democratic 
centralism’ [where binding decisions are made centrally] was also customary, 
but there was no drunkenness or democratic centralism” at Belavezha, he joked.

Although hunting was only the pretext to gather the leaders together, Kravchuk 
and the then Ukrainian prime minister, Vitold Fokin, went out the next morning 
and Fokin shot a wild boar, Shushkevich recalled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0fe2dfaf816ee5092e17d4db6f153525b9b14d%2F0_341_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20hunting%20trip%20with%20Yeltsin%20killed%20off%20the%20Soviet%20Union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmy-hunting-trip-with-yeltsin-killed-off-the-soviet-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d0fe2dfaf816ee5092e17d4db6f153525b9b14d%2F0_341_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A border guard on the Belarus-Poland border in 1999. Photograph: Vasily 
Fedosenko/Reuters 
That morning they reconvened and worked out the rest of the agreement. After 
signing it, Shushkevich called Gorbachev while Yeltsin called the then US 
president, George HW Bush. Shushkevich said Gorbachev hung up on him when he 
heard Bush had been told about the accords.

Shushkevich became the leader of an independent Belarus, but was defeated by 
Alexander Lukashenko in the 1994 presidential election. Since then, Lukashenko 
has resisted many reforms and locked up prominent critics, and the state still 
controls four-fifths of the economy.

The former leader said he was hopeful change would come with the younger 
generation, which unlike its predecessors has unfettered access to information. 
“I’m disappointed that we can’t strengthen democratic principles in Belarus, 
but we just need to live through this phase,” Shushkevich said. “After 
revolutions in the west, blood was spilled for a long time, and they fought for 
the rights they have now, an open society with human rights.”
 