
Louis Theroux’s My Scientology Movie pulls off the neat trick of finding a 
revelatory approach to a topic that’s been well covered of late: the Church of 
Scientology. For longtime Scientology obsessives, the last few years have puked 
up a glut of Scientology exposés.Paul Thomas Anderson downplayed similarities 
between The Master and the early years of L Ron Hubbard’s group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/paul-thomas-anderson-master-scientology>
, but the film still gives a good idea of how it may have developed. More 
worrying for Scientology and its leader, David Miscavige, wasLawrence Wright’s 
Going Clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/02/going-clear-scientology-wright-review>
 – rich in accounts from church apostates, lawyered-up and fact-checked to the 
nth degree – and the no-less-excoriating Alex Gibney documentary based on it. 
Both book and film were devastating for Scientology’s reputation.

Going Clear review – chilling and damning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/going-clear-scientology-observer-review>
If Going Clear had a failing, it was in its reluctance to fully call to 
account some of its witnesses, including a figure who reappears in Theroux’s 
movie, former church disciplinarian Marty Rathburn. Theroux takes an indirect 
approach. Basing himself in LA, he puts out a casting call for people to play 
Scientology followers, as well as Miscavige andTom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/10/mitt-romney-mormonism-tom-cruise-scientology>
.

The intent is to replicate on film, with the help of Rathburn, alleged 
practices never witnessed by outsiders: an E-meter session (newbies are probed 
for emotional weaknesses); a “bull-bait” drill (designed to instil fortitude 
through extreme belittlement); and a disciplinary session in “The Hole” 
(allegedly a trailer in the California desert), with Miscavige – played by 
actor Andrew Perez – abusing his disgraced senior management. (Of the three, 
the church only recognises E-meter sessions as official practice.)

Scientology leader David Miscavige threatens to sue UK publisher over father's 
memoir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/27/scientology-leader-david-miscavige-threatens-to-sue-uk-publisher-over-fathers-memoir>
These exercises, essentially actors’ workshops guided by Rathburn, are 
evocative and powerful, particularly the scenes in The Hole, which Theroux 
calls “the extreme but logical extension of the core principles of 
Scientology”. They are the movie’s most extraordinary moments.

But this is the super-paranoid Church of Scientology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology>, and soon they are on Theroux’s 
tail, trailing his car, implicitly threatening Rathburn, openly filming them, 
and harassing them with legal threats (they aggressively blanket-deny 
everything). This prompts the movie’s other masterstroke: Theroux undermining 
Marty Rathburn’s authority by reminding him that these abusive strategies were 
originally invented by… Marty Rathburn. Marty doesn’t like that one bit, and 
can’t hide it. I think Rathburn is – on balance – an anti-Scientology hero, but 
we deserve the more ambiguous, troubling portrait sketched here.

For these reasons, My Scientology Movie belongs in the company of the most 
serious work done on the church. The more sunlight that falls on this dark 
organisation, the better for all of us.

My Scientology Movie is in cinemas from 7 October
 