
My wife prefers masturbation to sex with me. This is devastating to me and my 
self esteem. There are always a long list of excuses of why she doesn’t feel 
like talking about it. She has cheated on me a few times, too, and I have 
forgiven her but never forgotten. I brought up going to see somebody to talk 
about it, but she won’t. What should I do?

Your wife is giving you a great deal of unspoken information, but it is hard 
for you to take in, probably because it’s painful. There must be specific 
reasons why you stay in a marriage with someone who not only rejects 
you sexually, but also allows you to be aware of her alternative sexual 
choices. If the positives of the relationship outweigh the negatives, then – 
like many other people in a similar bind – you may decide to continue. Plenty 
of people choose a sexless marriage, which is usually fine if that’s what both 
partners desire. But others put up with a situation such as yours because, 
deep down, they do not believe they can ever have a fair and equitable 
relationship. Think carefully about what you truly want and need. How important 
is sex to you? How important is having sex withher to you? Ask that she respect 
your perfectly valid and urgent need to talk this through. Given the impasse 
between you, you have a right to insist on counselling.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com <> 
(please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to 
answer, which will be published online and in print. She regrets that she 
cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 