
My wife of 28 years has informed me that I fail to get hard or stay hard while 
having vaginal sex, perhaps 80% of the time. She says if it is oral, I am 
always ready to go. She is worried that I don’t find her attractive. I am 
worried because I did not even realise. I am under a lot of stress, and suspect 
the problem is emotional not physical.

It is not necessarily “all in your head”. Some men are simply more aroused 
by oral sex, whether enjoying it as a somewhat “taboo” erotic act, as a visual 
stimulation, or being tantalised by the inherent relinquishing of control. But 
from a purely mechanical point of view, some men find that vaginal sex does not 
always provide the type of friction they need.

As men age, they often experience a reduction in erectile firmness, as well as 
in the angle of elevation, and it is understandable that these changes may go 
unnoticed, since they usually don’t affect their ability to achieve intercourse 
and ejaculate. But, unfortunately, partners often take these changes personally.

I suspect that the best way forward is to find out what these changes really 
mean for your wife’s sexual enjoyment. Focus on finding how to increase her 
stimulation and pleasure in ways other than intercourse, such as providing her 
with more direct manual or oral stimulation. And find ways to reduce your 
stress – and not just because it dramatically undermines sexual processes.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 