
Most writers’ work happens when they are away from their desks, when they are 
looking the other way, when they are engaged with some other mundane task. The 
washing up, the folding of laundry, the school run, the debate with a small 
child over the merits and demerits of wearing of a coat in December.

This Must Be the Place by Maggie O’Farrell review – technically dazzling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/17/this-must-be-the-place-maggie-ofarrell-review>
This is, at least, what I try to tell myself. The idea that there is a typical 
“writing day” makes me laugh, with a slight edge of hysteria. Life with 
children precludes such planning, such routine, such predictability. Last week, 
for example, my writing mornings were disrupted and erased by, in no particular 
order: the cat being copiously indisposed on sofa and carpet; my daughter 
drawing a seascape of swimming lions on top of some notes I had made; one child 
sent home ill from school; and another requiring lifts to and from concert 
rehearsals.

All books are written against impossible odds; the odds just change as time 
goes on. I write around the edges, and always have. My first two novels were 
written while I was working full-time, the next in an odd, tractionless 
hinterland between giving up full-time work and having children. Then my son 
was born and I developed such skills as how to juggle a pen and a notebook 
while breastfeeding, how to find a cafe table with both space for a buggy and 
power for a laptop, how to silently and secretly entertain a toddler while 
simultaneously taking a serious phonecall.

The edges, however, work for me. I do believe that a book has its own engine 
that is always running somewhere at the back of your mind. When I was going 
over the final draft of my last book,This Must Be the Place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/27/this-must-be-the-place-by-maggie-ofarrell-review>
, I became bothered by the fact that I had used the word “penumbra” twice. 
Penumbra is a beautiful word but you can’t use it twice, not even in a 
130,000-word novel, so I spent days puzzling over synonyms. “Halo”? I asked 
myself. Not quite right. “Meniscus”, “aureole”, “veil”? Then one of my children 
was sick in the middle of the night and I was mopping puke off the floor at 3am 
when the word “corona” slid into my mind. Corona, I thought, with relief, with 
joy, as I shovelled soiled bedding into the washing machine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmy-writing-day-maggie-o-farrell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff68420271b6e9ab1f6ffc886a868d0b6f19d901b%2F223_599_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20writing%20day%3A%20Maggie%20O%E2%80%99Farrell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmy-writing-day-maggie-o-farrell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20writing%20day%3A%20Maggie%20O%E2%80%99Farrell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmy-writing-day-maggie-o-farrell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff68420271b6e9ab1f6ffc886a868d0b6f19d901b%2F223_599_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
 Maggie O’Farrell: ‘I do believe that a book has its own engine that is always 
running somewhere at the back of your mind.’ Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the 
Guardian 
There is nothing so dangerous to good writing as having too much time, too 
much liberty. You need the filtration system of being kept from your work. You 
need to reach the keyboard in a state of hunger, of desperation. You need to 
sit down at your desk with a desire to unleash all that you have been mulling 
over, all those solutions and permutations and reframings.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are wonderful editors, 
not in the sense that they will go through your manuscripts with a red pen, but 
in that they occupy so much of your time and head that only the good words will 
make it to the page. It is only during periods of domestic distraction that the 
blind alleys, overblown passages and whimsical detours may be considered – and 
discarded.

Children are also very good at dragging you out of your imaginary world, at 
forcing you to engage with life. They have no truck with word counts, tricky 
metaphors, lexical conundrums, characters who won’t do as they are told. Make 
things with pipecleaners, is their solution to life’s problems. Paint me a 
nest. Help me find a dragon costume.

I am devoted to the practice of redrafting. I don’t plan too much but like to 
mould and alter as I go. In the mid-1990s, I went to weekly poetry classes 
given by the Irish-American poetMichael Donaghy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/20/michael-donaghy-hero-maggie-ofarrell>
. He gave us two pieces of advice that I still hold close. The first: to make 
every word pull its weight. The second: you will need scaffolding to build your 
writing inside but must remember to take it down at the end.

It’s a solace, when you are cutting great swaths through your paragraphs, to 
think of them as a necessary but disposable part of construction. The tricky 
bit is working out what is scaffolding and what is brickwork. One can be 
mistaken for the other but that, I tell myself, is what multiple drafts are for.

• Maggie O’Farrell’s This Must Be the Place 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-must-be-the-place-450556.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 has been shortlisted for the 2016 Costa novel award.
 