
It was 20 years ago that the North American Free Trade Agreement between the 
US, Canada, andMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> was 
implemented. In Washington, the date coincided with an outbreak of the bacteria 
cryptosporidium in the city's water supply, with residents having to boil their 
water before drinking it. The joke in town was, "See what happens, NAFTA takes 
effect and you can't drink the water here."

Our neglected infrastructure aside, it is easy to see that NAFTA was a bad deal
 <https://www.citizen.org/trade/> for most Americans. The promised trade 
surpluses with Mexico turned out to be deficits, some hundreds of thousands of 
jobs were lost, and there was downward pressure on US wages – which was, after 
all, the purpose of the agreement. This was not like the European Union's 
(pre-Eurozone) economic integration, which allocated hundreds of billions of 
dollars of development aid to the poorer countries of Europe so as to pull 
their living standards up toward the average. The idea was to push US wages 
downward, toward Mexico's, and to create new rights for corporations within the 
trade area: these lucky multinational enterprises could now sue governments 
directly before a corporate-friendly international tribunal, unaccountable to 
any national judicial system, for regulations (eg environmental) that infringed 
upon their profit-making potential.

But what about Mexico? Didn't Mexico at least benefit from the agreement? Well 
if we look at the past 20 years, it's not a pretty picture. The most basic 
measure of economic progress, especially for a developing country like Mexico, 
is the growth of income (or GDP) per person. Out of 20 Latin American countries 
(South and Central America plus Mexico), Mexicoranks 18 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/02/weodata/weoselagr.aspx>, with 
growth of less than 1% annually since 1994. It is, of course, possible to argue 
that Mexico would have done even worse without NAFTA, but then the question 
would be, why?

From 1960-80 Mexico's GDP per capita nearly doubled. This amounted to huge 
increases in living standards for the vast majority of Mexicans. If the country 
had continued to grow at this rate, it would have European living standards 
today. This is what happened in South Korea, for example. But Mexico, like the 
rest of the region, began a long period of neoliberal policy changes that, 
beginning with its handling of the early 1980s debt crisis, got rid of 
industrial and development policies, gave a bigger role to de-regulated 
international trade and investment, and prioritized tighter fiscal and monetary 
policies (sometimes even in recessions). These policies put an end to the prior 
period of growth and development. The region as a whole grew just 6% per capita 
from 1980-2000; and Mexico grew by 16% – a far cry from the 99% of the previous 
20 years.

For Mexico, NAFTA helped to consolidate the neo-liberal, anti-development 
economic policies that had already been implemented in the prior decade, 
enshrining them in an international treaty. It also tied Mexico even further to 
theUS economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy>, which was 
especially unlucky in the two decades that followed: the Fed's interest rate 
increases in 1994, the US stock market bust (2000-2002) and recession (2001), 
and especially, the housing bubble collapse and Great Recession of 2008-9 had a 
bigger impact on Mexico than almost anywhere else in the region.

Since 2000, the Latin American region as a whole has increased its growth rate 
to about 1.9% annually per capita – not like the pre-1980 era, but a serious 
improvement over the prior two decades when it was just 0.3%. As a result of 
this growth rebound, and also the anti-poverty policies implemented by the left 
governments that were elected in most of South America over the past 15 years, 
the poverty rate in the region has fallen considerably. Itdeclined 
<http://www.cepal.org/cgi-bin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/8/51768/P51768.xml&xsl=/tpl-i/p9f.xsl&base=/tpl/top-bottom.xsl>
 from 43.9% in 2002 to 27.9% in 2013, after two decades of no progress 
whatsoever.

But Mexico hasn't joined 
<http://www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/the-mexican-economy-and-the-2012-elections>
 in this long-awaited rebound: its growth has remained below 1%, less than half 
the regional average, since 2000. And not surprisingly, Mexico's national 
poverty rate was 52.3% in 2012, basically the same as it was in 1994 (52.4%). 
Without economic growth, it is difficult to reduce poverty in a developing 
country. The statistics would probably look even worse if not for the migration 
that took place during this period. Millions of Mexicans were displaced from 
farming, for example, after being forced into competition with subsidized and 
high-productivity agribusiness in the United States, thanks to NAFTA's rules.

It's tough to imagine Mexico doing worse without NAFTA. Perhaps this is part 
of the reason why Washington's proposed "Free Trade Area of the Americas" was 
roundly rejected by the region in 2005 and the proposedTrans-Pacific Partnership
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/13/trans-pacific-paternership-intellectual-property>
 is running into trouble. Interestingly, when economists who have promoted 
NAFTA from the beginning are called upon to defend the agreement, the best that 
they can offer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2013/11/24/what-weve-learned-from-nafta> 
is that it increased trade. But trade is not, to most humans, an end in itself. 
And neither are the blatantly mis-named "free trade agreements".
 