
As a YA writer and avid reader I know that I am not alone in my obsession with 
revenge-based dramas. Ancient Greek myths and Biblical stories understood that 
the most direct route to justice often requires travelling along the bumpy 
roads of revenge. In every era in human history, artists have reflected the 
moral urgency of vengeance, from the high art of Elizabethan and Jacobean drama 
to the lowbrow makers of heart-stopping horror films. There’s nothing like 
watching a score being settled and payback justly received.


1. True Grit <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/true-grit-7.html> by Charles 
Portis

The theme of justice and revenge is explored to great effect in one of my 
favourite childhood adventure books of all time, True Grit. Young, gritty, 
female protagonist Mattie Ross fully expects that the local sheriff will bring 
her father’s murderer to justice. When he refuses to give chase, Mattie must 
find someone of sufficient true grit who will restore moral balance by doing 
what’s just and necessary; ultimately it is she who possesses this trait the 
greatest.


Throughout the course of the adventure in True Grit, the central themes are 
obtaining justice, revenge, duty, and doing the right thing. No matter what the 
motivation is for retribution and how it is carried out, Portis shows there is 
a price to pay for those determined to seek justice: it can change you, kill 
you, do you in.

2. Heart-Shaped Bruise 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-shaped-bruise-2.html> by Tanya Byrne

This is a gritty psychological thriller set in the psychiatric unit of a young 
offenders institution. It’s a compelling, brutal and heart-breaking story about 
identity, infamy and how far a person might go to seek revenge.

Fight back! Why we need angry girls in YA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/15/fight-back-why-we-need-angry-girls-in-ya>
3. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lion-the-witch-and-the-wardrobe-10.html> by 
CS Lewis

The White Witch in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe rules through fear, 
terrifying her subjects and keeping order with her spies and secret police. She 
is the embodiment of selfishness, greed, and power. This classic children’s 
book asks questions of truth and lying, love and hate, good and evil, and 
forgiveness and revenge... It’s brilliant.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448544355413%2Fdb95cc6c-c39b-4694-8999-791903e6b46c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natasha%20Carthew%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20revenge%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natasha%20Carthew%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20revenge%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448544355413%2Fdb95cc6c-c39b-4694-8999-791903e6b46c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Gregory Peck in the 1950s film adaptation of Moby Dick. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/WARNER BROS 
4. Moby Dick <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/moby-dick-39.html> by Herman 
Melville

The villain in Herman Melville’s ultimate story of revenge, Moby-Dick, isn’t 
the monstrous white whale of the title, but the monomaniacal quest of the man 
that wants to kill him: Captain Ahab of the whaler Pequod, for revenge on Moby 
Dick, who had previously destroyed Ahab’s ship and severed his leg at the knee.


Moby-Dick is the story of an eerily compelling madman pursuing an unholy war 
against a creature as vast and dangerous and unknowable as the sea itself.

5. The Count of Monte Cristo 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/count-of-monte-cristo-17.html> by Alexandre 
Dumas

This, the most famous of revenge stories, it is an adventure story primarily 
concerned with hope, justice, vengeance, mercy, and forgiveness. The youthful 
Edmond Dantès is betrayed by a small group of friends and framed for a crime he 
did not commit. Sentenced to solitary confinement on the island prison of 
Chateau d’If, he meets a fellow inmate named Faria who takes Dantès under his 
wings. After spending 14 years locked away under the harshest of conditions, 
Edmond Dantès escapes his imprisonment and finds a lost treasure on the 
uninhabited isle of Monte Cristo, a fortune that the now deceased Faria had 
originally located. Armed with wealth beyond his imagination, Dantès transforms 
himself into the Count of Monte Cristo and returns to his native France to 
enact an elaborate plot against those responsible for his incarceration. 
However, his plans have devastating consequences for the innocent as well as 
the guilty. Romance, loyalty, betrayal, and selfishness, are all shown 
throughout the story as characters slowly reveal their true inner nature.


6. Carrie <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/carrie-3.html> by Stephen King

This is the chilling story of a girl out for revenge. The book revolves around 
the “Carrie” White, a misfit and bullied high school girl who uses her newly 
discovered telekinetic powers to exact revenge on those who torment her, while 
in the process causing one of the worst local disasters in history. Much of the 
book is written using newspaper clippings, magazine articles, letters, and 
excerpts from books to tell how Carrie destroyed her fictional home town whilst 
exacting revenge on her sadistic classmates. Not for the faint hearted!


7. Wuthering Heights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-39.html> by Emily Bronte

Wuthering Heights may be more usually thought of as a romantic novel but it 
revenge that leads the protagonists to their dismal fate that captivates. 
Bronte shows there is no peace in eternal vengeance and that, in the end, the 
self-injury involved in serving revenge’s purposes will be more damaging than 
the original wrong. Genius.


8. The Scarlet Letter <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/scarlet-letter-7.html> 
by Nathaniel Hawthorne

In The Scarlet Letter, Roger Chillingworth reaps revenge on Arthur Dimmesdale 
for his affair with his wife, Hester Prynne. As the novel progresses, 
Chillingworth fits the profile of “vengeance destroys the avenger”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448544149044%2F7e00f283-cefd-41d0-8f82-8aac14c2525c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natasha%20Carthew%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20revenge%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natasha%20Carthew%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20revenge%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fnatasha-carthews-top-10-revenge-reads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F26%2F1448544149044%2F7e00f283-cefd-41d0-8f82-8aac14c2525c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jennifer Lawrence as Katniss Everdeen, seeking revenge in The Hunger Games: 
Mockingjay, part two. Photograph: Allstar/LIONSGATE 
9. Mockingjay <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mockingjay-8.html> by Suzanne 
Collins

Katniss is out for revenge! She has only one thing on her mind, to kill 
President Snow. Against all odds, Katniss Everdeen has survived the Hunger 
Games twice. But now that she’s made it out of the bloody arena alive, she’s 
still not safe. The Capitol is angry. The Capitol also wants revenge...There’s 
nothing like retaliation when both sides are in the game.


10. You Against Me <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/you-against-me.html> by 
Jenny Downham

When Mickey’s sister accuses Ellie’s brother of date rape, he’s out for 
revenge. Mickey crashes a welcome home party that Ellie’s wealthy parents are 
hosting for their son, meets Ellie, and sees a way to get even. This is a 
morally and emotionally complex book that doesn’t take the easy way out when 
addressing issues of social class, justice, sexual responsibility, and loyalty. 
It is a brave and unflinching novel from the bestselling author of Before I 
Die, a book about loyalty and the choices that come with it. An intense, 
intelligent YA read.


Natasha Carthew is the author of Winter Damage. In her latest book, The Light 
That Gets Lost, the main protagonist Trey must avenge his parent’s murderer in 
order to find some kind of closure.Buy it at the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/274769/> and find out 
more about Natasha’s books on herwebsite 
<http://natashacarthew.moonfruit.com/home/4587659911>. 
 