
Related: Jackie review – Natalie Portman astonishes in remarkably intimate 
portrait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>

First Ladies On Film is a pretty small entry in the movie encyclopedia, but 
Natalie Portman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman>’s Jacqueline 
Kennedy surely shoots to the top of the heap because they are so rarely more 
than bit-parts in biopics of their husbands. We tend to remember the presidents 
and forget who played their mostly blameless wives, even though the faintly 
holy aura wafting around this nebulous office/non-job tends to suffuse both the 
casting process and the portrayals themselves. That usually means a big stage 
name or character player worthy of the role. Witness the women who have played 
Lady Bird Johnson: Felicity Huffman inPath To War 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0218505/> (opposite Michael Gambon’s LBJ); Melissa 
Leo in HBO’sAll The Way <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3791216/> (Brian 
Cranston), and Jennifer Jason Leigh (with Woody Harrelson) in the upcomingLBJ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/lbj-review-woody-harrelson-compelling-if-physically-unconvincing-in-firm-biopic>
; all serious, heavy-rep players, in keeping with the office. InJackie, Lady 
Bird is played, opposite John Carroll Lynch’s LBJ, by Beth Grant, best known as 
the “I got the cancer!” lady from No Country For Old Men.

The Jackies, however, have mostly remained in the shadows in the equivalent 
movies about JFK, since he was the glamour-boy prez at the centre of public 
events that enhanced his reputation and squalid private assignations that later 
besmirched it. As such, I struggled to recall who played Jackie opposite Martin 
Sheen in the Kennedy TV biopic of 1983 (it was Blair Brown), and was surprised 
to learn she’d previously been played by actors as varied as Katie Holmes (The 
Kennedys miniseries), Kat Steffens in Parkland, and Jaclyn Smith on TV in the 
80s.

Related: Natalie Portman: five best moments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/22/natalie-portman-five-best-moments>

All this leaves the field clear for Portman, who does an excellent job of 
embodying Jackie without imitating her. She finds a comfortable place inside 
that airy Minnie Mouse voice we remember from the real Jackie’s White House TV 
tour (though Jackie was no airhead). The plot itself concentrates on the weeks 
between the assassination itself and her Life interview with champion 
presidential myth-maker, journalist Theodore H White (Billy Crudup), in which 
she consolidates the “Camelot” lore. It’s a great showcase for Portman, 
allowing her to roam from the emotionally shattered, blood-covered pink-suit 
Jackie of 22 November to the shrewd, hard-nosed interviewee who expertly pushes 
Ted White around. The assassination itself, meanwhile – all exploding skull and 
massive gaping head wound – is more shockingly rendered than I’ve ever seen it, 
manipulatively positioned as the climax.

Other than that, JFK himself is barely in shot. The most interesting reversal 
here? For what must be the first time ever, the president has been First-Ladied 
out of the movie.

Jackie is in UK cinemas from Friday 20 January
 