
The controversy surrounding The Birth of a Nation director Nate Parker has not 
been enough to deter a strong showing in the nominations for the NAACP Image 
awards,which were announced on Tuesday 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/image-awards-nominees-beyonce-nate-parker-donald-glover-48th-naacp-image-awards-1201869526/>
.

Parker has been nominated for best film actor, writer and director, while 
Birth of a Nation, a drama about the brutally supressed 1831 slave rebelion led 
by Nat Turner, received nominations for best film, and best independent film. 
Aja Naomi King received a best supporting actress nod as Turner’s wife, Cherry.

The Birth of a Nation review – biblical passion and cheesy emotion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-nat-turner-nate-parker>
After the film’s success at the Sundance film festival, where it won both the 
grand jury prize and audience awards for dramatic features, hopes were high for 
its commercial and awards success. However, after it emerged that Parker had 
been charged with, and acquitted of, rape while a student at Penn State 
university,its momentum stalled and box office returns were modest on its 
release in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/nate-parkers-birth-of-a-nation-expected-to-lose-millions-for-fox>
.

Moonlight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moonlight>, the much-admired drama 
about a young black man’s struggle with his sexuality, also gained six 
nominations, including best director for Barry Jenkins and best supporting 
actor for Mahershala Ali and Trevante Rhodes.

The Image awards, presented by the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People for “excellence in film, television, music, and literature by 
outstanding people of color” covers a variety of art forms. Beyoncé leads the 
nominations list, with nine, including entertainer of the year and best female 
artist, whileAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> creator 
Donald Glover has three in the TV list, for best director, actor and writer.

The NAACP Image awards will be announced on February 11. For a full list of 
nominees click here. <http://www.home.naacpimageawards.net/nominees/>
 