
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will be 
remembered for two bad political miscalculations, firstly by agreeing to an EU 
referendum and secondly for failing to secure a remain vote.

So it is fitting that the former prime minister’s resignation as an MP is 
being regarded by the press as yet another miscalculation.

National newspaper editors of all political hues greeted his decision to stand 
down from parliament with derision, none more so than the Daily Mail’s Paul 
Dacre.

The paper inserts the knife and, as a series of headlines illustrate, twists 
it. “The crushing of David Cameron” (page 1); “Dave’s ready to rake in 
millions” (pages 6-7); “From election hero to oblivion in 16 months” (page 7); 
“He’s angry, vengeful and broken by the loss of power” (pages 8-9); and Peter 
Oborne’s savage response, “How tragic that by flouncing off to make a mint, 
Dave’s (yet again) shown he’s the heir to Blair 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3786407/PETER-OBORNE-tragic-flouncing-make-mint-Dave-s-shown-s-heir-Blair.html>
” (page 16).

Then comes the editorial 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3786354/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Exit-David-Cameron-bloodless-revolution.html>
, which praises him with faint damns: skilful politician... articulate... “in 
his moment, a strong leader”... saw Britain through the post-crash period... 
prudent manager of the public finances...

“But to our eyes, his self-styled One Nation, progressive conservatism often 
appeared devoid of strong convictions... He committed Britain to a reckless 
foreign aid target of 0.7% of GDP...

Having run his sofa government through a clique of aides known as the 
chumocracy, he then abused the honours system...”

Sure, “he honoured a pledge to give the public a vote on leaving the EU. But 
he then conducted a sham negotiation with Brussels before attempting to 
browbeat the public into voting Remain...

“The Mail wholeheartedly believes Brexit will be a success. But won’t that 
just further tarnish his legacy, given he opposed it with every bone in his 
body?”

The Times thought Cameron guilty of “misjudging the public mood” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/closure-on-cameron-hz2kfvnxj> over 
his attempt to win a remain vote. “For good or ill he was the prime minister 
who took Britain out of Europe. That is his legacy, however historians fine 
tune it.”

As for the so-called “big society”, that “came to nothing”. The paper was 
critical of his change of mind over staying on in the commons, and warned him 
about seeking to make money. “He should heed the lessons of Tony Blair’s 
post-premiership as a case study in venality.”

The Daily Express praised Cameron for calling the referendum - “a noble act” 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/709984/David-Cameron-take-prideyears-Prime-Minister-Conservative-party-MP-quit>
 - followed by “the fatal mistake of misjudging the mood of the people and 
underestimating the desire to throw off the shackles of the EU... his 
scaremongering tactics fell short of the standards one might have expected.”

Although the Daily Telegraph thought it “disappointing but understandable” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/09/13/david-camerons-resignation-as-an-mp-is-disappointing-but-underst/>
 that Cameron was standing down:

“With the new administration under Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> distancing itself from many 
of his policies - notably over grammar schools - he probably foresaw an 
uncomfortable few years ahead were he to stay as a backbench MP.

He might have been placed in the difficult position for a former party leader 
of having to oppose the Government. He also feared being seen as a sulker like 
Edward Heath or a distraction like Margaret Thatcher.”

The Sun scorned Cameron’s U-turn as “a final flounce” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1773588/david-cameron-hasnt-put-a-foot-right-since-his-election-victory/>
, arguing that “he couldn’t bear sitting on the back benches watching his 
former home secretary tear up his policies, and quit in a huff.”

He wasn’t a terrible prime minister, said the Sun, because “he fixed the 
economy and created huge numbers of jobs... instigated big and vital school 
reforms... [and] gave us the Brexit referendum... What else did he achieve? 
Sadly for him, not a lot.”

The Guardian said Cameron’s decision to go “completes one of the most rapid 
and certainly one of the most spectacular career eclipses in modern British 
politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/the-guardian-view-on-david-camerons-legacy-changes-that-suit-the-tories>
.”

He “perished almost entirely by his own hand... he blew it all by himself... 
by calling a European referendum... he will be for ever remembered as the prime 
minister whose career was destroyed by Europe. And deservedly so.”

It viewed his departure through the prism of constituency boundary changes: 

“Although Mr Cameron leaves politics as a man who failed, in these boundary 
changes he may bequeath the Conservative party a lasting electoral legacy for 
which Tories will thank him for decades.”

But “cutting the number of MPs... reduces the service that MPs can offer their 
constituents... It is hard to see in what way this increases trust or respect 
for representative democracy.”

Cameron may have grabbed the headlines by quitting just as the electoral 
system is being changed in the Tories’ favour. But “his priority was the party 
interest” and “he leaves a mess behind him.”

It concluded: “A better leader would leave with reputation intact. Yet when it 
came to the test, Mr Cameron failed it.”


The Daily Mirror agrees in a sharply critical leading article. 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-david-cameron-bows-8821338> 
Cameron “as an absolute failure”, it said, as the prime minister “who 
accidentally lost Europe, running away with his tail between his legs after 
betting Downing Street on the referendum which destroyed his leadership.”

It listed its disagreements with other policies: “his growth-sapping 
austerity... an ailing NHS... creator of the hated bedroom tax... refusing to 
build council houses because Labour voters might live in them.”

As for Metro <https://www.theguardian.com/media/metro>, the free daily paper 
that prides itself on being neutral, it revealed its feelings with a degree of 
subtlety. Reminding its readers that Cameron once declared “Brits don’t quit” 
during the EU referendum campaign, its front page headline said “So Brits DO 
quit.”

 