
Nato has announced the end of its military operation against Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> after using a unique combination of 
military power that could set a model for future warfare. Speaking in Tripoli 
after 9,600 strike sorties over seven months in which more than 1,000 tanks, 
vehicles, guns, and Gaddafi's air defence and command and control network, were 
destroyed, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, secretary general of the world's most 
powerful military alliance, proclaimed the end of "a successful chapter in 
Nato's history". Nato countries knew from their own experience that "hard-won 
freedom brings high hopes and great expectations, and the hard work to make 
them real has begun", he added.

Rasmussen ruled out Nato military action in Syria. "Nato has no intention [to 
intervene] whatsoever. I can completely rule that out," he told reporters. 
"Having said that, I strongly condemn the crackdown on the civilian population 
inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. What has happened in Libya 
sends a clear signal. You cannot neglect the will of the people."

Lt Gen Charles Bouchard, Canadian commander of the Nato operation based in 
Naples, said that despite political disputes, Nato had "stayed the course". Yet 
though it was an operation conducted by Nato commanders, barely half of the 
alliance's members took part in the military operation. It was truly a 
"coalition of the willing" â€“ while Britain andFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> flew a third of all missions, 
Germany and Poland played no part at all.

The US took a back seat as far as air strikes were concerned though Nato 
commanders say that they could not have succeeded without American 
intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance planes, and air-to-air refuelling 
aircraft. And in contributions which were as important politically as 
militarily, Qatar, Jordan, and theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates>, took part in the 
Nato-run campaign.

"Let me make it perfectly clear," Bouchard said on Monday, "Gaddafi was never 
a single target."

He was reflecting deep concern among Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> countries about the legal implications 
of any suggestion that the Libyan leader was a military target. Bouchard said 
he would have preferred to see Gaddafi face justice at the International 
Criminal Court in the Hague.

Nevertheless, commanders and senior officials in Nato countries make it quite 
clear that, in reality, regime change soon became the objective of the Nato 
bombing campaign.

The air strikes lasted so long partly because of the need to avoid civilian 
casualties with precision bombing by "smart" missiles, Nato argued. Bouchard 
gave as an example a decision to delay striking one target for two hours to 
wait for a group of Libyan children to finish a soccer game.

Nato once admitted to potential civilian casualties following an air strike on 
Tripoli on 19 June. A Nato spokesman said a weapons system failure caused the 
weapon to miss its intended target.

Libya was in many ways an easy target, analysts say, yet it could provide a 
template for any future Nato military intervention: air strikes, cruise missile 
attacks from submarines, and armed reconnaisance pilotless drones, but hardly 
any troop presence on the ground, just a few special forces.
 