
A major high street bank has paved the way for the introduction of negative 
interest rates for the first time in Britain by warning customers it may have 
to charge them to accept deposits.

The warning by NatWest was made in a letter changing the terms and conditions 
for the bank’s 850,000 business customers, which range from self-employed 
traders, charities and clubs to big corporations.

It could mean that an account holder with £1,000 in a NatWest account could 
see that shrink to £999 or less the following year as the bank charges a 
negative rate of interest.

In its letter to customers, NatWest said: “Global interest rates remain at 
very low levels and in some markets are currently negative. Dependent on future 
market conditions, this could result in us charging interest on credit 
balances.”


The taxpayer-owned bank – whose parent is Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> – said it had 
no plans to make changes to the terms and conditions of personal account 
holders to allow it to charge negative rates.

Interest rates on government and corporate bonds fell steeply in the political 
turmoil that followed the Brexit vote. TheBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is now under 
intense pressure to cut its already historically low base rate from 0.5% to 
kickstart the economy, although a move into negative territory is not likely in 
the short term.

NatWest business customers are asking if negative interest rates are legal. 
They are asking whether they should take their cash out of the accounts and put 
it under the mattress to maintain its value.

One treasurer of a local community council, who received a letter but asked 
not to be named, said: “Can they do that, is it legal? The letter goes on to 
say that they ‘value our relationship with you’, but I may need to review how 
much I can afford to have a relationship with them!”

Another customer, who holds funds for her grandchildren in a business bank 
account, said: “Will this spread to all high street banks? I can’t access it 
myself to put it under the mattress.”

Other high street banks contacted by the Guardian said they had no plans, for 
now, to change contracts to allow them to impose negative rates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmark-carney-interest-rate-cut-likely-bank-england-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Carney%20says%20interest%20rate%20cut%20is%20likely%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmark-carney-interest-rate-cut-likely-bank-england-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Carney%20says%20interest%20rate%20cut%20is%20likely%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fmark-carney-interest-rate-cut-likely-bank-england-video&media=>
Mark Carney says interest rate cut is likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/30/mark-carney-interest-rate-cut-likely-bank-england-video>
The prospect of banks levying a charge on deposits rather than paying interest 
turns traditional banking upside down.

“It is going to make businesses much less keen to hold significant balances in 
their accounts,” said mortgage and savings expert Ray Boulger. “If NatWest 
start doing this, other banks are likely to follow. Eventually personal 
customers with large balances could be hit, but the banks may decide that is 
going too far and take the hit themselves.”

Negative interest rates could have widespread undesirable effects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/negative-interest-rates-the-case-against-john-maynard-keynes>
 across the economy. Not only may customers decide to hoard cash rather than 
deposit it, banks may take excessive risks in lending in order to obtain 
returns, while pension companies will struggle to meet their liabilities.

So-called “voodoo banking” is already happening in some countries gripped by 
deflation.


The European Central Bank charges other banks 0.4% to deposit cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/european-central-bank-cuts-interest-rates-zero-mario-draghi>
, while theSwiss National Bank 
<http://www.snb.ch/en/ifor/finmkt/operat/id/finmkt_nz> charges domestic banks 
up to 0.75%.

Last week, ABN Amro, a major Dutch bank, told customers that because of 
“exceptional market conditions”, it may be necessary to charge negative 
interest rates at some time in the future.

After the Brexit vote, interest rates on government bonds – otherwise known as 
the “yield” – dived to record lows. When rates drop below zero, it effectively 
means people are paying the government to lend money to them.

The Bank of England this month chose to hold base rate at 0.5%, but in the 
City it iswidely anticipated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/24/uk-banks-prepare-response-to-expected-interest-rate-cut>
 that governor Mark Carney will cut the rate to 0.25% on 4 August, as well as 
introduce other measures to boost the economy.

The prospect of negative interest rates has been mooted by individual 
policymakers but they are not seen as likely for the UK any time soon.
In April, Jan Vlieghe, a member of the Bank’s nine-member monetary policy 
committee (MPC),floated the possibility of interest rates being cut below zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/22/interest-rates-could-go-negative-bank-of-england-vlieghe-says>
, meaning companies would pay to deposit their money with banks. His fellow MPC 
member, the Bank’s chief economist, Andy Haldane, also raised the prospect of 
cutting official borrowing costs to zero or perhaps even lowerin a speech last 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/interest-rates-rise-bank-of-england-chief-economist-andy-haldane>
.

But governor Mark Carney has appeared to oppose negative interest rates. 
Questioned by MPs in April,Carney said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/apr/19/markets-and-oil-rise-as-opec-gloom-fades-business-live?page=with:block-5716501ce4b0585020da6e98#block-5716501ce4b0585020da6e98>
: “We think we could move base rate closer to zero but have not said we have an 
appetite for negative interest rates.”


Millions of customers with savings accounts in Britain are already suffering 
from historically low returns, with many accounts paying close to zero. The
Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/23/bank-accounts-savings-interest-cash>
 last week named HSBC, First Direct and the Post Office as having easy access 
accounts that in some circumstances pay no interest.


The introduction of negative interest rates on deposits could spark a legal 
challenge from customers.

Shortly before the credit crunch, Cheltenham & Gloucester building society 
launched a mortgage deal that tracked the main Bank of England lending rate 
minus 1.01%. When the Bank cut interest rates to 0.5% in 2009, that suggested 
borrowers would have to pay -0.51%. Instead, C&G cut the rate to 0.01% – its 
computers could not handle mortgages at 0% – but did not actually go negative. 
Any challenge to negative interest on deposit accounts may cite the example of 
C&G.

But there will be winners if interest rates move to zero or below. Since the 
Brexit vote, a number of lenders have cut interest rates on mortgage deals, 
with the biggest change to five- and 10-year fixed-rate deals, now on offer at 
little more than 2% interest.



 