
District 9 director Neill Blomkamp has claimed Hollywood is ready to green 
light his highly-anticipated take on Alien, which would be led by original star
Sigourney Weaver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver>.

Last month Blomkamp released extensive concept art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
of Weaver as Ellen Ripley, the lead protagonist in four Alien movies between 
1979 and 1997, with the predictable explosive online reaction from fans of the 
space saga. Now the South African film-maker, who recently worked with Weaver 
on his new film Chappie, hasrevealed in an interview with Uproxx 
<http://uproxx.com/movies/2015/02/neill-blomkamp-alien/> that the main obstacle 
in the way of the new film is not studio intransigence, but his own uncertainty 
over whether to proceed.

“Basically, what happened was, when Chappie got heavily into post-production, 
I could take my foot off the gas a bit,” revealed Blomkamp. “I was thinking 
about what I wanted to do next and I’ve been wanting to make anAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> film for like years and years.

“Speaking to Sigourney Weaver, when we were doing Chappie, she set off a bunch 
of thoughts in my head — I had come up with an idea that didn’t have Sigourney, 
it was a different idea. But I spent all of the shooting time with her, it was 
like, holy shit, that could actually be really interesting. When I came back to 
Vancouver, I had an entire year to work on Chappie. And when I wasn’t needed in 
the edit, I could think about Alien. So, I basically developed an entire movie 
and I did all of this artwork as well.”

The artwork features Sigourney in a “space jockey” helmet similar to those 
seen in both 1979’s Alien and recent Ridley Scott spin-off Prometheus, as well 
as an image of Ripley with Aliens’ Michael Biehn as Hicks. Blomkamp did not 
reveal how his proposed movie connects to other films in the series, but said 
studio20th Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/film/20th-century-fox> was 
ready to make it.

Neill Blomkamp reveals concept art for 'abandoned' Alien project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
“There’s a high possibility, a high degree of chance that it happens that I go 
back and try to get Alien made,” he said. “I’m the problem. Fox, they would 
make it. Like, tomorrow. They would make it.”

Blomkamp’s comments are bound to leave fans of the space saga bamboozled for a 
number of reasons. Firstly, Weaver’s Ripley died at the end of 1992’s Alien 3 
(though she was conveniently brought back as a human-xenomorph clone in 1997’s 
Alien: Resurrection). Secondly, Scott is supposed to be working on a sequel to 
2012’sPrometheus <https://www.theguardian.com/film/prometheus> which is 
expected to continue the story of Noomi Rapace’s Elisabeth Shaw and android 
David (Michael Fassbender).


Scott said in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/25/ridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien>
 that the new film would follow the unlikely pair on their mission to find the 
home world of the Engineer aliens introduced in Prometheus, where they hope to 
discover why the human-like creatures want to destroy mankind. He said that 
several drafts of the screenplay had been written and confirmed the xenomorphs 
would not feature.

 