
Imagine if the people of the Soviet Union had never heard of communism. The 
ideology that dominates our lives has, for most of us, no name. Mention it in 
conversation and you’ll be rewarded with a shrug. Even if your listeners have 
heard the term before, they will struggle to define it. Neoliberalism: do you 
know what it is?

Its anonymity is both a symptom and cause of its power. It has played a major 
role in a remarkable variety of crises: thefinancial meltdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-crisis> of 2007‑8, the 
offshoring of wealth and power, of which thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> offer us merely a 
glimpse, the slow collapse of public health and education, resurgent child 
poverty,the epidemic of loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
, the collapse of ecosystems, the rise ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. But we respond to these 
crises as if they emerge in isolation, apparently unaware that they have all 
been either catalysed or exacerbated by the same coherent philosophy; a 
philosophy that has – or had – a name. What greater power can there be than to 
operate namelessly?

Inequality is recast as virtuous. The market ensures that everyone gets what 
they deserve.

So pervasive has neoliberalism become that we seldom even recognise it as an 
ideology. We appear to accept the proposition that this utopian, millenarian 
faith describes a neutral force; a kind of biological law, like Darwin’s theory 
of evolution. But the philosophy arose as a conscious attempt to reshape human 
life and shift the locus of power.

Neoliberalism sees competition as the defining characteristic of human 
relations. It redefines citizens as consumers, whose democratic choices are 
best exercised by buying and selling, a process that rewards merit and punishes 
inefficiency. It maintains that “the market” delivers benefits that could never 
be achieved by planning.

Attempts to limit competition are treated as inimical to liberty. Tax and 
regulation should be minimised, public services should be privatised. The 
organisation of labour and collective bargaining bytrade unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tradeunions> are portrayed as market 
distortions that impede the formation of a natural hierarchy of winners and 
losers. Inequality is recast as virtuous: a reward for utility and a generator 
of wealth, which trickles down to enrich everyone. Efforts to create a more 
equal society are both counterproductive and morally corrosive. The market 
ensures that everyone gets what they deserve.

We internalise and reproduce its creeds. The rich persuade themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/07/one-per-cent-wealth-destroyers>
 that they acquired their wealth through merit, ignoring the advantages – such 
as education, inheritance and class – that may have helped to secure it. The 
poor begin to blame themselves for their failures, even when they can do little 
to change their circumstances.

Never mind structural unemployment: if you don’t have a job it’s because you 
are unenterprising. Never mind the impossible costs of housing: if your credit 
card is maxed out, you’re feckless and improvident. Never mind that your 
children no longer have a school playing field: if they get fat, it’s your 
fault. In a world governed by competition, those who fall behind become defined 
and self-defined as losers.

Neoliberalism has brought out the worst in us | Paul Verhaeghe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/29/neoliberalism-economic-system-ethics-personality-psychopathicsthic>
Among the results, as Paul Verhaeghe documents in his book What About Me? are 
epidemics of self-harm, eating disorders, depression, loneliness, performance 
anxiety and social phobia. Perhaps it’s unsurprising that Britain, in which 
neoliberal ideology has been most rigorously applied, isthe loneliness capital 
of Europe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10909524/Britain-the-loneliness-capital-of-Europe.html>
. We are all neoliberals now.

***

The term neoliberalism was coined at a meeting in Paris in 1938. Among the 
delegates were two men who came to define the ideology, Ludwig von Mises and 
Friedrich Hayek. Both exiles from Austria, they saw social democracy, 
exemplified by Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal and the gradual development of 
Britain’s welfare state, as manifestations of a collectivism that occupied the 
same spectrum as nazism and communism.

In The Road to Serfdom, published in 1944, Hayek argued that government 
planning, by crushing individualism, would lead inexorably to totalitarian 
control. Like Mises’s bookBureaucracy, The Road to Serfdom was widely read. It 
came to the attention of some very wealthy people, who saw in the philosophy an 
opportunity to free themselves from regulation and tax. When, in 1947, Hayek 
founded the first organisation that would spread the doctrine of neoliberalism 
– theMont Pelerin Society <https://www.montpelerin.org/> – it was supported 
financially by millionaires and their foundations.

With their help, he began to create what Daniel Stedman Jones describes in 
Masters of the Universe as “a kind of neoliberal international”: a 
transatlantic network of academics, businessmen, journalists and activists. The 
movement’s rich backers funded aseries of thinktanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/30/list-thinktanks-uk> which 
would refine and promote the ideology. Among them were theAmerican Enterprise 
Institute <http://www.aei.org/>, the Heritage Foundation 
<http://www.heritage.org/>, the Cato Institute <http://www.cato.org/>, the 
Institute of Economic Affairs <http://www.iea.org.uk/>, the Centre for Policy 
Studies <http://www.cps.org.uk/> and the Adam Smith Institute 
<http://www.adamsmith.org/>. They also financed academic positions and 
departments, particularly at the universities of Chicago and Virginia.

As it evolved, neoliberalism became more strident. Hayek’s view that 
governments should regulate competition to prevent monopolies from forming gave 
way – among American apostles such asMilton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics> – to 
the belief that monopoly power could be seen as a reward for efficiency.

Something else happened during this transition: the movement lost its name. In 
1951, Friedman was happy todescribe himself as a neoliberal 
<http://0055d26.netsolhost.com/friedman/pdfs/other_commentary/Farmand.02.17.1951.pdf>
. But soon after that, the term began to disappear. Stranger still, even as the 
ideology became crisper and the movement more coherent, the lost name was not 
replaced by any common alternative.

At first, despite its lavish funding, neoliberalism remained at the margins. 
The postwar consensus was almost universal:John Maynard Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-maynard-keynes>’s economic 
prescriptions were widely applied, full employment and the relief of poverty 
were common goals in the US and much of western Europe, top rates of tax were 
high and governments sought social outcomes without embarrassment, developing 
new public services and safety nets.

But in the 1970s, when Keynesian policies began to fall apart and economic 
crises struck on both sides of the Atlantic, neoliberal ideas began to enter 
the mainstream. As Friedman remarked, “when the time came that you had to 
change ... there was an alternative ready there to be picked up”. With the help 
of sympathetic journalists and political advisers, elements of neoliberalism, 
especially its prescriptions for monetary policy, were adopted by Jimmy 
Carter’s administration in the US and Jim Callaghan’s government in Britain.

It may seem strange that a doctrine promising choice should have been promoted 
with the slogan 'there is no alternative'

After Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan took power, the rest of the package 
soon followed: massive tax cuts for the rich, the crushing of trade unions, 
deregulation, privatisation, outsourcing and competition in public services. 
Through the IMF, the World Bank, the Maastricht treaty and the World Trade 
Organisation, neoliberal policies were imposed – often without democratic 
consent – on much of the world. Most remarkable was its adoption among parties 
that once belonged to the left: Labour and the Democrats, for example. As 
Stedman Jones notes, “it is hard to think of another utopia to have been as 
fully realised.”

***

It may seem strange that a doctrine promising choice and freedom should have 
been promoted with the slogan “there is no alternative”. But,as Hayek remarked 
<http://www.counterpunch.org/2006/11/17/the-road-from-serfdom/> on a visit to 
Pinochet’s Chile – one of the first nations in which the programme was 
comprehensively applied – “my personal preference leans toward a liberal 
dictatorship rather than toward a democratic government devoid of liberalism”. 
The freedom that neoliberalism offers, which sounds so beguiling when expressed 
in general terms, turns out to mean freedom for the pike, not for the minnows.

Freedom from trade unions and collective bargaining means the freedom to 
suppress wages. Freedom from regulation means thefreedom to poison rivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2015/nov/12/toothless-environment-agency-is-allowing-the-living-world-to-be-wrecked-with-impunity>
, endanger workers, charge iniquitous rates of interest and design exotic 
financial instruments. Freedom from tax means freedom from the distribution of 
wealth that lifts people out of poverty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08ffcf400cb8a96c3aa28b6341fdd8c5f9a77ca0%2F0_117_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08ffcf400cb8a96c3aa28b6341fdd8c5f9a77ca0%2F0_117_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
 Naomi Klein documented that neoliberals advocated the use of crises to impose 
unpopular policies while people were distracted. Photograph: Anya Chibis for 
the Guardian 
As Naomi Klein documents in The Shock Doctrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/politics>, neoliberal theorists 
advocated the use of crises to impose unpopular policies while people were 
distracted: for example, in the aftermath of Pinochet’s coup, the Iraq war and 
Hurricane Katrina, which Friedman described as “an opportunity to radically 
reform the educational system” inNew Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/hurricane-katrina-10-years-on>.

Where neoliberal policies cannot be imposed domestically, they are imposed 
internationally, through trade treaties incorporating “investor-state dispute 
settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
”: offshore tribunals in which corporations can press for the removal of social 
and environmental protections. When parliaments have voted to restrict sales of
cigarettes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/hurricane-katrina-10-years-on>, 
protect water supplies from mining companies, freeze energy bills or prevent 
pharmaceutical firms from ripping off the state, corporations have sued, often 
successfully. Democracy is reduced to theatre.

Neoliberalism was not conceived as a self-serving racket, but it rapidly 
became one

Another paradox of neoliberalism is that universal competition relies upon 
universal quantification and comparison. The result is that workers, 
job-seekers and public services of every kind are subject to a pettifogging, 
stifling regime of assessment and monitoring, designed to identify the winners 
and punish the losers. The doctrine that Von Mises proposed would free us from 
the bureaucratic nightmare of central planning has instead created one.

Neoliberalism was not conceived as a self-serving racket, but it rapidly 
became one. Economic growth has been markedly slower in the neoliberal era 
(since 1980 in Britain and the US) than it was in the preceding decades; but 
not for the very rich. Inequality in the distribution of both income and 
wealth, after 60 years of decline, rose rapidly in this era, due to the 
smashing of trade unions, tax reductions, rising rents, privatisation and 
deregulation.

The privatisation or marketisation of public services such as energy, water, 
trains, health, education, roads and prisons has enabled corporations to set up 
tollbooths in front of essential assets and charge rent, either to citizens or 
to government, for their use. Rent is another term for unearned income. When 
you pay an inflated price for a train ticket, only part of the fare compensates 
the operators for the money they spend on fuel, wages, rolling stock and other 
outlays. The rest reflects the fact thatthey have you over a barrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/rail-privatisation-train-operators-profit>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_0_2726_2049%2F2726.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05320d557663eb6197cb76e161859a4a09c807a1%2F0_0_2726_2049%2F2726.jpg>
 In Mexico, Carlos Slim was granted control of almost all phone services and 
soon became the world’s richest man. Photograph: Henry Romero/Reuters 
Those who own and run the UK’s privatised or semi-privatised services make 
stupendous fortunes by investing little and charging much. In Russia and India, 
oligarchs acquired state assets through firesales. In Mexico,Carlos Slim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/carlos-slim-biography-diego-enrique-osorno-interviews>
 was granted control of almost all landline and mobile phone services and soon 
became the world’s richest man.

Financialisation, as Andrew Sayer notes in Why We Can’t Afford the Rich 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/347173/>, has had a 
similar impact. “Like rent,” he argues, “interest is ... unearned income that 
accrues without any effort”. As the poor become poorer and the rich become 
richer, the rich acquire increasing control over another crucial asset: money. 
Interest payments, overwhelmingly, are a transfer of money from the poor to the 
rich. As property prices and the withdrawal of state funding load people with 
debt (think of the switch from student grants to student loans), the banks and 
their executives clean up.

Sayer argues that the past four decades have been characterised by a transfer 
of wealth not only from the poor to the rich, but within the ranks of the 
wealthy: from those who make their money by producing new goods or services to 
those who make their money by controlling existing assets and harvesting rent, 
interest or capital gains. Earned income has been supplanted by unearned income.

Neoliberal policies are everywhere beset by market failures. Not only are the 
banks too big to fail, but so are the corporations now charged with delivering 
public services. As Tony Judt pointed out inIll Fares the Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/11/ill-fares-land-tony-judt>, Hayek 
forgot that vital national services cannot be allowed to collapse, which means 
that competition cannot run its course. Business takes the profits, the state 
keeps the risk.

The greater the failure, the more extreme the ideology becomes. Governments 
use neoliberal crises as both excuse and opportunity to cut taxes, privatise 
remaining public services, rip holes in the social safety net, deregulate 
corporations and re-regulate citizens. The self-hating state now sinks its 
teeth into every organ of the public sector.

Perhaps the most dangerous impact of neoliberalism is not the economic crises 
it has caused, but the political crisis. As the domain of the state is reduced, 
our ability to change the course of our lives through voting also contracts. 
Instead, neoliberal theory asserts, people can exercise choice through 
spending. But some have more to spend than others: in the great consumer or 
shareholder democracy, votes are not equally distributed. The result is a 
disempowerment of the poor and middle. As parties of the right andformer left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/looking-back-on-new-labour> adopt 
similar neoliberal policies, disempowerment turns to disenfranchisement. Large 
numbers of people have been shed from politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a15aa395ab7f962a249b9a7de5afde71c686e8%2F0_84_3208_1924%2F3208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%20%E2%80%93%20the%20ideology%20at%20the%20root%20of%20all%20our%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fneoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36a15aa395ab7f962a249b9a7de5afde71c686e8%2F0_84_3208_1924%2F3208.jpg>
 Slogans, symbols and sensation … Donald Trump. Photograph: Aaron 
Josefczyk/Reuters 
Chris Hedges remarks 
<http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/the_revenge_of_the_lower_classes_and_the_rise_of_american_fascism_20160302>
 that “fascist movements build their base not from the politically active but 
the politically inactive, the ‘losers’ who feel, often correctly, they have no 
voice or role to play in the political establishment”. When political debate no 
longer speaks to us, people become responsiveinstead to slogans, symbols and 
sensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/genius-donald-trumpspeak-steven-poole-words>
. To the admirers of Trump, for example, facts and arguments appear irrelevant.

Judt explained that when the thick mesh of interactions between people and the 
state has been reduced to nothing but authority and obedience, the only 
remaining force that binds us is state power. The totalitarianism Hayek feared 
is more likely to emerge when governments, having lost the moral authority that 
arises from the delivery of public services, are reduced to “cajoling, 
threatening and ultimately coercing people to obey them”.

***

Like communism, neoliberalism is the God that failed. But the zombie doctrine 
staggers on, and one of the reasons is its anonymity. Or rather, a cluster of 
anonymities.

The invisible doctrine of the invisible hand is promoted by invisible backers. 
Slowly, very slowly, we have begun to discover the names of a few of them. We 
find that the Institute of Economic Affairs, which has argued forcefully in the 
media against the further regulation of the tobacco industry,has been secretly 
funded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/17/media-big-tobacco-lobbyists-bbc-cigarette-packs>
 by British American Tobacco since 1963. We discover thatCharles and David Koch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/koch-brothers>, two of the richest men in 
the world, founded the institute that set up theTea Party movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/oct/25/tea-party-koch-brothers>
. We find that Charles Koch, in establishing one of his thinktanks,noted that 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/03/10/koch-brothers-new-brand/> “in order 
to avoid undesirable criticism, how the organisation is controlled and directed 
should not be widely advertised”.

The nouveau riche were once disparaged by those who had inherited their money. 
Today, the relationship has been reversed

The words used by neoliberalism often conceal more than they elucidate. “The 
market” sounds like a natural system that might bear upon us equally, like 
gravity or atmospheric pressure. But it is fraught with power relations. What 
“the market wants” tends to mean what corporations and their bosses want. 
“Investment”, as Sayer notes, means two quite different things. One is the 
funding of productive and socially useful activities, the other is the purchase 
of existing assets to milk them for rent, interest, dividends and capital 
gains. Using the same word for different activities “camouflages the sources of 
wealth”, leading us to confuse wealth extraction with wealth creation.

A century ago, the nouveau riche were disparaged by those who had inherited 
their money. Entrepreneurs sought social acceptance by passing themselves off 
as rentiers. Today, the relationship has been reversed: the rentiers and 
inheritors style themselves entre preneurs. They claim to have earned their 
unearned income.

These anonymities and confusions mesh with the namelessness and placelessness 
of modern capitalism: the franchise model which ensures that workersdo not know 
for whom they toil 
<http://maidinlondonnow.blogspot.co.uk/2015_08_01_archive.html>; the companies 
registered through a network of offshore secrecy regimes so complex thateven 
the police cannot discover the beneficial owners 
<http://www.andywightman.com/archives/4377>; the tax arrangements that 
bamboozle governments; the financial products no one understands.

The anonymity of neoliberalism is fiercely guarded. Those who are influenced 
by Hayek, Mises and Friedman tend to reject the term, maintaining – with some 
justice – that it is used todayonly pejoratively 
<https://twitter.com/georgemonbiot/status/530351056530980864>. But they offer 
us no substitute. Some describe themselves as classical liberals or 
libertarians, but these descriptions are both misleading and curiously 
self-effacing, as they suggest that there is nothing novel aboutThe Road to 
Serfdom, Bureaucracy or Friedman’s classic work, Capitalism and Freedom.

***

For all that, there is something admirable about the neoliberal project, at 
least in its early stages. It was a distinctive, innovative philosophy promoted 
by a coherent network of thinkers and activists with a clear plan of action. It 
was patient and persistent.The Road to Serfdom became the path to power.

Neoliberalism, Locke and the Green party | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/24/neoliberalism-locke-and-the-green-party>
Neoliberalism’s triumph also reflects the failure of the left. When 
laissez-faire economics led to catastrophe in 1929, Keynes devised a 
comprehensive economic theory to replace it. When Keynesian demand management 
hit the buffers in the 70s, there was an alternative ready. But when 
neoliberalism fell apart in 2008 there was ... nothing. This is why the zombie 
walks. The left and centre have produced no new general framework of economic 
thought for 80 years.

Every invocation of Lord Keynes is an admission of failure. To propose 
Keynesian solutions to the crises of the 21st century is to ignore three 
obvious problems. It is hard to mobilise people around old ideas; the flaws 
exposed in the 70s have not gone away; and, most importantly, they have nothing 
to say about our gravest predicament: the environmental crisis. Keynesianism 
works by stimulating consumer demand to promote economic growth. Consumer 
demand and economic growth are the motors of environmental destruction.

What the history of both Keynesianism and neoliberalism show is that it’s not 
enough to oppose a broken system. A coherent alternative has to be proposed. 
For Labour, the Democrats and the wider left, the central task should be to 
develop an economic Apollo programme, a conscious attempt to design a new 
system, tailored to the demands of the 21st century.

• George Monbiot’s How Did We Get into This Mess? is published this month by 
Verso. To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £16.99) ) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381048/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 