
Nestlé <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nestle> says it has found a way 
of slashing the amount of sugar in some of its chocolate bars by 40%, without 
compromising the taste.

The Swiss food company, whose products include Kit Kats, Aeros and Yorkies, 
said it has achieved the reduction by discovering a way “to structure sugar 
differently”. The new process is said to make sugar dissolve faster so that 
even when less is used, the tongue perceives an identical level of sweetness.

It plans to patent the process, discovered by its scientists, which it says 
will enable it to significantly decrease the total sugar in its confectionery 
products.

Sugar has been blamed for fuelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/mar/20/sugar-deadly-obesity-epidemic> 
the obesity epidemic crippling the NHS in the UK and health campaigners have 
urged confectionery companies to cut unnecessary sugar from their products.

In 2014, Action on Sugar was launched with the goal of encouraging government 
and manufacturers to cut sugar in food by 30%.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/09/obesity-campaign-cut-sugar-processed-foods>

In that context, Nestlé’s self-proclaimed breakthrough is likely to be 
welcomed, should it live up to its claims, and be potentially lucrative to the 
company.

It says it will begin to use the faster-dissolving sugar in its confectionery 
products from 2018.

A four-finger milk chocolate Kit Kat currently contains 23.8g of sugar, a 
plain (milk chocolate) Yorkie contains 26.9g and a medium peppermint Aero has 
24.9g of sugar. If the amount of sugar in each of these products was cut by 40% 
the new amounts would be 14.3g, 16.1g and 14.9g respectively.

Dietary sugar should account for no more than 5% of daily calories consumed, 
which equates to 30g for those aged 11 and over,according to the UK’s official 
nutrition advisers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/17/cut-recommended-daily-allowance-sugar-5-percent-daily-calories-report>

Figures published in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/sugar-warnings-not-reduced-consumption-public-health-england>
 showed that in 2012-14 the average was 13.4% for those aged between four and 
10, 15.2% among 11- to 18-year-olds, 12.3% for adults under 65 and 11.1% for 
those aged 65 and over.

Nestlé’s chief technology officer, Stefan Catsicas, said: “This truly 
groundbreaking research is inspired by nature and has the potential to reduce 
total sugar by up to 40% in our confectionery.

“Our scientists have discovered a completely new way to use a traditional, 
natural ingredient.”
 