
A test that checks for abnormal amounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jul/07/ivf-baby-born-genetic-screening>
 of DNA in IVF embryos has raised pregnancy rates at US fertility clinics that 
have started to offer the procedure.

Scientists in Oxford who helped develop the test claim it can boost the 
chances of an IVF pregnancy by 10 percentage points, leading to success rates 
of about 75% in 35-year-old women.

The test does not improve the quality of IVF embryos created at fertility 
clinics, but gives doctors a new way to identify the healthiest and most likely 
to produce a pregnancy.

UK DNA shared in worldwide search for genetic causes of disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/14/uk-dna-shared-in-worldwide-search-for-genetic-causes-of-disease>
Many IVF clinics already offer a procedure called pre-implantation genetic 
screening, or PGS, which is used to spot embryos that have the wrong number of 
chromosomes, the structures that carry the human genetic material.

Chromosome abnormalities are the single greatest cause of embryos failing to 
implant or miscarrying. But even with PGS, which costs from £2000 to £3000 in 
Britain, about a third of embryos do not go on to produce a successful 
pregnancy.

Researchers at the NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre and genetics 
laboratory Reprogenetics in the US, noticed that many of the embryos that 
failed to implant after PGS had abnormally high levels of DNA from structures 
called mitochondria. Healthy cells often carry hundreds of mitochondria to 
provide them with energy.

“Based on our findings we have devised a test whereby a small number of cells, 
carefully removed from an embryo, can be measured for the amount of 
mitochondrial DNA present,” said Elpida Fragouli, who led the research at 
Reprogenetics. “This will help guide doctors to the IVF embryos with the 
greatest chance of producing a viable pregnancy.”

Several clinics in the US, including the New York University Fertility Center, 
have already begun to offer the test, called MitoGrade. Data from the first 100 
couples suggest the test boosts pregnancy rates from about 65% to 75%, 
according to a presentation to be given at the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine annual meeting in Baltimore on Tuesday.

“Anything that reduces the number of unsuccessful embryo transfers that 
patients have to endure will certainly be welcome. This important discovery 
indicates that mitochondria represent an important piece in the complex jigsaw 
puzzle that is infertility,” said Dagan Wells, who leads the UK arm of the 
project.

Scientists are not sure why some embryos experience a sudden rise in 
mitochondrial DNA, or how this affects their ability to implant. One 
possibility is that defective embryos make more mitochondria to give them 
enough energy to survive, but ultimately fail and stop growing.

“These tests don’t make the embryos any better than they were in the 
beginning. There will still be patients out there, and many of them, who don’t 
produce any viable embryos at all. So it’s not going to guarantee future 
pregnancy rates to every patient overnight, but it will help,” Wells said.

The research team is in the process of applying to the UK fertility regulator, 
the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, for a licence to offer the 
procedure in Britain. Should they gain approval, the test could be offered in 
addition to PGS for an extra £200 from next year.

“There is a lot of interest in mitochondrial activity within eggs and 
developing embryos and this study presents a fascinating insight into the 
potential relationship between mitochondrial activity in genetically normal 
embryos and their potential for developing into a viable pregnancy,” said Adam 
Balen, consultant in reproductive medicine at Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS 
Trust and chair of The British Fertility Society.

“It is still early days and the proposed test requires much more work and 
validation before application into clinical practice. There is no doubt this is 
a very important line of research and Dr Wells and his team are to be 
congratulated for what they have achieved to date.”
 