
Although it is tempting to see the Philip Green scandal as a repeat of the 
Robert Maxwell scandal, there are clear differences.

Media owner Maxwell stole from the Mirror group pension fund. Green did not 
steal from theBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension fund.

Maxwell committed his crime because he was, to all intents and purposes, a 
bankrupt. Green’s “systematic plunder” occurred despite his vast wealth.

Maxwell jumped off his yacht because he couldn’t afford to sort matters out. 
Green is luxuriating on his yacht aware that he could, if he wishes, put things 
right.

And then comes a definite similarity. Both men used the services of respected 
legal, banking and accountancy firms in their unscrupulous financial 
shenanigans. This “cover” allowed them to do as they wished.

Another similarity. MPs, and newspapers, have decried Green’s activities as 
“the unacceptable face of capitalism”, just as they did in Maxwell’s case.

In fact, the phrase was coined in 1973 by the then prime minister Ted Heath to 
describe disgraceful behaviour by yet another dodgy businessman, Tiny Rowland 
(who later became owner of the Observer for 12 years).

Green was excoriated in Monday’s national press after the release of the 
damning report compiled by MPs on the work and pensions select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
, which raised questions - yet again - about the opacity of the governance of 
private companies and the (lack of) regulation of their pension funds.

“Sir Philip Green stands exposed today not as a creator of wealth but as an 
expropriator”, said the Times in a leading article headlined “Green’s greed 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/greens-greed-lt3lbblll>.” 

In urging the cabinet office to strip Green of his knighthood, it referred to 
“an appalling tale of nonchalance and cupidity” and “a saga of recklessness, 
ineptitude and avarice.”

It concluded: “BHS is a stain on the reputation of British commerce and its 
system of corporate governance. Above all, it is a source of everlasting shame 
and disgrace forSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>.”


The Daily Mail dubbed Green as Sir Shifty (both in its front page headline 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3706064/The-shaming-sir-shifty-Sir-Philip-Green-branded-unacceptable-face-capitalism-furious-MPS-devastating-report-says-plundered-hundreds-millions-doomed-BHS-tax-exile-wife-s-reaping-fortune.html>
, and in its editorial 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3706227/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-sale-BHS-sordid-tale-corporate-greed.html>
) and saw “the demise of BHS” as “a tale of rapacious capitalism at its most 
contemptible, exposing the rotten culture of greed and irresponsibility which 
still infects areas of big business and the City.”

It paid tribute to “the determination and forensic skills of Labour MP Frank 
Field” in exposing Green’s plunder. But, it added:


“The report is almost as scathing about the dogs that didn’t bark. Lord 
Grabiner, the supposedly independent chairman of the Green family’s holding 
company was described as ‘the apogee of weak corporate governance’...

The accountancy firms Grant Thornton and PwC, lawyers Olswang and Linklater 
and merchant bankGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> all acted as advisers on 
the BHS sale, most receiving huge fees. Yet none acted to prevent what was so 
clearly a disaster.”

In company with the Times, it  
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-sir-philip-green-8486615>
called for Green to lose his knighthood. The Daily Mirror also demanded that
“the cowboy of capitalism” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-sir-philip-green-8486615> 
should have “his prestigious title” withdrawn.” It added:

“The best chance Sir Philip ‘Greed’ has of salvaging anything of his shattered 
reputation is to change the habit of a lifetime, show some remorse - and use 
his own vast private wealth to plug the gap.”

The Sun agreed. “Green must pay the BHS pension bill,” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1496671/government-must-reject-any-eu-deal-containing-an-emergency-brake-on-immigration/>
 it said. “And if he refuses, Sir Philip should become plain Phil once again.”

And the Daily Express joined in 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/692775/dover-channel-traffic-chaos-revenge-brexit>
: “The Green cheque book, so ready to indulge an extravagant lifestyle, must be 
pulled out to safeguard the BHS pensioners.”

But how much should he pay? In his analysis,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/if-sir-philip-green-pension-fund-shortfall-knighthood>
the Guardian’s Nils Pratley pointed out that “it is up to the pensions 
regulator to determine the size of the shortfall.”

Similarly, it will be for the honours forfeiture committee to decide whether 
Green should lose his title. But, wrote Pratley, “the report provides 
ammunition by the bucket-load for both bodies.”

He thought Green should be pressed to repair the pension damage in full: “It 
would be a disgrace if even part of the shortfall is covered by the pension 
protection fund.”


As for the “slightly trickier” question of the knighthood, Pratley argued for 
a “pragmatic compromise”... if Green pays up in full and without further fuss, 
he can keep his gong.”

I have a feeling that BHS pensioners who have had nightmares about whether 
they will receive their money, and all the BHS staff who are now facing the 
loss of their jobs, will not agree.
 