
News Corp Australia is making 42 journalists, artists and photographers 
redundant in the latest round of cost-cutting in a bid to slash $40m from 
Rupert Murdoch’s Australian newspapers.

Journalists at the Australian, the Daily Telegraph, the Herald Sun and the 
Courier Mail have been offered the chance to take a voluntary redundancy after 
a fall in revenue from print advertising took its toll.

Forced redundancies will follow if the company does not fill its quota.


Sydney sausage sizzle sparks Fairfax fair pay fizzle | Amanda Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/sydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle>
The Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance has confirmed the company is 
looking to cut 42 full-time equivalent (FTE) roles after a significant cut to 
the masthead budgets.


“The company has advised MEAA that several FTE positions have been filled by 
voluntary redundancies from individuals who have registered interest in the 
past, and the opportunity remains for staff who wish to register interest in 
voluntary redundancies to do so.

The MEAA accused News Corp of “yet again refusing to commit to an open and 
transparent round of redundancies”. News Corp Australia has been approached for 
comment.

The union was holding staff meetings across the country on Wednesday to advise 
members on their rights.


News Corp Australia suffered an 11% fall in advertising revenue in the first 
quarter, according to the company’s financial results in November.


Last week News Corp formalised its purchase of the Australian News Channel, 
which produces Sky News in Australia and New Zealand. Australian News Channel 
was formerly a joint venture of Seven West Media (33%), Nine Entertainment Co. 
(33%) and Sky PLC (33%).

News Corp’s Australasia executive chairman, Michael Miller, said the 
investment brought together two of Australia’s strongest and most credentialed 
news media sources.

News Corp posts 28% decline in global earnings despite real estate boost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/09/news-corp-posts-28-decline-in-global-earnings-despite-real-estate-boost>
 “This is a significant investment that reinforces News Corp Australia’s 
continued commitment to quality journalism, talent and content,” he said.

 “I’m excited by the prospects offered by this acquisition and to lead a 
company that is investing in the best news coverage for all Australians.”

Last year just before Christmas News Corp targeted 55 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/26/news-corp-denialist-makes-cut-for-reporting-from-paris-talks-weekly-beast>
 for redundancy. In 2014 it was revealed that the companyhad shed 1,000 jobs in 
the 2012-13 financial year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/20/news-corp-australia-leaked-accounts-show-1000-jobs-cut-across-mastheads>
.
 