
An editor has demanded that a local council should stop producing its 
fortnightly newsletter because it competes unfairly with his newspaper.

Keith Magnum, founder of the Hackney Citizen 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/tag/hackney-citizen/>, says east London’s 
Hackney council is luring away advertising revenue from the local press with its
Hackney Today <http://www.hackney.gov.uk/hackney-today>.

The Citizen is a free monthly, with a print run of 10,000, while Hackney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hackney> Today, also a free, has a print run of 
108,000.

Government guidelines state that publications run by local authorities should 
not be published more often than quarterly.

In his open letter to Hackney’s mayor 
<https://www.hackneycitizen.co.uk/2016/11/28/open-letter-hackney-citizen-mayor-philip-glanville/>
, Philip Glanville, Magnum wrote:

“We call on you to halt the sale of advertising in the council’s fortnightly 
freesheet and on its website so that the borough’s news publishers can at least 
operate in a similar commercial environment to those in the vast majority of 
otherLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> boroughs.”

Magnum accepted that the council had a right to produce its own communications 
for residents, but regarded the selling of advertising space as “unfair 
competition.”

He argued that Hackney Today “would not be viable were it not subsidised by 
the taxpayer”, adding: “It does not rely on advertising sales as its lifeblood. 
But local news publishers do.”

Glanville, in an email sent to the Hackney Citizen 
<https://www.hackneycitizen.co.uk/2016/11/28/row-ad-sales-war-local-press-keith-magnum-philip-glanville/>
, countered that it would face a loss of between £100,000 to £150,000 if it did 
not sell display advertising for its newsletter. He wrote:

“Hackney Today is still by far the most popular source of information in 
Hackney about the council, other local services and national policy changes, 
especially amongst older people and those on lower incomes.

Given the amount of change around housing, education and welfare reform it is 
more important than ever that this information reaches everyone in the borough.”

He pointed out that most of its advertising revenue comes from the NHS, 
schools, colleges and housing associations. As for display ads, these are 
obtained “through a national network” and do not therefore involve local 
businesses.

Magnum was unconvinced. “Three years ago I said I did not regard Hackney Today 
as a competitor,” he said. But the commercial landscape newspapers “has changed 
significantly since then” with journalists are being laid off and newspapers 
folding.

“If the challenges for local newspapers are exacerbated further by local 
councils, it will have dire consequences for democracy.”


Ted Jeory, the Independent’s investigations editor who runs a blog  
<https://trialbyjeory.com/>covering the neighbouring borough of Tower Hamlets, 
backed Magnum.


For years that council ran a weekly, East End Life, until government 
commissioners forced its closure. Now the council produces a quarterly, which 
complies with government guidelines.

Jeory said: “Hackney Today seems to display the same attitude to transparency 
and accuracy on costs as the old East End Life.

“On page 2 of every edition, it says: ‘It [Hackney Today] has a print run of 
108,000 copies and is delivered free to every home and business in the borough.’

“It’s simply not true that it is distributed free. The council (ie, taxpayers, 
its readers) paysTrinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> to print the paper and a 
distributor to deliver these 108,000 copies.”

And Magnum has also secured the support of another local rival 
<https://www.hackneycitizen.co.uk/2016/11/30/journalists-unite-josh-loeb-ramzy-alwakeel-hackney-today-gazette-citizen/>
: Hackney Gazette editor Ramzy Alwakeel. He said: “I hope Hackney council 
agrees with me that the existence of a free press is an indispensable asset to 
public life in Hackney.

“I believe the best way for the town hall to communicate with the people who 
live here is by working with papers like the Gazette and the Citizen, not 
competing with them.”
 