
Team Great Britain’s success at the Rio Olympics is being celebrated by 
newspapers seeking a sign of national cohesion amid the divisions over Brexit.

Their message: despite economic and political uncertainty following the EU 
referendum, there is at least one reason to be cheerful. Look how good we are 
now at sport.

With Britain attaining second place in the medals table, and well before the 
Games reach their conclusion, editors have rushed to praise our sporting stars. 
But they interpret those medal-winning triumphs in very different ways and 
offer diverse reasons for it.

We have managed to “put the ‘Great’ back into GB” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/08/15/our-athletes-put-the-great-back-into-gb/>
, said the Daily Telegraph, because of funding that flowed from the national 
lottery after its establishment by John Major in 1994.

It has enabled “coaches and sporting associations to pick out talented 
athletes and train them to be world-beaters.” Accepting Mo Farah’s point about 
individual “hard work and grafting”, the paper believes money provided “that 
extra edge to getTeam GB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> into the 
medals.”

The Telegraph concluded: “Since the vote to leave the EU on June 23 there has 
been a sense of a country unsure of where it is heading next. We needed a lift, 
and a reminder that the Great in GB is still deserved. Our splendid team in Rio 
has shown emphatically that it is.”

The Times also thinks money and the establishment of UK Sport in 1997 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/run-for-your-money-tg9lh0r2p>, which 
allocates the lottery funds, has been one crucial factor. The other has been 
the embracing of science, such as computer analysis and aerodynamics technology.

Interestingly, it also noted that “participants in the advantaged sports tend 
to be more affluent and better educated... Three of Britain’s medal-winning 
rowers went to Oxford and many attended fee-paying schools.

“That allows them to profit from a wealth of educational and financial 
resources in their training and development. It is often those sports which are 
easier to pick up late in the day, meaning that British sport can turn around 
winners relatively quickly.”

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>, pointing to the 
transformation from widespread pre-Olympics Games negativity to an increasingly 
positive appreciation of their benefits, said:

“Sporting success is something to applaud, not sneer at - and yes, Britain is 
good at this stuff. Much of the competition in these Games has been 
unconditionally inspiring.”

The Olympics are not perfect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/the-guardian-view-on-rio-2016-so-far-so-inspiring-again>
, said the paper, arguing that “it might be better to hold them on a permanent 
site in Greece... than to rotate the Games every four years. But Rio is 
confirming what London taught.

“The games are worthwhile. They celebrate individual achievement of every 
kind, not just national prowess. They bring people together far more than they 
drive them apart. And the peoples of the world respond to them with real 
enthusiasm.”

The Daily Mail celebrated the “sheer diversity” of the men and women 
representing Britain with such great success in Rio 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3742513/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Taser-tragedy-raises-worrying-questions.html>
:

“Ethnic minority boxers from tough inner cities, public school-educated 
rowers, multi-millionaire golfers, cyclists, runners, swimmers and tennis 
superstars - who probably would never have met in other circumstances - have 
become a truly inspiring band of brothers and sisters.

And as if to underline their inclusivity, we have heard interviews and 
acceptance speeches in accents from towns and cities across the UK - Uttoxeter 
and Hemel Hempstead, Burnley and Bearsden, Coleraine and Douglas. What matters 
in this team is not where you’re from or how you talk but what you can do.

When so many are emphasising the divisions in our society, this group of 
exuberant, hard-working young people tell a very different story... The Mail 
salutes them.”

The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun>, in recognising that “this has 
been a turbulent and often divisive year”, contended that “Brits have united in 
awe of the brilliant performances of our sportsmen and women in Brazil, 
reminding us all why this is the greatest nation on earth.”

The Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> thought it 
refreshing to see how this new generation of young Brits “have shown once again 
that they are ordinary people who manage to achieve the extraordinary.”

And the Daily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, in its 
Monday editorial, agreed: “Barely a day goes by at the Rio Games without 
another clutch of medals, another moment on the podium. How our fortunes have 
changed. What a lot we have to be proud about.”

Columnists joined in. The Mail’s Robert Hardman believed the Games “have made 
us a United Kingdom again 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3742456/ROBERT-HARDMAN-Rio-2016-United-Kingdom-again.html>
” and called for the medal-winners to be honoured.

There must be a bumper crop of Olympic gongs, knighthoods and damehoods, he 
wrote, concluding: “Given what this lot have done to lift the mood of her 
fractious kingdom in the past few days, she will be more than happy to oblige.”

The Telegraph’s Jeremy Warner argued that a conservative vision has been the 
inspiration for Britain’s gold rush 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/08/15/british-success-at-the-olympics-is-not-just-a-national-achieveme/>
: “For those interested in the history of ideas, there could scarcely be a more 
revealing example of the way individualism, with its focus on outcompeting 
rivals, repeatedly triumphs over collectivism.”

He wrote: “Britain’s medal haul is a lesson in the determined, often ruthless 
pursuit of success, and the rewards it brings. Yet again, the ideas of the 
Right have been proved to have so much more to offer than those from the Left.”

In the Financial Times, Janan Ganesh, saw the allocation of money used in 
concert with a sensible strategy as the key:“There was never a costless route 
to their present eminence 
<https://www.ft.com/content/0ba195cc-608a-11e6-b38c-7b39cbb1138a>, which the 
left can cite as a kind of social democracy in action.”

Similarly, the Telegraph’s Jim White believed that the success stemmed from 
planning, coordination and method: “Properly financed, properly coached, 
properly organised, the back-up for the Brits leaves the rest in awe.”

He wrote: “The Russians may attempt to gain advantage through state-sponsored 
doping; we do it by Lottery-funded professionalism.”
 