
What have the Wall Street Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wallstreetjournal> and the Eskdale & 
Liddesdale Advertiser got in common? Or perhaps that question should be: what 
have the Journal’s owner, mighty News Corporation, and the Advertiser’s owner, 
the modest CN Group, got in common?


The Journal sells more than 1m copies a day in print while the Advertiser 
manages about 1,200 newsprint sales a week.

But the crisis facing both newspapers and their publishers is exactly the 
same: their business model, which is based around advertising revenue, is in 
the process of being destroyed.

In fact, in the Advertiser’s case, the past tense is more relevant. After 168 
years of publication, it is losing money and staring closure in the face.

CN Group <http://www.cngroup.co.uk/>, the small Carlisle publishing 
organisation, cannot justify producing the paper any longer and is asking for 
someone to come forward who is willing to take it off its hands.

If it can’t find a buyer (and it is seeking only a “nominal” sale price) the 
paper will be closed next month, leaving the people ofLangholm 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Langholm> and its surrounding hinterland in 
Dumfries and Galloway without their paper.

CN is hoping for a “community benefactor” to emerge and has asked for people, 
a group of people perhaps, to contact them. If not, the last issue will appear 
on 14 December.

There is no existential crisis of that sort at News Corp’s Wall Street 
Journal, of course. At least, not yet. But the situation at the New York title 
is certainly dramatic.

Last month, the Journal’s editor-in-chief, Gerard Baker, announced that a 
“substantial number” of staff would be required to take to voluntary redundancy 
packages. 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/paulfletcher/2016/10/24/are-wall-street-journal-buyouts-a-harbinger-of-more-industry-layoffs/#5c5bf5cd4720>

By 2 November, with 48 people having already accepted the deal, it emerged that
the Journal’s section covering Greater New York was being folded into the 
paper’s broader coverage of the city 
<http://www.poynter.org/2016/layoffs-hit-the-wall-street-journal-2/437385/>. 
That threatened the jobs of a further 19 staff.

Other separate sections were also consolidated as part of a downsizing 
exercise which came against a background of falling ad income. More 
journalists, inevitably, will be going in the coming months.

That is the continuing story at all newspaper companies in both the UK and the 
US. From British publishers, such asJohnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press>, Trinity Mirror and the 
Guardian to American publishers, such as the New York Times, Gannett and 
McClatchy.

According to a recent analysis, for the Columbia Journalism Review 
<http://www.cjr.org/business_of_news/wsj_newspapers_layoffs_advertising.php?Newsletter>
 by Washington Post writer Pete Vernon, national print advertising in the 
States has fallen by 35.1% over the year. He wrote:

“Print advertising, still the most lucrative revenue source for most newspaper 
companies, is in a freefall. The cash cow has steadily declined for years, but 
2016 has seen an acceleration in the departure of ad dollars.”

He pointed out that between 2010 and 2015, there had been “a relatively stable 
decline” of print advertising (between 5-8% each year, according to thePew 
Research Center <http://www.journalism.org/2016/06/15/newspapers-fact-sheet/>).

But a predicted 11% fall in advertising this year “now seems optimistic.” Why? 
Because “with shrinking circulations and an inability to provide the targeted 
marketing and detailed analytics of options such as Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, print just isn’t as enticing 
to advertisers.”

That’s it in a nutshell. The digital giants are sucking up advertising, which 
is threatening the viability of newspapers. More pertinently, and much more 
significantly, it is threatening journalism itself.

That’s why I support the call by the Media Reform Coalition 
<http://www.mediareform.org.uk/> (MRC) and National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/home/> to impose a 1% levy on the operations of Google 
and Facebook in order to fund public service reporting.

As I reported on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/08/make-google-and-facebook-pay-for-public-service-reporting>
, the MRC believes public interest journalism is in peril and, in company with 
the National Union of Journalists, it hopes to persuade politicians to include 
an amendment to the digital economy bill in order to create the levy.
 