
Brexit-supporting newspapers greeted Theresa May’s Brexit speech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/02/conservative-conference-may-to-explain-brexit-great-repeal-bill-in-marr-interview-politics-live>
at the Conservative party conference as if it marked the dawn of a new epoch.

It was “a huge moment in the nation’s history” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3818856/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Brexit-real-work-begins.html>
, said the Daily Mail, while the Daily Express believed us to be“on brink of a 
new era in British history.” 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/716884/Bright-prosperous-future-for-Britain>
 A little less hysterically, the Daily Telegraph regarded it as“a watershed 
moment.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/10/02/the-monumental-task-of-brexit-has-only-just-begun/>

The Sun, now firmly of the opinion that May is Margaret Thatcher reborn, said: 
“We have entered the era of ‘Global Britain’” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1899190/any-doubt-about-theresa-mays-commitment-to-brexit-has-been-quashed-may-is-the-capable-pm-we-can-be-proud-of/>
.

Those newspapers that advocated a remain vote in the EU referendum - Times, 
Guardian,Financial Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>, 
Independent and Daily Mirror - were unwilling to grant the speech any such 
accolades.

This national press split represents the continuing division over European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> membership across the UK and, as 
several papers noted, it also reflects the division within the Tory party.

That was also evident in the leading articles of the Brexiteering quartet. 
Despite their enthusiam for a new political heroine, they were just as 
concerned about how she will realise her (and their) ambitions.

The Telegraph, while moved by May’s “stirring and patriotic speech” wondered 
how she will rise to “the political challenge that lies ahead.” It said:

“Mrs May said she wanted the ‘right deal’ for Britain. But there are 
fundamental differences of opinion over what that constitutes, not just in 
parliament but in her own party...

The deep divisions exposed by the referendum are reflected among Conservatives 
just as they are in the country at large.

Mrs May’s task is to chart a course between the two extremes and find a way 
through that both holds her party together and benefits the country, while 
retaining a good relationship withEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. It is a monumental task that 
has only just begun.”

The Times thought May “short on specifics”, demonstrating “the risk at the 
heart of negotiations for Brexit”. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/no-soft-option-n97ztr02w> It urged 
the prime minister to “acknowledge that many of the regulations that currently 
apply as a result of membership are helpful for commerce” and EU membership 
“confers economic benefits.”

It was unimpressed with her “so-called Great Repeal Act”, arguing that “it is 
simply not correct for Mrs May to have claimed that this legislation will make 
Britain a ‘sovereign and independent country’ again.”

The paper also said: “The idea that there are no costs at all in Brexit and 
that the benefits of membership may be retained is... false and irresponsible.”

The Guardian was, if anything, slightly softer on the prime minister. It noted 
that May has still failed to detail what Brexit means, but argued that“she did 
enough to be going on with.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-tories-and-brexit-may-still-does-not-know-her-goal>

While accepting that “this is still a largely symbolic stage of the process”, 
the paper thought it “a very dispiriting spectacle to anyone who wants the 
terms of Britain’s departure from the EU to contain some recognition that 48% 
of the electorate rejected the proposition altogether.”

The Independent believed May’s speech indicated “she may be preparing for a 
hard Brexit” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/editorials/theresa-may-s-timetable-for-article-50-won-t-allay-brexit-concerns-a7341636.html>
 and, if so, “jitters will run through the Europhile wing of the Conservative 
party quicker than you can say Liam Fox.”

It said: “It is incumbent on the prime minister therefore to provide a clearer 
sense of what Brexit will look like... Only then can the British people work 
out whether the government is exceeding the mandate it was given.”

The Financial Times was encouraged by May having “provided much-needed 
clarity.” <https://www.ft.com/content/9968043e-88c3-11e6-8aa5-f79f5696c731>Even 
so, her “speech still leaves plenty of options open” which “may not please 
business, which has been desperate for [Brexit] details”.

But the FT is clearly worried: “Significant questions... remain about the 
economic impact... Her speech was predictably heavy on patriotic emotion and 
light on strategy.”

The Mail wasn’t so concerned about that, praising May for giving “Britain a 
date with destiny” and “laying out an inspiring vision of Britain’s future 
after we become an independent sovereign country once more.”

It said: “There is to be no backsliding, no quibbling and no shabby 
‘Brexit-lite’ sellout.” But it also realise that May “should be under no 
illusion about the vast scale of the task ahead”, not least from “many 
embittered Remainers who still want to subvert the will of the people.” The 
Mail continued:

“These contemptible wreckers are in total denial about the referendum result. 
They claim to be standing up for democracy but in fact they are flouting it.”

The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> referred to remainers as 
“remoaners” and, while conceding that We should “the road ahead will be tough” 
believed “the PM has shown us she’s ready to fight and she believes she can 
win.” It concluded:

“She won’t compromise on restoring British sovereignty, cutting immigration or 
our ability to forge new trade deals — exactly as the Sun demanded.

A confident, capable female Prime Minister we can be proud of on the world 
stage. Remind you of anyone?”

The Express pointed to the CBI’s claim that ‘British business can expect a 
Brexit ‘surge’” and said “the outlook for this country is better than it has 
been for years.”

And the Mirror? It lashed into May as “an accidental prime minister unable to 
control her own destiny” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/incoming/voice-mirror-theresa-no-plan-8966613> who is 
being “bullied by ideological Tories.”

“Mrs May,” it said, “risks becoming a prisoner of the Tory ideologues”, which 
represents “a frightening threat to our prosperity and security.”
 