
It may not be the ambassadorship to Washington, or even to the EU, but Nigel 
Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> does finally have a 
steady job now he is no longer Ukip leader: presenting a radio talkshow four 
nights a week.

Farage – who is still officially an MEP though a largely absent one 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/only-one-person-eu-parliament-8302643> 
– is to host an hour-long programme four weekday evenings a week on LBC 
beginning from next Monday, the radio station has announced.

The Nigel Farage Show runs from Monday to Thursday, and will be presented 
variously from London or across the US or Europe, depending on Farage’s travels.

Farage stepped down as Ukip leader following the election of Diane James in 
September, although he was obliged to fill in again when sheresigned after 18 
days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/ukip-leader-diane-james-resigns-after-just-18-days-in-job-reports>
 in the job.

When Paul Nuttall took over the post in November, Farage said he would 
definitely step back from frontline politics, saying he would instead focus on 
areas including broadcasting and his new interest in US politics.

Since then the former leader has been linked – admittedly mainly by himself 
and his close allies – with becoming the newambassador to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
, replacing Sir Ivan Rogers as theenvoy to the EU 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/04/might-new-man-brussels-sir-ivan-rogers-resignation/>
, or evenjoining the House of Lords 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/29/nigel-farage-should-get-a-peerage-ukip-leadership-hopefuls-say/>
. None of those has come to pass yet.

He has appeared regularly on the broadcast media, especially LBC, where he has 
attracted some headlines, notably last month when heaccused the widower of the 
murdered Labour MP Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
 of being associated with extremism.

Farage has previously stood in as a guest presenter on LBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc>, which began in the 1970s as a 
London-only station, but is now broadcast nationwide.

When Nick Clegg was deputy prime minister he presented a weekly call-in 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/10/nick-clegg-lbc-radio-show> on 
LBC. Among Farage’s current co-presenters are Nick Ferrari, James O’Brien, and
professional contrarian and attention-seeker 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/katie-hopkins-retweets-nazi-twitter-9551819>
 Katie Hopkins.

Announcing Farage’s new show, LBC said the new presenter would “bring his 
inside knowledge, experience and grasp of world politics at a pivotal time in 
our history”.

Farage said: “If 2016 was exciting, then this year could be tumultuous, with 
President Trump, article 50, elections all over Europe and maybe a eurozone 
crash. I can’t wait to start my daily show on LBC and I invite listeners to 
agree with me or challenge me and together we can lead Britain’s conversation.”

In a tweet, Farage said the show would also feature an element he described as 
“my final nightly thought on the events of the day”.
Nigel Farage (@Nigel_Farage) 
The Nigel Farage Show will be full of opinions, callers and reaction, as well 
as my nightly Final Thought on the events of the day.
 <https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/816941824359198720> January 5, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/816941824359198720>  