
Maimuna Abdulmunini was just 13 when she was arrested for burning her 
35-year-old husband to death.

The legal process dragged out over five years. Finally in 2012, when she 
turned 18, Abdulmunini was convicted of murder and sentenced to death. Today, 
despite a court ruling six months ago that the sentence is a violation of her 
rights, she is still on death row, waiting.

Wasila Tasi’u is 14 but has been in a prison in Gezawa, outside the city of 
Kano, for the last five months. She too faces the death penalty for allegedly 
murdering her 35-year-old husband, Umar Sani, and three others at her own 
wedding party.

 Soon after she was arrested, Tasi’u told her lawyer Hussaina Ibrahim that she 
had been tied to the bed and raped by Sani on their wedding night. When she 
appeared in Gezawa high court for the first time back in the autumn, she could 
barely say her own name, turning her back to the court when the charges were 
read, breaking down in tears.

How girl activists helped to ban child marriage in Malawi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/26/girl-activists-child-marriage-malawi-let-girls-lead>
Her trial resumes today. A strike by judicial staff, coupled with the 
customary delays in the Nigerian legal system, has meant that she has been 
incarcerated since October, with limited access to her mother and father. 
Tasi’u is struggling to cope with her current situation, according to Ibrahim. 
Once described as a “jovial” and “intelligent” teenager, Tasi’u is now 
withdrawn and scared.

The Nigerian government made child marriage illegal in 2003, but according to 
campaigners fromGirls Not Brides <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/>, 17% of girls 
in the country are still married before the age of 15. In the Muslim-dominated 
northwest, 48% of girls are married by the age of 15 and78%  
<http://nigeria.unfpa.org/nigeirachild.html>are married by the time they hit 
18. In Kibbe state, the average age of marriage for girls is just11 
<http://www.unfpa.org/child-marriage>.

The Child Rights Act, which raises the minimum age of marriage for girls to 
18, was introduced in 2003. But the legislation, which was created at a federal 
level, is only effective if it is passed by state governments. To date, only 24 
of Nigeria’s 36 states havepassed the act 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Child_Marriage_Report_7_17_LR..pdf>. The 
legislation is yet to be passed in either Abdulmunini or Tasiu’s home states.

Within Nigerian politics the issue has proved controversial, not least because 
politicians have a habit of marrying teenagers. Senator Ahmed Sani Yerima, 
representative for Zamfara West in northern Nigeria, madeheadlines 
<http://www.nairaland.com/444471/senator-ahmed-sani-yerima-justifies> back in 
2010 when he married a 13-year-old Egyptian girl. Three years later he 
persuaded his fellow Senators todefeat a motion 
<http://www.vice.com/read/child-marriage-was-nearly-made-illegal-in-nigeria-last-month>
 that would have removed a constitutional loophole that means girls under the 
age of 18 are considered adults as soon as they get married.

Now, with less than three weeks to go before the country goes to polls in the 
presidential election, the issue has taken on a political edge. Ibrahim says 
the government doesn’t care about the girls forced into marriage, claiming that 
politicians could have Tasi’u released if they really wanted to.

Girls and media: how TV chat shows and soaps can have a positive influence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/09/girls-and-media-how-tv-chat-shows-and-soaps-can-have-a-positive-influence>
A senior lawyer at the International Federation of Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> Lawyers in Kano, Ibrahim is 
currently dealing with 54 cases related to child marriage, including a 
12-year-old charged with attempted murder and an 11-year-old who attempted 
suicide and ran away from home a week before she was due to marry a 45-year-old.


Ibrahim starts her working day at three in the morning, before prayers and 
taking her children to school. As a woman in a high-powered job, she faces 
regular harassment from opponents, as well as the general sexism that 
punctuates her dealings with state officials and members of the police force.

“I am frustrated. There is a real problem with access to education in this 
region. The government could take steps to address this, but it is yet to do 
so. Better access to education could have a real impact on child marriage. It’s 
easy to get the sense that those in charge in the south don’t care about the 
people of the north. The election has been so focused on terrorism and Boko 
Haram that other issues are being lost,” she says.

Maryam Uwais, a lawyer based in northern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, who “grew up watching girls being 
married off all around” her, suggests that politicians in the north of the 
country are reluctant to come out against child marriage for fear of losing 
popular support. “Many of our northern politicians seem to think that taking a 
stand against pegging the minimum age for marriage would be synonymous with 
taking a stand against the Muslim faith. The religion has been misinterpreted 
to convey that child marriage is encouraged in Islam, whereas contextual 
interpretations would suggest the opposite,” she says.

“Child marriage is prevalent in many of the communities where poverty is 
endemic. Parents (and fathers especially) actually benefit from the dowry and 
extras that their daughter’s suitor contributes to the family of the girl 
child.”

 The lawyers representing Maimuna Abdulmunini are equally frustrated with the 
Nigerian political system. Angela Uwandu works withAvocats Sans Frontières 
<http://www.asf.be/> in Abuja. Together with Jean-Sebastian Mariez, who works 
for the organisation from Paris, she tookAbdulmunini’s case 
<http://www.courtecowas.org/site2012/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2&Itemid=5>
 to the Economic Community of West African States (Ecowas) Court of Justice.

In June 2014, after granting her an injunction to prevent her being executed 
four months earlier, the court said the decision to sentence Abdulmunini to 
death for a crime committed when she was a minor was a violation of her rights. 
In its judgement, the court also noted a number of flaws in the original trial. 
The issue of her age had been ignored by both sides, while lawyers for the 
prosecutionargued 
<http://saving-lives.com.ng/doc/Maimuna%20Abdulmumini%20Vs%20The%20Federal%20Republic%20of%20Nigeria.pdf>
 that Abdulmunini’s desire to keep her newborn baby with her while she was 
incarcerated was just a cynical attempt to gain sympathy.

Is there hope for the child bride accused of murder in Nigeria?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/22/is-there-hope-for-the-child-bride-accused-of-in-nigeria>
Lacking the authority to order her release, the Ecowas court can only urge the 
Nigerian government to follow its judgement. ASF’s lawyers have been lobbying 
to ensure this happens but so far their pleas have fallen on deaf ears.

A separate criminal appeal has been filed by Abdulmunini’s lawyer at the 
national level challenging the death sentence conviction by the High Court.

Abdulmunini, who Uwandu described as being “overjoyed” when she heard the 
regional court had decided to strike down her sentence back in June, is now 
dejected.

She is currently separated from her three-year-old daughter – the result of a 
relationship she had while out on bail – and is living in an overcrowded cell 
with six other inmates.

Françoise Kpeglo Moudouthe, head of Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> engagement at Girls Not Brides, is 
calling on the Nigerian government to do more to tackle child marriage.
“If nothing is done, it’s clear that Nigeria – and other countries where child 
marriage is prevalent – will continue to fall short in its efforts to improve 
the education, health and wellbeing of millions of its citizens.
“It’s important to remember that many parents marry off their daughter as a 
child because they believe it is the best and safest option for her future. The 
government of Nigeria must do more to empower girls and ensure their access to 
safe secondary schools, and other services, if parents are to see that they and 
their daughters have other options to child marriage.”

 * This article was amended on 12 March 2015. It originally said that 39% of 
girls in Nigeria are married before the age of 15. The correct figure is 17%. 
Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 