
Donald Trump has chosen the first women for senior posts in his 
administration, announcing on Wednesday that the South Carolina governor, Nikki 
Haley, as US ambassador to theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, and Betsy DeVos as his 
secretary for education.

Both cabinet-level positions require Senate confirmation and came amid 
speculation that Trump was poised to nominate rival presidential candidate Ben 
Carson to head the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

In a statement, the president-elect said Haley was “a proven dealmaker and we 
look forward to making plenty of deals”, adding that the South Carolina 
governor “will be a great leader representing us on the world stage”.


An outspoken Trump critic throughout much of the presidential race, Haley 
would become Trump’s first female – and first non-white – cabinet-level 
official if the appointment were confirmed by the Senate. Critics, however, are 
likely to seize on her lack of foreign policy experience.


Donald Trump's 'alt-right' supporters express dismay at disavowal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/alt-right-supporters-donald-trump-backlash-disavow-reddit-4chan>
Haley, 44, accepted the offer, saying in a statement: “Our country faces 
enormous challenges here at home and internationally, and I am honored that the 
president-elect has asked me to join his team and serve the country we love as 
the next ambassador to the United Nations.”

She said she would “be forever grateful” that South Carolinians “took a chance 
on a little-known, 38-year-old, minority, female governor”.


Two sources familiar with the decision told the Associated Press the 
ambassadorship would be a cabinet-level position, which is at the discretion of 
the president. She will succeed Samantha Power.

Trump called DeVos “a brilliant and passionate education advocate” in a 
statement on Wednesday.

She faced criticism even before it was formally announced on Wednesday 
afternoon. Conservatives warned that DeVos, a longtime Republican donor, 
previously supported the Common Core education standards that Trump railed 
against during the campaign.


Haley had initially campaigned for Marco Rubio and then Ted Cruz in the 
Republican primary. Trump tweeted in March: “The people of South Carolina are 
embarrassed by Nikki Haley!” Haley denounced several of Trump’s campaign 
comments and urged voters to “reject the siren call of the angriest voices” but 
she did eventually vote for him.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstate-of-the-union-nikki-haley-republican-response-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F13%2F1452715010398%2FKP_1354167_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nikki%20Haley%3A%20reject%20%E2%80%98siren%20call'%20of%20Republicans'%20angriest%20voices%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstate-of-the-union-nikki-haley-republican-response-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nikki%20Haley%3A%20reject%20%E2%80%98siren%20call%27%20of%20Republicans%27%20angriest%20voices%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstate-of-the-union-nikki-haley-republican-response-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F13%2F1452715010398%2FKP_1354167_crop_640x480.jpg>
Nikki Haley: reject ‘siren call’ of Republicans’ angriest voices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/13/state-of-the-union-nikki-haley-republican-response-video>
Lindsey Graham, a senator for South Carolina and another longtime Trump 
adversary, praised Haley as “a strong leader” who would be an “outstanding 
ambassador” to the UN and a “strong supporter” of Israel.

“As governor of South Carolina she has recruited and dealt with some of the 
largest international business firms in the world,” he said. “Her husband was a 
member of the South Carolina national guard who served a tour of duty in 
Afghanistan.”

Graham added: “Governor Haley and her family fully understand what is at stake 
in the war against radical Islam. I know she will be a valuable ally to 
President-elect Trump as our nation tries to re-engage the world and lead from 
the front, not behind.”

Matt Brooks, executive director of the Republican Jewish Coalition, said: “
Governor Nikki Haley is a brilliant choice to serve as our country’s ambassador 
to the United Nations. Governor Haley is hard-working, smart and has a strong 
world view that will represent the United States well on the global stage.”

At the UN missions of US allies, diplomats were hastily researching Haley’s 
record on Wednesday morning, but some ambassadors said they had met her in her 
role as governor, so she was not entirely an unknown quantity.

The European Union envoy to the UN, João Vale de Almeida, tweeted that he had 
come across her when he had been posted to Washington and that he looked 
forward to working with her, especially because there was a lot for the EU and 
US to do together.

The French envoy, François Delattre, who had also met Haley when he was 
France’s ambassador to Washington, said: “We had a very good contact. She is a 
highly regarded, very respected professional.

“France and the United States must confront together the challenges we face, 
including here at the UN,” Delattre said. “More than ever, we need an America 
that is committed to world affairs. It’s true also here at the UN, where a 
strong Franco-American partnership is needed, based on our common values and on 
our shared interest.”

Delattre’s remarks reflected general relief around the UN that Trump’s nominee 
did not appear to be an ideological unilateralist sent to New York to make a 
point. However, that relief is cautious, pending the announcement of a nominee 
for secretary of state.

“It’s worth noting that the job will be a cabinet office,” a European diplomat 
said. “That is a reassuring. It’s also true that she doesn’t have a lot of 
experience, but that can be a good thing in that she doesn’t carry baggage.”

Haley, who met Trump last week, has a track record of taking on and beating a 
Republican party establishment dominated by white men. She was born Nimrata 
Nikki Randhawa in Bamberg, South Carolina, to Sikh parents who emigrated from 
India. Haley has told how her brother was teased at first for not cutting his 
hair, in line with Sikh tradition, and Haley and her sister were disqualified 
from a local junior pageant because the judges were “flummoxed” by their 
ethnicity, she told theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/14/us/politics/14haley.html> in 2010.

“It’s survival mode,” Haley said. “You learn to try and show people how you’re 
more alike than you are different.”

Her father worked as a biology professor and her mother created a clothing 
business, where Haley began keeping books at the age of 13. She studied 
accounting at Clemson University, where she met her husband, Michael Haley, an 
army national guard captain who served in Afghanistan in 2013.

They married in 1996 in two ceremonies, one Sikh and one Methodist, although 
Haley has said she converted to Christianity before her wedding and that both 
her children were baptised in a Methodist church.


 