
They call it the Bae Of Pigs 
<http://thespinoff.co.nz/21-09-2015/politics-david-cameron-and-the-bae-of-pigs/>
: our beloved leaderDavid Cameron has been accused  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/piggate-hameron-twitter-react-david-cameron-pig-head-claims>
 of “putting a private part of his anatomy” into the head of a dead pig. At 
Oxford University it is claimed that he attended a gathering of the 
ultra-exclusive, ultra-poshPiers Gaveston Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-piers-gaveston-society-what-we-know-oxford-secret>
, where –so the allegation goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-pig-head-lord-ashcroft-unofficial-biography-drug-taking-claims>
 - he got a little too familiar with a pig’s head, to the raucous cheers of the 
myriad lords and ladies in attendance. This is of course a watershed moment in 
British political history.

As with every time something like this happens, the usual suspects emerged 
from their respective caves, chanting their mantras: he was just a student; 
we’ve all done it; I once stole a traffic cone; it’s Oxford, this kind of thing 
happens, forget about it. Despite these mitigations clearly being rubbish, 
they’ll work. In the long run, this episode won’t hurt Dave. The sort of people 
who go from Eton to Oxford,join the Bullingdon Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/04/david-cameron-bullingdon-club>
 and attend Piers Gav parties, they aren’t like you or me. They’re special, and 
they’ll do whatever they need to do to achieve their manifest destiny. That’s 
the unspoken thesis of the British class system.

David Cameron, a pig's head and a secret society at Oxford University 
– explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-piers-gaveston-society-what-we-know-oxford-secret>
A few years ago, as I was finishing my degree, I got myself invited to a Piers 
Gaveston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-piers-gaveston-society-what-we-know-oxford-secret>
 event. (My then girlfriend was friends with a Bullingdon member.) Forgive me, 
but I was excited. Whatever lefty leanings I’d picked up in my three years of 
Oxford, I still nursed a morbid fascination with the really rich kids: the 
aristocrats, their estates, their balls, their legendary forebears, their 
profligacy at nightclubs, the sense that their names could open doors to 
oak-panelled rooms filled with leather chairs and expensive scotch.

Even though I knew, logically, that these people were no better than me, being 
with them was like breathing rarefied air. So the invitation to their most 
exclusive party felt like an honour. I pictured the doors of a fantastical 
country seat opening to me. Gold-plated cherubs. Sparkling fountains of 
champagne. Secret nooks where future titans of industry would carve up the 
world over beluga and Bollinger. I eagerly accepted the invitation. I was then 
told that it’d cost me £65 and could I please make a bank transfer to the guy 
in charge of the guest list.

A few months later we gathered at a certain time outside a certain pub, 
dressed according to a certain theme (Arabian Nights, a choice so crushingly 
unimaginative that I should have considered myself warned there and then). 
Crowds of Oxford’s bright young things – all glittering sequins and dubious 
turbans – climbed aboard seven battered coaches (the type that reek of 
cigarettes) that drove for an hour into the countryside.

We were kicked out on a damp country path in the middle of nowhere. As the 
coaches drove off, a queue stretched towards a gate on the lip of a valley. 
Bouncers frisked the partygoers, confiscated phones and cameras, bagged them 
and stuck them in the back of a beaten-up Renault Espace. It felt less
Brideshead Revisited <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brideshead-revisited>, 
more Gatwick security. Finally, we were allowed through. I crossed the gate, 
crested the lip of the valley, and beheld a field with three gazebos in it. The 
first contained a bar and was done up like a sultan’s harem – carpets, 
lanterns, and low, smooth tables. The second, a dancefloor. The third contained 
a trio of impassive dealers, charging £40 for a gram ofMDMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/05/ecstasy-mdma-anonymous-drug-user>
. (I did not partake, in case my mother reads this.)

And that was it. There was no champagne fountain, no grand initiation 
ceremony, no Masonic orgies, certainly no porcine initiation ceremonies. It 
wasn’tEyes Wide Shut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76659/eyes.wide.shut>. It was 
Glastonbury with worse music.

As the night wore on, I ran out of money and got cold. Nobody was dancing. 
People started to get grumpy. They argued and threw bottles onto the bonfire. A 
girl was crying by the portable toilets. Grim-faced staff made their way 
through the prone bodies of Oxford’s youths, bundling their trash into plastic 
bags. The sun rose through grey mist. A bouncer caught someone with a 
contraband phone and threw it into a lake. The coaches returned and we fought 
to get back on board.

Piers Gaveston was an earl. He died in 1312 
<http://www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/piers-gaveston-executed>, 665 
years before the eponymous society was founded. Save for the name, they have 
little in common. Like every cloak-and-dagger secret society, it’s a front, a 
way to tart up debauchery, privilege and selfishness with the borrowed lustre 
of centuries-old tradition.

Maybe Cameron did go to one of these parties. He looks the sort. But let’s not 
pretend that it’s part of a long and noble British tradition. Because once you 
get over the Brideshead delusion, all you have left is a terrible headache and 
some really terrible puns about ham.
 