
The news that director Neill Blomkamp is moving ahead with his plan for a new 
Alien movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
 presents many more questions than it does answers. The saga that launched in 
1979 with Alien, Ridley Scott’s claustrophobic space-slasher flick, and was 
revived in 2012 with the veteran British film-maker’s befuddledPrometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review>, is a prime 
example of a franchise filming itself into a corner. And Blomkamp won’t be able 
to use time travel to get himself out the mess, as was done in two of Alien’s 
science-fiction peers, Terminator and Star Trek. So how should he do it? Or how 
shouldn’t he? Here are five things we don’t want to see in Alien 5.

1. Predators and space jockeys

The Alien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> series was never meant to 
be the sci-fi equivalent of Celebrity Deathmatch. Much-loved though the 
mandible-sporting alien mega-hunters of Predator may be, the thought of them 
turning up in the same universe as the xenomorphs – as they did in two 
ill-fated mid-naughties movies – is only slightly less upsetting than the idea 
of Spock wielding a lightsaber.

Ditto the space jockeys that were revealed in Prometheus to be god-like 
humanoids who spawned life on Earth but decided they didn’t like what they had 
created. These are best left for Ridley Scott’s planned sequel, which will 
supposedly explore their homeworld. (Good luck with that).
 Director Neill Blomkamp on the set of his 2013 film Elysium. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto/Allstar/Columbia Pictures 
2. Anything that happened in Alien 3

It’s not fair to blame David Fincher for killing off all the surviving cast of 
Aliens, including Ripley herself, by the end of his1992 directorial debut 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alien_3>. First of all, it sounds as if 2oth 
Century Fox in the early 90s was a terrifying place to work for a fledgling 
film-maker. The screenplay went through multiple rewrites and the project 
through several directors. Second, Weaver is said to have stipulated that the 
third film should excise the previous instalment’s blam-blam-thank-you-ma’am 
aesthetic in favour of a less gun-heavy approach – and include the demise of 
Ripley. It’s shows one should be careful what you wish for.

Despite the best efforts of legendary character actors, Alien 3 ended up being 
damp squib. The balls-to-the-wall blockbuster world developed byJames Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamescameron> on the previous film was 
suddenly invaded by multiple offbeat denizens of British kitchen-sink drama. It 
lacks even the exploitation-tinged nastiness of Alien: Resurrection, and the 
main event of note is shaven-headed Ripley’s final leap into the industrial 
furnace, Alien queen safely on board. After the emotional investment filmgoers 
had made in Newt and Hicks, the two are killed off before they even land on 
Fiorina 161, while android Bishop gets only a (beautifully-realised) cameo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQlr-4PECivg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQlr-4PECivg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQlr-4PECivg&media=>
 Ripley’s leap … Alien 3 – video 
Blomkamp’s concept art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
for the new film features both Ripley and Hicks, the latter scarred from his 
encounters with the xenomorphs in Aliens, suggesting an approach that could 
involve simply forgetting that Fincher’s film ever existed. And who could blame 
him for that?

3. Human xenomorph Ripley

If you can’t use time travel or alternate timelines to bring back a much-loved 
character, you can always try cloning. Inexplicably emerging from the director 
of Delicatessen and Amélie (Jean-Pierre Jeunet), not to mention the future 
writer of Serenity and The Avengers (Joss Whedon), Alien: Resurrection (1997) 
gave us a Ripley brought back from the dead via sinister technologies. It’s a 
scenario that might just have been acceptable in the pages of 2000 AD but 
always failed to pass the logic test on the big screen. Clones do not maintain 
the personality traits of their “parent” donors, damn it!

While Weaver’s brutal performance as a creature with human and xenomorph 
lineage arguably took the character into intriguing new territory, the absence 
of the original Ripley meant the connection to all those fabulous moments from 
Alien and Aliens was slight.

4. Earth

Alien: Resurrection left the crew of the Betty poised above Earth. Where could 
the saga go from here? Might the next instalment reveal an alien stowed away on 
board (again!), unleashing the horrifying xenomorphs on Earth when the ship 
lands?

Please, no. The idea of an army of xenomorphs facing off against hundreds of 
thousands of badass human marines in a Lord of the Rings-style mass battle is 
anathema to the saga’s DNA. And asthe makers of zombie apocalypse blockbuster 
World War Z recently discovered 
<http://screenrant.com/world-war-z-movie-original-ending-sequel/>, the more you 
expand the scope of the narrative, the more you lose the human connection to 
those leading it. Ripley needs to be trapped in an alien horror show on some 
distant exo-solar hellhole, not leading the charge against rampaging xenomorph 
battalions like a sci-fi Boadicea.

5. Hamfisted explanations for Weaver’s age

If Blomkamp does return the story to the point just before Alien 3 jumped the 
xenomorph, how will the South African film-maker explain the fact that Ripley 
and Hicks are now almost three decades older than they were when we last saw 
them? Was there a malfunction in the cryotubes? Did the dropship make it back 
to Earth, with the new film kicking off 30 years later? What happened to Newt? 
And why would Ripley be called into duty again?

An Alien movie without Weaver – which Blomkamp initially had in mind – might 
make a lot more sense. But the geek world – and I have to say I, grudgingly and 
with trepidation – clearly believes he can make the first great Alien movie in 
30 years.

If not, there’s always the option of taking off and nuking the whole project 
from orbit. It’s the only way to be sure we never get another terrible Alien 
movie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCbfMkh940Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCbfMkh940Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaCbfMkh940Q&media=>
 Watch a clip from Aliens – video  