
“Toxic masculinity”: if any one term has graduated, through the tumult of 
2016, from specialized social-justice parlance to mainstream media ubiquity, 
it’s this one. Misuse has inevitably come with popularity – it denotes the 
social normalization of misogyny and sexual aggression that can poison 
masculine identity, not an intrinsic male evil – but in the year of Brock 
Turner, Nate Parker and President-elect Donald Trump, cultural critics haven’t 
had to reach too far for illustrative examples.

Nocturnal Animals review – Tom Ford's deliciously toxic tale of revenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/03/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-amy-adams-jake-gyllenhaal>
Nor have film critics, for that matter – quite aside from the off-screen case 
of the disgraced actor and film-maker Parker, who saw the success of his 
directorial debut, The Birth of a Nation, halted by revived college rape 
allegations, identifying his own “toxic masculinity [and] male privilege” in a 
much-circulated Ebony interview. (He later walked this statement back, refusing 
to apologize and denying any degree of guilt – only furthering the impression 
that his publicists were moreau fait with the terminology than he was.) A 
number of films this year have knowingly fed the increasingly loud conversation 
about abusive patriarchy – few more queasily thanNocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nocturnal-animals>, the fashion designer Tom 
Ford’s second turn behind the camera, an intricately folded double narrative in 
which male violence takes both bloodily literal and more smoothly insidious 
forms.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Ftom-ford-amy-adams-aaron-taylor-johnson-nocturnal-animals-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Ford%20on%20Nocturnal%20Animals%3A%20'I'm%20conflicted%20about%20what%20I%20do'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Ftom-ford-amy-adams-aaron-taylor-johnson-nocturnal-animals-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Ford%20on%20Nocturnal%20Animals%3A%20%27I%27m%20conflicted%20about%20what%20I%20do%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Ftom-ford-amy-adams-aaron-taylor-johnson-nocturnal-animals-video-interview&media=>
Tom Ford on Nocturnal Animals: ‘I’m conflicted about what I do’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/02/tom-ford-amy-adams-aaron-taylor-johnson-nocturnal-animals-video-interview>
“I did not realize that Nocturnal Animals would be such a tough movie to watch 
the day before the election,”tweeted the US critic Sam Adams last week 
<https://twitter.com/SamuelAAdams/status/795670388734881792>, going on to 
describe it to a colleague as “A Field Guide to Toxic Masculinity”. The film, 
adapted from Austin Wright’s 1993 novel Tony and Susan, nestles one chilly 
fiction inside another. In the “real” world, disaffected gallery owner Susan 
receives the manuscript of a novel by her long-estranged ex-husband Edward, and 
is invited to ponder the resonance of its contents; in the novel’s world, math 
professor and family man Tony’s world unravels when his wife and daughter are 
raped and murdered by a passing band of Texan thugs, setting him on a grisly 
revenge mission.

The crimes are committed without apparent motive beyond a hint of 
class-related antipathy – with Tony arguably representing the metropolitan 
elite so vilified by Republicans in this year’s election campaign. As such, 
they are the most direct manifestation of toxic masculinity in Ford’s film: 
played by Aaron Taylor-Johnson, kitted out in bluntly stereotypical lumberjack 
plaid, the killers’ ringleader is a symbol of unevolved chauvinism beside Jake 
Gyllenhaal’s more sensitive, cosmopolitan victim. (I’d say “effete”, but it’s 
still a robustly bearded Gyllenhaal we’re talking about.) Ford’s social 
symbolism isn’t especially subtle or measured: working-class white America in 
effect gets the “basket of deplorables” treatment here, give or take Michael 
Shannon’s sympathetic but coarsely law-bending sheriff.

Why The Girl on the Train heralds the return of the Hitchcockian thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/05/girl-on-the-train-alfred-hitchcock-thriller>
Things get more ambiguous in the film’s framing story, however, as it 
gradually dawns on Susan that this unsavory reading material may itself be a 
passive-aggressive act of revenge againsther. As the dissolution of her 
marriage to Edward, and her apparent role in its failure, is rehashed in her 
mind, the allegiances of Ford’s film become harder to parse: is this 
mini-melodrama a critique of the ways in which men blame women for their own 
emotional insecurities? Or is Nocturnal Animals, by its bleak, isolating 
finale, a misogynistic cautionary tale complicit in punishing its heroine? It’s 
a film arch enough to reflect either interpretation in its gorgeous, mirrored 
surfaces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnocturnal-animals-toxic-masculinity-girl-on-the-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04aa061588405a6335cbdfdd2cf698fb6af58274%2F166_0_3402_2041%2F3402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nocturnal%20Animals%20caps%20off%20Hollywood's%20year%20of%20toxic%20masculinity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnocturnal-animals-toxic-masculinity-girl-on-the-train%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nocturnal%20Animals%20caps%20off%20Hollywood%27s%20year%20of%20toxic%20masculinity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fnocturnal-animals-toxic-masculinity-girl-on-the-train%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04aa061588405a6335cbdfdd2cf698fb6af58274%2F166_0_3402_2041%2F3402.jpg>
 Emily Blunt in The Girl on the Train. Photograph: Allstar/Dreamworks Skg 
Though it aspires to a higher grade of pulp, Nocturnal Animals makes a rather 
good companion piece to this autumn’s multiplex phenomenonThe Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-girl-on-the-train>, a largely 
standard-issue whodunnit that reveals a far more interesting gendered subtext 
once the machinations of its critical twist are laid bare. There’s no denying 
it brings toxic masculinity to the metropolitan elite: in its moneyed slab of 
upstate New York (relocated from Paula Hawkins’ bestselling UK source novel), 
three unallied women turn out to be linked by the undisciplined, domineering 
sexuality and self-protective gaslighting trickery of one aggressively entitled 
man. His psychology remains opaque to the last; no reason is presented for his 
use and abuse of these women but the fact that he has the power and privilege 
to do so, which might be the most salient point this lurid potboiler has to 
make.

A female protagonist gets a more proactive role in policing male violence, 
meanwhile, in Paul Verhoeven’s arthouse lightning-rod Elle, which sees Isabelle 
Huppert’s independent video game CEO unusually responding to her rape by 
pursuing her attacker, determining her own degree of pleasure in her violation. 
It’s a fearsome rewrite of the rape-revenge genre’s dubious rules of 
exploitation, and one that has feminists split down the middle on its 
progressiveness or otherwise – but it’s a game in which male sexuality gets 
coolly outplayed. Female sexuality, meanwhile, is all but incidental to the 
toxic masculinity of Andrew Neel’s discomfiting campus drama Goat, which 
scrutinizes the grotesque hazing rituals of a university fraternity as a kind 
of microcosm of the ways in which brutally competitive male communities, 
fixated on outdated ideals of steak-eating straight masculinity, finally 
destroy themselves; the feminist Greek director Athina Rachel Tsangari’s 
Chevalier put an absurdist Mediterranean spin on similarly pernicious alpha 
infighting.

Colossal review – Anne Hathaway's madcap monster movie plays it too safe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/10/colossal-review-anne-hathaways-madcap-monster-movie-plays-it-too-safe>
Next year will see the release of Nacho Vigalondo’s curious monster-movie 
hybrid Colossal, in which Anne Hathaway’s self-destructive protagonist 
discovers an absurd affinity with the Godzilla-type creature laying waste to 
south-east Asia across the globe – a connection that turns out to hinge on her 
fractious relations with overbearing men. The Vanity Fair critic Richard Lawson
provocatively posited 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/09/anne-hathaway-colossal-review> 
that “the straight men [he] saw the film with didn’t like it,” while other 
viewers “will know exactly why those men didn’t”. True or otherwise, it’s a 
critical statement indicative of its times: far from the unifying escape route 
they’ve long been viewed as in times in political upheaval, the multiplex looks 
more than ever like a place to see our divisions writ large.
 