
Mixed up ballot boxes, collapsing tables and rain-sodden voting slips … these 
are just some of theabsurd problems that have held up the count for the 
Northern Ireland assembly elections 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/politics/election-2011/poll-delivers-a-resounding-no-for-shabby-organisation-15152514.html>
, amid scenes reminiscent of a Father Ted episode. At the Mid Ulster and North 
Antrim count centre, election workers were sent home early – apparently, 
because there weren't enough chairs for them to sit on. Hairdryers had to be 
deployed in the Omagh centre to separate out the votes that had got drenched. 
And the West Tyrone vote declaration, when it finally came, was interrupted by 
the returning officer's mobile phone, which blasted out a burst ofGuns N' Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gunsnroses>'" Sweet Child of Mine". It was 
that kind of night.

The results themselves, which continue to trickle in slowly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/may/06/northern-ireland-assembly-ulster-unionists-fourth>
, seemed almost secondary to the stuttering mechanics of the count. Although 
DUP andSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> supporters 
gave up their usual bullish cheers when party members were elected, and there 
were sporadic scenes of candidates being hoisted aloft on shoulders, this has 
been a quiet and underwhelming election. With the exception of a ridiculous 
schoolboy row over whether DUP leader Peter Robinson thought outgoing Sinn Féin 
education minister Caitriona Ruane was "great" ("a lie from hell",according to 
a pink-faced Robinson 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/politics/election-2011/peter-robinson-calls-lawyers-over-the-lie-from-hell-15148117.html>
), there have been few raised voices, and the parties have been largely 
campaigning on everyday policy issues, rather than the constitutional question.

Perhaps, that is the explanation for the unusually poor turnout. In the 2007 
assembly elections, turnout stood at 62%. This time round, it's at a historic 
low of 55% – possibly leaving the new government with the support of less than 
half the electorate. In the hyper-politicised North, where political parties 
count on the staunch, unquestioning loyalty of diehard voters, such apparent 
apathy and indifference is surprising. Lulled to tedium by the flawed but 
relatively stable setup at Stormont, it seems that many people inNorthern 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> can only be bothered 
to vote when it's a rabid tussle between orange and green. Normal, (semi-) 
functioning, everyday politics just doesn't turn them on. If there isn't a 
tribal fight, then what's the point?

Times are changing, even in Northern Ireland. There was clear evidence Friday 
night that some Sinn Féin voters were giving their second and third preference 
votes to the DUP, and vice versa. This would have been unthinkable in the past; 
it shows that the understanding between first minister Peter Robinson and 
deputy first ministerMartin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> (some call it cosy; 
others a carve-up) is secure and unassailable, and is now beginning to extend 
across their respective constituencies. Elsewhere, the uninspiring Ulster 
Unionist party appears to have blundered off into political oblivion, and the 
SDLP faces a struggle to hold its position. In North Antrim, the arch-critic of 
the powersharing arrangement at Stormont, Jim Allister, strode off grim-faced 
into the night, having failed to make the quota on the first count.

Bored, fretful and vaguely dissatisfied, Northern Ireland nonetheless shuffles 
on towards the future.
 