
“During our periods, we used to have to clean our sleeping areas with leaves 
and weren’t allowed to enter the house,” says 12-year-old Sushila who lives in 
Gorkha district, centralNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>. “Now, 
we can sleep in our beds. We must be open about menstruation.”

When Sushila first got her period, she had to stay home from school for 11 
days. She wasn’t allowed to touch books. Sushila’s situation is common in much 
of Nepal:95% of adolescent girls 
<http://unicef.org.np/uploads/files/389372788817342779-highlights-adap-final.pdf>
 surveyed in the mid and western regions practice some kind of restrictions 
during their periods, from staying home from school or temple to having tosleep 
outside <http://mosaicscience.com/story/blood-speaks>.

Menstruation affects educational access across much of the globe: more than 
20% of girls 
<http://www.unicef.org/wash/schools/files/WASH_in_Schools_Empowers_Girls_Education_Proceedings_of_Virtual_MHM_conference(2).pdf>
 in Sierra Leone miss school during their periods; in Nepal and Afghanistan 30% 
do. Almost a quarter ofIndian girls 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/70-cant-afford-sanitary-napkins-reveals-study/articleshow/7344998.cms>
 drop out of school when they start menstruating and the ones that remain miss 
on average five days a month.

For some girls, the problem is as basic as toilet access: only 45% of schools 
<http://www.unicef.org/wash/schools/files/WASH_in_Schools_Empowers_Girls_Education_Proceedings_of_Virtual_MHM_conference(2).pdf>
 in the least developed countries have them; in Nigeria there is one toilet for 
every 600 students. In other contextscultural stigma and the fear of leaks 
<http://www.washinschoolsmapping.com/projects/pdf/tanzania/Tanzania_Mhm.pdf>, 
lack of knowledge, orlack of menstrual materials 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/in-nairobi-slums-sex-for-sanitation-139382973/159607.html>
 force girls to stay home. In most places, it’s a combination these factors.

Compromised educations due to menstruation don’t only affect adolescent girls; 
it impacts the whole community. A woman’sfuture earnings grow 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099079934475/547667-1135281504040/Returns_Investment_Edu.pdf>
 with every extra year of primary education. When a girl receives education, 
she marries later, has fewer, healthier children and is less likely to 
experience sexual violence.

It’s not just the girls and women who benefit. Wider society and national 
economies can profit from better menstruation management. With every 1% 
increase in the proportion of women with secondary education, a country’sannual 
per capita income grows by 0.3%. 
<http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-5753> Closing the 
unemployment gap between adolescent girls and boys would result in an up to1.2% 
increase in GDP <http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-5753> 
in a year. Overall, education has a tremendous impact on girls’ health, safety 
and livelihoods.

Her Turn run workshops for girls to discuss the life-changing effects of 
education and the barriers that can get in the way. During the first week we 
cover health: sanitation, puberty, and menstrual hygiene. The second week of 
the workshop is dedicated to safety issues which, likechild marriage 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/100492/analysis-why-child-marriage-persists-in-nepal>
, forces girls out of school. They discusshuman trafficking 
<http://thediplomat.com/2014/02/women-and-girls-a-commodity-human-trafficking-in-nepal/>
, sexual abuse, and other forms of gender-based violence, laws, prevention and 
response mechanisms. During week three the girls work on team building, 
developing confidence and leadership skills. By the end of the fourth week they 
plan and implement a community project: from toilet repair, to classroom 
upgrades, to emergency pad supplies.

These projects have had real impacts. One principal told us he regretted not 
putting more effort into providing a safe environment for young girls going 
through puberty. He also admitted gaps in knowledge of other issues. “In my 24 
years, bullying, sexual harassment, and menstruation were never talked about 
formally with the students,” the principal said, now committed to openly 
addressing these issues in his school.


The results of the programme 
<http://www.her-turn.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Her-Turn-2013-Annual-Report.pdf>
 so far have been promising. In 2013, only 13% of girls we surveyed knew the 
legal age of marriage; after taking our program, 92% did. Knowledge of 
menstrual hygiene rose from 54% to 98%. And while before the workshop almost 
half of participants reported it was okay for a man to hit his wife, after, 97% 
thought it was unacceptable.

We also see knowledge transfer from participants to their friends and 
families. Parents report changing hygiene practices in their households. 
Mothers learn about menstrual health from their daughters. “I used to worry a 
lot about the quantity of blood I lost during my period,” one mother said. Her 
daughter showed her our Girls Guidebook, which explained normal blood loss. 
“She showed me that I had nothing to worry about.”

We also see many challenges. As with other practices, like child marriage or 
female genital mutilation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/17/mothers-grandmothers-fgm-child-marriage>
, it is often women who perpetuate menstrual restrictions. In some areas it is 
hard to find a woman who would not share the belief in menstrual “impurity”. 
When asked why she follows these rules, one trainer explained, “I don’t like 
community people talking about my family.” Adolescent girls also tell us it is 
the women in their communities who enforce these rules. “We don’t talk with men 
about these things,” a 14-year-old student explained.

Changing social norms is rarely fast or easy and menstrual practices are no 
exception. But girls like Sushila are changing them. Moving forward, we are 
planning workshops to involve boys. We recognise that just working with girls 
is not enough: to truly impact the gender dynamic, boys must be agents of 
change too. Only a fully holistic approach can rid communities of 
discriminatory social norms that turn a normal body function into a shameful 
secret.

Ola Perczynska is programme manager and Danielle Preiss social media 
coordinator atHer Turn <http://www.her-turn.org/>. Follow @HerTurnNepal 
<https://twitter.com/HerTurnNepal> on Twitter.

Read more stories like this:

• #HeForShe: how to engage men in the fight for gender equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/engaging-boys-men-gender-equality>

• What kind of men support FGM? An illustrated guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/01/what-kind-of-men-support-fgm-an-illustrated-guide>

• A bleeding shame: why is menstruation still holding girls back? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/28/menstruation-girls-education-uganda-sanitation>

• Advertisement feature: We need to talk about violence against girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/2014/oct/16/talk-about-violence-against-girls>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 



 