
I’m submerged in a heaving, sweaty mass of bodies, all singing, dancing, 
clapping along to the mesmeric crooning of Alemayehu Eshete – the man known as 
the Ethiopian Elvis. It’s Saturday night and I’m sharing limited oxygen with 
Addis Ababa’s great and good atMama’s Kitchen 
<https://www.facebook.com/MamasKitchenAddisAbaba>, a wood-and-glass bar on the 
fourth floor of an innocuous shopping mall near Bole airport. Eshete, a shining 
star of the 1960s Ethiopian music scene, conducts the revelry in local Amharic 
tones as his band deliver a hypnotic mix of funky jazz, rockabilly and the 
swinging scales of traditional Ethiopian folk. This isEthio-jazz 
<http://theculturetrip.com/africa/ethiopia/articles/ethio-jazz-the-amazing-story-of-ethiopian-jazz-from-london-to-addis/>
.

A fusion of the eerie rhythms of ancient Ethiopian tribal music with the 
soulful undertones of jazz and the funky bounce of Afrobeat, Ethio-jazz had its 
heyday in the 1950s and 60s but in recent years has been making a slow but 
unmistakable comeback in the country’s capital.

“There are kids now playing Ethio-Jazz. It’s really becoming big again,” music 
legendMulatu Astatke 
<https://www.facebook.com/Mulatu-Astatke-Official-Artist-Page-170786992977869/> 
tells me on the sidelines of a gig at his bar,African Jazz Village 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheAfricanJazzVillage>. “I have this radio programme; 
for seven years I have been pumping out Ethio-jazz, teaching the people what 
it’s all about, but it’s definitely catching on now.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb1b319fc5338f07b3fc45023dc467fcf8c863e9%2F0_427_6368_3820%2F6368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb1b319fc5338f07b3fc45023dc467fcf8c863e9%2F0_427_6368_3820%2F6368.jpg>
 Mulatu Astatke. Photograph: Alamy 
In the basement of Addis’s historic Ghion Hotel <http://www.ghionhotel.com.et/>
 (doubles from £60), African Jazz Village comprises a large, circular wooden 
room with a sunken dancefloor, and could easily be mistaken for a stylish jazz 
bar in a chic Chicago hotel. I encounter a very different kind of Ethio-jazz to 
that of Mama’s Kitchen. The band, Meleket, play soft, mellifluous free-form 
jazz peppered with the odd drum solo. It’s interspersed with the enchanting 
snake-charmer sounds of the Washint, a tribal flute, giving the music a 
mystical Arabian Nights feel.

That mysticism is reflected in the music’s heritage. Western-style instruments 
only came to Ethiopia in the 1920s, when Emperor Haile Selassieadopted a 
40-strong brass band of Armenian orphans 
<http://thearmenite.com/2014/10/company-emperors-story-ethiopian-armenians/> on 
a state visit to Jerusalem. The new palace band, and Selassie’s fondness for 
their music, helped popularise jazz across the country. In the mid-50s, local 
musicians such as Astatke, Mahmoud Ahmed and Gétatchew Mèkurya began fusing the 
western-influenced jazz with traditional Ethiopian folk music. And so the 
musical genre Ethio-jazz was born.

The genre, however, was all but extinguished under the 18-year reign of 
Ethiopia’s communist military junta, the Derg (1973-1991); with the dictator 
Mengistu Haile Mariam suspicious of the music’s free-form nature. However, 
after the Derg’s demise, Ethio-jazz experienced a slow comeback in the 90s. But 
with the helping hand of Astatke and other past masters, the revival has picked 
up pace in Addis Ababa since the start of the 21st century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb48c3da91372a3a3cc4428ec62ff12563387074%2F0_177_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb48c3da91372a3a3cc4428ec62ff12563387074%2F0_177_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
 A performance at Mama’s Kitchen. Photograph: Oliver Gordon 
Ethio-jazz is now played on the radio and taught at all the capital’s music 
colleges, and a new crop of musicians is beginning to flower as a result. 
“There are talented young musicians out there, such asGirum Gizaw 
<http://www.girumgizaw.com/> (from the aforementioned Meleket) and Samuel Yirga 
<http://samuelyirga.com/>, who are really coming up’,” says Astatke. “But 
they’re not just mimicking the old music, they’re evolving it into new 
directions.”

Other post-Derg exponents include Henock Temesgen’s Nubian Arc 
<https://www.facebook.com/debresina/>, the JAzmaris 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/JAzmarisMusic>, Girum Mezmur 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rdGWx2UjwLQ>’s Addis Acoustic Renaissance and 
Melaku Belay’sEthiocolor Band 
<https://www.facebook.com/EthiocolorTraditionalBand/>. They can all be found 
playing at the city’s favourite jazz haunts: the aforementioned Mama’s Kitchen 
and African Jazz Village, along with the grittierJazzamba 
<https://www.facebook.com/Jazzamba-Lounge-191762557543162>, Coffee House 
(opposite the Egyptian Embassy, Off Angola Stret, Sidist Kilo), Le Bateau Ivre 
(Dejamach Beyene Merid Street, Kazanchis) andFendika Azmari Bet 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/fendikazmaribet>.

A dark, dank jazz den attached to the Hotel Taitu playing gigs seven nights a 
week, Jazzamba is currently closed due to a fire last year but is expected to 
reopen later in 2016. Fortunately, Coffee House, one of Addis’s oldest jazz 
houses, recently reopened after a spell on the sidelines and hosts the 
capital’s top Ethio-jazz players on Thursday and Saturday nights. And if you 
like to get up close and personal with your jazz, Le Bateau Ivre is a laid-back 
but cramped tapas bar in the Kazanchis district that often has live concerts. 
Also in Kazanchis, Fendika is the prototypicalazmari 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azmari> bet (literally, House of the Musician) 
and hosts jazz and Ethiopian folk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178eacec9bb5a3fd1f689de01ef307571640c416%2F0_188_5141_3083%2F5141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178eacec9bb5a3fd1f689de01ef307571640c416%2F0_188_5141_3083%2F5141.jpg>
 Taitu Hotel, a good spot for trying Wat (stew). Photograph: Alamy 
Before hitting the town, it’s worth fuelling up on two of Ethiopia’s 
specialities: coffee and food. For the former, try Addis’s oldest and most 
venerated coffee house,Tomoca <http://www.tomocacoffee.com/> or, for a more 
folksy experience, any of the multitude of hole-in-the-wall coffee stalls 
around the city. For food, fill up on any of a variety of Wat (spiced stews) 
served on the much-reveredinjera (sourdough pancake) at the cheap and cheerful 
Taitu Hotel <http://taituhotel.com/>– Addis’s oldest, and the setting of Evelyn 
Waugh’s novel Scoop. Or, for the full gastronomic immersion, enjoy a 
spectacular dinner buffet and traditional tribal dancing performances for 
around £10-£15 a head atYod Abyssinia Cultural Restaurant 
<https://www.facebook.com/YOD-Abyssinia-Cultural-Restaurant-183666201707828/>.

If you are keen to get under the skin of Addis’s jazz scene, go to Fendika, 
the working man’s musical refuge. Wandering through a nondescript gate in the 
Kazanchis, you find yourself in a cavernous tavern, adorned with animal hides 
and resembling a vast bedouin tent. Most nights there are performances by 
azmaris (traditional musical satirists). But every other Saturday it is home to 
the Ethiocolor Band: a collective of musicians mixing experimental jazz with 
the unique sounds of Ethiopian tribal instruments such as the crar (Ethiopian 
lute) and Masinko (a sort of one-string violin) and accompanied by 
shoulder-gyrating Eskista dancers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c886d063b6980fa1c5ec98a9f15df9f40fb0b57%2F0_304_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Notes%20from%20Ethiopia%3A%20the%20jazz%20revival%20in%20Addis%20Ababa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fjazz-revival-addis-ababa-ethiopia-ethio-jazz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c886d063b6980fa1c5ec98a9f15df9f40fb0b57%2F0_304_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
 Coffee shop Tomoca. Photograph: Alamy 
“Famous jazz musicians from all over the world come to play at Fendika,” the 
bar’s owner and Ethiocolor’s orchestrator, Melaku Belay, tells me, reeling off 
an esoteric list of Norwegian saxophonists and Chicagoan drummers. But despite 
his optimism for the trajectory of Ethio-jazz in Addis, he confides he harbours 
concerns over the homogenising influence of western musical culture, and the 
precedent set by a recent spate of government-enforced closures of many of the 
city’s azmari bets to make way for new high-rise buildings.

Despite its recent revival, Ethio-jazz is still relatively underground in the 
city and has a way to go to match its past glories: sitting in one of the 
Addis’s Soviet-era Lada Sedan taxis, you’re more likely to hear Orthodox 
Amharic folk music; and frequenting one of the city’s high-end nightclubs, more 
likely to encounter the Ethiopian equivalent of Rihanna. Nonetheless, as I 
begrudgingly board my flight home, only to be met by the dulcet tones of Mulatu 
Astatke, I’m reminded – and convinced – of Belay’s parting words to me: 
“Ethio-jazz will never die.”

• For listings of Ethio-Jazz nights in Addis visit thisisaddis.com 
<http://www.thisisaddis.com/weeklyRoundUp.html>
 