
In a pretty limp week for mainstream DVD releases, two of the year’s most 
startling documentaries redeem the pile. The first,Notes on Blindness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MCWouLeXRsI> (Curzon Artificial Eye, U), bends 
the form most liberally, fusing archival material, performance and highly 
stylised cinematic trickery to movingly evoke the experience of sight loss. 
Taking a leaf from Clio Barnard’s similarly fluidThe Arbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/the-arbor-review>, directors 
James Spinney and Pete Middleton have enlisted actors to lip-synch to the audio 
testimonies ofthe late Australian theologian John Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/16/john-hull>, who began going 
blind in his mid-40s, and his family, accompanying their first-hand memories 
with a wealth of inventive imagery and sound design to convey the more abstract 
aspects of his condition.

Taking a less subversive but no less lyrical approach to documentary form is 
Zhao Liang’s staggeringBehemoth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kxmgCakyGH4> 
(New Wave, 15), which surveys both the vast mechanical spectacle and intimate 
human tragedy at work in a Mongolian coal mine. With calm but piercing 
scrutiny, Zhao’s camera gazes upon the damage wreaked by industrial labour on 
the landscape and the average worker’s visage alike; it’s a remarkable feat 
that sustains both the bigger and smaller picture to the end.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8GAMZqJqjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8GAMZqJqjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8GAMZqJqjs&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Boss. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8GAMZqJqjs> 
Neither film is one to seek out if you’re after a barrel of laughs. Alas, 
neither isThe Boss <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8GAMZqJqjs> (Universal, 
15), a cramped, one-gear vehicle for the tinderbox talents of Melissa McCarthy, 
whose mere presence accounts for more laughs than the script she co-wrote. As a 
nightmarish, swollen-egoed businesswoman with an attitude and a kind of 
power-wombat hairdo, she has created a brilliant sketch-comedy figure of fun, 
ill served by the film’s predictably redemptive trajectory. It might, in fact, 
be less funny thanGods of Egypt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0VDveYwbuU> 
(eOne, 12), a ludicrous sword-sandals-and-abdominals spectacle from the 
dwindling imagination of Alex Proyas, but that’s no endorsement.

Studiocanal’s run of notable direct-to-DVD releases continues with The Idol 
<http://www.studiocanal.co.uk/Film/Details/ceb43ae9-9794-4618-903c-a6a200c44725>
 (Studiocanal, PG), the sunniest and most crowd-pleasing feature to date from 
Palestinian film-maker Hany Abu-Assad (Paradise Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/apr/16/features.review7>, Omar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/omar>). A loose biopic of Mohammed Assaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/10/palestinian-pop-singer-mohammed-assaf>
, the Gazan refugee who eventually triumphed on the Arab edition ofPop Idol, 
the film weaves more textured social nuance into its potentially schmaltzy 
premise than you might expect, though its feelgood kick is irrepressible.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUO95ZPBtMDw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUO95ZPBtMDw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUO95ZPBtMDw&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Commune. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UO95ZPBtMDw>
Meanwhile, Thomas Vinterberg’s The Commune 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UO95ZPBtMDw> (Curzon Artificial Eye, 15), a 
tear-stained comedy of a couple-swapping, mixed-family household gone awry in 
the swinging 70s, never quite attains the bittersweet release it’s aiming for; 
there’s a little too much cruelty to its human contrivances.

I believed more in the outlandish character twists of Aloys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_g7qdHh2a2Q> (Eureka, 12A), a strange, 
affectingly melancholic tale of socially withdrawn detective led through the 
recesses of his own psyche by a mysterious anonymous caller, even if Tobias 
Nölle’s film feels like an over-expansion of an ingenious short. It’s not half 
as disorienting, however, asRemainder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4O4D3kgUzTw> (Soda, 15), artist Omer Fast’s 
dizzy, sporadically dazzling existential psycho-thriller adapted fromTom 
McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/01/tom-mccarthy-c-james-purdon>’s 
novel, which treads a fine line between intrigue and sheer inscrutability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4O4D3kgUzTw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4O4D3kgUzTw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4O4D3kgUzTw&media=>
Watch the trailer for Remainder. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4O4D3kgUzTw> 
Among the week’s classic rereleases, with Bowie nostalgia still in full 
mournful cry, you hardly need to be reminded of the merits of Nicolas Roeg’s 
still-pristine, still-unsettling sci-fiThe Man Who Fell to Earth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1rZ8OHRVwmM> (Studiocanal, 18), though a new 
40th-anniversary restoration drives them home. But you might not previously 
have heard ofOdds Against Tomorrow 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2b6b1d7390> (BFI, 12), a tight, 
terse, politically loaded 1959 noir led by Harry Belafonte. It’s been 
deservedly dusted off for the BFI’s diversity-focusedBlack Star season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/13/bfi-black-star-uk-season-celebrating-black-cinema>
, along with the jagged, jangly, New Wave-influenced jazz rambleParis Blues 
<http://shop.bfi.org.uk/seasons/black-star/paris-blues.html#.WAerPjaU1dA> (BFI, 
12), memorably pairing Sidney Poitier with Paul Newman.

Finally, for discerning film lovers who missed out on the recent London film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>, Mubi.com is 
streaming some of the programme’slower-key highlights 
<https://mubi.com/specials/lff>. I’m particularly glad to see Further Beyond 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGoIVCERHOU>, the first documentary from the 
reliably fascinating Irish duo Christine Molloy and Joe Lawlor (Mister John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/29/mister-john-review-aidan-gillen>
), among its picks. Having long harboured ambitions of making a biopic of 
18th-century Irish adventurer Ambrosio O’Higgins, the film-makers arrived 
instead at this, a wittily sidelong, distraction-riddled look at their own 
tangled research process, tracing their subject’s steps from Eire to Chile 
while musing more discursively on the nature of immigration and identity. The 
biopic couldn’t have been as interesting.
 