
When turkey farmer Bernard Matthews died in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/26/bernard-matthews-obituary>, 
the company bearing his name was in a bad way. The avian flu of 2007 led to a 
cull of turkeys and undermined confidence in the business. Despite the best 
efforts of advertisers, turkey meat had failed to displace the popularity of 
chicken and pork. In 2013 the Matthews family secured £25m in investment from 
private equity firm Rutland Partners, and gave up control of Bernard Matthews 
Limited. The new controllers hoped to revive the business; but that is not how 
it turned out and they were soonlooking for buyers 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/11610426/Bernard-Matthews-in-fresh-search-for-funds-as-turnaround-battle-rages-on.html>
.

In July this year the company’s German subsidiary was sold for £11.9m, but its 
fortunes continued to decline and accountancy firm Deloitte was hired as an 
adviser. The course of action chosen by the directors – a “pre-pack” 
administration – is controversial because of the secrecy involved, and because 
buyers can cherry-pick assets while dumping liabilities. Today I deliveredmy 
report on this arrangement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/news-parliament-2015/pre-pack-bernard-matthews-briefing-16-17/>
to the work and pensions committee.

Once again, pensioners find themselves at the back of the queue when things go 
wrong

In September Deloitte was appointed administrator, and on the same day the 
assets of the business – which included farms, land and buildings – were sold 
for £87.5m to two property companies in the Boparan Private Office, a private 
investment vehicle. This was good news for employees as most of the 2,000 jobs 
were saved, at least for the time being, and for secured creditors Wells Fargo 
and PNC Financial Services, who are set to be paid £46.6m. Rutland has already 
received £34m. But the big losers here,as at BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/sir-philip-green-i-am-working-every-day-on-the-bhs-pension-crisis>
, are the pensioners and the unsecured creditors.

The Bernard Matthews <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bernard-matthews> 
pension scheme had a deficit of £17.5m, rising to £20m, but is unlikely to 
receive anything. Unsecured creditors, who between them are owed £39m 
(including more than £1m owed to HMRC), will be lucky to receive 1p in the 
pound, which is likely to have a devastating effect on the local economy in 
Norfolk and Suffolk.

Deloitte has charged a fee of £790,000 and its advisers have run up another 
£668,000. Meanwhile, pension scheme members and trustees can do little to 
challenge this outcome. Administrators generally do not owe a “duty of care” to 
all parties.

The poor state of UK regulation is captured by a letter from the pensions 
regulator to the work and pension committee last month. The letter notes that 
there is no compulsion to inform the regulator when such a deal is made. The 
Bernard Matthews pension scheme may eventually be rescued by the Pension 
Protection Fund (PPF), but employees may not be entitled to 100% of their 
accrued pensions. We are still waiting to learn how much of BHS’s £700m pension 
scheme liability is to be absorbed by the PPF.

So once again, pensioners find themselves at the back of the queue when things 
go wrong, as shareholders’ interests are prioritised over theirs. Despite 
reporting pension scheme deficits ofnearly £710bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/01/uk-defined-benefit-pension-fund-deficit-grows-100bn-one-month-pwc>
, companies do not prioritise deficit reduction.One recent study  
<https://www.ajbell.co.uk/news/ftse-100-companies-pension-deficits-paid-out-%C2%A348-billion-dividends>
notes that over the past two years, FTSE100 companies paid at least £48bn in 
annual dividends while leaving £52bn in pension scheme deficits. Another study 
noted that FTSE100 directors paid £13.3bn to reduce their pension scheme 
deficits, compared with £71.8bn in payments to shareholders.

Bernard Matthews pension pot to receive just 1p in the pound
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/bernard-matthews-pension-pot-to-receive-just-1p-in-the-pound>
The following steps would help stamp out such practices. All large companies – 
say with more than 500 employees – should have significant employee 
representation on their boards. These representatives could be expected to 
stand up for the rights of employees. Second, no company should be able to pay 
dividends without a plan to reduce pension scheme deficit. Third, for companies 
in administration or liquidation, the pension scheme should be a priority 
creditor. Fourth, the regulator’s permission should be needed before any sale 
can go ahead.

The dumping of pension liabilities is a public matter. Sales and agreements 
like this one, affecting thousands of lives, should not remain confidential. 
This is not to say that openness is a panacea. The problems of corporate 
governance and capitalism more widely are deep-rooted. But some new rules and a 
greater degree of transparency could help prevent companies from playing fast 
and loose with pension liabilities.
 