
The New South Wales Electoral Commission has stood firm on its decision to 
withhold public campaign funding for the NSW branch of the Liberal party, 
despite the Coalition frontbencherArthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> threatening it 
with legal action.

Last week Sinodinos’s lawyers wrote to the commission expressing concern that 
documents it had published advising of its decision to withhold funds implied 
that Sinodinos had engaged in wrongdoing.

Arthur Sinodinos threatens legal action against NSW Electoral Commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/arthur-sinodinos-threatens-legal-action-against-nsw-electoral-commission>
In 2011, just after the NSW state election, Sinodinos was the branch’s 
treasurer. He now holds the senior position of cabinet secretary in the federal 
government.

The commission alleged the party’s fundraising body, the Free Enterprise 
Foundation, was used tofunnel $680,000 in prohibited donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/nsw-electoral-commission-withholds-44m-from-liberals-over-donations-scandal>
. The branch had refused to disclose all political donations made to the 
foundation so the commission withheld $4.4m in public campaign funding.

On Thursday the commission responded to Sinodinos’s lawyers 
<http://www.elections.nsw.gov.au/about_us/work_of_the_commission/statements_issued_by_the_chair_of_the_commission>
 saying it would not reconsider the decision to withhold the money, and would 
not retract the statement in which the decision was published.

Sinodinos has steadfastly rejected any suggestion that he knew prohibited 
donors were putting money towards the NSW state election.

He acknowledged that the list of donors to the Free Enterprise Foundation 
included property developers – who have been banned from making donations in 
NSW since 2009 – but insisted he did not know they were putting money towards 
state elections.

Arthur Sinodinos under attack over NSW Liberals' donations scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/25/arthur-sinodinos-under-attack-over-nsw-liberals-donations-scandal>
“That was the universe of potential donors,” he told ABC Radio on Thursday.

“While it was illegal for prohibited donors like property developers and other 
donors under NSW legislation to make money available to state campaigns, they 
could still – if they were a property developer or whatever at that stage – 
provide money for federal campaigns, which some did in 2010, for example.”

He said he had been careful to follow the law on donations.

“No one would be approached where this would involve breaking the law, and 
that was the clear premise on which the whole of our activities were pursued,” 
Sinodinos said.

“I wasn’t asked to solicit donors from prohibited donors. None of our people 
who were on the committee were asked to do that. I was not aware of any scheme 
whereby we went to prohibited donors to ask them for money via the Free 
Enterprise Foundation.”

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, urged the NSW 
branch to release the list of donors to the commission.

On Thursday the Australian newspaper released a list of the 73 individuals and 
companies 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/revealed-the-angry-donors-in-nsw-liberals-scandal/news-story/a71dcd2e30a7accf4f6797a705836a20>
 that had donated through the Free Enterprise Foundation. The list includes a 
number of property developers, many of whom denied they provided money for the 
NSW state election in 2011, saying it was intended for the federal party.

 