
Efforts to appoint more women to the boards of Britain’s biggest companies 
have stalled, while men still exert a tight grip on key decision-making 
positions, new data has revealed.

Less than a quarter of FTSE 100 boardroom recruits in the six months to March 
2016 were women, the lowest level since 2011, according to theFemale FTSE Board 
Report 
<file:/Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/Female%20FTSE%20Board%20Report%202016.pdf>
.

The minister for women and equalities, Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, said the figures showed 
that “momentum has not kept pace”, adding that it was time to “call out those 
sections of the business community who aren’t doing their bit”.

The report charts the progress of the government’s efforts to address the 
gender divide in British business.

In 2011 Mervyn Davies, a former trade minister, asked FTSE 100 businesses to 
ensure that 25% of directors were women. Lord Davies has since extended the 
voluntary challenge to all firms in the FTSE 350 and called on them toreach a 
target of 33% by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/a-third-of-boardroom-positions-should-be-held-by-women-uk-firms-told>
.

But while blue-chip FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 
companies reached a level of 26% in October – up from 23.5% in March 2015 – the 
proportion has not increased since then.

Meanwhile FTSE 350 companies remain a long way from Davies’ target, staying at 
just 22%, and female representation dwindles significantly among the most 
influential executive positions.

Fewer than 10% of the three most senior positions at FTSE 100 firms were held 
by women, the report says, compared to nearly a third of less powerful 
non-executive roles.

“There are still more [people] called John chairing FTSE 100 boards than there 
are women,” said Morgan.

The report also reveals that 15 firms of Britain’s top 350 still have no women 
on their boards at all. These companiesinclude the Egypt-focused mining firm 
Centamin, the interdealer brokerage Icap, the gambling firm Playtech, the 
building materials group Grafton, and Hastings Insurance.

Lucy Neville-Rolfe, a minister in the department for business, who has been on 
the boards of firms such as ITV and Tesco, called on male dominated firms to 
mend their ways. “Making sure there’s at least one woman on every 350 board is 
an extremely good idea,” said Lady Neville-Rolfe. “Knowing who those 15 
companies are is helpful. I’ve got the list and if they want to talk to me, of 
course they can.”

This year’s report also marks the moment when Davies hands over responsibility 
for the review to the team of Sir Philip Hampton, chair of GlaxoSmithKline, and 
Dame Helen Alexander, chair of the events group UBM.


Hampton has promised to focus on addressing the balance of executives, saying 
the overall increase in female board members over the past few years was 
largely a non-executive phenomenon. “We still have tiny numbers of women in 
senior executive positions in listed companies,” said Hampton, who has also 
served as chair of the Royal Bank of Scotland.

Fewer than 10% of the top three executives at any one UK company are women, 
the report reveals, while three firms have no women in executive jobs at all.

The trio with an all-male executive committee are Shell, the defence firm 
Babcock, and Provident Financial.

While Davies set a target of 25% women on FTSE 350 boards, Hampton and 
Alexander will oversee efforts to reach a more stretching target of 33% by 2020.

Hampton said he and Alexander were considering setting a new target for the 
executive pipeline of each company – the talent pool of staff thought destined 
for the top jobs.

Among FTSE 100 companies Diageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo>, 
the owner of Guinness, had the largest proportion of women on its board, with 
five of 11 boardroom seats at the drinks company occupied by women. The Chilean 
copper miner Antofagasta came in last place, with only one woman in 11.

The Female FTSE Board Report was written by academics from Cranfield School of 
Management, and sponsored by KPMG.

•This article was amended on Friday 8 July. The Female FTSE Board Report 
wrongly claimed that RSA Insurance had no woman executives.
 