
NWA

We said: “Their angry lyrics were politicised but in a new kind of nihilistic, 
apoliticised, unaligned way, gatecrashing the white world of success.”Straight 
Outta Compton movie review, 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/straight-outta-compton-review-how-hip-hop-pioneers-nwa-took-on-the-world>

George Osborne said <http://www.nme.com/news/dr-dre/88834>: “It was an amazing 
concert. These were the angriest young band from America … ”

Our verdict: Nice try George. You might have deliberately picked NWA as an 
example of your eclectic tastes, but this isn’t nearly as impressive as it 
sounds. You’re discussing a group ofbillionaire tech magnates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/28/apple-buys-beats-dr-dre-music-streaming>
 andCoors Light <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VPZiOo2LH24> spokespeople. You 
can’t ruin NWA for us. NWA already ruined NWA for us.

The War on Drugs

We said: “On the thrilling An Ocean in Between the Waves, [Adam Granduciel’s] 
hoarse, Springsteen-like vocal jags red-raw in the song’s luminescent glow.”
Live review, 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/03/the-war-on-drugs-review-triumphant-heartbreak-music>

David Cameron said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/27/david-cameron-backs-the-war-on-drugs>
:“Samantha got me listening to a new thing called The War On Drugs. I can 
recommend it. They’re a band, you can find them on Spotify or iTunes – anyway, 
they’re good.”

Our verdict: It’s not so much that Dave likes the War on Drugs – the admission 
was made during the election campaign, when he would have professed an affinity 
for torching catteries if it got him an extra vote – more that he felt obliged 
to explain how to listen to their music. Embarrassing.

Nadiya Hussain

We said: “Nadiya’s popularity has demonstrated how the vast majority of people 
in Britain embrace diversity and inclusivity, and are certainly not going to 
dismiss her based on religion, race or attire.”Comment, 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/nadiya-hussain-has-won-so-much-more-than-the-great-british-bake-off>

David Cameron said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/07/nadiya-jamir-hussain-great-british-bake-off-favourite>
: “She is so cool under pressure.”

Our verdict: There isn’t a chance in the universe that David Cameron watched 
enough of The Great British Bake Off to pick a favourite. At least during his
Fruit Ninja 
<http://politicalscrapbook.net/2012/05/david-cameron-ipad-fruit-ninja-game/> 
phase he could still actually attend meetings, but if he really set aside an 
hour a week to watch Mary Berry eat biscuits, we’d all be dead by now. Besides, 
everyone knows that Tamal was the connoisseur’s choice.

Strictly Come Dancing

We said: “Ballroom dancing is an aesthetic pursuit, an art form that has been 
turned into a competition, the result of which is that everything is done to 
attract the attention of the judges. The competitors must try to fit within a 
set of rules and so a tawdry, flashy, kitsch aesthetic takes over”.Comment, 2014
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/29/alexei-sayle-marxist-demolition-of-strictly-come-dancing>

Culture secretary John Whittingdale said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-33584893>: “Strictly was perhaps, 
at first sight of the commissioning editor, not necessarily a show which was 
going to be as successful as it has proved to be.”

Our verdict: Two quotes by two different yet equally lofty establishments, 
neither of which can quite bring themselves to say that Strictly Come Dancing 
is any good. And it isn’t. It’s rubbish. You can’t ruin something that’s 
already ruined, guys.

Breaking Bad

We said: “This little-known show, two seasons old and already a surprise 
Emmy-winner, might well be the finest thing you haven’t seen.”TV review, 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/aug/21/breaking-bad>

Boris Johnson said 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/why-on-earth-cant-the-bbc-produce-a-show-as-brilliant-as-breaking-bad-asks-boris-johnson-is-that-why-10392776.html>
: “Why on earth can’t the BBC produce a show as brilliant as Breaking Bad?”

Our verdict: Johnson might have been using Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> to beat the BBC, but 
the Guardian review rightly points out that nobody actually watched the thing 
for years. He is either saying that more failing TV shows should be kept on 
air, or suggesting he’s an insufferable box set hipster. Either way, something 
feels tainted.

Finding Nemo

We said: “Finding Nemo is set in a vivid, surreal secret world. As ever, there 
are wacky creatures of all shapes and sizes: a ragtag platoon of amiable 
attitudes and comedy voices. This time they’re fish.”Movie review, 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1054234,00.html>

Education secretary Nicky Morgan said 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/11916926/24-quirky-things-that-happened-at-the-Conservative-conference.html>
:“It’s my children’s favourite film.”

Our verdict: Admittedly Morgan only said this because her nickname – NiMo – 
sounds like the film’s titular character, but still. Imagine her sitting down 
to watch Finding Nemo with a notepad on her lap reading “Destroy all state 
schools”. Takes the shine off a bit, doesn’t it?

 Supertramp

We said: “The only possible reason [Jeremy] Clarkson can have had for choosing 
[Supertramp LPCrime of the Century 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crime_of_the_Century_(album)>] in the first 
place was to pick a fight.”TV review of Danny Baker’s Great Album Showdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/feb/06/danny-baker-great-album-showdown-review>
, 2013

David Cameron’s university chum James Delingpole said: “It sounds especially 
good when you’re stoned – or so Dave, our friend James and I decided one 
afternoon in my rooms above Peckwater Quad, where we’d gathered for a smoke and 
a nostalgic listen.”

Our verdict: Of all the awful rumours spread about David Cameron this year, 
the insinuation that he in any way enjoyed the music of Supertramp was the most 
egregious. Cameron himself hasn’t confirmed himself as a fan. This is probably 
for the best. The country would probably never recover.
 