
The chief executive of O2 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/o2> has said 
the company is “prepared but not committed” to a £10bn initial public offering 
(IPO), citing issues including the state of the UK economy, which has been 
weakened by fears of the impact of Brexit.

Mobile bill shock for O2 customers holidaying in Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/mobile-bill-shock-o2-customers-europe-travel-bolt-on>
Mark Evans, chief executive of O2’s Spanish owner, Telefonica, said the widely 
touted possibility of an IPO of the UK mobile company next year hung on the 
performance of the economy. “An IPO is a real and distinct opportunity for this 
business,” said Evans, in a briefing before the company’s third-quarter 
results, which were due to be released on Thursday.

“It is being prepared for, as opposed to committed to. I’ll draw that very 
clear distinction. What you’ve seen over the course of the last six to eight 
weeks is the market going into some flux. Softening.”

Evans said that O2, which had a merger with its competitor Three UK thwarted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/11/three-takeover-of-o2-blocked-by-european-commission-on-competition-concerns>
 by competition regulators, had been hit by issues including the severe 
weakening of the pounddue to fears about Brexit.

“Currency conversion certainly hasn’t helped us from an exchange rate 
perspective,” he said. “We will continue to prepare. Banks, analysts and 
advisers have been enthused by our performance.”

O2, which has a deal to provide the network for Sky’s imminent launch of a 
mobile service, said that it added 232,000 customers to 25.4 million in the 
three months until the end of September.

The company said that it was not concerned by convergence in the market, such 
as AT&T buying Time Warner.

Evans said that O2’s strategy, producing low customer churn, proved that in 
the UK it was not necessary to own content companies and offer packages 
including TV and landline.

He said that an IPO was an option Telefonica was looking at in order to lower 
its debt, which stood at about €50bn, or three times its earnings before 
interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation. “We are not committing to a 
timeline [for an IPO],” he said. “We just need to be ready if the market 
conditions are right. There will be a judgment at that stage. Be ready, be 
prepared. It is one of many options the group will look at in terms of its 
indebtedness.

“We’ll decide in 2017 if it’s right to move ahead with an IPO. Market 
conditions will undoubtedly have a part to play. It won’t be the only 
assessment.”
 