
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> suggested how 
he might reform so-called Obamacare if he were to remain in office: decidedly 
to the left of Republican proposals.

The president suggested he would give people more financial aid to offset the 
cost of health insurance and create apublic option 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/us-doctors-calling-universal-healthcare-system-affordable-care-act>
 where insurance in the commercial health insurance market competition is 
scarce.

Both proposals are far from the market-based solutions past Republican 
healthcare reforms have suggested, such as capping spending on health programs 
for the elderly and poor.

“Healthcare’s not cheap,” Obama said in an interview with Vox broadcast online 
on Friday. “All the promises they made about they can do it better, cheaper, 
are going to be really hard to meet.”

Obama called Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
strategy to repeal then replace the law after a two-to-four year “transition 
period” a “disservice to the American people”.

“I am saying to every Republican right now, if you in fact can put together a 
plan right now that is demonstrably better than what Obamacare is doing,” Obama 
said, “I will publicly support repealing Obamacare and replacing it with your 
plan.”

The Republicans who are not totally enthusiastic about repealing Obamacare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
Since returning to Congress, Republicans have made repealing the president’s 
signature health law a top priority, seeking to fulfill the “repeal and 
replace” promise President-elect Donald Trump and others campaigned on for 
years.

Obama’s suggestions fall far to the left of what many past Republicans have 
proposed in the past. Conservative proposals tend to includetax preferred 
savings 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/06/22/republicans-have-a-plan-to-replace-obamacare-and-its-costs-are-unclear/?utm_term=.fcbb131ad237>
 accounts andcaps on government healthcare spending 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/05/opinion/the-health-care-plan-trump-voters-really-want.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0&mtrref=undefined&assetType=opinion&gwh=44D38C16312135F2F1D8F4AC055A6391&gwt=pay>
 while maintaining more popular Obamacare provisions such as a ban on insurance 
companies disqualifying people with pre-existing illnesses.

The relatively friendly interview came the same day as an opinion piece by the 
president was published by theNew England Journal of Medicine 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1616577?query=featured_home> and a 
national survey by the health research nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation. The 
op-ed called on Republicans to replace the law at the same time as repeal. The 
survey foundjust 20% of Americans 
<http://kff.org/health-costs/poll-finding/kaiser-health-tracking-poll-health-care-priorities-for-2017/?utm_campaign=KFF-2017-January-Priorities-Tracking-Poll&utm_source=hs_email&utm_medium=email&utm_content=40166809&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-9zn4OZhblUx-xpgsER0wwg3jnSB0fR8rMIa_y6WkUDOBmDPI80gFvewk6Lhw-UiEOfm_Sbkgb9UNhly4TQTpd2WmtTCUzZ2ksYulGAWG7ubJ2OhFw&_hsmi=40166809>
 want Republicans to repeal the law immediately without working out a 
replacement solution.

Some Republicans also expressed doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
 this week about the “repeal and delay” strategy championed by congressional 
leadership.

That strategy would have Republicans immediately do away with parts of 
Obamacare that impact taxes and spending, such as the tax penalty imposed on 
people who don’t buy insurance, while keeping popular parts of the law, such as 
a provision that allows children to stay on their parents insurance until they 
are 26.

More than 90% of Americans have health insurance since the implementation of 
Obamacare, the highest proportion ever. Growth in healthcare spending has also 
slowed compared to years before Obamacare.

However, state exchanges set up by the law have also suffered, as insurers 
have pulled out following Republicans’ refusal to fund subsidies to insurance 
companies. Further, for some in states where Republican governors refused to 
expand public health insurance programs for the poor, some are still unable to 
afford insurance.
 