
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has commuted 
the sentence of Oscar López Rivera, a victory for the Puerto Rican independence 
activist who is considered to be one of the world’s longest-serving political 
prisoners.

In his final days in office, Obama has issued a record number of pardons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/barack-obama-commutes-sentences-presidential-pardons>
 and commutations, including granting therelease of Chelsea Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
 on Tuesday, the US army soldier who became one of the most famous 
whistleblowers in modern times.

Related: 'I'm no threat' – will Obama pardon one of the world's 
longest-serving political prisoners? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/obama-pardon-mandela-puerto-rico-oscar-lopez-rivera->

López Rivera, whose commutation was announced on Tuesday along with those of 
208 others, has been incarcerated for 35 years for his role in fighting for 
Puerto Rico’s independence.

The 74-year-old, who has spent more than half of his life behind bars, was 
convicted of “seditious conspiracy” for plotting against the US. The US 
government had also classified him as a terrorist.


If Obama had not intervened, he would have remained in captivity until 26 June 
2023, five months after his 80th birthday.

Jan Susler, López Rivera’s lawyer, said the prisoner’s release is a huge win 
in the ongoing fight for Puerto Rican independence, adding that she was 
grateful that Obama understood “there wasn’t any legitimate reason to keep 
Oscar in prison.


“We have to celebrate every victory,” she said. “We have a lot of work left to 
do, and now Oscar will be able to join us, and we can work side by side.”

Susler broke the news to López Rivera.

“He said, ‘Can you imagine a better birthday present for my daughter?’” Susler 
told the Guardian by phone, adding: “He’s a very centered, peaceful human 
being, and that’s how he received the news.”

In a recent interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/obama-pardon-mandela-puerto-rico-oscar-lopez-rivera->
, he said he still believes in what he described as the “noble cause” of full 
sovereignty for his Caribbean birthplace, which is classified as a US 
“territory”.

López Rivera was born in 1943 in San Sebastián in Puerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/puerto-rico>, where he lived until his 
family moved to Chicago when he was 14 years old. He was later drafted to serve 
in the Vietnam war, and when he returned he became deeply involved in community 
activism among Puerto Ricans in Chicago.

López Rivera eventually became a member of a clandestine group called Fuerzas 
Armadas de Liberación Nacional <https://www.britannica.com/topic/FALN>, which 
argued that armed force was a justified tactic in the fight for Puerto Rican 
independence.

US prosecutors accused the group of carrying out 140 bombings on military 
bases, government offices and financial buildings, but López Rivera has 
repeatedly denied involvement with fatal attacks.

The prisoner has repeatedly insisted that he was focused on actions that did 
not endanger people’s lives.

“For me, human life is sacred. We called it ‘armed propaganda’ – using targets 
to draw attention to our struggle,” he told the Guardian last year.
 Protesters call for the release of Oscar López Rivera in October outside the 
White House. Photograph: Manuel Balce Ceneta/Associated Press 
The group was dismantled in 1983, and López Rivera and his fellow Puerto Rican 
independence fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/cuba-us-thaw-fugitives-william-morales>
 eventually renounced violence and embraced peaceful reform tactics.

Asked about his decision to publicly renounce force, he said: “We realised 
other tactics to armed force could be more effective, mobilising people through 
peaceful campaigning. Morally, also, we came to see that we had to lead by 
example, that if we are advocating for a better world then there are things you 
cannot do. You cannot get a better world by being unjust yourself.”

In August of 1999, Bill Clinton used his final days in office to grant a 
pardon to 11 Puerto Rican independence fighters 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/campaigns/keyraces2000/stories/faln091199.htm>
. López Rivera was offered a lesser deal that would have resulted in early 
release after a decade, but he turned it down because he said he did not 
believe the US government would stick to its side of the bargain, and he was 
upset offers were not made to fellow fighters.

“When I was in Vietnam I never left anyone behind. That’s not my practice, I 
couldn’t do it,” he told the Guardian last year.

Many prominent figures have aggressively lobbied for López Rivera’s pardon, 
including Archbishop Desmond Tutu; the governor of Puerto Rico, Alejandro 
García Padilla; the Hispanic caucus of the US Congress; former US president 
Jimmy Carter; former Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders; and 
Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator of the smash Broadway musical Hamilton

Miranda brought widespread attention to López Rivera’s case after confronting 
<http://www.elnuevodia.com/Interstitial/?oasSitePage=elnuevodia.com/interstitial&oasReturnPage=http://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/politica/nota/obamaatiendepedidodelinmanuelsobreoscarlopez-2175040/>
 Obama during a White House visit.

“Sobbing with gratitude,” the performer tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/821470034472136708> on Tuesday. “OSCAR 
LOPEZ RIVERA IS COMING HOME.” Miranda alsoannounced 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/entertainment/theater/ct-oscar-lopez-rivera-commutation-lin-manuel-miranda-20170117-story.html>
 that he would play the role of Alexander Hamilton for a performance for López 
Rivera in the Chicago production.

Some have compared López Rivera to Nelson Mandela, labeling him the “Mandela 
of Puerto Rico”.

The commutation could have implications beyond López Rivera. The Venezuelan 
president, Nicolás Maduro, said last year he wouldseek the release of the 
jailed opposition leader Leopoldo López 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-prisoners-idUSKBN0KD0PQ20150104> 
if the US agreed to release López Rivera.

US congressman Luis Gutiérrez celebrated Obama’s decision on Tuesday, saying 
in a statement, “I am overjoyed and overwhelmed with emotion. Oscar is a 
friend, a mentor, and family to me … The long fight against colonialism in the 
Caribbean has had many chapters and we have all put violence behind us. 
Releasing Oscar López Rivera back to his homeland and his people is a step 
towards peace and reconciliation and is being celebrated by Puerto Ricans of 
all political stripes, classes, colors and geographies.”

Obama has commuted the sentences of 1,385 individuals, more than any other US 
president. On a call with reporters, a White House official said more 
commutations are expected “most likely on Thursday”.


 