
The White House has announced that it will not send an official delegation to 
Fidel Castro’s memorial service in Havana but that the US will be represented 
by a senior presidential aide and the top US diplomat inCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>.

The decision represents a compromise, sending representation to maintain the 
US-Cuba thawBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
began nearly two years ago while downgrading its status to satisfy critics who 
argue the administration has not properly held Cuba to account for human rights 
abuses.

Obama was broadly assailed by Republicans and Democrats for a statement on 
Castro’s death on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-obama-trump-response>
 that made no mention of the brutal aspects of his regime. The White House has 
been on the defensive over the issue, wary that it is one of many flagship 
Obama policies that Donald Trump isthreatening to overturn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>
 on taking office.

Donald Trump threatens to freeze US-Cuba thaw days after Castro's death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>
The White House spokesman, Josh Earnest, said the US officials attending 
memorial ceremonies on Tuesday evening would not constitute a formal 
presidential delegation, as is normal for the funeral of a head of state. 
Instead, the country would be represented by the top diplomat already on the 
island, chargé d’affaires Jeffrey DeLaurentis, and deputy national security 
adviser Ben Rhodes, who – Earnest stressed – was going to be in Cuba this week 
anyway.

“Much of the US diplomatic relationship with Cuba is quite complicated,” 
Earnest said, adding that past bilateral ties “were characterized by a lot of 
conflict and turmoil, not just during the Castro regime, but we continue to 
have some significant concerns about how the Cuban government currently 
operates particularly with regard to protecting the basic human rights of the 
Cuban people.”

The United States only restored full diplomatic contacts with Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/20/cuba-embassy-washington-flag> in 
July last year. The newly reopened US embassy in Havana is one of the few 
diplomatic missions whose flag is not at half-staff as a mark of respect for 
Castro’s death.

“We believe this an appropriate way for the US to show our commitment to an 
ongoing future-oriented relationship with the Cuban people, and this was an 
appropriate way to show respect to participate in the events that are planned 
for this evening while also acknowledging some of the differences that remain 
between our two countries,” Earnest said.

“Mr Rhodes has played a leading role in crafting the normalization policy that 
President Obama announced about two years ago. He has been the principal 
interlocutor with the Cuban government from the White House in crafting this 
policy and implementing it successfully,” the spokesman said.

“He was actually already planning to travel to Cuba this week so in addition 
to the meetings he already has on his schedule with Cuban government and 
officials at the US embassy, he will be attending the memorial this evening.”

Other world leaders including Vladimir Putin and Theresa May have announced 
that they will not be attending the funeral, as diplomatic services attempt to 
calibrate an appropriate response to the death of a man lionized as a hero by 
some and reviled as a dictator by others.

On Monday, the office of Justin Trudeau said that he would not attend the 
ceremony – even though Castro was an honorary pallbearer at the funeral of 
Trudeau’s father, Pierre Trudeau. The Canadian prime ministerprompted fierce 
criticism for fondly remembering Castro in remarks after his death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/justin-trudeau-fidel-castro-trudeaueulogies>
.

But many leaders of Latin America’s left, including the Venezuelan president, 
Nicolás Maduro, and Bolivian president, Evo Morales, have arrived to attend the 
ceremony, due to start at 7pm in Revolution Square, the same space where Castro 
once delivered rousing, marathon speeches.

 Among African leaders will be Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe and the South African 
president, Jacob Zuma. The late Nelson Mandela repeatedly thanked Castro for 
his efforts in helping overturn apartheid in South Africa.

 Mugabe, 92, himself a former Marxist guerrilla who has led Zimbabwe as prime 
minister or president since 1980 despite financial and health crises, praised 
Castro’s government for having trained thousands of Zimbabwean doctors and 
teachers.

 “Fidel was not just your leader. He was our leader and the leader of all 
revolutionaries. We followed him, listened to him and tried to emulate him,” 
Mugabe told reporters as he arrived in Havana, “Farewell, dear brother. 
Farewell, revolutionary,” he said.
 