
President Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> is 
ending a longstanding immigration policy that allows any Cuban who makes it to 
US soil to stay and become a legal resident, a senior administration official 
said Thursday.

The repeal of the “wet foot, dry foot” policy is effective immediately, 
according the official. The decision follows months of negotiations focused in 
part on gettingCuba  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>to agree to take 
back people who had arrived in the US.

The US and Cuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> planned to issue a 
joint statement later Thursday. The official insisted on anonymity in order to 
detail the change ahead of the announcement.

The official said the Cubans gave no assurances about treatment of those sent 
back to the country, but said political asylum remains an option for those 
concerned about persecution if they return.

Related: Cubans risking their lives en route to US as thaw triggers 
immigration policy fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/10/cuban-migrant-fears-us-immigration-policy>

Obama is using an administrative rule change to end the policy. Donald Trump 
could undo that rule after becoming president next week. He has criticized 
Obama’s moves to improve relations with Cuba. But ending a policy that has 
allowed hundreds of thousands of people to come to the US without a visa also 
aligns with Trump’s commitment to tough immigration policies.

The “wet foot, dry foot” policy was put in place in 1995 by Bill Clinton as a 
revision of a more liberal immigration policy. Until then, Cubans caught at sea 
trying to make their way to the US were allowed into the country and were able 
to become legal residents after a year. The US was reluctant to send people 
back to the communist island then run by Fidel Castro, and the Cuban government 
also generally refused to accept repatriated citizens.

The Cuban government has in the past complained bitterly about the special 
immigration privileges, saying theyencourage Cubans to risk dangerous escape 
trips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/cuban-migrants-stranded-colombia-panama-human-trafficking>
 and drain the country of professionals. But it has also served as a release 
valve for the single-party state, allowing the most dissatisfied Cubans to seek 
better lives outside and become sources of financial support for relatives on 
the island.

Relations between the US and Cuba were stuck in a cold war freeze for decades, 
but Obama and Cuban president Raúl Castro established full diplomatic ties and 
opened embassies in their capitals in 2015. Obama visited Havana last March.

US and Cuban officials were meeting Thursday in Washington to coordinate 
efforts to fight human trafficking. A decades-old US economic embargo, though, 
remains in place as does the Cuban Adjustment Act which lets Cubans become 
permanent residents a year after legally arriving in the US.

The official said that in recent years, most people fleeing the island have 
done so for economic reasons or to take advantage of the benefits they know 
they can receive if they make it to the US.

Related: Global refugees take long detours through Latin America to reach the 
US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/syrian-refugees-central-america-routes-cuban-migrants>

The official also cited an uptick in Cuban migration, particularly across the 
US-Mexico border – an increase the official said reflected an expectation among 
Cubans that theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> would soon move to 
end their special immigration status.

Since October 2012, more than 118,000 Cubans have presented themselves at 
ports of entry along the border, according to statistics published by the 
homeland security department. During the 2016 budget year, which ended in 
September, a five-year high of more than 41,500 people came through the 
southern border. An additional 7,000 people arrived between October and 
November.

The influx has created burdens on other countries in the region that must 
contend with Cubans who have yet to reach the US border, the official said.

The Cuban Medical Professional Parole Program, which was started by President 
George W Bush in 2006, is also being rescinded. The measure allowed Cuban 
doctors, nurses and other medical professionals to seek parole in the US while 
on assignments abroad.

People already in the pipeline under both “wet foot, dry foot” and the medical 
parole program will be able to continue the process toward getting legal status.

The preferential treatment for Cubans reflected the political power of 
Cuban-Americans, especially in Florida, a critical state in presidential 
elections. That has been shifting in recent years. Older Cubans, particularly 
those who fled Castro’s regime, tend to reject Obama’s diplomatic overtures to 
Cuba. Younger Cuban-American voters have proven less likely than their parents 
and grandparents to define their politics by US-Cuba relations. Exit polls show 
Obama managed roughly a split in the Florida Cuban vote in 2012, and Trump in 
November won the same group by a much narrower margin than many previous 
Republican nominees.
 