
People with a gene linked to weight gain are just as likely to benefit from 
weight loss programmes as those without, researchers have discovered.

The findings suggest diet, exercise and drug-based approaches to losing weight 
can be widely beneficial, even if some people may have a greater risk of piling 
on the pounds due to their genetics. In short, your DNA is not a barrier to 
weight loss.

Genetic study shows men's height and women's weight drive earning power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/08/genetic-study-shows-mens-height-and-womens-weight-drive-earning-power>
While many genes are believed to affect body weight, a particular version of 
the so-called FTO gene shows one of the strongest associations with fat gain. 
Those carrying two copies of the genetic variant – about 16% of the population 
– are on average 3kg heavier than those without, and 1.7 times more likely to 
be obese.

While it is not known exactly how the genetic variant promotes weight gain, it 
is believed to increase the appeal of high-calorie foods and reduce the feeling 
of fullness after a meal. But whether it also affects efforts to shed pounds 
has been a matter of debate.

“It has become clear that genetics play a part in the reason why some of us 
get fatter,” said John Mathers, lead author of the research from Newcastle 
University. “The one that has the biggest effect in most people is the FTO 
gene, so we wondered whether having the [high-risk version of the] FTO gene 
would affect how well you could lose weight.”

Writing in the British Medical Journal 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i4707>, Mathers and an international team 
of collaborators describe how they analysed eight previously published 
randomised control trials involving a total of more than 9,500 overweight or 
obese adults to investigate whether carrying the obesity-linked version of the 
FTO gene affects the ability to lose weight.

In all of the studies, the participants were tested to discover whether they 
carried the genetic variant, and whether they had one copy or two, but the 
results were not disclosed to the participants. The researchers found that for 
each copy of the high-risk gene the participants possessed, they were, on 
average, almost 0.9kg heavier.


The participants took part in a variety of weight-loss programmes, including 
diet-based, exercise-based and drug-based approaches. “To our surprise, we 
discovered that carrying the [high-risk] FTO gene made no difference to your 
ability to lose weight. So people lost weight at just the same rate if they had 
the [high-risk version of the] FTO gene as if they didn’t,” said Mathers.

“There was no link between the type of the intervention – so whether the 
people were losing weight through diet or physical activity – and the gene. It 
seemed to work equally well.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fobesity-gene-weight-loss-gain-study-diet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51b1787eb2126d011012f14fd9798ad7549f040c%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obesity%20gene%20no%20barrier%20to%20weight%20loss%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fobesity-gene-weight-loss-gain-study-diet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obesity%20gene%20no%20barrier%20to%20weight%20loss%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fobesity-gene-weight-loss-gain-study-diet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51b1787eb2126d011012f14fd9798ad7549f040c%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 The genetic variant that promotes weight gain is believed to increase the 
appeal of high-calorie foods. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Sex and ethnicity, the authors said, did not affect the rate of weight loss, 
although they noted there was a lack of participants of Asian descent.

The studies, added Mathers, did not show whether carrying the obesity-linked 
version of the FTO gene affects whether weight loss was sustained, as the 
longest follow-up time was three years.


Dr Jude Oben, co-founder of the Obesity Action Campaign and senior lecturer in 
hepatology at University College London, welcomed the results. “Obesity is 
costing the NHS £16bn a year. We atObesity Action Campaign 
<http://www.obesityac.org/> are alarmed by this. Obesity causes cancer, 
diabetes, heart disease and liver cirrhosis. It is the HIV of our age. It is 
killing millions of our patients,” he said.

“That this size of study and its robust statistical methodologies support 
common sense is great. It means that general weight loss strategies which must 
involve the psychological, nutritional, physical and policy changes should be 
developed.”


Andrew Hattersley, professor of molecular medicine at the University of Exeter 
and part of the team that discovered the influence of the FTO genetic variant 
on weight gain, said it was not surprising that those with the variant were as 
able to lose weight as those without.


“Part of [obesity] is environmental, part of it is genetic, part of the 
genetic component is the FTO gene,” he said. “This isn’t a group that is 
remarkably different genetically. It is a very minor change and it is only a 
minor part of their susceptibility.”

 