
With an increasingly urban population, rising disposable incomes 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our-insights/mapping-chinas-middle-class>
 and a growing demand for international cuisines, it is no wonder China is home 
to a high number of fast-food brands.

Of these, KFC planned to open 600 new restaurants across cities in China in 
2016. Meanwhile, McDonald’s aims to roll out1,000 new outlets 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mcdonalds-china-idUSKCN0WX16M> over five 
years.

Starbucks, with its frothy, sugary offerings, has acknowledged that China 
could eventually surpass the United States in terms of market size for the 
fast-coffee chain, and in October announced plans todouble 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-19/starbucks-plans-to-double-number-of-locations-in-china-by-2021>
 the number of its 2,300 outlets in China by 2021.

All of that, of course, carries physical costs. Swelling waistlines are the 
most visible symptom. Even the state-run media outlet Global Timesfound 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/977264.shtml> that China now has the largest 
overweight population in the world – 10.8% of men and 14.9% of women in a 
nation of 1.4 billion people – bumping the United States to second place, 
according to astudy published 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(16)30054-X/abstract>
 in the Lancet Medical Journal.

That’s more than 43 million men and 46 million women classified as overweight. 
For children and young adults, the numbers are even more dire: the World Food 
Programindicated <http://www.wfp.org/stories/10-facts-about-nutrition-china> 
that 23% of boys and 14% of girls under 20 are overweight or obese. The Chinese 
often see themselves as in a race with the US; in this, they win.


Companies with emblems of golden arches and monochrome mermaids are not the 
sole perpetrators of this circumstance. Active lifestyles have not caught on, 
and nutritional balance in daily diets is often askew. The ubiquitous barbecued 
lamb skewer, for example, found in any bustling neighbourhood or night market 
from Ürümqi to Shenzhen, bundlestwo-thirds 
<https://foodindustry.asia/defining-junk-food-in-an-asian-context> of the 
calories found in a pack of KFC fries.


Active lifestyles have not caught on, and nutritional balance in daily diets 
is often askew

China’s healthy eating plan

In response to a progressively unhealthy lifestyle festering within its 
cities, the central government has brandished a plan calledHealthy China 2030 
<http://english.gov.cn/policies/latest_releases/2016/10/25/content_281475475062678.htm>
, with the aim of making China healthy again in the next 13 years.


The plan’s blueprints were released in October, including the introduction of 
health education into the school curriculum and promoting “health as habit”, to 
bump up the populace’s life expectancy by four years to 79, and eventually 
match the health standards of high-income economies like those found in North 
America and western Europe.


Will the 13-year plan reverse a distressing trend? That’s hard to say; the 
plan is still fresh and details of execution are hazy, but the World Health 
Organisation has alreadyframed 
<http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/conferences/9gchp/healthy-china/en/> it as 
a move by the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, to “put health at the centre of 
the country’s entire policy-making machinery”. Food and beverage companies have 
also jumped on the bandwagon, championing “Healthy China 2030” with gusto.


Yum China, which owns KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell franchises in cities across 
China, haspublicly 
<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/business/consumer/Yum-China-KFC-Health-Foundation-hosts-annual-conference-supports-research-and-educational-programs-to-contribute-to-Healthy-China-2030/shdaily.shtml>
 backed the central government’s pronouncement. Its vice-president of public 
affairs said that Yum China has “always been committed to improving the lives 
and nutrition of people across the country”.

But health experts remain cautious. Barry Popkin, who started the China Health 
and Nutrition Survey <http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/china> in the late 1980s, 
pointed out that the WHO recently called for regulatory and fiscal reforms to 
address the causes of China’s noncommunicable disease health crisis, which 
Healthy China 2030 lacks.

“For the past 30 years, the Chinese have been misdirected and focused on 
physical activity instead of the food system as a way to address obesity,” he 
said. “One of the major shifts inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
 has been the massive decline in physical activity and the concurrent increase 
in the modern retail food sector and consumption of packaged food.”


Even as some other nations are implementing targeted fiscal measures such as 
taxes on sugary beverages, the Chinese are being misled into thinking that 
Healthy China 2030 will prevent obesity and nutrition-related diseases. Popkin 
estimated that 60% of consumed calories in China will come from packaged food – 
a figure thatmatches <http://time.com/4252515/calories-processed-food/> 
America’s. What’s needed is a different regulatory approach paired with 
incentives for the population to change their diets.


Considering the massive expansions by fast-food giants across Chinese cities, 
Popkin’s suggestions seem unlikely to materialise.


Chinese New Year is just around the corner. If KFC plays its cards right – as 
it didlast year <http://www.bbc.com/news/business-36098182> – the fast-food 
chain will see a good bump in profits again, with buckets of fried chicken as 
part of a special promotion zipping into the hands of eager, hungry Chinese 
diners.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 