
The chief enforcer of television quality and standards at regulator Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> is set to leave after just five 
months after being forced to choose between his job and his outside work as a 
journalist.

As the watchdog prepares to take on greater regulation of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, it has emerged that a legal wrangle 
broke out earlier this summer when the former Economist editor Bill Emmott was 
told by Ofcom that writing or speaking about national or international public 
policy matters would be at odds with his role as chair of its content board.

It is understood that Ofcom said that, although Emmott’s role there was part 
time, he was writing more than they had thought he would and that they were 
concerned that one of his articles may one day be used as evidence of bias or a 
conflict of interest in a future court case.

Sources say Emmott argued that his outside interests had been cleared when he 
joined in January. However Ofcom insisted his two roles, as a writer and chair 
of the content board, were incompatible.

With the power to deal with viewers’ concerns about offensive or inaccurate TV 
shows and advise on fining channels that breach broadcasting rules,Ofcom’s 
content board deals with some of the most sensitive areas of television and 
radio 
<http://%20https//www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/22/complaints-channel-4-news-hijab-the-sun-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
.

The abolition of the BBC Trust <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/media/bbc-trust> 
at the end of the year under the terms of the new BBC charter gives the 
regulator new powers to oversee the corporation, including its editorial 
standards – a notoriously tricky area, particularly when it comes political 
programming.

Emmott was appointed in January when it was already suspected that the 
government wanted Ofcom to take on more regulation of the BBC, but since the 
white paper in May confirmed the move the regulator has felt under greater 
scrutiny.

Ofcom content board members are part-time but bound by a strict code of conduct
 
<http://www.ofcom.org.uk/content/about/how-ofcom-is-run/content-board/Code-of-Conduct.pdf>
 that includes them having to declare conflicts of interest due to other roles.

However, the code says that “strong links with the broadcasting industry” are 
allowed “certain paid employment” which “may be permissible so long as it is 
open and accounted for and any conflict of interest is declared and discussed 
at a content board meeting before each relevant agenda item”.

It is not suggested that Emmott has breached any of the codes. When he took on 
the role – which was due to last four years – Ofcom knew of his journalism 
interests, including that he had previously made a documentary for the BBC 
about the EU called The Great European Disaster Movie.

The fact Emmott was a journalist who did not have a background as a 
broadcasting executive – as many who have worked for Ofcom have – was pointed 
to as a strength by some within the regulator, with chair Patricia Hodgson 
saying he had a “wealth of experience”.

It is understood that lawyers have been in discussions over the summer about 
the terms of his departure, which needs to be officially signed off by the 
Department for Culture, Media & Sport.

Both Emmott and Ofcom declined to comment.
 