
As Panamanians celebrated the expansions of the Panama canal this weekend, the 
country’s officials expressed concern that the historic moment could be 
overshadowed by thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>. 

What are the Panama Papers? A guide to history's biggest data leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
The leak of 11.5m files from the database of Mossack Fonseca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
, a Panama-based law firm, shone a bright light on the world of offshore tax 
planning. In addition to its headquarters in Panama, the firm employed 600 
people in 42 countries and was the world’s fourth-biggest offshore law firm.

Ivan Zarak, Panama’s vice-minister of economy, said that referring to the 
Mossak Fonseca leak and the ensuing scandal as “Panama Papers” was unjust.

“It’s not about Panama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama>, it’s about 
one company. Nobody called it the Texas fraud when Enron [went] bankrupt,” he 
said. “It’s unjust. You are holding accountable the whole country for the 
actions of one company.”

Following the Panama Papers revelations, the company’s affiliate in Nevada 
resigned as theagent for 1,000 companies it administered there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/panama-papers-mossack-fonseca-remains-under-investigation-bvi>
. The firm also decided to close its offices in British-dependent territories 
of Jersey, Isle of Man and Gibraltar.


“We certainly believe that we have done so much in terms of the story of 
success for people to be talking about the success of Panama and not about the 
Panama Papers, which do not define the Panamanian reality,” Gian Castillero, 
adviser to the government of Panama and acorporate services lawyer 
<http://www.arifa.com/arifa/index.php?option=com_lawyersbio&view=contact&id=21%3ACastillero&catid=47%3Alawyers&lang=en&Itemid=9>
, told reporters on Saturday. 


Mossack Fonseca data seen by the Guardian covered more than 200,000 companies 
for which the firm acted as registered agent. The British Virgin Islands held 
more than100,000 companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
.

“More than half of the companies were established in the British Virgin 
Islands. Why don’t call it BVI papers? Or the British Commonwealth papers? We 
take the issue with the fact that it was called the Panama Papers. Call them 
Mossack Fonseca papers. I don’t care,” he said.

Mossack Fonseca remains under investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/panama-papers-mossack-fonseca-remains-under-investigation-bvi>
 in theBritish Virgin Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-virgin-islands>. 

Don’t blame Panama for the Panama Papers | Isabel Saint Malo de Alvarado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/21/panama-papers-tax-haven-financial-transparency>
In their conversation with reporters, both Castillero and Zarak defended 
Panama as a financial center.

“Panama is not a tax haven. We wish Panama was a tax haven. We pay taxes as 
you do in any of your countries,” said Castillero. He explained that Panama has 
a territorial tax system which requires Panamanians to only pay taxes on income 
earned within Panama.

“We only have four million people and this is the type of fiscal system that 
works for us. It was not created to stimulate tax evasion. Basically, we are 
such a small number of Panamanians that if we would have worldwide taxed 
income, perhaps the efforts of collecting the taxes abroad would be far more 
expensive than what you would have collected in the first place,” he explained.

Zarak noted that even prior to the leak, Panama had been committed to 
transparency and had made a commitment to automatic exchange of information 
with countries deemed secure for such information exchange. This commitment was 
“not a knee-jerk reaction” to Panama Papers, he said, adding: “The steps that 
we have been taking are not because of the Panama Papers. These were decisions 
that were made before the Panama Papers came out.”

“We are bad communicators and we have not been able to successfully put 
forward all the effort that Panama has made in terms of transparency and 
exchange of information, how strong our commitment to that is,” explained 
Castillero. “And service provider economy that depends dramatically on 
international services, we are very much aware that our main asset is 
reputation and that we cannot get isolated from international community by not 
meeting international regulations.”

Panamanian trade analyst Ernest Bazan told Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-panama-canal-idUSKCN0ZC0Q9> that Panama’s 
reputation has “unfortunately been affected [by the Panama Papers] and that 
undoubtedly affects the business climate, including the Panama canal”. 
According to analysts, the scandal was one of the reasons why a just dozen of 
the 70 heads of states who were invited were scheduled to attend the Sunday’s 
ceremony. Jill Biden, second lady of the United States, attended as part of the 
US delegation.

Castillero noted that “the damage to the reputation is mainly in the layman 
persons who do not understand and read the papers and get the impression that 
there could be something wrong about Panama”. The reputation in the financial 
sector has not suffered much and as a result “there has been no reduction in 
demand of Panamanian services after Panama papers,” he said.
 