
Oil companies, housebuilders and investment companies were boosted by 
chancellor George Osborne’s budget speech, but news of a sugar tax sent soft 
drinks firms tumbling.

The FTSE 100 rose from 6144 at the start of Osborne’s speech to close at 
6175.49, up 35.52 points on the day, as business welcomed the proposed cuts in 
corporation tax.

Oil companies moved higher after news of tax changes for the North Sea oil 
sector, withBP up 2% to 350.1p, Royal Dutch Shell A shares 2.7% better at 
1703.5p,Tullow Oil adding nearly 8% to 207.2p, Cairn Energy climbing 6.7% to 
204.5p and oil services businessWood Group rising 2.6% to 634.5p. The 
chancellor said he was halving the supplementary charge on oil and gas from 20% 
to 10% and effectively abolishing the Petroleum Revenue Tax, which together 
should save the industry around £1bn over the next five years.

Housebuilders benefited from proposals to encourage construction of new homes 
on brownfield land, as well as the lack of any new taxes or levies on the 
sector.Taylor Wimpey was up 3.4% at 187.6p, Crest Nicholson climbed 4% to 551p, 
andBarratt Developments was 3% better at 572.5p.

News of the increase to ISA savings limits lifted investment groups Hargreaves 
Lansdown, up nearly 1% at £13.04, St James’s Place, 3.8% higher at 934.5p, and 
Brewin Dolphin,0.5% better at 260.9p.

Bookmakers were relieved there were no new measures announced that would 
dampen their business, given talk of changes in the racing levy.Ladbrokes was 
up 6% at 121.7p andWilliam Hill 4% to 379.6p.

Insurers also moved higher after the much-mooted rise in insurance premium tax 
of 0.5% was lower than expected. Motor specialistAdmiral added 12p to £19 while 
Avivawas up 1.4% at 482.9p.

Pubs groups toasted the freeze in beer and cider duty, with Greene King up 
1.2% to 860p andJD Wetherspoon 1.4% higher at 700p.

But the sugar tax on drinks left Irn Bru maker AG Barr 2.4% lower at 540.5p and
Britvic down 1.3% to 699.5p, while Vimto company Nichols fell 6.5% to £12.19. 
The levy, designed to help tackle childhood obesity, will raise up to £520m 
which will go towards funding sport in schools.

Tate & Lyle was also 1% lower at 564.5p but came off its worst levels as 
investors realised it had sold its sugar business although it still makes 
artificial sweetener Splenda.

In the currency markets the pound fell from $1.4081 to $1.4064 during the 
speech but was steady against the euro. The move in the dollar came ahead of 
the latest US Federal Reserve decision on interest rates. No increase is 
expected this month, but investors expect the central bank to give an update on 
when a rate hike might come.
 