
Theresa May’s corporate governance agenda is in trouble. The prime minister 
last week abandoned her plan to put workers on boards, though she couldn’t 
bring herself to admit it frankly. Now comes an attack on two other key 
proposed reforms: the idea of forcing companies to publish a ratio showing how 
the pay of the chief executive compares with that of the average worker; and a 
move to make shareholders’ votes on pay binding.

These ideas were, we thought, less controversial than reserving a seat in the 
boardroom for a worker, which would have been a revolution in company law. Pay 
ratios and binding votes could be framed as a natural extension of a UK 
corporate governance code that has been refined many times since its first 
expression in the 1990s.

Yet there is real resistance. On Friday, a taskforce established by 
independent thinktank the Big Innovation Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/theresa-may-executive-pay-big-innovation-centre>
 and the Bank of England published a paper that was progressive in spirit and 
contained elements that chimed with May’s agenda, such as the need to make 
executive pay simpler and linking it to long-term performance. But, crucially, 
it failed to back the two remaining flagship ideas.

The taskforce said a “snapshot” pay ratio could lead to misleading comparisons 
and create perverse incentives. It thinks companies should instead publish a 
“fair pay charter”, explaining their philosophy and principles on the matter of 
fair pay. On shareholder votes, it opted for a complicated system whereby a 
binding regime would be triggered only if companies failed to get satisfactory 
advisory support; it called the current regime effective.

These objections carry weight because of the high-powered figures who made up 
the taskforce. They included Andy Haldane, chief economist of the Bank of 
England; Tom Gosling, a pay consultant; Clare Chapman, a non-executive director 
at Kingfisher; and Will Hutton, former editor of this newspaper and current 
columnist.

How should the prime minister react to their scepticism? If she wants to 
retain her credibility, she should probably ignore it. There are good reasons 
to do so.

The idea that the public would somehow be baffled by pay ratios doesn’t wash. 
Given the right context – the taskforce’s fair pay charter could provide this – 
interested parties should be perfectly able to make rounded judgments. The 
desire for obfuscation seems to flow from chief executives’ wish to avoid 
embarrassment. There is no need to indulge them. It would only reinforce the 
sense that bosses play a different game behind a smokescreen.

As for binding votes, well-run companies have nothing to fear. Shareholder 
rebellions are rare; they would probably be rarer still under a binding regime. 
And, come on, what is the logic of an advisory set-up where “no” can mean 
“yes”? Almost 60% of BP shareholders voted against a £14m pay package for the 
chief executive this year, but Bob Dudley still collected the lot (indeed, had 
already done so). Making only minor tweaks to such a bizarre system will not 
restore trust.

To stiffen her sinews, May should read a submission by the Institute of 
Business Ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/02/restore-cash-as-the-essential-currency-of-paying-executives>
, the best in the current crop. It takes the near-universal desire for greater 
simplicity seriously. Executives would be paid in cash but be obliged to use a 
portion of salary to buy and then hold shares in the company for a long period. 
That would make pay ratios meaningful, because the rest of the workforce is 
generally also paid cash. And pay rises and bonuses would depend on a thumbs-up 
from shareholders. Yes, executive salaries would increase as the paraphernalia 
of share options and long-term incentives was swept away, but the system would 
be transparent and easy to understand, useful qualities in the trust-restoring 
game.

Workers on boards was, perhaps, a fight May was never going to win. But she 
should not be swayed by the naysayers on pay ratios and binding votes. They are 
modest reforms to which she gave her full backing. If she can’t get them over 
the line, she’s spineless.

These tax breaks for the rich are unfair and unaffordable

This sentence from the autumn statement has caused more debate than any other: 
“The government is committed to enabling individuals to save more so that they 
have security in retirement, but it is important that resources focus where 
there is most need.”

On the face of it, this was a hint that the Treasury is preparing to cut 
pension tax relief for higher-rate earners. That would be a fundamental reform 
to the pensions system but it’s understandable that, with the national debt 
heading towards £2 trillion, the government might wish to make savings.

Tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> relief on pension contributions 
goes by income tax band, so higher-rate earners get the biggest benefit. But 
the skewing is extraordinary. Of the £48bn in pension tax relief, about 
two-thirds goes to higher earners, the people most able to provide for their 
retirement.

In the event, the Treasury stamped on talk of reform: There were “no plans” to 
scrap relief for higher earners. Last week’s hotly debated sentence was 
referring to cutting the Money Purchase Annual Allowance – the amount that 
people who have already started to access their pension pots can be saved into 
a pension – a relatively minor reform, in other words.

A full overhaul would be the right thing to do. Setting relief at 20% for 
everyone would save £15bn a year – serious money in the context of a budget 
deficit of £68bn. Or the government could set a flat rate of 25%, thereby 
creating a bigger incentive for most people to save, which is meant to be the 
point of the pensions system.

Why doesn’t the government make a reform that is both financially prudent and 
fair? Political timidity. Abolishing higher-rate relief would cause uproar 
among the well-off , and the benefit for lower earners of a 25% flat rate might 
feel invisible, as the gain will only be enjoyed in retirement.

But timidity is a terrible excuse for inaction. Philip Hammond should get on 
with it. Higher-rate relief is an illogical privilege the country can no longer 
afford.

Another pension deficit with Philip Green’s name on it

A year ago, Sir Philip Green warned of fierce high street competition as he 
reported a fall in underlying sales at his Arcadia retail empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/philip-green-65-pre-tax-profit-boost-after-bhs-sale>
. This year there has been no word on trading at the group, which owns Topshop, 
Dorothy Perkins, Burton and Miss Selfridge.

But business is unlikely to have been brisk. The Arcadia chains have lost 
ground to rivals and been hit by the trend for shoppers to spend less on 
clothes and more on leisure.

Last week, the pensions regulator, already pursuing Green over the £571m 
pension black hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 at the collapsed BHS,launched a probe into the £151m pension deficit at Arcadia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/pensions-regulator-sir-philip-green-arcadia-bhs>
.

Green is not the only steward of a pension scheme with a big deficit as 
lifespans increase and robust financial returns are hard to find. But the 
record £1.2bn dividend paid to the Greens in 2005 – four times the chain’s 
profits at the time – left Arcadia with less to invest in its stores and 
pension scheme. The regulator is right to investigate.
 