
Here are the opening lines of some anonymous verses from the mid-17th century, 
which I print here to show that newspapers did not actually invent nonsense, 
any more than it was invented by Lewis Carroll or Edward Lear. The title of the 
piece is Newes. Now Gentlemen if you will hear Strange news as I will tell you, 
Where ere you go both far and near, You may boldly say that this is true.

 We all want to believe what we read. What follows are eight stanzas 
recounting such wild improbabilities that no one, of course, would believe they 
were true for a moment: for example, When all the Lawyers they did plead/All 
for love, and not for gain,/Then 'twas a jovial world indeed...

An unkind person might say that this anonymous scribbler thus anticipated the 
advent of the daily newspaper. If you want a quick laugh try saying: It must be 
true - I read it in the paper. I find these verses somehow reassuring to read 
at the end of a period in which, to assist our readers in their New Year 
celebrations, we presumed to instruct them in the steps of the Dashing White 
Sergeant. In transcribing the diagram designed to help them - kindly supplied 
by the Royal Scottish Country Dance Society - we managed to introduce into it a 
number of significant mistakes, leading some of you, perhaps, a merry dance 
indeed.

I have a vision of Guardian readers locked, innocently but inconveniently, in 
threes, forlorn signs of the season still around them, struggling to reach the 
telephone to call for help. It would be nice to say we never put a foot wrong. 
Alas, we do.

Most of our mistakes do not affect the general believability of the paper. One 
writer has suggested that by running all our corrections together in a daily 
column we diminish the force of the most serious ones. My experience suggests 
otherwise.

Serious mistakes dictate their own priority and the corrections of them always 
lead the column to which a great many readers now clearly turn to see what new 
horrors have been perpetrated. The Guardian is still the only newspaper in 
Britain that owns up to and systematically corrects errors in this way.

The so-called trivial mistakes, including the grammatical ones, may feed a 
running anxiety among readers that too often we allow our attention to stray. 
The corrections demonstrate that we have a compensatory anxiety, at least as 
strong, to get it right.

Readers pay great attention to the grammar and language we use. They want to 
emerge from the end of a report as into clear day, and not dazed or confused, 
or in a tangled heap like the poor people persuaded to try our steps for the 
Dashing White Sergeant.

More people complain about grammar, language, style, construction than any 
other category, not just to us, but to other papers where there is some 
equivalent of a Readers' Editor.

Here is a selection from an advice list for journalists that circulates in the 
United States. Its origin is unknown. The Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist 
William Safire may have had something to do with it.

1. Verbs has to agree with their subjects.

2. Prepositions are not words to end sentences with.

3. And don't start a sentence with a conjunction.

4. It is wrong to ever split an infinitive.

5. Avoid cliches like the plague.

6. Also, always avoid annoying alliteration.

7. Be more or less specific.

8. Parenthetical remarks (however relevant) are (usually) unnecessary.

9. No sentence fragments.

10. Contractions aren't necessary and shouldn't be used.

11. One should never generalise.

12. Don't use no double negatives.

13. Eschew ampersands & abbreviations, etc.

14. Eliminate commas, that are, not necessary.

15. Never use a big word when a diminutive one would suffice.

16. Kill all exclamation marks!!!

17. Use words correctly, irregardless of how others use them.

18. Use the apostrophe in it's proper place and omit it when its not needed.

19. Puns are for children, not groan readers.

20. Proofread carefully to see if you any words out.

A sense of perspective is important. I leave you with the words of 
e.e.cummings:... life's not a paragraph and death i think is no parenthesis

Â• The verses come from Le Prince d'Amour; or The Prince Of Love. With a 
Collection of Several Ingenious Poems and Songs by the Wits of the Age (London, 
1660). You can read them in full in the excellent The Origins of English 
Nonsense by Noel Malcolm,published in 1997 by HarperCollins.
 