
When I arrived in Afghanistan in 2011 for the first time, I proudly displayed 
several patches on my shoulders. One was the flag of the United States, the 
country I love so much. Another was the 10th Mountain Division insignia, 
representing the unit with which I had been deployed. But there was also one 
more: the Isaf patch, signifying participation in Nato’s International Security 
Assistance Force.

So, when President-elect Donald Trump claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/trump-reckless-on-nato-says-defence-committee-chairman>
 in a recent interview that Nato is obsolete in part because it “didn’t deal 
with terrorism,” I was dismayed. Trump’s assertion is patently untrue, and it 
disrespects the efforts that fellow Nato members have made to combat this 
threat.

In case Trump needs a history lesson, the North Atlantic Treaty, signed in 
1949, includingarticle five 
<http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_110496.htm>, provides that Nato 
countries will collectively defend each other in the event of armed attack on 
any member.

Through the Cold War, Article 5 never had to be invoked, which is a testament 
to the organization’s deterrent effect on adversaries. But following the 9/11 
attacks on the United States conducted by al-Qaida – who had been harbored by 
the Taliban in Afghanistan –Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> 
invoked Article 5 for the first time ever, specifically to deal with terrorism.

Whether Nato’s campaign against terrorism has been effective is a fair 
question. Some might argue that al-Qaida, which has been unable to conduct 
another attack on the scale of 9/11, has largely been denied safe haven in 
Afghanistan, and that terrorismdoes not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/24/terrorism-poses-no-existential-threat-to-america>
 present an existential threat.

On the other hand, some might argue that al-Qaida’s persistence and a 
resurging Taliban 
<http://www.militarytimes.com/story/military/pentagon/2016/06/16/afghanistan-nicholson-commander-pentagon-report-war/85972056/>
 provide evidence that Nato has not succeeded in its task. One could also argue 
that Nato should be more involved in countering Islamic State (Isis) in Iraq 
and Syria, because of the threat the organization projects into Europe. 
However, these considerations should not obscure the undoubted fact that Nato 
has taken concrete steps to deal with terrorism since 9/11.

In addition, despite what some may think, the burden of the Nato mission has 
fallen on the shoulders not only of the US. Consider the fatalities suffered by 
Nato members in Afghanistan. If we use the methodology of a2010 analysis 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/steve-coll/burden-sharing> that looked at 
fatalities <http://icasualties.org/OEF/index.aspx>-per-population 
<https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2119rank.html>
 and apply it again today, we can see the tiny country of Denmark ranks higher 
than the United States, which comes in second.

It therefore appears that Trump was shooting from the hip, blatantly 
disregarding history and disrespecting Nato allies along the way. But should we 
be surprised?

When it comes to fighting terrorism, Trump is clueless. This is the same man, 
after all, wholudicrously proposed 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/21/us/politics/donald-trump-mosul-iraq.html> 
that Mosul could and should be captured from Isis in a surprise attack.According
 <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-38630016> to outgoing CIA Director 
John Brennan, this kind of careless spontaneity is “not something that protects 
national security interests.” Will he ever learn?

 