
No one has been able to approach the political power that Public Enemy brought 
to hip-hop. I put them on a level with Bob Marley and a handful of other 
artists - the rare artist who can make great music and also deliver a political 
and social message. But where Marley's music sweetly lures you in, then sneaks 
in the message, Chuck D grabs you by the collar and makes you listen.

I remember the first time I heard Rebel Without a Pause: We were on tour with 
Run DMC, and one day Chuck D put on a tape they had just finished. It was the 
first time they used those screeching horns along with this incredibly heavy 
beat - it was unlike anything I had ever heard before. It blew my wig back.

Later I remember listening to Black Steel in the Hour of Chaos over and over 
again on headphones after It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back came 
out. The premise of it - that the current US prison system has many parallels 
to slavery - blew my mind, and the music is incredible: that Isaac Hayes sample 
and Chuck D's rhymes about a jailbreak. Like a lot of their songs, it's like 
watching a movie.

Public Enemy completely changed the game, musically. No one was just putting 
straight-out noise and atonal synthesizers into hip-hop, mixing elements of 
James Brown and Miles Davis; no one in hip-hop had ever been this hard, and 
perhaps no one has since. They made everything else sound clean and happy, and 
the power of the music perfectly matched the intention of the lyrics. They were 
also the first rap group to really focus on making albums - you can listen to 
Nation of Millions or Fear of a Black Planet from beginning to end. They aren't 
just random songs tossed together.

To me, Chuck D is the most important MC in hip-hop. His power and cadences on 
lines like "Yes/ The rhythm, the rebel/ Without a pause/ I'm lowering my level" 
is unmatched. Then if you take into account what he's actually saying, it puts 
him on a different plane from any other MC. The combination of him and Flavor 
Flav is incredibly effective: Chuck is so straight and direct and Flav brings 
this wild randomness to it. They complement each other perfectly.

Public Enemy made hip-hop that was more than entertainment. They inspired a 
lot of people who believed that you can effect change through music, and 
they're still inspiring to me.

 Â· Public Enemy's Greatest Hits is out on Mercury.
 