
To most British comics, success means breaking even on a month-long run at the 
Edinburgh fringe – a lofty goal unattainable to all but the cream of the comedy 
crop. The stakes are a little different in the US, where comedians are 
considered catastrophic failures if they manage to go more than a year on the 
circuit without being given a semi-autobiographical comedy-drama by a premium 
cable network or online streaming platform.

Comics playing fictionalised versions of themselves on screen is nothing new, 
but since the debut of Louis CK’s Louie – a show so roundly deified that its 
creator now sees fit to embark upon six-episode narrative arcs like the 
latter-day Shakespeare he’s been so regularly told he is – it seems every 
comedian who knows Marc Maron to say hello to has been given $10m and a dozen 
half-hours to play with.

Some have risen to the challenge (Aziz Ansari’s Master Of None was one of the 
best shows of last year), while others have only illustrated the huge potential 
for obnoxiousness in a format that invites comedians to be even more 
navel-gazing than usual (Rob Schneider’s Real Rob is successful only as a 
mechanism to get its star’s entire family on the Netflix payroll).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCb5VUOalPjk&media=>
The latest comedian to mine her personal life for prestige dramedy is Tig 
Notaro <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tig-notaro>, the cult US comic who 
shot to fame in 2012 after impulsively opening a set with the words, “Hello, I 
have cancer.” Her subsequent battle with stage 2 breast cancer, and the 
unexpected death of her mother the same year, combine to form the melancholic 
baseline ofOne Mississippi, a new show for Amazon Prime.

Over six episodes, which were all released yesterday, Notaro returns to her 
home state in an effort to come to terms with a number of disorientating 
losses: that of her mother, that of a failed relationship, and that of her 
breasts, recently removed in a double mastectomy. There, she reconnects with 
her brother and stepfather, while also recording the folksy radio show through 
which she habitually delivers One Mississippi’s moral messaging.

It’s impossible to say exactly how true to life the show is beyond its premise 
but, refreshingly, its creator forgoes the dramatic get-out clauses used by 
some of her peers to distance themselves from their on-screen doubles. Where 
Louis CK and Aziz Ansari change their names and dial down their successes on 
screen, Notaro embraces the tragedies and triumphs of her life without 
moderation – and to great effect. It turns out self-indulgence can be strangely 
endearing when stripped of self-defence.
 