
The gunman who killed 49 people in an attack on a gay nightclub in Orlando is 
said to have been a regular at the venue and had messaged several people on gay 
dating apps, according to reports.


An unnamed FBI official told the Associated Press on Tuesday that the bureau 
was investigating the claims.

At least four regular customers said they had seen killer Omar Mateen drinking 
at the nightclub on multiple occasions. “Sometimes he would go over in the 
corner and sit and drink by himself, and other times he would get so drunk he 
was loud and belligerent,”Ty Smith told the Orlando Sentinel 
<http://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/pulse-orlando-nightclub-shooting/os-orlando-nightclub-omar-mateen-profile-20160613-story.html>

World stands in solidarity with Orlando's LGBT community as a city weeps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-pulse-attack-lgbt-solidarity>
“We didn’t really talk to him a lot, but I remember him saying things about 
his dad at times,” Smith said. “He told us he had a wife and child.”

Jim Van Horn, 71, told the Associated Press Mateen was a “regular” at the 
Pulse nightclub where the murders took place. “He was trying to pick up people. 
Men,” he said. “He was a homosexual and he was trying to pick up men. He would 
walk up to them and then he would maybe put his arm round them or something ... 
That’s what people do at gay bars. That’s what we do.”

Asked what went through his mind when he saw his picture, Van Horn, who lost 
three friends in the shooting, said: “We just went, ‘Oh. That makes sense. 
That’s Omar.’”

He added: “I think it’s possible that he was trying to deal with his inner 
demons, of trying to get rid of his anger of homosexuality. It’s really 
confusing to me. Because you can’t change who you are. But if you pretend that 
you’re different, then you may shoot up a gay bar.”

Asked by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooting-omar-seddique-mateen-father-interview>
 about rumours his son was gay, Mateen’s father Seddique Mateen said: “It’s not 
true. Why, if he was gay, would he do this?”

But when asked why she thought he went regularly to a gay club, his ex-wife 
SitoraYusufiy told CNN 
<https://twitter.com/OutFrontCNN/status/742501408881168384>: “When we had 
gotten married he confessed to me about his past that was recent at that time, 
and that he very much enjoyed going to clubs and the nightlife … I feel like 
it’s a side of him or a part of him that he lived but probably didn’t want 
everybody to know about.” Asked if she thought he was gay, she said: “I don’t 
know.”

As accounts of the gunman’s reported appearances at Pulse emerged on Monday 
evening, thousands of Orlando residents packed a downtown square in memorial of 
the dead. Bells at the First Methodist church tolled 49 times for each of the 
victims, the last of whom to be identified, Akyra Monet Murray, also the 
youngest at 18, was named shortly before the vigil began.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdcff8415f2d27147dc05d8467944c6d5d533adb%2F0_103_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orlando%20gunman%20Omar%20Mateen%20'was%20a%20regular%20at%20Pulse%20nightclub'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orlando%20gunman%20Omar%20Mateen%20%27was%20a%20regular%20at%20Pulse%20nightclub%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdcff8415f2d27147dc05d8467944c6d5d533adb%2F0_103_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People gathered in Orlando on Monday night to remember the victims of the 
Pulse massacre. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
As the crowd at the vigil raised up candles in front of the Dr Phillips Art 
Center, which had been lit in rainbow colors, faith leaders including an imam 
and Hispanic evangelicals joined LGBT activists and campaigners against gun 
violence in a collective cry of defiance that love would conquer hate.

“We remain a city in pain. We are mourning and we are angry,” said mayor Buddy 
Dyer, who told the crowd that Orlando had become itself the victim of a 
dreadful irony. “Our city, a joyful melting pot of cultures and ways of life, 
now has to bear the title of the site of the worst mass shooting in American 
history.”

Two prominent members of the Pulse community addressed the vigil. The club’s 
manager Neema Bahrami said to a huge cheer: “I want you to know we are not 
leaving. We are here to stay. We will be bigger and better than you can ever 
imagine. We will not be defeated. We are here to stay.”

Pulse’s co-founder Ron Legler said that he and Barbara Poma had opened the 
popular gay venue “as a place of pride. A place you could feel safe. We are 
going to rebuild that Pulse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c251637974d584b6651e3a206a13053d9060f7b%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orlando%20gunman%20Omar%20Mateen%20'was%20a%20regular%20at%20Pulse%20nightclub'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orlando%20gunman%20Omar%20Mateen%20%27was%20a%20regular%20at%20Pulse%20nightclub%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Forlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c251637974d584b6651e3a206a13053d9060f7b%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Orlando mayor Buddy Dyer and police chief John Mina at a memorial service for 
victims. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
Terry DeCarlo of the GLBT Community Center in Orlando told the vigil that he 
had received messages of condolence and solidarity from all around the world. 
The mayors of Berlin and London, and leaders from Australia, Spain and Brazil 
had all contacted him “saying Orlando, we see you, we stand with you, we love 
with you,” he said.

Among the huge numbers of people at the vigil, many of whom carried rainbow 
flags or the national emblem of Puerto Rico in reflection of the large number 
of Hispanic victims, was a man who described to the Guardian his extraordinary 
story of survival at Pulse. Orlando – he would not give his last name – 
described how for three terrible hours he lay motionless on the ground in a 
back bathroom of the club, his head rammed up against the toilet bowl, trying 
to maintain total silence.

In all that time, he said, as the shooter of the Pulse nightclub massacre 
calmly moved around him, he kept having just one thought.

“I’m not going to make it out of here. I kept thinking I wasn’t coming out of 
this, I just wasn’t.”

Orlando and two other terrified clubgoers at the popular gay venue avoided 
drawing the gunman’s attention by playing dead, as all around them they could 
hear the carnage. “Everyone was screaming and bellowing, except for us. Me and 
my friend kept quiet. We could hear the shooter talking to people in the next 
bathroom stall.”

The clubgoer said he heard Mateen ordering people in the adjacent bathroom 
stall not to use their phones to make text messages. “He said, ‘Please don’t 
text’. That was the words he used.”

He also heard the shooter make a call, apparently to the police, and making 
the statement that America should stop bombing Isis in Syria.

Orlando recalls hearing the gunman make reference to a bomb vest in other 
phone calls, as well as a strange moment in which he demanded to know if anyone 
in the bathroom was African American. “I have no problems with black people,” 
the shooter said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhat-do-we-know-about-orlando-killer-omar-mateen-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20do%20we%20know%20about%20Orlando%20killer%20Omar%20Mateen%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhat-do-we-know-about-orlando-killer-omar-mateen-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20do%20we%20know%20about%20Orlando%20killer%20Omar%20Mateen%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fwhat-do-we-know-about-orlando-killer-omar-mateen-video-explainer&media=>
What do we know about Orlando killer Omar Mateen? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/15/what-do-we-know-about-orlando-killer-omar-mateen-video-explainer>
Finally, explosions ripped through the wall of the bathroom as the police SWAT 
team made their controlled entry. The air filled with dust as a hole was 
punched in the wall, a wild burst of shooting ensued, and Orlando found himself 
being tugged up out of the stall by officers and hurled physically out of the 
hole and into the open air.

“An office just grabbed me and flung me out through the hole,” he said.

As he recounted the story, Orlando was still wearing the medical tag from 
Florida Hospital, where he was treated.

Further accounts of the shooter’s apparent interaction with gay culture in 
advance of his rampage were given by users of a gay dating app Jack’d, who told 
news outlets that Mateen had contacted them through it. Kevin West, 37, a 
former Navy serviceman, said he been messaged by Mateen on the app.

Though out of touch with him for a few months, West said he had received a 
message from Mateen saying he was in town and asking to meet for a drink.

West told the LA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-orlando-nightclub-shooting-20160613-snap-story.html>
 he had immediately contacted the FBI after seeing Mateen’s picture on the 
news, handing over his login details to his Jack’d app.

Another man apparently messaged by Mateen on the dating app was 23-year-old 
Cord Cedeno, who also told the Washington Post he had seen Mateen at the club 
before. “It was definitely him. He’d come in for years, and people knew him,” 
Cedeno said. “He was open with his picture on the sites; he was easy to 
recognise.”

His former classmate Samuel King, who also worked at the same shopping mall as 
Mateen after high school, said Mateen had known that he and many of his friends 
were gay but never expressed any disapproval. “He had to know it, but I never 
got any sense of homophobia or aggression from him,” he told the Washington 
Post.

The information adds to a complex and often contradictory picture that is 
emerging of the gunman and his motivation for the outrage. His father, Seddique 
Mateen, hours after the shooting said that Mateen had once become incensed when 
he saw two men kissing in Miami in front of his wife and child.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fomar-mateen-father-orlando-nightclub-shooting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Omar%20Mateen's%20father%20says%20he%20cannot%20forgive%20his%20son%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fomar-mateen-father-orlando-nightclub-shooting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Omar%20Mateen%27s%20father%20says%20he%20cannot%20forgive%20his%20son%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Fomar-mateen-father-orlando-nightclub-shooting-video&media=>
Omar Mateen’s father says he cannot forgive his son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/14/omar-mateen-father-orlando-nightclub-shooting-video>
However, in an interview with the Guardian, the father indicated he believed 
the importance of the incident had been overblown. “But that was a couple of 
months ago and he never talked about it afterwards,” he said. “I don’t think 
that incident would trigger this kind of violent reaction.”

Details have also emerged as to how Mateen was able to buy two powerful 
weapons with which he carried out the attack - .223 assault rifle made by Sig 
Sauer and a Glock 9mm handgun. He bought the firearms in three separate visits 
earlier this month to a gun range and store about 15 miles from his home in 
Fort Pierce.

The owner of the St Lucie Shooting Center, a retired New York city police 
officer called Ed Henson, told reporters that he had no responsibility for what 
had happened. Mateen had passed a full federal background check before he was 
allowed to buy the guns, Henson said, and besides “If he hadn’t purchased them 
from us I’m sure he would’ve gotten them from another shop in the area.”

Now that all 49 of the dead have been identified, and their families told the 
dreadful news, Orlando will start to begin the long process of grieving. Five 
of the 53 injured remain in grave condition in hospital, with 47 still in 
treatment.

Barack Obama will visit the city on Thursday for a ritual of mourning and 
reflection that has become all too familiar to him in his eight years in office 
– this being the 15th time he has had to address the dark subject of mass 
shootings. After that, the funerals will begin.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
















 