
Stop all the clocks, cut off controversy, prevent any dogs barking in the 
Commons, silence all protest and clear the decks. Let nothing ruffle feathers 
on right or left before thereferendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>: not Heathrow’s runway, 
the bill of rights, or the BBC charter. Stifle the Queen herself, delay her 
speech until after the great 23 June decision.

Is the chancellor right to not change pensions tax relief?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/07/is-chancellor-right-not-change-pensions-tax-relief-budget>
Expect the blandest of budgets. Best not to outrage Labour voters by 
abolishing the top rate of tax or imposing savage cuts. Best not to squeak the 
pips of the wealthy either. Is it advisable to privatise our Royal Parks? 
Scatter sweeteners, don’t be nasty and woo voters towards EU remain. 
Afterwards, nastiness will resume.

But the chancellor’s emergency stop on anything contentious has killed off his 
one good radical plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/george-osborne-backs-down-on-radical-pension-reform>
 – the reform of our arcane and unjust pension system.

Right up until last Friday it was full steam ahead inside the Treasury to 
reclaim at least £10bn for the exchequer from the pockets of wealthier savers. 
After months of preparation, a new system would share out state contributions 
to savers more fairly between high- and low-paid. Two thirds of the proceeds of 
the colossal £35bn pension tax relief goes to just 8% of savers, who would save 
anyway. A system that’s expensive, inequitable, incomprehensible and illogical 
is now destined to stay that way.

The crescendo of protest from vested interests had reached a pitch where 
political klaxons went off inside No 10. The Telegraph, Mail and even the Sun 
warred against this planned assault on “the middle classes 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/pensions/12182776/Millions-of-middle-class-savers-could-lose-out-under-radical-pensions-shake-up.html>
” – which is what they call the top 15%. Those who stood to lose were on the 
40% or 45% tax rate and not middling at all. The 85% of people paying no more 
than the basic tax rate would have gained.

The Times warned George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> to drop reform and to cut 
the top rate of tax instead – hardly a fair swap. Reform might see most people 
gain, but not the editors and upper echelons who set their papers’ policy of 
deliberate misinformation.

It’s no surprise that most people know virtually nothing about how pensions 
work, as well-informed savers are not in the interests of the pensions 
industry, their lobbyists or the powerful influencers who resist reform.

Pensions system favours the richest | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/08/pensions-system-favours-those-who-need-least-help>
Besides, pensions are notoriously dull: the industry relies on people trusting 
financiers who make their money by fleecing savers with unseen or 
hard-to-compute charges. Most Tory donations come from hedge funds and fund 
managers, and many Tory MPs protesting vigorously against the reform have 
fingers in those pies.

Where did Osborne’s initial pensions radicalism come from? Michael Johnson is 
pensions expert at the rightwing thinktank the Centre for Policy Studies, an 
unlikely source of social justice reform. He has been camped out in the 
Treasury, its leading inspiration asauthor of many papers 
<http://www.cps.org.uk/experts/michael-johnson/> up-ending conventional 
beliefs. He questions whether the state need pay people to save for pensions at 
all. The stock answer is that people don’t save enough for their old age, but 
those who don’t save are the lower paid – not the rich who need no incentives.

Johnson quotes plentiful studies showing that tax reliefs don’t incentivise 
those who don’t save enough: half the population don’t know what a tax relief 
is. Denmark all but abolished tax reliefs, and the evaluation by Copenhagen and 
Harvard universities found no effect on savings. But Johnson wasn’t proposing 
anything so extreme – simply to cut back on pointless reliefs and share the 
rest more fairly. Why do the better-off get a 40% or 45% bonus for every pound 
they save while the state gives those on the basic rate just 20%? Everyone 
should get a flat rate at around 33%, saving the state some £10bn.

Why, he asks, should people take out a quarter of their pension in a tax-free 
lump sum when that pension has already had its tax relief? “No one knows why,” 
he says. The system is riddled with fiddles: 54-year-olds can put £120,000 into 
their pension covering the last three years, and then at 55 take out 25% tax 
free.

Until last week Osborne was set to play Robin Hood, but now he's back in the 
City sherrifs' pocket

The most radical plan Osborne floated, as devised by Johnson, was for a 
lifetime Isa: instead of tax reliefs, for every pound saved into it out of 
taxed income, the state would add 50p. The incentive to leave the money saved 
until old age would come from taking away that 50p from any pound taken out 
before retirement. The state would save by keeping a cap on annual payments at 
£10,000 a year: only the very well-off can afford to save more than that.

The insurance companies and pension providers lined up in threatening ranks 
against the Isa plan, which would have diminished their business. Indicative 
was the reaction of Steve Webb, former Lib Dem pensions minister, who has now 
gone to the other side working for Royal London insurance: he called these 
proposed pensions reforms “daylight robbery 
<http://www.professionaladviser.com/professional-adviser/news/2448050/webb-accuses-chancellor-of-daylight-robbery-over-pension-tax-reforms>
”. Indeed it is, both schemes taking from the rich to give to the lower paid.

The chancellor could cut the cap on pensions again. There was a furore over 
his current cap of £40,000 a year – though only the richest can save anything 
like that. But they are the ones who make most noise, set the agenda and 
terrorise governments. Yet again they have won this battle to protect their 
phenomenally disproportionate bounty from the state.

There are many more dark mysteries in the pensions cupboard, including the 
£14bn the state gives to employers in national insurance tax relief for no good 
reason. But eyes glaze over at too much detail, and so those with most vested 
interests win the day.

What happened last week was the re-capture of the Treasury by the pensions 
industry, holding on to what’s theirs. The 85% basic rate taxpayers are the 
losers. Until last week Osborne was set to play Robin Hood, but now he’s back 
in the City sheriffs’ pocket.

Is this reform lost or just delayed? If the referendum were safely won, he 
could return to it. But in the coming leadership contest, he may shy away from 
alienating well-off Tory supporters. Shameless Boris Johnson would likely take 
up their cause.

The pensions industry tasted blood this time and they will fight hard if 
Osborne tries it again, as will Tory donors. The average saver will be silent, 
few knowing what they lose. As in most Osborne budgets, those with the most win 
out against the rest.
 