
At a time when Donald Trump is a glaring, bulbous reality, perhaps it’s hard 
for fictional political satires to compete. Few went to see David Gordon 
Green’s limber, snappy and very funny Our Brand Is Crisis (Warner, 15) in 
cinemas, but it deserves another chance on DVD: loosely inspired by a 2006
documentary of the same title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/mar/22/broadcasting.tvandradio>, it’s a 
cheerfully scalding examination of crooked campaign management. Sandra Bullock, 
applying a hard enamelled finish to her signature all-American klutziness, aces 
the change of pace as a famed US spin doctor hired to spearhead the 
presidential campaign of a Bolivian rightwinger in 2002; even with the cynicism 
dialled up to 11, she’s likable enough to heat this tale of cool-blooded 
dealings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60873a6ddc6de909eda97d50dda203f24e16672%2F0_227_3000_1768%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20Brand%20Is%20Crisis%3B%20Youth%3B%20The%20Club%3B%20Rams%3B%20600%20Miles%3B%20Goosebumps%3B%20The%20Peanuts%20Movie%3B%20Bon%20Voyage%20Charlie%20Brown%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20Brand%20Is%20Crisis%3B%20Youth%3B%20The%20Club%3B%20Rams%3B%20600%20Miles%3B%20Goosebumps%3B%20The%20Peanuts%20Movie%3B%20Bon%20Voyage%20Charlie%20Brown%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa60873a6ddc6de909eda97d50dda203f24e16672%2F0_227_3000_1768%2F3000.jpg>
 Paul Dano, Harvey Keitel and Michael Caine in Youth: ‘lavishly wearying’. 
Photograph: Allstar/Studiocanal 
Paolo Sorrentino’s Youth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/31/youth-review-michael-caine-harvey-keitel>
(Studiocanal, 15), on the other hand, is a film intended to stir up warm, 
soaring feelings on big, capital-lettered themes – Art, Beauty, Love, Loss – 
that nonetheless leaves my heart entirely frozen. Not one grandiose formal 
gesture or expression of feeling strikes me as sincere in this wobbling, 
honey-drenched pudding of Eurokitsch, starring Michael Caine as a retired 
composer contemplating existence and death and nubile young women at a Swiss 
mountain spa for the inordinately wealthy and contemplative. But what was 
intended to be a universal meditation on what makes life worth living is 
stymied by the suffocating tunnel vision of its ultra-privileged male 
perspective. It’s livened up toward the end by a brassy Jane Fonda cameo, if 
only because she, unlike everything else in this lavishly wearying film, 
actually intends to be grotesque.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8JC_NARTdfA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8JC_NARTdfA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8JC_NARTdfA&media=>
 The Club: trailer. 
I’d quite like to see a version of Youth directed by Chilean master Pablo 
Larrain, who refuses to go easy on any institution of privilege and power. Even 
then, it probably wouldn’t be half as good asThe Club  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-club-review-pablo-larrain-catholic-church-chile>
(Network, 18), a scorching, black-souled parable that tackles the abuses of the 
Catholic church as violently head-onas Spotlight did  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/victoria-spotlight-big-short-assassin-mavis-eat-your-bones>
with reserved finesse. (They’d make a riveting, if somewhat despairing, double 
bill.) Set in and around a kind of protective sanatorium for problematic 
priests, it’s gutsy, gutting political film-making, woven through with dark 
ribbon of acrid comedy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-kDCNOie_78&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-kDCNOie_78>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-kDCNOie_78&media=>
 Rams: trailer 
Grímur Hákonarson’s Rams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/rams-observer-film-review> (Soda, 
15) is a somewhat more tender arthouse option, albeit one that hides behind a 
particularly Icelandic cold front: this story of estranged sheep-farming 
brothers, forced into collaboration by an outbreak of livestock disease, 
gradually thaws into a poignant, off-kilter appreciation of kinship. If you’re 
after something a little more kinetic – though not in the shoot-’em-up style 
its subject matter might lead you to expect – Mexican director Gabriel 
Ripstein’s gun-running thriller 600 Miles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/19/600-miles-review-film-tim-roth-mexican-thriller-edinburgh>
 (Soda, 15) merits a look: starring Tim Roth as a US federal agent kidnapped by 
a Mexican arms smuggler, it’s urgent and level-headed, delivering a tacit 
dressing-down to the pro-gun lobby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bdbbe2931f1d479afdb64b7bdd46982be689bbf%2F0_0_1719_1076%2F1719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20Brand%20Is%20Crisis%3B%20Youth%3B%20The%20Club%3B%20Rams%3B%20600%20Miles%3B%20Goosebumps%3B%20The%20Peanuts%20Movie%3B%20Bon%20Voyage%20Charlie%20Brown%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20Brand%20Is%20Crisis%3B%20Youth%3B%20The%20Club%3B%20Rams%3B%20600%20Miles%3B%20Goosebumps%3B%20The%20Peanuts%20Movie%3B%20Bon%20Voyage%20Charlie%20Brown%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fguy-lodge-dvds-brand-is-crisis-the-club-rams-600-miles-goosebumps-peanuts-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bdbbe2931f1d479afdb64b7bdd46982be689bbf%2F0_0_1719_1076%2F1719.jpg>
 Snoopy and Charlie Brown: The Peanuts movie: ‘a turnoff to adult Peanuts 
nostalgists’. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
Kids have two exercises in nostalgia to choose from this week, each drawn from 
a source that handily predates the viewers they’re targeting. There’s little to 
love inGoosebumps (Sony, PG), a cluttered, digitally uglified, Jack 
Black-starring riff on RL Stine’s popular junior horror books of the 90s.Snoopy 
and Charlie Brown: The Peanuts Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/20/snoopy-and-charlie-brown-the-peanuts-movie-review-wry-adaptation>
(Fox, U) has a sweeter outlook, though it’s unlikely to sell children on 
Charles Schulz’s classic comic strips, given that his jaded wit has largely 
gone out of the window. Its smoothed-out CG animation style, meanwhile, is a 
turn-off to adult Peanuts nostalgists, this one included.

Instead, I found myself heading for the jagged, hand-drawn comforts of 1980’s 
Bon Voyage, Charlie Brown! on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/movie/peanuts-bon-voyage-charlie/id1032938896>. 
Frequently sidelined in the Peanuts canon, but a personal childhood favourite, 
this feature-length outing strands Schulz’s gang in rural France; decades on, I 
found its loopy humour and skew-whiff child’s-eye observations reassuringly in 
place.
 