
On a Saturday afternoon shortly before Christmas, I found myself in the 
dungeon-like basement of a sex club in Manhattan to see a site-specific 
performance calledAdonis Memories <http://www.inourwords.org/adonismemories>. 
It was an immersive theater experience based upon oral histories with patrons 
of theAdonis movie theater 
<http://www.back2stonewall.com/2013/02/adonis-movie-porn-theater-nyc.html>, the 
once opulent movie house-turned-gay porn theater located off Times Square in 
the 70s and 80s. In its day the Adonis epitomized hedonistic group viewing of 
pornography, the kind of place where gay, queer and straight men could watch 
hardcore films together. Meanwhile, just offscreen, it was anything goes 
between the men in the audience, especially in the theater’s infamous balcony.

The performance, the brainchild of Alan Bounville, a theater artist and 
activist, makes the audience contend with the gay art of cruising: the practice 
of fleeting sex between men, usually anonymously and without exchanging names, 
often in semi-public indoor spaces (bathrooms, saunas) or outdoors (rest stops, 
forests). Audience members watched actors re-enact Adonis patrons cruising each 
other, and made them complicit by having them follow the action around the 
space, deciding what they watched and what they didn’t.

Garth Greenwell: ‘Cruising parks need to be written about with much more 
richness and nuance’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/26/books-interview-garth-greenwell-what-belongs-to-you-gay-rights>
Cruising has been having something a moment in art over the past year or so, 
though it’s not as if it hasn’t been depicted in fiction and non-fiction for 
some time. The act has received heavy criticism for depicting gay life as 
deviant and inherently dangerous. The late George Michael was outed when he 
engaged in a“lewd act” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/26/george-michael-lgbt-rights-i-never-had-a-problem-with-being-gay>
 in Beverly Hills in 1998, and Republican senator Larry Craig was lambasted in 
media in 2007 when he “tapped his right foot”, which an officersaid 
<http://www.cnn.com/2007/POLITICS/08/27/craig.arrest/?iref=nextin> was 
“recognized as a signal used by persons wishing to engage in lewd conduct”.

The shame was viscerally reinforced in the 1980 William Friedkin movie 
Cruising, in which Al Pacino must go undercover in “the world of homosexual 
sadomasochistic sex he is assigned to infiltrate” to investigate a string of 
murders. As Roger Ebertnoted <http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/cruising-1980>, 
the film’s controversial production did not just alarm conservatives but also 
“the New York gay community [which] rose up in protest”, worried the film would 
“present a distorted view of gay life. It would imply the small subculture of 
S&M was more prevalent than it is, and that, if gays were ‘into’ violence, 
attacks on them would somehow be justified.” (James Franco was behind a 
less-seen riff on Friedkin’s film, Interior. Leather. Bar., in 2013.)

But the art of cruising is not simply about shame and self-hatred; it can also 
be a space of exploration and connection, as queer literature and art have 
reflected more recently. It’s at the heart of Garth Greenwell’s much-lauded 
novel from earlier this year, What Belongs To You, in which an unnamed American 
narrator becomes obsessed with a sex worker named Mitko he meets in a bathroom 
in Bulgaria. Everything about their relationship is in the context of sex, and 
as Mitko and the narrator get to know one another, Greenwell presents gay male 
life through the prism of their complicated sex lives, moments of intimate 
partner violence, and the risk of sexuality transmitted disease.

That a book about cruising has been so welcomed by mainstream readers and 
critics 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/20/books/review-what-belongs-to-you-a-story-of-desire-and-outcomes.html>
, and featured onbest of lists 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/isaacfitzgerald/the-best-fiction-books-of-2016?utm_term=.inqn6E562#.bobNdx5dj>
 is pretty stunning. As Greenwell discussed in January, it’s been considered 
impolite to discuss not just in front of straight people, but also within gay 
circles until now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcruising-gay-culture-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091c3a1a79dc02bc709e9d923c1f760ea01914c3%2F0_78_2490_1494%2F2490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Out%20from%20the%20shadows%3A%20why%20cruising%20had%20a%20cultural%20moment%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcruising-gay-culture-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Out%20from%20the%20shadows%3A%20why%20cruising%20had%20a%20cultural%20moment%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fcruising-gay-culture-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091c3a1a79dc02bc709e9d923c1f760ea01914c3%2F0_78_2490_1494%2F2490.jpg>
 Al Pacino stars in the 1980 film Cruising, directed by William Friedkin. 
Photograph: United Artists/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Still, Greenwell contends that cruising “spaces can be spaces of exploration 
and empathy”, ripe for artistic and emotional study. And yet, due to its 
inherent corporeal hedonism that Greenwell and Bounville (and visual artists
Prem Sahib 
<https://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/gay-cruising-meets-minimalism-in-prem-sahibs-ica-show>
 andJohn Walter 
<http://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/welcome-to-john-walters-alien-sex-club>) 
have recently depicted, it’s largely been left untouched as a site of study 
within mainstream art or literature.

The reasons for this are many. One is that apps like Grindr and Scruff have 
made cruising possible on your smartphone. Another is that fear of HIV/Aids 
made the kind of free sexual exchange depicted in the Adonis play extremely 
dangerous, leadingmunicipalities to shutter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/23/gay-bathhouses-us-face-uncertain-future>
 many theaters, bathhouses and saunas where cruising flourished. But as Samuel 
Delaney describes in his beautiful 1999 bookTime Square Red, Times Square Blue 
<http://nyupress.org/books/9780814719206/>, cruising was also a victim of 
gentrification. It was victim to the pressure from real estate developers which 
led cities like New York to dispatch the NYPD to “clean up” and crack down on 
any form of sexual assembly, so that places like Times Square could be 
rebranded as family-friendly and “Disney-esque”.

Mayors like Rudy Giuliani were as likely 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6TPZjNlzp8> to “clean up” Times Square of 
what they saw as the filth of cruising as Republicans were to publicly decry 
depictions of queer sexuality 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/07/28/opinion/in-the-nation-art-and-indecency.html>
 in art. But what of the left? Why have they protested about such depictions, 
from Friedkin’s movie until now?

“I think the marriage equality battle was important and it’s important that we 
won it,” Greenwall said during an onstageinterview 
<http://gawker.com/this-is-just-a-great-sermon-on-the-desperate-urgency-of-1762965937>
 in March. But he believes that “it came at a really great cost. And that cost 
was a marketing campaign that took queer lives and translated them into values 
that could be appreciated by people who are disgusted by queer people.”

So while Greenwell believes our current moment has allowed for “a beautiful 
model of human life, and it should be available to queer people”, he also 
worries about the effects.

“I think it forecloses much of the kind of radical potential in queer life. 
And that radical potential, I think, inheres in spaces like cruising bathrooms 
and parks, where the categories by which we organize our lives, like race and 
class, get scrambled by desire, which is a reason why our culture is so 
terrified by desire, because it scrambles those things,” he said.

Cruising inhabits a kind of sexuality that is about seeking fleeting pleasure, 
allowing for bodily expression to function as free-from commitment in the same 
vein that same-sex marriage is tethered to commitment. The multimedia artist 
John Walter addressed the disappearing act by mounting the exhibitAlien Sex Club
 <http://www.cultureontheoffensive.com/alien-sex-club/>, “a large-scale 
installation based on the shapes of cruise mazes, found in sex clubs and gay 
saunas”, during 2015 Pride in London. Walterwanted 
<https://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/welcome-to-john-walters-alien-sex-club> to 
raise awareness about HIV and hosted testing onsite to decrease its stigma. He 
said: “I’m not actively facilitating sex,” in his exhibits, “I advertise my 
work on Grindr. If people want to have sex in the spaces I do my work, that’s 
fine. It highlights the fact that you can repurpose any space for sex.”

Then, last fall, British artist Prem Sahib <http://www.artspace.com/prem-sahib>
 had two shows in London which explictly dealt with “cottaging”, though the 
work is so clean and precise, a viewer might not know the reference unless they 
knew about underground gay culture. As Viceobserved 
<https://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/article/gay-cruising-meets-minimalism-in-prem-sahibs-ica-show>
, “the gay aspect of the work is thrilling and affirmative to anyone who’s 
found themselves cruising in loos, losing themselves on a dance floor 
(preferably Berghain) or lounging listlessly in an odd sauna.”

Garth Greenwell on his debut novel: 'I've been cruising since I was 14'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/25/garth-greenwell-new-book-what-belongs-to-you-interview>
But one reason it is so surprising to see cruising being taken seriously in 
theater, gallery art and literature (domains which, no matter how much they may 
seem to foster the work of gay men, have their gates kept by straight people) 
is that a fear of possible cruising has been a driving force in American 
cultural politics. As the writer and scientist Joseph Osmundsonwrote 
<http://lithub.com/where-trans-bodies-and-straight-fragility-meet/>, “This has 
been the year that cruising has reached the literary mainstream,” but also “the 
year that gay, queer, and especially trans bodies have been made criminal 
entities simply for existing in public bathrooms.” All over the US, the threat 
of cruising has created a wave of transphobia, just as cruising is getting an 
airing in art – from North Carolina’s notoriousHB2 
<http://www.ncleg.net/sessions/2015e2/bills/house/pdf/h2v4.pdf> “bathroom bill” 
to11 states suing the federal government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/25/eleven-states-sue-us-government-transgender-bathroom-laws>
 after the Obama administration directed “US public schools to let transgender 
students use the bathrooms and locker rooms that match their gender identity”. 
As Osmundson writes, “it is in bathrooms that these two trends – integration 
into the mainstream literary canon and a rightwing backlash against gay and 
trans progress – currently meet.”

It is no surprise, then, that liberals and conservatives alike have been loth 
to discuss cruising, particularly as the most heralded (if tacitly secure) 
civil rights win for LGBT people – same-sex marriage – is only barely accepted 
on the condition of queer life being mythologically private and desexualized. 
Bathrooms have become such a source of sexual anxiety that, according to alarge 
survey 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/12/08/majority-of-transgender-americans-now-avoid-public-bathrooms/>
, a majority of transgender Americans avoid public restrooms altogether.

Good art, though, should walk us right into the mess of locations of conflict. 
That’s why it is so rewarding when Bounville, Greenwell, Walter and Sahib take 
us into these shadowy spaces, where so many gay connections have happened (and 
still happen). Cruising sites are spaces of gay censure and celebration alike, 
tense with the possibilities of danger and connection at the same time. They 
straddle the boundaries of the public and private, the respectable and the 
reviled. Cruising spaces may never be wholly resolved – and thus they remain 
ripe for art.
 