
The Lib Dems, Labour and Greens together polled more votes the Witney 
byelection than the Conservatives (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/witney-byelection-lib-dems-tories-slashed-majority>
, theguardian.com, 21 October), but the Tories won the seat. Does the word 
“cooperate” not appear in the UK edition of the A-Z of strategies for 
opposition parties in a first-past-the-post system?
Paul Tattam
Chinley, Derbyshire

• I don’t share Roger Mullis’s experience (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/why-aping-humans-is-to-be-abhorred>
, 20 October). Far from greeting me with a “smile of genuine gratitude”, my 
local Oxfam bookshop was frankly irritated and very reluctant to take two 
years’ worth of National Geographic magazines (in excellent condition).
Patrick Russell
London

• I have never understood why independence for central banks is considered so 
important (Top Tories accused of foisting blame on Carney for impact of 
austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/william-hague-attacks-bank-of-england-over-ultra-low-interest-rates>
, 19 October). We had a disastrous boom and bust syndrome in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s when the Bank of England was under political control and another 
one in 2007 when it was independent.
David Redshaw
Gravesend, Kent

• I was surprised by Tory MP David Davies’s sudden interest in the dental care 
of the few young refugees who are at last being allowed to enter the UK from 
Calais (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
, 19 October). While I’m sure that some of them would not be averse to a free 
dental checkup, he should be careful not to be seen to be promoting compulsory 
dentistry. Human rights legislation could well class this as cruel and unusual 
punishment.
John Eoin Douglas
Edinburgh

• I don’t care if Sir Philip Green keeps his knighthood (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, 21 October) as long as all his ex-employees get their pensions. Keep up the 
pressure on him to reimburse those who lost out: if the trade-off is that he 
keeps his title, so be it. The damage to his reputation and that of predatory 
capitalism is done.
Lorrie Marchington
Whaley Bridge, Derbyshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 