
A century passed – the 20th – in which the University of Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/oxforduniversity> did not acquire an 
interior as magnificent as this. A cylinder of void rises seven storeys, ringed 
with galleries, congruent until they diminish and become eccentric at the top 
two levels. Other circles spin off, secondary stairs and light fittings, as if 
this were a habitable astrolabe, the model of a previously unknown solar 
system. The main material is concrete, but warmed by the smell of oak, with its 
notes of wine cellars and forests. The form echoes Frank Lloyd Wright’s 
Guggenheim in New York; the ambition compares to the large Victorian chapel of 
Keble College, where some of the guano fortune of the donor William Gibbs was 
transmuted into polychromatic piety.

The inner wonder is combined with an impervious exterior. The internal form 
translates into a glass drum surmounted by a smaller one, with the smooth 
geometry interrupted at one point by a rectangular layer. The entrance is 
assertively symmetrical. The glass cladding offers opacity, although the 
architects say that it will be more transparent when it is complete. There is a 
ground-level cafe that for now will open only inwards, denying the simple move 
of providing pavement tables, and offering more inscrutable glazing to the 
passer-by. Security barriers will stop the casual visitor getting deep into the 
building. The circular shapes seem to whip up a wind on the paved plinth.

The form, say its architects, Herzog and de Meuron, is inspired by the 
university’s freestanding monuments such as the baroque Radcliffe Camera, but 
the material is deliberately not of its context, nothing like the neoclassical 
stone ex-chapel to one side, or the Oxford University Press building, also 
stone and classical, opposite, or the modest houses of the surrounding streets. 
The material is high-class curtain walling, a variant of a type seen 
everywhere. As often in their work, the architects try to introduce some 
sublimity or suggestive evanescence to the surface through its reflections of 
sky and clouds, but the stronger reading is of something both confident in 
itself and from another world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96de129829b467c137133ed1985322f15a4fb3bf%2F102_588_3119_1872%2F3119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96de129829b467c137133ed1985322f15a4fb3bf%2F102_588_3119_1872%2F3119.jpg>
 The Blavatnik School of Government in Oxford by Herzog & de Meuron 
It creates a privileged inner life wrapped in a distancing exterior. It 
resembles a ministry in an architecturally astute petro-state, which is a 
pertinent if questionable reference for what is the new building (not quite 
finished) ofOxford’s Blavatnik school of government 
<http://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/about/new-building>. Come here, it seems to say to 
future administrators and rulers of this and other countries, and prepare 
yourself for life in an agreeable, culturally sophisticated bubble, an 
inward-looking society protected by a hard septum from the rest of the world.

It seems to follow the values of its donor. The school has attracted headlines 
recently, for the fact that it is sponsored by £75m from the Ukrainian-born 
oligarch and Putin associateLeonard Blavatnik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/len-blavatnik>, who was implicated in, 
among other things, the Russian state-assisted mugging of BP. Twenty-one 
people, including heroic opponents of oppression in the Soviet era,wrote a 
letter to theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/03/oxford-university-must-stop-selling-its-reputation-to-vladimir-putin-associates>
protesting at the university’s acceptance of such money. As was previously 
noted in theNew Yorker, it is like “having a henhouse sponsored by a fox”.

It is also the most dramatic example yet of a new kind of Oxford architecture 
that engages in the international competition with Harvard or Berkeley for the 
best students and academics by trying to offer the most impressive facilities. 
Big international donors are required to pay for such buildings, which in turn 
means that glamorous designs by big international architects are enlisted to 
attract such donors.

For many decades modern architecture in Oxford has not been like this. It has 
been more careful and scrupulous, trying to marry the traditions of quadrangles 
with modern construction techniques. It has paid its dues to the city’s use of 
Cotswold stone, either with the stone itself, or with brick or concrete not too 
far from its honeyed hue. There was an acute awareness of the university’s 
architectural traditions, and of the need to honour them in a modern spirit. 
Finishes were of good quality, details considered, budgets a bit higher than on 
the social housing projects on which some of these architects –Powell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/may/09/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
and Moya, Arup Associates, Howell Killick Partridge & Amis – also worked.

These works had to survive the merciless scepticism of dons and 
undergraduates, who loved to magnify the technical faults – and there were some 
– that came as the slapstick companions to the high ideals. There was also the 
occasional rude boy such asJames Stirling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/mar/20/james-stirling-tate-britain-drawings>
, whose Florey building for Queen’s College challenged the Cotswold quadrangles 
with an angular construction of industrial glazing and hard brick tile, and 
became a legend of acoustic and thermal malfunction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab9d7d3863944c27ae812c5c06f3969761a9716d%2F0_156_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab9d7d3863944c27ae812c5c06f3969761a9716d%2F0_156_5000_3001%2F5000.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid’s Investcorp building at St Anthony’s College. Photograph: Alamy 
As elsewhere there was a blip in the 1980s when confidence in modern 
architecture collapsed, but it was bridged more smoothly in Oxford than 
elsewhere by architects such asRichard MacCormac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jul/29/richard-maccormac>, who 
continued the theme of beige/honeyed traditional-modern quads, with the 
“traditional” dial turned up a notch or two. This way of building continues to 
the present, in some ways better than it has ever been, and thanks to advances 
in construction and building regulations less leaky/noisy/freezing/boiling than 
before. Examples include blocks atSt Anthony’s 
<http://www.bennettsassociates.com/portfolio/0604/> and Somerville 
<http://www.niallmclaughlin.com/projects/student-housing-somerville-college/> 
colleges, predominantly student accommodation, by Rab Bennetts and Níall 
McLaughlin.

But things changed with the appointment of Rafael Viñoly in 2005 to prepare a 
masterplan for £500m of new university buildings on the former site of a 
hospital, the Radcliffe Infirmary. Born in Uruguay, based in New York, and now 
best known in Britain for hisWalkie Talkie tower  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/sep/02/walkie-talkie-london-wins-carbuncle-cup-worst-building-of-year>
in the City of London, Viñoly is a flamboyant character outside the traditions 
of those careful history-conscious Brits. He envisaged a plan of radiating 
avenues and diagonal axes, a slice of Haussmann’s Paris transposed to Oxford, 
which was widely criticised for its indifference to local patterns.

The Commission for Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> and the Built 
Environment (Cabe) condemned the plan as inflexible and insensitive, and it was 
eventually abandoned. The Blavatnik, indeed, stands on the spot where Viñoly 
hoped that his grandest diagonal would be launched, but he still designed the 
new mathematical institute, which now stands on part of the infirmary site.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d144c99f489a016096f56c5da77ac317a4544c7%2F0_0_850_1276%2F850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d144c99f489a016096f56c5da77ac317a4544c7%2F0_0_850_1276%2F850.jpg>
 Viñoly’s Mathematical Institute: ‘By his standards sober’. Photograph: Alain 
Goriely 
Another monument of the new Oxford is Zaha Hadid’s Middle East centre, now 
called theInvestcorp Building 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2015-05-27-new-building-zaha-hadid-unveiled-middle-east-centre>
, at St Anthony’s, a torqued tube, very much not-Cotswold, in stainless steel, 
glass and concrete. Investcorp’s chairman, Nemir Kirdar, is like Hadid an 
Iraqi-born Briton. There is also theWeston library 
<http://www.wilkinsoneyre.com/projects/new-bodleian>, part of the Bodleian, a 
more discreet work by WilkinsonEyre that renovates a 1930s building, which 
nonetheless is partly driven by sponsorship. “It’s hard to fundraise for 
storage,” says the Bodleian’s spokeswoman, which was the project’s primary 
function, so more appealing and not unwelcome additions were made to the brief: 
exhibition galleries, a visiting scholars’ centre and a large central space of 
partly uncertain purpose. The Garfield Weston Foundation, Samsung and others 
duly came up with support.

Of these the most dazzling in form is Hadid’s, an intricate assembly of 
multiple unexpected spaces, in which a freeform open-welled stair runs up from 
the wooden cave of a lecture theatre, its ceiling cut with slashes of light, to 
a bright cave of a reading room, its wall curving in all directions, and 
tear-shaped roof lights cut into the ceiling. Glimpses are offered, up, down, 
sideways and obliquely, to grass, sky, tree-trunk and historic neighbours. For 
all its radical dissimilarity to the Edwardian and Victorian villas that it 
adjoins, it is more responsive to the site than many of Hadid’s recent works. 
Its spatial gymnastics are an answer, if not a purely rational one, to the 
question of getting a complex set of uses into a constrained location.

Viñoly’s building is by his standards sober, if not exactly retiring, which 
perhaps reflects the mathematicians’ insistence that they got a building that 
really met their needs. It includes such things as offices that can be 
ventilated simply by opening a window, which doesn’t happen often in buildings 
of this scale. Externally it offers large gridded flanks, like graph paper, one 
is tempted to say. Inside it has plunging atria where wooden galleries and 
stairs encourage, as they are supposed to, chance meetings. Less successful are 
the clanging, hard-surfaced spaces that contain a cafeteria, an exhibition 
gallery and common rooms. The man from the maths department told me that they 
weren’t like an airport terminal but, actually, they are.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edeb909fd2fbd647ca652b91733470b42ccb60f%2F0_0_3838_5760%2F3838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%E2%80%99s%20dreaming%20spires%E2%80%A6%20and%20hard%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Foxford-university-architecture-dreaming-spires-hard-cash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edeb909fd2fbd647ca652b91733470b42ccb60f%2F0_0_3838_5760%2F3838.jpg>
 Inside the new Weston library, part of the Bodleian, in Oxford, by 
WilkinsonEyre, a renovation of the existing 1930s building by Sir Giles Gilbert 
Scott. Photograph: Pete Lusabia/Alamy 
These buildings come with the large budgets and functional surprises that you 
tend to find in iconic architecture. Blavatnik costs £30m for 9,800 square 
metres, Investcorp £11m for 1,127 square metres. Some odd-shaped working areas 
end up being squeezed into the Blavatnik’s circles, and the archive room in the 
Investcorp has a huge south-facing glass wall, which is hardly ideal in a space 
dedicated to precious documents.

As in other modern cities, investment in the individual object can come at the 
expense of the cohesion of the whole. This is less of a problem for the Hadid 
building, for which the more muted work of Bennetts et al acts as (although 
this wouldn’t have been Bennetts’s primary ambition for his project) a foil. 
The infirmary site is another matter. Most of it is a big, empty not yet 
developed space, over which the 18th-century Radcliffe Observatory presides 
with the surprised look of someone who finds that their bedroom wall has fallen 
away. New buildings advance towards each other from different directions, 
Viñoly, Herzog, and the flank of McLaughlin’s Somerville block, but speaking 
such divergent languages that it is hard to know what they would say to each 
other if they met. Also as in other modern cities, investment in icons 
contrasts with indifference towards more everyday places. The university that 
is so keen to show its glamour projects to the world commissioned theCastle 
Mill student housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/02/oxford-university-plans-student-building-castle-mill>
, whose impact on the scenic Port Meadow prompted local outrage. The fiasco has 
at least prompted an invitation to Cabe to oversee design quality from now on.

There is something to celebrate in all this, which is the current energy and, 
sometimes, quality of current Oxford architecture. Nor is it a bad thing if the 
formulas of Oxford building are challenged. Oh God, not another bloody quad, I 
can imagine the folk at Herzog & de Meuron saying, as they went for their 
un-honeyed glass castle. The place should not always be condemned to repeat 
itself.

It remains to be defined what exactly this new ambition wants to achieve, 
beyond the creation of expensive lures for rich donors. It has been pointed out 
that the use of university architecture for the laundering of consciences and 
reputations has been practised over centuries by slave traders, ennobled 
gangsters, monk-robbers and tyrants’ stooges. It could also be said that some 
of the resulting buildings are not exactly democratic. But the question for 
Oxford now is how much it wants its architecture to reflect its own idea of 
what a modern university might be, and how much it wants to follow the 
sponsors’ money.
 