
 The whistleblower behind the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> broke their silence on 
Friday to explain in detail how the injustices of offshore tax havens drove 
them to the biggest data leak in history.

The source, whose identity and gender remain a secret, denied being a spy.

“For the record, I do not work for any government or intelligence agency, 
directly or as a contractor, and I never have. My viewpoint is entirely my own.”

The whistleblower said the leak of 11.5m documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
 from the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca had triggered a “new, encouraging 
global debate”, thanks to the publication last month of stories by an
international consortium of newspapers 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160403-mossack-fonseca-offshore-secrets.html>, 
including the Guardian.

“Shell companies are often associated with the crime of tax evasion. But the 
Panama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> Papers show beyond a shadow 
of a doubt that although shell companies are not illegal, by definition they 
are used to carry out a wide array of serious crimes,” the source wrote. 
“Income inequality is one of the defining issues of our time.”


“The prevailing media narrative thus far has focused on the scandal of what is 
allowed and legal in this system. What is allowed is indeed scandalous and must 
be changed.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Panama%20Papers%3A%20how%20to%20hide%20a%20billion%20dollars%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Panama%20Papers%3A%20how%20to%20hide%20a%20billion%20dollars%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer&media=>
The Panama Papers: how to hide a billion dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/03/the-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer>
In what amounts to an 1,800-word manifesto days before David Cameron holds a 
global anti-corruption summit in London, the source singled out the 
Conservatives, saying they had been “shameless about concealing their own 
practices involving offshore companies”.

Cameron was forced to disclose last month he held shares in Blairmore, his 
father’s offshore investment fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/09/david-cameron-questions-gift-mother>
. More than 40 countries are due to attend the summit on Thursday.


The source behind the Panama Papers got in touch last year with Bastian 
Obermayer, an investigative journalist with Germany’s Süddeutsche Zeitung 
newspaper. They used the name John Doe and sent the message: “Interested in 
secret data?”

The source gave Süddeutsche Zeitung leaked documents from Mossack Fonseca’s 
internal database in real time instalments. The papers included details of the 
beneficial owners of offshore companies, passport copies, and emails. The 
newspaper shared the material with theInternational Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists (ICIJ) 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160403-mossack-fonseca-offshore-secrets.html> 
in Washington.


In one of the biggest collaborations in journalistic history, the ICIJ gave 
access to the data to 100 media organisations, in 83 countries, which spent a 
year investigating them.

The source said they decided to act after understanding the “scale of the 
injustices” the documents described. Mossack Fonsecadenies wrongdoing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/mossack-fonsecas-response-to-the-panama-papers>
 and says its operations in Panama and elsewhere are “beyond reproach”.

Since the publication of the papers last month, governments and law 
enforcement agencies have sought access to the files. The ICIJ had “rightly” 
declined to help, the source said, but added: “I, however, would be willing to 
cooperate with law enforcements to the extent that I am able.”

Intriguingly, the source said they originally offered the documents to 
“several major media outlets”. Editors reviewed the Panama Papers but in the 
end “chose not to cover them”, they alleged. It is unclear which media 
organisations declined the material.

The anonymous whistleblower also approached WikiLeaks <https://wikileaks.org/> 
– again without success. “Even WikiLeaks didn’t answer its tip line 
repeatedly,” the source complained, adding: “The media has failed.”

The source was excoriating about the legal profession, which helped set up 
tens of thousands of Mossack Fonseca-run shell companies. More than half the 
law firm’s offshore corporations were based in the British Virgin Islands, a 
UK-administered tax haven.

“Mossack Fonseca did not work in a vacuum. Despite repeated fines and 
documented regulatory violations, it found allies and clients at major law 
firms in virtually every nation,” the manifesto claimed.

The source was also critical of governments, in particular over their harsh 
treatment of whistleblowers. They appear to have been inspired at least in part 
by the example ofEdward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, who in 2013 revealed how 
the US and UK routinely monitor the communications of their own citizens. The 
Obama administration has charged Snowden with espionage and he was “stranded in 
Moscow”.

“For his revelations about the NSA, he [Snowden] deserves a hero’s welcome and 
a substantial prize, not banishment,” the source said.

Other whistleblowers who have faced punishment for their actions include 
Antoine Deltour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/24/luxleaks-antoine-deltour-luxembourg-tax-avoidance-pricewaterhousecoopers-trial>
, the source noted. Deltour is on trial for revealing how Luxembourg secretly 
sanctioned massive, aggressive cross-border tax avoidance by multinational 
corporations.

The source supported moves by Cameron to introduce public registers of 
offshore companies which would show the beneficial owners of companies. Britain 
is to introduce a public register for UK companies next month. But Downing 
Street has so far beenunable to persuade Britain’s overseas territories to 
follow suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/nigeria-calls-on-anti-corruption-summit-to-back-registers-of-ownership>
. They have offered to share information, but only with law enforcement 
agencies and only on demand.

Despite some positive steps, the UK government needed to do more, the source 
said: “The UK still has a vital role to play in ending financial secrecy on 
various island territories, which are unquestionably the cornerstone of 
institutional corruption worldwide.”

The whistleblower was generally underwhelmed by official reaction to the leak. 
In New Zealand, the prime minister, John Key, had been “curiously quiet” about 
his country’s role in enabling “financial fraud” in the Cook Islands. In the 
US, tax evasion could not be fixed, the source argued, while politicians relied 
on the super-rich for campaign funding.

The source concluded on an optimistic note. In an age of “inexpensive, 
limitless digital storage” and internet connections that transcend national 
boundaries “the next revolution will be digitised”.

“Or perhaps it has already begun,” the source said.

Credit: Süddeutsche Zeitung
 