
A group of investigative journalists has published the names of thousands of 
offshore companies at the heart of thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
 – a massive trove of data on the finances of the rich and powerful.

The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists made data on 200,000 
entities available on its website <https://offshoreleaks.icij.org/> on Monday.

Mossack Fonseca: inside the firm that helps the super-rich hide their money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
The files contain basic corporate information about companies, trusts and 
foundations set up in 21 jurisdictions including Hong Kong and the US state of 
Nevada. The data was obtained from Panamanian law firmMossack Fonseca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
, which said it was hacked.

Users can search the data and see the networks involving the offshore 
companies, including, where available, Mossack Fonseca’s internal records of 
the true owners.


Information and documents on bank accounts, phone numbers and emails have been 
removed from the database.

Mossack Fonseca said last week it had sent a cease and desist letter to the 
ICIJ urging the organisation not to publish the database, “taking into 
consideration that it is based on the theft of confidential information”.

The ICIJ said it was putting the information online “in the public interest” 
as “a careful release of basic corporate information”, not a “data dump”, as it 
builds on an earlier database of offshore entities.

Setting up an offshore company is not by itself illegal or evidence of illegal 
conduct, and Mossack Fonseca said it observed rules requiring it to identify 
its clients.

The ICIJ prefaced the database release by noting that the appearance of 
particular persons and companies on the list did not imply wrongdoing.

A world of hidden wealth: why we are shining a light offshore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/a-world-of-hidden-wealth-why-we-are-shining-a-light-offshore>
But anti-poverty campaigners say shell companies can be used by the wealthy 
and powerful to shield money from taxation, or to launder the gains from 
bribery, embezzlement and other forms of corruption. The Group of 20 most 
powerful economies has agreed that individual governments should make sure 
authorities can tell who really owns legally registered companies, but 
implementation in national law has lagged.

The data cache showed offshore holdings of 12 current and former world leaders.

Reports based on the documents quickly led to the resignation of Sigmundur 
Davíð Gunnlaugsson as Iceland’s prime minister after it was revealed he and his 
wife had set up a company in the British Virgin Islands that had holdings in 
Iceland’s failed banks. The British prime minister, David Cameron, who had 
campaigned for financial transparency,faced questions about shares he once held 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/09/david-cameron-questions-gift-mother>
in an offshore trust set up by his father. The ICIJ reported that associates of 
the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, moved some $2bn through such companies. 
Putin’s spokesman dismissed the report.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpanama-papers-full-database-of-offshore-companies-published-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F192b2bb44a60678184bb81c36255068230a61630%2F0_80_3300_1979%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20Papers%3A%20full%20database%20of%20offshore%20companies%20published%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpanama-papers-full-database-of-offshore-companies-published-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20Papers%3A%20full%20database%20of%20offshore%20companies%20published%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpanama-papers-full-database-of-offshore-companies-published-online%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F192b2bb44a60678184bb81c36255068230a61630%2F0_80_3300_1979%2F3300.jpg>
 Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson resigned as Iceland’s prime minister over 
revelations in the Panama Papers. Photograph: Birgir Por Hardarson/EPA 
The ICIJ said on Monday that Mossack Fonseca had files on dozens of Americans 
who have faced accusations of civil or criminal financial misconduct. That was 
based on reporting credited to consortium partners McClatchy Newspapers, the 
Portland Business Journal and Fusion Investigates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Panama%20Papers%3A%20how%20to%20hide%20a%20billion%20dollars%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Panama%20Papers%3A%20how%20to%20hide%20a%20billion%20dollars%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fthe-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer&media=>
The Panama Papers: how to hide a billion dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/03/the-panama-papers-how-to-hide-a-billion-dollars-video-explainer>
Its website reported that people who had set up offshore companies included 
people with publicly available records of their legal troubles. One was a 
financier sentenced in 2002 to prison for fraud. The firm also set up a company 
for six Americans later sued for running a Ponzi scheme, a type of financial 
fraud in which new money is used to pay off earlier investors until the scheme 
collapses.

The report said the leaked records “suggest that Mossack Fonseca’s high-volume 
business model made it difficult for it to keep track of its clients’ 
backgrounds and activities”. The firm set up more than 100,000 offshore 
entities, such as trusts and shell companies, between 2005 and 2015, the report 
said.

“Mossack Fonseca’s working relationships with dozens of Americans tied to 
financial misconduct raises questions about how well the firm keeps its 
commitment to following international standards for preventing money laundering 
and keeping offshore companies out of the hands of criminal elements,” the ICIJ 
report said.
 