
A founding partner of the law firm at the centre of the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> revelations was a 
minister for and adviser to Panama’s president but will not receive special 
treatment in a high-profile corruption investigation, a deputy minister said on 
Thursday.

Ramón Fonseca of Mossack Fonseca  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
was close to Juan Carlos Varela until allegations of money-laundering linked to 
Brazil’s state-controlled oil company forced him to quit his positions two 
months ago.

Mossack Fonseca: inside the firm that helps the super-rich hide their money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
But Ivan Zarak, vice-minister of economy for Panama, told an audience in 
Washington 
<https://www.wilsoncenter.org/event/panama-combating-banking-secrecy-through-financial-transparency>
 that Fonseca would face the law like any other citizen and claimed it was 
wrong to blame his country for the worldwide scourge of offshore tax evasion.

“We cannot deny Mr Ramón Fonseca was an adviser to President Varela in a post 
as a minister adviser,” he said in response to a question from the Guardian at 
the Wilson Center thinktank. “He resigned a couple of months ago to focus on 
his defence.

“Now, Panama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> is respectful of the 
rule of law and the separation of powers. It will be up to the attorney 
general’s office to make the appropriate investigations and come out with a 
definite proposal.”

Mossack Fonseca, which specialises in setting up offshore companies, is 
currently under examination by four different regulatory agencies, Zarak added. 
Fonseca has said the company did not break any laws.

Zarak continued: “He will be treated as any Panamanian by the attorney 
general. This is a very high-profile case and I would just ask for any person 
to wait until the final investigations are made.”

While the corruption case gained little international attention, this month’s 
Panama Papers leaks embarrassed several world leaders,including the British 
prime minister, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/09/david-cameron-questions-gift-mother>
, and shone a spotlight on the shadowy world of offshore companies. They also 
caused discomfort in the small Central American republic, home to 3.9 million 
people, where Fonseca’s proximity to the president is potentially damaging.

In a televised address, Varela pledged to create an international panel to 
help improve transparency in the country’s offshore financial industry. Earlier 
this week Mossack Fonseca’s headquarters in Panama Citywere raided by police 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-panama-tax-raid-idUSKCN0XA020> on the orders 
of the attorney general.

Panamanian officials sought to fight back at Thursday’s event in the US 
capital, arguing that Varela, who has been in power for 21 months, had already 
begun financial and legal reforms and it would be unfair to scapegoat the 
country for a global problem. They repeatedly used the prefix “so-called” when 
referring to the Panama Papers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fpanama-papers-unfairly-named-says-juan-carlos-varela-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20Papers%20unfairly%20named%2C%20says%20Juan%20Carlos%20Varela%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fpanama-papers-unfairly-named-says-juan-carlos-varela-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20Papers%20unfairly%20named%2C%20says%20Juan%20Carlos%20Varela%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fpanama-papers-unfairly-named-says-juan-carlos-varela-video&media=>
 The Panama Papers are unfairly named, Juan Carlos Varela has repeatedly said. 
Zarak said: “From all the allegations being put forward, none of the assets 
mentioned are deposited in the Panamanian system. We’re talking about 210,000 
companies. Maybe there are some companies that have assets in the Panamanian 
banking system but so far all of the financial operations were performed in 
Europe.

“So if we’re going to talk about the regulations and if there’s blame to go 
around, I would say there’s plenty of blame to go around, not just in Panama … 
To pinpoint this problem on Panama is completely unfair … Because of the 
‘Panama Papers’, this unfortunate name, we’ve become like the poster child for 
this, and 75% of those companies were not incorporated in Panama.”

The event at the Wilson Center <https://www.wilsoncenter.org/>, named after 
former president Woodrow Wilson, had been planned before the Panama Papers came 
to light and no doubt better attended because of them. Zarak commented wryly: 
“When we first started discussing this event over a month ago, our plans were 
slightly more low key.”

He said Panama had been ranked as one of the fastest-growing economies in 
Latin America and the most competitive economy in Central America, attracting 
increased foreign direct investment. Legal services related to corporations 
represent less than 1% of GDP.

He went on: “I have to acknowledge the elephant in the room: the recent 
publication of documents that have unfairly been used to tarnish the name of 
our beloved country. Let me say, first and foremost, that Panama does not 
tolerate illegal activities in any form.”

Panama has already made significant reforms and would cooperate and share 
information with the international community in its investigations, Zarak 
continued. The new international panel would include Nobel prize-winning 
economistJoseph Stiglitz <http://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/jstiglitz> and 
report its findings in around six months. “That said, the so-called Panama 
Papers are not in fact about Panama or even about Panamanian companies.”

Mossack Fonseca has branches in 30 countries around the world, he noted, and 
some of the transactions detailed in the files date back 40 years.

Mossack Fonseca's Panama offices raided as tax investigators meet in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/mossack-fonseca-raided-offices-investigators-panama>
“These documents shed light not on a Panamanian problem but rather on a global 
phenomenon that is affecting almost all countries. This is not a cop-out as no 
doubt there are further steps Panama has committed to take to strengthen 
transparency but rather a reflection of what is happening today around the 
world.”

Zarak added: “More work needs to be done to eliminate the problem of tax 
evasion in money laundering not only in Panama but around the world. We must 
resist the temptation to go on a historical witch-hunt that ignores the 
significant progress made in recent years.”

Eyda Varela de Chincilla, Panama’s vice-minister of finance, made a brief 
reference to this week’s raid on Mossack Fonseca’s office, remarking: “This 
shows our system is working as intended … The new regime we have so recently 
implemented has started taking the appropriate steps to improve financial 
transparency. However, this is only the beginning.”

In February the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) removed Panama from its 
“grey list” 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/riskandcompliance/2016/02/19/algeria-angola-panama-removed-from-fatf-blacklist/>
, consisting of countries it regards as having inadequate provisions in place 
to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. The 
intergovernmental organisation said it had made “significant progress” in 
meeting its standards.


Chip Poncy <http://www.defenddemocracy.org/about-fdd/team-overview/chip-poncy>
, a senior adviser at the Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance at the 
Foundation for Defense of Democracies, said Panama had been grey-listed by the 
FATF in June 2014. “I’ve never seen a country come off the list inside of two 
years. Panama did it in just under two years, so this was supposed to be a 
congratulatory panel and it should be.”

Referring to an episode of the current affairs series 60 Minutes 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/anonymous-inc-60-minutes-steve-kroft-investigation>
 that investigated the setting up of anonymous shell companies in the US, he 
asked: “Do we think this is a Panama problem? Fourteen out of 15 law firms in 
New York City agreed to do the same thing on camera … There was a shock that 
we, Americans in this case, allow this to happen.”

Congress has been holding hearings about terrorist groups’ exploitation of 
such loopholes for more than 15 years, Poncy added. “I’m shocked that we’re 
shocked … The real question is, are we going to be shocked this time long 
enough to do something about it?”
 