
Thousands of people, many waving paper fans to fend off the humidity and heat, 
gathered at Cocolí locks outside Panama City on Sunday to watch a colossal 
container ship bearing 9,472 containers become the first vessel to officially 
pass through the newly expandedPanama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama>
 canal and, hopefully, usher in a new era of trading prosperity for the Central 
American country.

The opening of the expansion of the 102-year-old landmark after a 
controversial and delayed $5.25bn refit comes at a difficult moment for the 
shipping industry. International trade has slowed as China’s economic growth 
has stalled. In Egypt the Suez canal – Panama’s main rival – recently lowered 
tariffs in an attempt to keep its traffic.

But there was little sign of worry as the 158ft-wide (48.2 meters) and 
984ft-long (300 meters) Cosco Shipping Panama, approached the Panamanian 
isthmus on Sunday.

As a few thousand people danced in the stands erected on the banks of the 
newly constructed Cocolí locks, other Panamanians gathered around large screens 
placed throughout Panama.


When the ship approached the Cocolí locks, a wild cheer went up. People got to 
their feet in hopes of getting a view of the ship right before it entered the 
latest stage of its journey from Greece across the Atlantic and through the 
Panama canal to the Pacific Ocean.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b9d99fb522428d66f1e464caf52615df522921d%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20'center%20of%20the%20Americas'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20%27center%20of%20the%20Americas%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b9d99fb522428d66f1e464caf52615df522921d%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Cosco Shipping Panama cargo ship prepares to cruise past the old Pedro 
Miguel locks, as it heads towards the new Cocolí locks, on Sunday. Photograph: 
Dario Lopez-Mills/AP 
The special guest section of the opening ceremony, which housed about 3,000 
people, was packed with delegations from different states, business associates 
and heads of different authorities and organizations.

“This new transit route is the tip of the iceberg in making Panama once again 
the logistic center of theAmericas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>
,” Jorge Luis Quijano, canal administrator, said on Sunday. “And it represents 
a significant opportunity for the countries of the region to improve their 
infrastructure [and] increase their exports.”

During the early morning ceremony, a moment of silence was dedicated to people 
who died building the canal.


Story of cities #16: how the US-run Canal Zone divided Panama for a century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/06/story-cities-16-panama-canal-zone-history-us-run-divided-city>
The canal operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week and 35 to 40 ships are 
expected to pass through every day. Each trip takes about eight to 10 hours.

The expansion mainly consists of building two new locks, each with three 
slots. The newly expanded locks are meant to double the canal’s capacity. The 
locks were initially scheduled to open in 2014, on the canal’s 100th 
anniversary.

Among those gathered for the later event was Jill Biden, wife of US 
vice-president Joe Biden, who was leading the US delegation. Up until 1999, the 
canal was under the US authority. Out of the 70 heads of state invited to 
attend the ceremony, only a dozen attended. The low turnout of world’s 
politicians has been attributed to thePanama Papers scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
, which erupted when 11.5m documents belonging to Mossack Fonseca, a 
Panama-based law firm, were leaked earlier this year.

Panama officials have said that the scandal unjustly damaged the country’s 
reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/panama-papers-canal-mossack-fonseca>
, as only a portion of the companies mentioned in the documents were actually 
incorporated in Panama.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e51a9e2ab54959ce6d95c72e65427a09b47ffd3%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20'center%20of%20the%20Americas'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20%27center%20of%20the%20Americas%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e51a9e2ab54959ce6d95c72e65427a09b47ffd3%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Jill Biden at the Panama Pacifico airport in Panama City. Biden attended the 
opening ceremony of the the Panama canal expansion project. Photograph: Jeffrey 
Arguedas/EPA 
The Panama Papers leak shone a bright light on the world of offshore tax 
planning. In addition to its headquarters in Panama, the firm employed 600 
people working in 42 countries and was the world’s fourth biggest offshore law 
firm.

Ivan Zarak, Panama’s vice-minister of economy, said that referring to the 
Mossak Fonseca leak and the ensuing scandal as Panama Papers was unjust.

“It’s not about Panama, it’s about one company. Nobody called it the Texas 
fraud when Enron [went] bankrupt,” he said. “It’s unjust. You are holding 
accountable the whole country for the actions of one company.”

In the week leading up to the opening of the new locks, the Panama Canal 
Authority has also been defensively answering questions raised bya New York 
Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/06/22/world/americas/panama-canal.html?_r=0>
report into the project. Among the concerns voiced by those interviewed by the 
Times was whether the concrete used in the canal was strong enough, whether, 
after the end of the driest season in 36 years, there was another water and 
whether the new locks were big enough to accommodate the boats they were 
intended for.


The new locks can accommodate 98% of the ships currently floating. But by 2019 
that number is expected to drop to 95%, according to Manuel Benítez, deputy 
administrator at the Panama Canal Authority, as even larger ships are launched.

“Will the ships keep growing forever? I think there is a point of diminishing 
returns,” said Benítez.

“The Panama Canal Authority is already looking into another expansion,” said 
Zarak. But the new expansion plans will have to be economically viable, he 
added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa099535706f3aff2f8ace0a8f4106df801ac12a7%2F366_122_3644_2186%2F3644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20'center%20of%20the%20Americas'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20canal%20reopens%20with%20hopes%20for%20trade%20boost%20as%20%27center%20of%20the%20Americas%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fpanama-canal-expansion-reopens-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa099535706f3aff2f8ace0a8f4106df801ac12a7%2F366_122_3644_2186%2F3644.jpg>
 The Neo-panamax cargo ship Cosco Shipping Panama makes passage through the new 
locks in the expanded canal. Photograph: Oscar Rivera/EPA 
The canal already has 166 reservations. About 17 of those reservations are for 
liquified petroleum gas, LPG, carriers. In the coming years, Panama hopes to 
capitalize on the fact that the US has recently become an exporter of oil.

Ilya de Marotta, executive vice-president of engineering and administration at 
the Panama Canal Authority, said that the New York Times report was “outdated” 
and that it served more as a historic account of challenges the authority faced 
while building the canal. The challenges have since been addressed and the 
project was complete, she said.

Prior to the ceremony, as Marotta made her way through the special guest area, 
she was greeted with applause. Those in attendance lined up to take photos and 
selfies with a woman who, with her trademark pink hard hat, has become a minor 
celebrity as a female engineer in charge of this challenging and historic 
project.

 There has also been pressure in Panama to ensure that some of the profits 
from the new canal are used to address inequality in the country. According to 
the World Bank, Panamareduced its poverty <http:// 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/panama/overview> rate from 39.9% to 26.2% 
between 2007 and 2012, but many of its citizens continue to live in poverty. 
Colón, on the Atlantic side of the canal, is Panama’s second largest city and 
where Sunday’s festivities began. It is also the poorest city in the country. 
Many of its building are condemned. Garbage lines the roads. Stray dogs can be 
seen roaming the streets.

The current government hopes to change that with a housing project called 
Nuevo Colón. The project includes 5,000 two- and three-bedroom apartments that 
would be rented out at $50 a month. A thousand apartments are scheduled to 
become available in October 2017. In addition to housing, residents take part 
in “human integration program” designed to provide them with skills necessary 
to enter the job market.


The buildings – designed in shape of a V and H – have open stairwells to take 
advantage of the wind and natural light. Open stairwells also allow for 
everyone to see what you are doing, said Nilda Pallares Quijano, a Nuevo Colón 
Consortium engineer who grew up in Colón. “A lot of things happen in the stairs 
here,” she said.

The development might not be finished for more than a year yet, but it seems 
to already have at least one resident. As a stray dog wandered across the site, 
no workers seemed to notice or mind. Finding some shade, the dog laid down and 
slept.
 