
I may not be the fastest runner in town. I’m never going to win any podium 
places, but for me it’s about so much more than silverware. It’s about keeping 
fit (obviously) but also about being a role model to my children – and showing 
that exercise need not be a chore.

Growing up in south Wales I would often go out running with my Dad. Unlike my 
contemporaries I actually looked forward to school cross country races and 
today I like nothing better than a long run around Richmond Park in London, 
hopefully with a few muddy puddles to splash in. I’m trying to show my own 
children that running and fitness can be fun – but what happens when one of 
your children is disabled, and running is a physical impossibility?


My youngest daughter, Daisy, is wheelchair dependent, and has complex 
disabilities which mean that participating in sport, even Paralympic sports, is 
really difficult. However, I’m not one to give up easily and, thanks to a 
special-needs jogging buggy thatmy running club <http://www.windmilers.org.uk/> 
helped to fundraise for, I take Daisy out for laps of our local park. She can 
feel the breeze on her face as we race around the paths – and she tells me to 
go faster.


Recently, Daisy got a chance to take part in a race and win her own medal at 
long last. The firstParallel London festival <http://parallellondon.com/> took 
place in the Olympic park just a few days before the Rio Paralympics opening 
ceremony. Billed as the world’s first fully accessible and all-inclusive mass 
participation push/run event, the vision of its founder, Andrew Douglass, is to 
encourage more active lifestyles and fitness, regardless of ability.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fparallel-london-an-inclusive-running-festival-like-no-other%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40cfdfb8ab01df0ed11c54a07f5010495aa9680b%2F0_100_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parallel%20London%3A%20an%20inclusive%20running%20festival%20like%20no%20other&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fparallel-london-an-inclusive-running-festival-like-no-other%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parallel%20London%3A%20an%20inclusive%20running%20festival%20like%20no%20other&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fparallel-london-an-inclusive-running-festival-like-no-other%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40cfdfb8ab01df0ed11c54a07f5010495aa9680b%2F0_100_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The finish line at Parallel London Photograph: Stephanie Nimmo 
Thousands of people participated in one or more of the five Parallel London 
challenges – 100m, 1km, 5km, 10km and Super Sensory 1km. Over 40% of the 
participants had some form of disability and were in turn supported by 500 
carers. The races were open to all, regardless of age or ability. Guide Dogs, 
racing chairs, scooters, walkers – nothing was off limits. We even saw a young 
woman on roller skates holding the back of her dad’s wheelchair as he raced 
along the route.


We chose to take part in the 5K race, which took in many of the sights of the 
Olympic park. Daisy loved it, as always telling me to go faster, high-fiving 
marshals and waving at the crowds lining the route. The atmosphere was as good 
as any major race I have participated in: it felt, for want of a better word, 
like a “proper” race, not just a nod to the disabled. I felt pretty choked up – 
at last, I was running in a race with my daughter, doing something that many 
families take for granted, participating in sport together.


Daisy was so happy to receive her own medal, and later that evening she 
insisted she wanted “more running” although next time her brother could push 
and I could watch – clearly she needs to go even faster. Parallel London is 
planned to be an annual event and a national celebration of inclusivity, it 
could be a game changer for people like my daughter.


I'm used to people laughing as I run – but do they ever wonder why I look so 
awkward?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2015/sep/25/im-used-to-people-laughing-as-i-run-but-do-they-ever-wonder-why-i-look-so-awkward>
Further details: parallellondon.com <http://parallellondon.com/>

 