
The vast majority of parents of overweight children in England do not 
recognise the fact, the annual NHS health survey has found, raising fears that 
high levels ofobesity <https://www.theguardian.com/society/obesity> have 
normalised unhealthy weights.

Nine in 10 mothers and eight in 10 fathers of an overweight child described 
them as being about the right weight. Almost half of mothers (48%) and 43% of 
fathers said their obese child was about the right weight, according tothe 
Health Survey for England 2015 
<http://www.content.digital.nhs.uk/catalogue/PUB22610>, published by NHS 
Digital on Wednesday.

Gillian Prior, head of health at the National Centre for Social Research, 
said: “Around three in 10 children are overweight or obese, yet nearly half of 
mothers think their obese child is about the right weight. It is possible that 
consistently high levels of childhood obesity in recent years have normalised 
an unhealthy weight.


“This should be of concern to parents and public health professionals alike. 
Obesity <https://www.theguardian.com/society/obesity> is linked to a number of 
health conditions in later life, such as diabetes and heart disease. Parents 
want to do the best for their children and the difficulty of recognising 
obesity in their own child could be putting them at risk.”

The survey showed that child obesity remains stubbornly high, despite attempts 
to raise public awareness of the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/childhood-obesity-strategy-wasted-opportunity-campaigners>
. In 2015, 28% of children were either overweight (14%) or obese (14%). This 
was down from the previous year, when the figure was 31% and the 2004 peak of 
34%, but higher than 20 years ago, when it was 25%.

Obesity, which is defined as a BMI of 30 or more for adults, also remains high 
among adults. Over a quarter (27% of men and women) were obese last year and a 
further 41% of men and 31% of women were overweight.

The average waist circumference of an adult reached its highest ever figure – 
92.9cm, or 36.57in, (88.4cm, or 34.8in, for women and 97.4cm, or 38.34in, for 
men) – compared with 87.1cm when the survey began in 1993. Carrying too much 
fat around your middle can increase the risk of developing conditions such as
heart disease <https://www.theguardian.com/society/heart-attack>, type 2 
diabetes <https://www.theguardian.com/society/diabetes> and cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/cancer>.

Almost half of women (47%) and just over a third of men (35%) were found to 
have a very high waist circumference, defined as a waist circumference greater 
than 88cm for women and greater than 102cm for men.

The Obesity Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Alliance, a 
coalition of more than 30 leading charities, royal medical colleges and 
campaign groups, said: “Obesity is still an urgent public health epidemic 
costing our national health service billions of pounds every year. Prevalence 
hasn’t changed much but the majority of adults remain worryingly obese or 
overweight. As our waistlines continue to increase, so do the chances of 
developing type 2 diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease and other 
devastating health conditions.

 “We must take bold action now by bringing in measures like the soft drinks 
industry levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/05/price-of-sugary-soft-drinks-could-rise-by-8p-a-can-when-tax-introduced>
, reducing the sugar, salt and fat from everyday foods andrestricting junk food 
marketing to children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/stop-junk-food-advertising-curb-childhood-obesity-experts>
. We still have a way to go to truly tackle this deadly and economically 
draining obesity issue. However, these proposed measures will be a major step 
towards creating a healthier environment.”

The survey was based on interviews with 8,034 adults and 5,714 children.

Alison Tedstone, chief nutritionist at Public Health England, said: “Parents 
have been misjudging their children’s weight for a number of years, making 
addressing our current obesity crisis even more challenging.

“Tackling obesity is everyone’s responsibility, not individual parents and 
children. We’re working with industry to reduce the amount of sugar in products 
children consume every day as part of a widerchildhood obesity plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/childhood-obesity-a-plan-for-action>
 to help them lead healthier lives.”
 