
Manchester United's match-winner Park Ji-sung has admitted he has mixed 
feelings about his impending departure to compete in the Asian Cup.

After last night's 1-0 victory over Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/13/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league>
, Sir Alex Ferguson revealed the midfielder will miss seven matches once he 
flies back home after the Boxing Day game with Sunderland. Should South Korea 
be knocked out early during the three-week tournament in Qatar, Park will be 
back sooner. But as they are one of the favourites to lift the trophy, that 
seems unlikely.

And having been one of United's most impressive performers recently, Park 
accepts that, for once, he will head home with a heavy heart. "I have mixed 
feelings about the Asian Cup," he said. "At the moment I am playing with 
confidence, so I do feel a bit strange about going.

"But I am always happy to join my national team as well. Even without me 
Manchester United have enough players to keep winning, so I will concentrate on 
the national team and then focus onManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>."

Park has a fine record against Arsenal. His first-half header last night was 
the fourth time he has scored against them, which is a quite remarkable record 
in itself given the 29-year-old's overall tally since he moved from PSV 
Eindhoven in 2005 is just 22.

The latest effort was among the most impressive as he had to act fast to 
change his body position as Nani's right-wing cross bounced down off GaÃ«l 
Clichy. "It was a strange goal," he said. "The ball changed direction so I had 
to move suddenly. I thought it was going to hit the post."

It put United top of the Premier League, two points clear of Arsenal and 
Manchester City, with a game in hand. Should they win at Stamford Bridge on 
Sunday to extend their unbeaten start to 17 matches, they will really start to 
believe a record 19th league title is theirs for the taking.

"At the moment we are in a great position," Park said. "But there is still a 
long way to go in the league. We always seem to play very well in the winter so 
we just have to try and keep our performances up."

Meanwhile Rio Ferdinand has insisted United's run of form has not taken him by 
surprise. "I do believe it," he said. "When I look around the changing room I 
see a fantastic bunch of players. I never doubt them or what they are capable 
of.

"This was a very big result for us. It is not a defining result but it is the 
kind of result you are looking for against one of the teams who are also at the 
top of the table. Last year we probably didn't do as well against the big teams 
as we should have. This was a good way to start."
 