
Boomer Patty Mills has starred in the San Antonio Spurs’ 110-90 NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> defeat of the Portland Trail Blazers, 
adding a season-high 23 points off the bench.

Kawhi Leonard scored 33 points, while LaMarcus Aldridge had 18 and 14 
rebounds, to hand Portland their fifth straight loss despite the Spurs resting 
Pau Gasol, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili.

The Golden State Warriors have improved, but so has the rest of the NBA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/golden-state-warriors-nba-improved>
“We wanted to get one back,” said Leonard. “We definitely didn’t want to lose 
two games in a row (after losing to the LA Clippers).”

Meanwhile, Russell Westbrook has had his 14th triple-double of the season and 
his third straight 40-point game, scoring 45 with 11 assists and 11 rebounds to 
lead Oklahoma City Thunder to a 117-112 victory over the Boston Celtics.

Westbrook scored the last seven points of the first half as the Thunder turned 
a three-point deficit into a four-point lead.

He scored 18 in the fourth quarter, including eight straight during a 10-0 run 
that flipped a 104-100 deficit into a six-point lead.

“It’s important for me to know how to close games,” Westbrook said. “All the 
best players figure out how to close games.”

Celtics coach Brad Stevens said: “I don’t know what to say other than ‘hats 
off to him’ for plays he made.”

Draymond Green made a tie-breaking dunk with 1:31 left and Kevin Durant scored 
32 points, lifting Golden State Warriors to 119-113 win over the Detroit 
Pistons.

The NBA-leading Warriors have won seven straight, rolling with new star, 
Durant, heading into their Christmas NBA Finals rematch in Cleveland.

The Pistons have lost five in a row.

Nic Batum had 20 points in his first triple-double of the season as the 
Charlotte Hornets beat the Chicago Bulls 103-91 for their third-straight 
victory.

Elfrid Payton had 25 points and nine assists in the Orlando Magic’s a 109-90 
victory over the Los Angeles Lakers.

LeBron James scored 19 points, Kevin Love added 14 and 15 rebounds, and the 
Cleveland Cavaliers rolled the Brooklyn Nets 119-99.

Cleveland, who have won four straight and nine of 10, host Golden State on 
Christmas in a rematch of the past two NBA Finals.

Giannis Antetokounmpo had a career-high 39 points and the Milwaukee Bucks beat 
the Washington Wizards 123-96.

Mike Conley scored 24 points and Zach Randolph and Marc Gasol each added 16 to 
help the Memphis Grizzlies beat the Houston Rockets 115-109.

Memphis snapped a three-game home skid and ended Houston’s road winning streak 
at five.
 