
It is considered one of the more unlikely Oscar-winners of recent times, a 
film that triumphed over heralded competition such as Brokeback Mountain, 
Munich, Capote, and Good Night, and Good Luck. It also faced criticism for what 
some considered to be racial stereotyping. Now director Paul Haggis has 
admitted his film Crash did not deserve to win the 2005 Academy award for best 
film.

Interviewed by Hitfix 
<http://www.hitfix.com/whats-alan-watching/even-the-director-of-crash-wouldnt-have-voted-for-it-for-best-picture#IbsDFH1dL2ej4pgt.99>
, Haggis dismissed criticism over the movie’s treatment of ethnicity, 
suggesting he had intended to draw the viewer into prejudiced reactions to 
racially charged scenarios, before subverting them.

“What I decided to do early on was present stereotypes for the first 30 
minutes,” he said. “It’s fine, you can think these things. You can laugh at 
these people. We all know Hispanics park their cars on a lawn, and we all know 
that Asians can’t drive in the dark. I know you’re a big liberal, but it’s OK, 
nobody’s going to see you laugh.

Crash
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/aug/12/1> 
“As soon as I made you feel comfortable, I could very slowly start turning you 
around in the seat, so I left you spinning as you walked out of the movie 
theatre. That was the intent.

“So when the criticism came later – ‘Oh my God, it’s full of stereotypes’ – I 
went: ‘Oh my God, you’re a genius. Really? Wow! That’s remarkable, really! I 
should have corrected that.’ No. So when you’re doing something that’s 
different, I think people are always going to say things, but it amused me more 
than anything.”

Haggis said his ensemble drama, which also won him the best director Oscar, 
did not deserve to win best film given the standard of the competition a decade 
ago.

“Was it the best film of the year? I don’t think so,” he said. “There were 
great films that year. Good Night, and Good Luck – amazing film. Capote – 
terrific film. Ang Lee’s Brokeback Mountain, great film. And Spielberg’s 
Munich. I mean please, what a year.

US critic: 'undeniably racist' Gone with the Wind should be banned from cinemas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/us-critic-deniably-racist-gone-with-the-wind-should-be-banned-from-cinemas>
“Crash, for some reason, affected people, it touched people. And you can’t 
judge these films like that. I’m very glad to have thoseOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>. They’re lovely things. But you 
shouldn’t ask me what the best film of the year was because I wouldn’t be 
voting for Crash, only because I saw the artistry that was in the other films.

“Now however, for some reason that’s the film that touched people the most 
that year. So I guess that’s what they voted for, something that really touched 
them. And I’m very proud of the fact that Crash does touch you. People still 
come up to me more than any of my films and say: ‘That film just changed my 
life.’ I’ve heard that dozens and dozens and dozens of times. So it did its job 
there. I mean, I knew it was the social experiment that I wanted, so I think 
it’s a really good social experiment. Is it a great film? I don’t know.”

Crash boasts the lowest critical rating of all the 2005 nominees for best 
picture, its 75% fresh score on the critical aggregator Rotten Tomatoes 
contrasting with 93% for George Clooney’s Good Night, and Good Luck, 90% for 
Capote, 87% for Brokeback Mountain and 78% for Munich.

The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw gave Haggis’s film a three-star review in August 
2005 <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/aug/12/1>, writing: “Crash 
is a very watchable and well-constructed piece of work, and a potential script 
masterclass: but its daringly supercharged fantasies of racial paranoia and 
humanist redemption are not to be taken too seriously.”
 