
Paul Auster finds himself in unlikely company as he joins the line-up of 
authors in the running for this year'sArthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction.

Auster's latest novel Man in the Dark sees the insomniac protagonist telling 
himself a story about an alternate America where civil war reigns. It is 
longlisted for the prize alongside a host of more classically science fiction 
titles, including Iain M Banks's latest foray into the Culture universe, 
Matter, and Alastair Reynolds's epic far-future space opera, House of Suns.

The award's organisers, who took the decision this year to announce the full 
list of eligible books for the first time to "highlight the strength and 
diversity of current science fiction", also longlisted Patrick Ness's young 
adult title The Knife of Never Letting Go. That novel, which won the Guardian's 
children's fiction prize last year, tells of a dystopian world where thoughts 
can be heard.

John le Carr√©'s son Nick Harkaway makes it into the running with his debut 
novel The Gone-Away World, a tour de force of post-apocalyptic fantasy/science 
fiction/kung-fu/horror, while three authors - Stephen Baxter, Charles Stross 
and Eric Brown - get two books apiece the longlist of 46.

There's some overlap with this year's other major SFF award, the British 
ScienceFiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> Association's best 
novel prize, with Baxter's Flood, in which the Thames Barrier is breached, 
Harkaway's debut, Ken MacLeod's The Night Sessions and Neal Stephenson's 
Anathem making the BSFA shortlist as well as the Arthur C Clarke longlist.

A shortlist for the Arthur C Clarke award will be announced in mid-March, 
while the winner of the BSFA prize will be revealed on 11 April at SF 
convention Eastercon.
 