
A war of words between racing and bookmakers over prize-money cuts caused by a 
drop in Levy funding stepped up a gear today when one of the sport's leading 
figures described an owners' strike as "inevitable". However, the threat seemed 
to carry little weight with bookmakers themselves, one of whom accused racing 
of "shooting itself in both fetlocks".

Paul Dixon, the president of the Racehorse Owners Association and the chairman 
of the Horsemen's Group which represents the interests of owners, trainers, 
jockeys, stable staff and breeders, is one of the most outspoken critics of 
bookmakers, whom he accuses of not giving the sport a fair deal in the payments 
which they hand over from their profits.

Government intervention in the financial details of next year's Levy 
settlement appears inevitable, with bookmakers and the racing authorities tens 
of millions of pounds apart in their proposals. Talk earlier this year of a 
more harmonious relationship between the two groups is long forgotten.

Although the threat of strike action is nothing new, the prospect of mass 
withdrawals or boycotts receiving unanimous support from owners, trainers and 
jockeys, ought to carry more weight.

"Racing should organise to exert maximum harm on the bookmakers. This would 
require non-racing days," Dixon said. "The bookmakers like to tell us that 
racing is far less important to them than it used to be. We shall see.Horse 
racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> remains very important 
to bookmakers and its withdrawal would inflict significant harm on their 
businesses."

Strike action designed to produce small fields or even the abandonment of 
whole meetings is understood to be planned for 1 November, but previous 
boycotts have failed to gather the necessary support from all owners and 
trainers.

Ralph Topping, the chief executive of William Hill, was quick to fire a return 
volley. "We are not concerned about racing's leaders shooting themselves in 
both fetlocks," he said.

"Racing's popularity is in decline, and we have a number of other popular 
products to offer clients. The sport, thanks to poor leadership and vision, is 
in a crisis of its own making. Currently their collective actions smack of 
clueless desperation at a time when their noses need to be pressed against the 
window of the future. A future that should be all about getting real.

"They're killing income, not creating it, and remain the only sport in 
Britain, outside of tiddlywinks, that hasn't advanced in recent years."

In the present circumstances it is little wonder that a race such as 
Saturday's Bet 365 Charlie Hall Chase, which has had its prize-money held at 
Â£100,000, promises to attract such a competitive field.

Barbers Shop was today given the go-ahead to play his part in restoring the 
lustre of the race, which since its glory days in the 1980s and 1990s, when the 
likes of Wayward Lad, One Man, Barton Bank and See More Business were all dual 
winners, has sometimes seemed to be in decline.

Last year, Deep Purple scrambled home from only four rivals just a fortnight 
after four horses were killed at one meeting, a day which attracted the worst 
kind of publicity for the track, although subsequent investigations failed to 
establish a clear link between the deaths. However, the Wetherby executive have 
carried out further remedial work to the track this summer and the track has 
been rewarded with a field that is set to include high-class steeplechasers 
such as Carruthers, The Tother One, Weird Al and previous winners Deep Purple 
and Ollie Magern.

Owned by the Queen, Barbers Shop may be paying the penalty for being about the 
only horse to try and put up a fight against Kauto Star in last year's King 
George VI Chase at Kempton before ultimately finishing an exhausted third and 
he did not look the same horse subsequently.

Nicky Henderson, his trainer, said: "Poor old Barbers Shop has been set an 
impossible task in his life. Rated where he is, he's always going to run off 
top weight in handicaps but he hasn't won a race for two years. You never quite 
know what's going to turn up [in the Charlie Hall] but it's an open race and it 
looks as if he's going to have a chance." Wetherby chief executive Jonjo 
Sanderson commented: "We had a lot of positive feedback for the work which was 
carried out on the track before our first meeting of the season and I think 
it's understandable that trainers had some reluctance to run their horses last 
year after what had happened two weeks earlier. "This year's race looks to have 
plenty of strength in depth and I am delighted with the ground. Conditions 
should be perfect on Saturday."
 