
It was only when the sun came out and the snow thawed that Andorra truly 
froze. Ski lifts ground to a halt, shutters went down on hotel windows and a 
nation went into a suspended animation before coming back to life with the 
first snowfall.

So it went in Andorra for summer after sleepy summer. But now the tiny 
Pyrenean principality is peeling off its collective ski suit and goggles and 
peering into a brave new world of warm-weather activities. For a place where 
the only industry to speak of is tourism, shutting down for half the year is no 
longer an option, so off I go to see how it aims to attract the summer crowds - 
and, better still, keep them coming back.

I arrive by road; this landlocked nation without an airport or railway station 
is only accessible by motorway from either Barcelona or Toulouse through a 
series of tunnels cut through the mountains. Immediately Andorra is 
spectacular. As we approach from the Spanish side, my driver points to the 
little stadium to our right that is the home of Andorran football. The team, 
incidentally, were due to appear on the British radar as England's first 
opponents at the new Wembley: a stadium which, when finally completed, will be 
able to comfortably hold Andorra's entire population of just over 70,000.

As if to compound the impact of the smallness of the country, our first stop 
is the parliament building off Andorra's main shopping strip in Andorra la 
Vella (the capital, if you can call it that). Set in stone and lined with local 
pine, the debating chamber is a monument to small government: there's no pomp: 
just a dozen or so chairs and a table. In fact, the principality hardly needs 
to be governed at all - there's virtually no crime or unemployment, and income 
tax is zero.

However, culture and history amount to virtually zero too, so this is to be my 
only diversion from Andorra's leisure pursuits, which begin with a vengeance at 
the crack of dawn the following morning.

The hills are alive ...

As well as being blessed with beautiful scenery, Andorra is embarrassed by its 
wealth of walking guides, who know precisely where everything is and what 
everything is called. Mine for the duration of the trip was lean, enthusiastic, 
vastly experienced and proud of his boast of being the only person of Zambian 
descent to be born Andorran.

A short drive north from our base at the Hotel Princessa Park in the resort 
town of Ordino, we hit the hills of the Sorteny valley. Swathed in vast blocks 
of blooming rhododendron, the gradual ascents of the easy-rated routes are a 
scenic as well as gentle entry point to the many on- and off-the-beaten-track 
walks available.

Once you are away from the road, civilisation recedes completely. Undisturbed 
by overhead planes (no airport, remember), faraway sirens or even the 
oppressive humidity of nearby Barcelona, the ascent is a heavenly one. With 
only the chirrup of crickets for company, it's hard for even the most hardened 
city boy not to start skipping as he walks, belting out: 'hello sky, hello 
trees.'

But before I go into full twirling Julie Andrews mode, civilisation looms into 
view once more in the guise of one of Andorra's stone cabins or bordas. There 
are 27 of these spartan stone huts dotted around the valleys providing shelter 
for overnight campers and partying kids alike. With a bare minimum of 
facilities and no staff (but no tariff) you rely completely on the kindness of 
strangers for stocks of water (and occasional vodka). The cabin made an ideal 
stopping point for a picnic of recuperative Catalan sausage and a feisty local 
red.

We stop regularly after this on a worn path dotted with one of nature's 
practical jokes: the bright yellow Pyrenean lily, which our guide cheerfully 
informs us "smells of sperm". All the while the easily spottable Lammergeier 
vultures - now relatively abundant after a successful conservation campaign - 
circle overhead. Horses and cattle roam free, and mushrooms and wild celery 
line routes begging to be tried out.

Sporting chances

If the rolling hills and clear water springs are the Pyrenees' bread and 
butter, it's the Vallnord resort in Pal-Arinsal that best embodies Andorra's 
recent summer awakening. Sitting in the shadow of Andorra's highest point at 
Coma Pedrosa and reachable by cable car, it and has recently acquired a 
professional-standard mountain biking track which is already attracting top 
bikers from around Europe for competitions. There is also quad-biking, archery, 
horse riding and a large children's activity centre.

While diverting for an afternoon, the resort still has some way to go to fully 
capture the imagination even of the children at which it is primarily aimed, 
and a day of family activities there could end up being quite pricey.

However, for those serious or even curious about downhill or cross-country 
mountain biking, a visit is a must. Even the beginners' tracks are 
hair-raising; my tanned, athletic guide, with calves as thick as snooker table 
legs, shoots down vertical slopes easily while I make tentative progress 
between hard braking and unconvincing zigzags. When you get the hang of it 
though, the experience of freewheeling down a dry ski slope wondering how 
you're going to stop is one that every traveller should tick off.

Another big attraction, and one involving considerably less courage or effort, 
is the food. It is almost impossible to eat badly in Andorra and Moli del 
Fanals is a firm local favourite. The traditional Pyrenees appetiser is 
ubiquitous: crusty bread smeared with half a fresh tomato, a clove of garlic 
and plenty of salt and olive oil. Combined with the local cava, it certainly 
takes the edge off the post-hike ache in my legs. The duck in grape sauce 
cooked in front of you in a traditional wood-fired grill also takes some 
beating.

Water features

The Sport Hotel Village in Soldeu, on the eastern side of Andorra, faces the 
French border and is the site of one of the many current construction projects 
in the area. Not that you'd notice from the inside: the impressive building is 
a world in itself, with cavernous luxury suites and a state-of-the-art spa 
facility.

The Andorran government has announced a short moratorium on construction 
projects as the number of cranes and half-built, scaffolded shells threatens to 
overwhelm the region. But the Sport Hotel Village, which already controls much 
of Soldeu, is fanning out further, with one five-star hotel annex already due 
later this year and another on the way.

The layout of the spa complex is akin to the lair of a Hollywood master 
criminal. Rooms with diabolical-looking instruments offering the most modern of 
heat and water treatments are all sparklingly new. However, in my book, baths 
with water jets and disco lights sound more stressful than relaxing so I 
sidestepped the gimmickry of the treatment rooms and headed straight for the 
Turkish baths.

Here the idea is to progress from one temperature-controlled room to another 
in search of physical and spiritual cleansing while losing buckets of sweat. 
The mildest room is similar in temperature to a medium-sized office without 
air-conditioning; from there you travel through tube-in-rush-hour heat to 
something I imagine to be like running a Saharan marathon in a foam suit. After 
all that, you are encouraged to rub yourself with ice-cubes and plunge into a 
swimming pool. I really can't recommend it highly enough.

The setting is perfect: it captures the whole Andorran experience. The culture 
of the principality is one of stark dichotomies and extremes: it's half Spain, 
half France: half hot, half cold: half uphill, half downhill. And you can see 
all this from the outdoor hot-tub while your body temperature oscillates 
wildly. You can see the sun set over the French border, across which Andorran 
duty-free cigarettes are regularly smuggled during the hours of darkness. You 
can see snow on the highest peaks and quad-bikers on the lower slopes: you can 
see the mountainous terrain, which has warded off centuries of would-be 
attackers, now being put to good use all year round.

They say you should never focus on the sun with both eyes and for years 
Andorrans working in the tourist industry turned away from it completely. But 
now the principality's restaurant terraces are humming with late-night patrons, 
new paths through the hills are being beaten all the time, and Andorra is 
finally waking up from its long summertime siesta.

Way to go 

Inghams <> offer the resorts of Arinsal, Soldeu and Ordino. Guests can choose 
to stay solely in one resort or combine stays of three, four, seven, 10 or 11 
nights in different resorts. A trip to Barcelona is also a possible add-on. For 
example, a stay of four nights at the four-star Hotel Sporthotel Village in 
Soldeu and three nights at the four-star Hotel Princessa Parc in Arinsal costs 
from £483 per person. A 14-night two-centre break at the above hotels costs 
from £1096 half-board.

All prices include flights with British Airways from Gatwick to Barcelona and 
resort transfers. Flights are also available from Stansted, Luton, Heathrow, 
Bristol, Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds-Bradford and Newcastle at a 
supplement. Booking now for summer 2007 saves £100 per couple. Quads cost from 
30 per person per hour.
 