
The Pensions Regulator is seeking millions of pounds from Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> and Retail Acquisitions 
in relation to the £571m deficit in the BHS pension scheme.

Sources close to the situation say warning notices sent by the regulator to 
Chappell and his company show it wants to receive “multiples of £1m”.


The regulator has started legal proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 against the former BHS owners Chappell and Sir Philip Green in an attempt to 
fill the pension deficit.

Pensions Regulator begins legal proceedings against Sir Philip Green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
The exact details of the regulator’s claims are unclear. Any party that 
reveals the details of the warning notice sent to them risks breaking the law.

The claims against Chappell and Retail Acquisitions are likely to relate to 
the amount of money they took out ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> and the sale of assets during their 
13 months as owners of the department store chain.

The parliamentary committee that investigated the demise of BHS accused 
Chappell of having “his fingers in the till” and helping oversee the 
“systematic plunder” of the retailer.

Retail Acquisitions, which is 90% owned by Chappell, collected an estimated 
£17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/dominic-chappell-bled-bhs-dry-says-paul-sutton>
 from BHS afterbuying it for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 from Green in March 2015. The company sold off BHS’s flagship store on Oxford 
Street and its warehouse in Atherstone, Warwickshire, with some of the proceeds 
used to pay off a loan Retail Acquisitions had taken out.

The regulator is seeking about £300m from Green, but its legal claim against 
Chappell is significant and raises further questions about how well BHS was 
managed under his ownership. While Green is a billionaire tycoon, Chappell is a 
serial bankrupt.

BHS collapsed into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs. Green controlled the retailer 
between 2000 and 2015, during which time his family and other shareholders
collected more than £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
.


The regulator announced last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 that it had sent warning notices to Green, Chappell and their respective 
companies, Taveta and Retail Acquisitions. The regulator has not disclosed any 
of the details in the warning notices, but they run to more than 300 pages and 
explain why it believes the parties are liable to financially support the BHS 
pension scheme.

The notices are understood to set a range for the financial contribution 
sought from Green and Chappell, rather than a single figure.

The pair have about six months to reply to the regulator and set out their 
case. When they do, a determinations panel at the regulator, which is 
independent of the investigations team, will decide whether they have to make a 
contribution and how much it should be.

The regulator launched an anti-avoidance investigation into BHS in March 2015 
after it was sold. The regulator has trawled through nearly 100,000 documents 
and held talks with the parties involved.

Lesley Titcomb, the chief executive of the Pension Regulator, has said she is 
still open to agreeing a settlement over the scheme’s funding. Last week, she 
said the warning notices had been issued after a “complex investigation” and 
the regulator was yet to receive a “sufficiently credible and comprehensive 
offer” to bail out theBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension 
scheme, which hasmore than 20,000 members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/06/bhs-pension-deficit-sir-philip-green-sort-it>
.

The scheme is currently in an assessment period with the Pension Protection 
Fund. If a deal or settlement with Green cannot be reached, the scheme will
eventually enter the PPF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/pension-protection-fund-bhs-retirement-ppf>
, where the members’ benefits will be cut by at least 10%.

In June, Green told MPs he would sort the problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
 facing the scheme. However, no deal has been forthcoming and the tycoon was 
photographedon his new yacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/sir-philip-green-clashes-with-tv-reporter>
 during the summer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video-&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20support%20stripping%20'billionaire%20spiv'%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20of%20his%20knighthood%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20support%20stripping%20%27billionaire%20spiv%27%20Sir%20Philip%20Green%20of%20his%20knighthood%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fmps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video-&media=>
MPs support stripping ‘billionaire spiv’ Sir Philip Green of his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/20/mps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
Last month, the House of Commons voted unanimously to strip Green of his 
knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, which was awarded a decade ago for services to retail. During a fiery debate 
in parliament, Green was lambasted anddescribed as a “billionaire spiv” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/20/mps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
.

The vote is advisory, as the power to rescind a knighthood 
<https://www.gov.uk/honours/having-honours-taken-away> rests with the honours 
forfeiture committee, a group of civil servants and dignitaries.

Pensions experts have warned that a legal battle about the BHS scheme could 
take years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/former-bhs-workers-may-wait-years-for-pension-scheme-bail-out>
. Although the regulator can legally force Green and Chappell to make a 
payment, they can take an appeal against such a decision to the supreme court.

The regulator and Chappell declined to comment.
 