
A ban on cold calling to sell pension products will be introduced in next 
week’s autumn statement, after changes brought in by former chancellor George 
Osborne led to a surge in scammers tricking people out of their retirement 
savings.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, will use his first 
budget statement to announce the new rules, with the intention of ending 
approximately 250m scam calls a year leading to pensions fraud of almost £19m 
in 2015.

There has been a surge of fraudulent cold calling targeting pensioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/07/over-55s-targeted-scammers-exploit-pension-freedoms>
 since Osborne’s reforms of the pension system to make it easier for people to 
withdraw sums without penalty.

The scams tend to be presented as unique investment opportunities, such as 
putting your pension pot into a new hotel in an exotic location or supposedly 
ethical projects that promise huge returns.

Related: Over-50s risk pension scams as they shun expert advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/02/over-50s-pension-scams-shun-advice-retirement-threat-fraud>

Under the changes due to be announced by Hammond, all calls relating to 
pension investments where a business has no existing relationship with the 
individual will be forbidden. Similar rules already cover cold calls relating 
to mortgages.

Companies flouting the ban could face fines of up to £500,000 from the 
information commissioner, although the watchdog does not have powers to tackle 
firms operating outside the UK.


Pension firms will be given more powers to block suspicious transfers, 
preventing people’s life savings from being transferred without any checks. The 
rules will also stop small self-administered schemes from being set up using a 
dormant company as the sponsoring employer.

Some research 
<https://www.ftadviser.com/2016/05/25/pensions/scammers-linked-to-of-pension-transfer-requests-LxLJKTjfB3OXD84OIIB0pM/article.html>
 has suggested that scammers could be behind as many as one in 10 pension 
transfer requests.

Hammond appears to be acting after a petition 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/pensions/article-3890208/Make-cold-calls-pensions-investments-illegal-demands-petition-adviser-Darren-Cooke.html>
 signed by thousands of people, including former pensions ministers Ros Altmann 
and Steve Webb, Martin Lewis of the websiteMoney Saving Expert 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/>, and a number of independent financial 
advisers, requested pension cold calling be made illegal.

Michelle Cracknell, head of the government’s Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Advisory Service helpline, also 
called for a ban, saying every customer should refuse to take pension cold 
calls.
 