
The government may be preparing to increase the official state pension age to 
70 for millions of people currently in their 20s, a former minister has claimed.

Steve Webb said documents produced by the Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> suggested a “more aggressive” 
timetable on state pension age (SPA) increases than previously planned was 
being prepared.

 Steve Webb. Photograph: Rui Vieira/PA 
This could affect tens of millions of workers aged under 55, and bring a 
pension age of 70 into the official timetable for the first time for people 
currently aged between 22 and 30, he added. The current official SPA for people 
in their 20s is 68, though under the existing schedule it could be expected to 
rise to 69.


The SPA is the earliest age someone can start receiving their state pension, 
and is due to rise to 66 between 2018 and 2020, to 67 between 2026 and 2028, 
and then to 68 between 2044 and 2046.


An official review is taking place into the future of the state pension, and 
on 16 November the DWPasked the Government Actuary’s Department 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/future-life-expectancy-to-be-considered-in-first-state-pension-age-review>
 (GAD) to look at projected life expectancy in future years. It wants the 
department to set out a schedule for SPA increases, assuming the government 
sticks to its previously-announced policy that people should spend two-thirds 
of their adult life in work and one third (33.3%) in retirement.


But the DWP also requested figures for people spending 32% of their adult life 
in retirement. The DWP said this “reflects the experiences of those reaching 
state pension age over the last 20 years”, but Webb said this failed to take 
account of more recent improvements in longevity. He said that asking for 
figures based on 32% was an “unexpected move”.


The move pushes out the age at which the SPA can be paid out, according to 
analysts by pension consultancy firm Willis Towers Watson.

Related: Are we all really expected to work until we drop? | Catherine Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/living-longer-soaring-state-pension-bills-britain>

Webb, a former pensions minister who is now director of policy at mutual 
insurer Royal London, said: “The previous policy strikes a fair balance between 
expecting people to work longer and allowing people to enjoy a decent 
retirement.”

“If the government is planning to force tens of millions of people to work to 
68, 69 or even 70, then it should be transparent about its plans. This would be 
a huge shift and should be properly debated, not buried in a technical document 
seen only by specialists,” said Webb.

Willis Towers Watson looked at what switching from the existing 33.3% 
<https://www.towerswatson.com/en-GB/Insights/Newsletters/Europe/rumour-rhetoric-and-reality/2016/11/Your-State-Pension-another-year-away>
 formula to 32% would mean for the SPA, using official life expectancy 
projections. It said people born between March 1962 and April 1972 would see 
their pension age rise from 67 now to 68. Meanwhile, those born between March 
1973 and April 1985 would have a pension age of 69 rather than the present 68. 
Those born between March 1986 and April 1994 would see their SPA rise from an 
assumed 69 to 70.


A DWP spokesperson said: “This work forms part of our research ahead of the 
first state pension age review. It’s important we have a clear understanding of 
how the current system is working for pensioners before we undertake the 
review.”

Willis Towers Watson said that if the decision had to be about how to take 
money off the public rather than whether to do so, “later retirement may appear 
more palatable than higher tax rates for (often) the same people”.

It added: “Later working can boost economic output and tax revenues, too. 
There was barely a squeak of protest when the government announced that the SPA 
would reach 67 in 2028.”


Possible future changes to state pension entitlements were hinted at by the 
chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/how-will-autumn-statement-affect-you>
, Philip Hammond, in his autumn statement when he said: “As we look ahead to 
the next parliament, we will need to ensure we tackle the challenges of rising 
longevity and fiscal sustainability.”


There are also fears that the government will water down the state pension 
“triple lock”, which means that the payments rise in line which ever is the 
highest of average wages, inflation, or 2.5%. Damian Green, the minister 
responsible for pensions, did not guarantee this mechanism would remain during 
an interview on ITV’s Preston on Sunday, saying it was “premature” to decide on 
its future. “We’ll need to see what happens to the economy between now and 
2020, apart from anything else,” Green said.
 