
The Pensions Regulator (TPR) has fired a warning shot at Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> by agreeing its biggest 
ever settlement with a private company in a case with similarities to BHS.

Coats Group, one of the biggest manufacturers of sewing threads in the world, 
has agreed to pay more than £255m into its pension scheme after the regulator 
started legal proceedings against it.

John Ralfe, a pensions consultant, said Green should feel “very, very 
uncomfortable” about the deal.

Related: Petition urges Philip Green to tackle BHS pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/petition-urges-philip-green-to-tackle-bhs-pension-deficit>

“This is the most important settlement the Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator has ever reached,” he 
said. “With all other warning notices [of legal proceedings], the company is 
already bust, so the regulator has been picking over the carcass in the 
bankruptcy courts.

“There are clear parallels with BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> 
– the parent company has no legal obligation for the subsidiary’s pension 
scheme and there is no obvious breach of rules, but the regulator has been 
tough and got a large contribution from the parent.”

The regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
, the former owners ofBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, in an 
attempt to fill the £571m deficit in the retailer’s pension scheme. Last month, 
it issued warning notices to Green, Chappell and their companies outlining why 
they are liable to make financial contributions to the pension scheme.

TPR is understood to be seeking about £350m from Green. Six months ago, the 
billionaire tycoon promised to MPs that he would “sort” the problems facing the 
BHS pension scheme, but a deal is yet to be agreed.

Frank Field, the Labour MP and co-chairman of the parliamentary committee that 
investigated the demise of BHS, said: “What a fantastic Christmas gift it would 
be to the 20,000 pensioners counting on Sir Philip if he were to keep that 
promise now.”

It also emerged on Friday that Green is working on plans to open as many as 80 
Topshop stores across China. Green owns Topshop alongside the US private equity 
firm Leonard Green.


TPR’s previous largest settlement was a £184m lump sum payment it won for the 
Lehman Brothers pension scheme after the collapse of the investment bank.


The pension schemes connected to Coats have a combined estimated deficit of 
£565m. The regulator issued warning notices to Coats in 2013. The dispute 
centred on the company’s plan to hand the bulk of the £700m it raised from the 
sale of assets and businesses to shareholders rather than the struggling 
pension schemes.

The settlement between Coats and TPR shows it could take years for the BHS 
saga to be resolved but also that the regulator is prepared to continue 
negotiations with a company about a deal even after starting legal proceedings.

Nicola Parish, the executive director of frontline regulation at TPR, said: 
“This is a substantial settlement of our case where neither the employers nor 
the targets were insolvent. It shows we can and will use our existing powers 
against a solvent employer if that is the right thing to do.

“This case is a great example of how, even after warning notices have been 
served, TPR, the company and the trustees can work together to achieve a good 
outcome for members without the need to formally enforce our powers through the 
determinations panel.

“We will continue to take a commercially minded and pragmatic approach when 
pursuing the use of our powers to achieve good outcomes for scheme members.

“In this case, the settlement will substantially improve the funding of the 
two schemes and also strengthen the employer covenant supporting those schemes.”
 