
The £700bn UK pension fund industry has failed to match the returns earned on 
the FTSE All-share index for the second year running, with the level of 
underperformance against the index the worst for 15 years, according to a 
survey published yesterday.

The All-share index rose 13.8% in 1998, yet the median UK-invested pension 
fund achieved a return of just 10.4%, according to performance measurement 
agency Caps. The 3.2% difference was the biggest since 1984 and follows a 1.6% 
undershoot in 1997.

The lag in performance came as pension funds missed out on the soaring prices 
of four key stocks during 1998, Glaxo Wellcome, SmithKline Beecham, BT and 
Vodafone. 'Portfolios not holding the key stocks or being underweight suffered 
significantly over the year,' says Caps.

Three out of four UK investment portfolios failed to match the index, while 19 
out of 20 overseas-invested funds failed to match overseas equity indices.

Overseas investments in shares and bonds helped boost the total average return 
for British pension funds to 12.4% during 1998, but this was also significantly 
below the Caps worldwide index benchmark, which grew by 14.6%.

One unnamed fund achieved a total return of just 8.2%, largely because of a 
'substantial' under-performance in UK equities, while the best fund earned 
24.9% over the year for its pensioners.

'For the second year running, portfolios underperformed in both UK and 
overseas equities, and now lag the comparative indices over one, three and five 
years,' says Caps.

The failure of high-earning City investment managers to match stock-market 
indices will increase pressure by trustees to switch pension funds away from 
active fund management to computer-run indexation services which promise to 
deliver returns on the FTSE for a fraction of the charges levied by active 
managers.

Nearly 20% of the UK pen sion fund money is now indexed, according to 
specialist newspaperPensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Week, 
with Barclays Global Investors and Legal & General picking up the vast majority 
of indexed mandates.

Last week the BGI and L&G scooped the £810m Former Registered Dock Workers 
Pension Fund from its previous managers, Mercury and Prudential, following a 
decision to switch from active management to indexation.

The scheme's secretary, George Taylor, told Pensions Week: 'On equities, we 
did not feel that our managers, or in fact anybody's managers, are able to beat 
the index.'

 The National Association of Pension Funds yesterday began a campaign, called 
Towards Simpler Pensions, to persuade the government to lift limits on the 
amounts that can be paid tax-free into a company pension and to allow employees 
to hold a personal pension and an occupational scheme at the same time.
 