
The Pensions Regulator has begun formal legal proceedings against Sir Philip 
Green andDominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> that could force them 
to fill the £571m deficit in the BHS pension scheme, marking a dramatic 
escalation of the scandal surrounding the demise of the high street chain.


The regulator said that after a “complex investigation” and months of talks 
with Green about a rescue deal for the pension scheme it was sending warning 
notices to the billionaire tycoon, Chappell and their companies.

Lesley Titcomb, chief executive of TPR, said it was yet to receive 
“sufficiently credible and comprehensive offer” to bail out theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension scheme, which has more than 
20,000 members, despite Green pledging to fix the problems facing it.

The tycoon has rebutted TPR’s claim, saying he had made a “credible and 
substantial proposal” and shown he had cash available to support the pension 
scheme. Green said that his proposal would mean the BHS scheme avoids entering 
the Pension Protection Fund and be a “ better outcome” for pensioners.

The warning notices run to more than 300 pages and explain why TPR believes 
the parties are liable to make a financial contribution to the pension scheme 
and provide ongoing support. The notices mark the start of a so-called 
enforcement action against Green and his investment company Taveta, and 
Chappell and his consortium Retail Acquisitions. The action could end in a 
legal battle if Green and Chappell do not agree to TPR’s demands.


Frank Field, the Labour MP, said TPR had “lost patience with Sir Philip 
Green’s excuses and empty promises”. Field was the joint chair of the 
parliamentary committee that investigated the collapse of BHS, which concluded 
the department store chain had been systematically plundered by its former 
owners.

BHS collapsed into administration in April, leading the loss of 11,000 jobs 
and leaving a pension deficit of £571m. Green controlled BHS between 2000 and 
2015, during which time his family and other shareholders collected more than 
£580m. Green sold BHS in March 2015 to Chappell, a serial bankrupt with no 
retail experience, for just £1. Retail Acquisitions collected an estimated £17m 
from BHS despite owning it for just 13 months until it fell into administration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fphilip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f283253c16bc7e548dabe9f5651cac228c9672a%2F0_216_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pensions%20Regulator%20begins%20legal%20proceedings%20against%20Sir%20Philip%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fphilip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pensions%20Regulator%20begins%20legal%20proceedings%20against%20Sir%20Philip%20Green&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fphilip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f283253c16bc7e548dabe9f5651cac228c9672a%2F0_216_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Frank Field was one of the MPs that investigated the collapse of BHS. 
Photograph: David Rose/Rex Features 
Green told Field’s parliamentary committee that he would “sort” the problems 
facing the BHS pension scheme in June when he appeared in front of MPs to 
answer questions about the collapse of the department store chain. However, no 
deal has been forthcoming and the billionaire tycoon was photographed on his 
new yacht throughout the summer.

Last month the House of Commons voted unanimously to strip Green of his 
knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, which was awarded a decade ago for services to retail. During a fiery debate 
in parliament, Green was lambasted and described as a “billionaire spiv”.

TPR launched an anti-avoidance investigation into BHS in March 2015 after 
Green sold it to Chappell. It has trawled through nearly 100,000 documents and 
held talks with the parties involved. The warning notices sent to Green and 
Chappell are different, TPR confirmed.

“We have been clear in our public commitment to make significant progress by 
the end of 2016 and the issue of these notices meets that commitment,” Titcomb 
said.

“Our decision to launch enforcement action is an important milestone in our 
work to attain redress for the thousands of members of BHS schemes who have 
been placed in this position through no fault of their own.

“Issuing warning notices at this time reflects the outcome of our 
investigations and that we are yet to receive a sufficiently credible and 
comprehensive offer in respect of the BHS schemes.

“We continue to pursue the best deal for members of the BHS pension schemes. 
If parties wish to approach us with settlement offers, that course remains open 
to them.”

In response, Green said: “I have read the statement from the Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator this evening and noted 
its contents. I have provided the regulator with what I believe to be a 
credible and substantial proposal, with evidence and bank confirmation of cash 
availability, which would prevent the scheme from entering the Pension 
Protection Fund. This is in order to achieve a better outcome for the BHS 
pensioners.

“I have also spoken to the chairman of the trustees who is supportive of the 
proposal on the basis that it provides members with better benefits than they 
would receive from the PPF.

“I believe the above statement confirms the statement of intent that I made in 
regard to the BHS pensioners.”

Pensions Regulator's powers might be expanded after BHS scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/pensions-regulator-could-see-powers-expand-after-bhs-collapse>
However, Field said he was not surprised by TPR’s action. He said: “His answer 
throughout our inquiry was always that he was going to “sort” the disastrous 
position he left the pension fund in when he sold off BHS to Dominic Chappell 
for £1. We are glad to see TPR is now calling his bluff and instigating 
enforcement proceedings. It seems clear Sir Philip would rather kick the can 
down the road and avoid responsibility than come up with any fair, sustainable 
settlement for BHS pensioners.”

Business select committee chair Iain Wright said: “In June, Sir Philip told us 
he would sort out the pensions mess at BHS. Five months on, we’ve seen Philip 
Green sunning himself on his yacht – his third – but no credible plan or cash 
on the table.

“He is meant to be able to do deals quickly but he hasn’t been keen to do a 
deal which would quickly end the misery for thousands of BHS pensioners. Sir 
Philip said he would sort it but he has not yet been true to his word. He has 
not come up with the money to satisfy the regulator, who has clearly and quite 
rightly now lost patience with his obviously empty promises.”

Clive Lewis, shadow business secretary, said: “Four months after Sir Philip 
Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> promised to make good 
the pensions deficit created by his shoddy management of BHS, and weeks after 
MPs voted unanimously to strip Green of his knighthood, tens of thousands of 
pensioners are still waiting to find out the fate of their pensions.

“Let’s hope that, by stepping up their investigations, the Pensions Regulator 
will finally hold Philip Green to account and give those pensioners the 
security they deserve.”
 