
The year was 1975 and the South American Championship had a new name: Copa 
América. There would be no host nation and the matches would be played by 10 
Conmebol nations between July and October across South America. Peru were 
experiencing their second golden era, and in retrospect it’s not outrageous to 
suggest that they had the best midfield in the world heading into the 
tournament. Led by the nation’s greatest ever player, Teofilo “Nene” Cubillas – 
whopractically invented the artistry of the deceiving free-kick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BA1k6gVLsuo> (sorry Dimitri Payet) – the squad 
had a supporting cast of some magical playmakers, who have now been forgotten 
by many football historians.


Brazil tumble out of Copa América in group stage after Peru's handball goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/brazil-copa-america-handball-peru>
Hugo “Cholo” Sotil had just won La Liga with Johan Cruyff and Barcelona 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3_vMDzH816Q>, and César “The Left-Footed Poet” 
– it sounds better in Spanish – Cueto, wasa human highlight reel. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RjWuRbvRPaQ> Above talent, however, this was 
primarily a team who implemented a quintessential Peruvian trait:garra, or 
courage. Peru played with a carefree philosophy, attacking from kick-off as if 
they were 3-0 down. That may seem like a familiar trait for many South American 
countries, butLa Blanquirroja took it to another level: they simply did not 
care who the opposition was. In 1975 theirgarra helped them beat Brazil in 
semi-finals and Colombia in the final to lift the trophy for only the second 
time in their history.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBA1k6gVLsuo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBA1k6gVLsuo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBA1k6gVLsuo&media=>
 Peru defeat Brazil 3-1 in Belo Horizonte in the first leg of the semi-finals 
of Copa America in 1975 
Fast forward to this summer’s Copa – where a controversial victory over Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/brazil-copa-america-handball-peru>
 again sees Peru face Colombia in Friday night’s quarter-final – and the 
similarities between this team and the heroes from the 1970s are striking, not 
so much in talent but in ideology. Since his appointment, Ricardo Gareca, 
Peru’s Argentinian manager, wanted to make one thing clear: regardless of 
tactics and delivery, from a physical standpoint, leave everything on the 
field. As simple as that attitude may seem, it can be a difficult concept to 
achieve if you don’t have players with the right mindset (Leicester City being 
a perfect example). So for this tournament, Gareca decided to prioritize 
attitude andgarra over reputation when picking his team. Gareca’s ultimate goal 
is reaching the World Cup, and with qualifiers resuming in September, the 
Centenario is the perfect audition to see who fits with his philosophy.

Welcome to the choke: the ballad of a Peru fan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/16/welcome-to-the-choke-the-ballad-of-a-peru-fan>
From an international perspective, this squad is highly inexperienced. 
Seventeen of the 23 squad members play their club football in Peru’s Primera 
División, and against Brazil, nine starters had fewer than 10 caps. This is a 
significant contrast with other teams, who have a large number of 
European-based players: even Haiti entered this tournament with more experience.
Diario Depor (@deporpe) 
¡Buenos días! Esta es nuestra portada impresa del miércoles. 
https://t.co/GrXw0vyEhA <https://t.co/GrXw0vyEhA> pic.twitter.com/hWRQ3GcFCu 
<https://t.co/hWRQ3GcFCu>
 <https://twitter.com/deporpe/status/743082362926424066> June 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/deporpe/status/743082362926424066> 
The work-rate from the young, energetic core has helped propel Peru so far, 
but the principal shining moments have come from two experienced players who 
bring as much quality to the squad as they do leadership. Before the tournament 
startedChristian Cueva, the attacking midfielder who plays like he has three 
lungs, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/copa-america-argentina-messi-mexico-usa>
 was highlighted as one to watch: his ability to change direction should be 
studied for research. But all eyes are on the dramatically skillful Paolo 
Guerrero, Copa América’s leading scorer in the last two tournaments. The 
captain has the fearlessness ofAtahualpa 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atahualpa>, spearheading the line like a 
Peruvian Gerd Müller. His goal against Haiti cemented his place in history, as 
he surpassed Cubillas to become the nation’s all-time leading scorer with 27.

So with Brazil vanquished comes the the question: how will Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peru> do on Friday against the supremely 
athletic Colombia? José Pekerman is one of the smartest managers in world 
football, and controlling James Rodriguez and Juan Cuadrado will be no easy 
task. And David Ospina may play Robin to Peter Cech’s Batman for Arsenal but 
for his country no one commands more presence than the 27-year old stopper from 
Medellin. The ex-Atletico Nacional player has only conceded one goal in 180 
minutes of play for his country.

History, however, is on Peru’s side. In 2011’s Copa América 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-america>, the nations met in the 
quarter-finals and last year they were in the same group.Los Cafeteros failed 
to win either game. But that was then and this is now, and the romanticism that 
comes with the knockout stages paints a simple picture: how we got here means 
nothing, everyone is blessed with a clean slate.

But Peruvians – and I count myself among their number – believe that we can 
progress: after all, not many people thought we’d get this far in the first 
place. The appetite is certainly there: while many games in this tournament 
have been played in half-empty stadiums Friday’s quarter-final is a sell-out, 
with more than 80,000 fans packed into the New Jersey’s Metlife Stadium. More 
than a few of them will be dreaming of a repeat of 1975.
 