
Former BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> workers and trade union 
representatives are to descend on the headquarters of Sir Philip Green’s retail 
business in an attempt to force him to fill the £571m deficit in the collapsed 
department store chain’s pension scheme.

More than 100,000 people have signed a petition calling for the billionaire 
tycoon to fulfil his promise to “sort” the scheme. The petition will be 
delivered to Green’s Arcadia business on Wednesday by John Hannett, the general 
secretary of the shopworkers’ trade union Usdaw.

Green promised to deal with the problems facing the pension scheme when he 
appeared before MPs in June. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/mps-sir-philip-greens-reputation-and-knighthood-depend-on-pension-offer>
 However, he has failed to agree a deal with the Pensions Regulator, which has 
nowlaunched legal proceedings against Green and Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/sir-philip-green-courts-could-seize-yacht-other-assets-pensions-regulator>
, the former owners of BHS.

Hannett said Green needed to pump more than £250m into the scheme, which has 
more than 20,000 members, calling anything less “derisory”.

He said: “Our priority is to see Sir Phillip do the right thing and deliver on 
his promise to ‘sort’ the pension fund. If he wants to recover any reputational 
credibility he must not haggle his way out of his responsibilities, he must 
make a full contribution and do it quickly. That is the least he can do for 
former staff, many of whom spent their entire working life at BHS.”

The petition that will be delivered to Arcadia – which controls Topshop, 
Dorothy Perkins and Miss Selfridge – includes comments from BHS workers such 
as: “This man’s greed is unbelievable and I worked for him.”

BHS collapsed in April leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and to the £571m 
pension deficit. A parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer 
found that BHS had beensystematically plundered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 under Green and Chappell.

Green controlled the business for 15 years until he sold it to Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
, a three-time bankrupt, for £1 in March 2015. Green, his family and other BHS 
shareholderscollected at least £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
 from the retailer, while Chappell’s company Retail Acquisitions waspaid an 
estimated £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/pensions-regulator-seeks-millions-dominic-chappell-retail-acquisitions-bhs-pension-deficit>
.
 