
My ideal writing day involves getting up at five in the morning. I feed my two 
dogs, jack russell–maltese crosses, then do my daily 40 minutes of yoga on the 
veranda of my cottage overlooking the Bvumba mountains in the east of Zimbabwe. 
I then go to my study and sit at my desk, a walnut Victorian library table. My 
favourite artists – Gareth Nyandoro,Misheck Masamvu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/sep/12/sao-paulo-biennial-incerteza-vivain-art-pictures>
, Helen Teede and Portia Zvavahera – hang on the walls. I listen toThomas 
Mapfumo <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/aug/02/worldmusic.arts>,
Verdi <https://www.theguardian.com/music/giuseppe-verdi> and the Bhundu Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/16/john-peel-plays-bhundu-boys>. On 
good days, when the writing is firing, I will have produced one or two thousand 
words by lunch time. I break to walk the dogs in the hills.

This day is a complete fantasy. The dogs and the art are real, but I own 
neither a cottage in the Bvumba, nor a walnut Victorian library table: it does 
exist though, for the last six years it has been on sale at an antique shop I 
have passed on the way to the Bvumba, waiting for me to afford it.

If things go well, one day this may be my writing day. For now, each of the 
three books I have written came out of different routines. Until June, I worked 
full time as an international lawyer in Geneva: I had to balance my writing 
with the real world of work. My first book,An Elegy for Easterly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/19/short-stories-elegy-easterly-gappah>
, was a collection of stories that sprung from a mini-life crisis. I had 
written all my life, I had just never shown anyone what I wrote, until 2006. 
That year, I woke up one day and panicked that, at 35, I might never achieve my 
dream of becoming a published author. So I forced myself to wake up early and 
write before I went to work. About 18 months later, I had a complete 
manuscript. I followed the same routine with my most recent book,Rotten Row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/19/rotten-row-by-petina-gappah-review>
, another story collection. For two years, between February 2014 and March 
2016, I wrote in the mornings, went to work, then came back home and edited 
what I had written earlier.

The Book of Memory by Petina Gappah review – a fictional testament from death 
row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/19/the-book-of-memory-petina-gappah-review-death-row>
The book that came between these two, a novel called The Book of Memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/19/the-book-of-memory-petina-gappah-review-death-row>
, was a messier affair. It took me six years to write, and part of that came 
from the absence of routine. I decided while I was writing it to move from 
Switzerland to Zimbabwe for three years. But without the routine I had 
established in Geneva, I found that I simply could not write. There was time in 
front of me, you see, so much time, time to spare, time to waste. To fill the 
time, I ended up working on a project to rebuild the Harare city library. But 
because no day in Zimbabwe was ever predictable, I found it impossible to 
establish a proper working pattern.

Stricken by guilt, I would sometimes take a week off and drive outside Harare 
to write. I fell in love with the east of Zimbabwe, a part of the country I had 
not known as a child. One of the best weeks of my writing life was spent at the 
Tanganda tea estate in Chipinge. In the morning, I ran through the tea plants, 
greeting the pickers who had risen long before I had, then I went back my 
cottage to write, then napped, then wrote again. In the evening, I sat on the 
veranda watching the sun sink over the rows and rows of tea. It was bliss.

In June this year I left my job, and Geneva, for good. Tempting as it was 
to move back to Harare, I knew that if I went back, I would probably involve 
myself in something likely to consume me as much as the library had. But the 
novel I am working on now requires a relentless single-mindedness. It is my 
white whale, the only novel I wanted to write – I saved my first version of 
this book on a floppy disk. Having served my apprenticeship, I am now ready to 
take it on fully. So I am not moving back to Harare, but to Berlin, where 
I will be an artist-in-residence.

I have promised myself that once I can write this novel, I will find that 
cottage in the Bvumba, and make it my home. And all writers will be welcome to 
visit. Particularly those who love dogs.

• Rotten Row by Petina Gappah is published by Faber.
 