
Unanimous votes are rare in parliament. The House of Commons interfering in 
the Queen’s honours system, perhaps rarer still. Yet, yesterday, parliament 
voted unanimously tostrip Philip Green of his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
.

Kicking Philip Green is absurd. Here’s who MPs should be castigating | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/kicking-bhs-philip-green-absurb-heres-who-mps-should-castigate>
There is no doubt that he deserves it. During his time at BHS, Sir Philip Green
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> treated the company as his 
own personal plaything. Instead of investing in its branches and developing its 
brand, he ran down the pension scheme and used the company to line his own 
pockets. Then, when years of woeful – some would say wilful – mismanagement 
made itself felt, he jumped ship like the proverbial rat from a sinking ship.

It would be laughable for him to retain his honour for “services to retail” in 
the face of such conduct. But while the revocation of a knighthood might make 
headlines, we shouldn’t let it distract us from the real issues.

Stripping Green of his knighthood won’t create jobs for the 11,000 who lost 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-is-sad-and-very-very-sorry-to-bhs-workers-video>
, or fill the£571m deficit in the pension fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-unlikely-to-be-compelled-over-bhs-pension-deficit-says-expert>
. Nor will it fill the hole left on high streets up and down the country, pay 
back the £6m owed to HMRC, or ensure that firms in BHS’s supply chain – many of 
them small businesses, the foundation stones of our economy – are paid what 
they are owed.

If yesterday’s vote achieves anything, it will be to put pressure on Green to 
pay back the pension deficit in full, from his own ample wealth. It would make 
for a reassuring ending. There may be the occasional person who acts 
irresponsibly, but rest assured, when that happens, your democratic 
representatives can be relied upon to roundly condemn them and right the 
situation. Surely that means the system works?

But yesterday’s vote was purely symbolic, an act of tokenism. If Green does 
make good his promise to replenish the pension fund, it will be due to popular 
pressure, not the power of the law. This is the most extraordinary thing about 
the whole affair – legally, Green has done nothing wrong. We are not talking 
about a criminal caught with his hands in the till. As repugnant as it seems, 
he was acting within the letter of the law.

This matters because it points to a broader problem. The Tories will have us 
believe that the BHS scandal arose from the moral failings of one man. But it 
is the system that is bent. The destruction of the pension scheme is not unique 
to BHS. Just weeks ago,Bernard Matthews went into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/bernard-matthews-pensioners-regulation-shareholders>
, and it was pensioners, including in my own constituency of Norwich South,who 
paid the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/bernard-matthews-pension-pot-to-receive-just-1p-in-the-pound>
.

And let’s not forget the questionable role played by the auditors who signed 
off on BHS as a “going concern” just a year before it wassold off for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
. Or the huge City financial advisers who waved through the sale of BHS to 
Dominic Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions then went on to receive millions in 
salaries and management fees from the company.

Napoleon or billionaire spiv? MPs line up to take a shot at Philip Green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/napoleon-or-billionaire-spiv-mps-line-up-to-take-a-shot-at-philip-green>
Good businesses are the lifeblood of the economy. But, as responsible business 
people up and down the country know, the system too often allows good 
businesses to be undercut by bad. Green is the product of decades of 
deregulation and market deference, which have encouraged the use of companies 
to extract wealth rather than create it.

Over recent weeks, we have heard the government claiming to have thrown out 
the laissez-faire fanaticism that has dominated Conservative thinking for 30 
years. We have faced the incongruous sight of a Conservative prime minister 
deploying the language of fairness, democracy and workers’ voices while talking 
about the economy.

But are we really to believe that the party of billionaires and tax avoiders 
is now the champion of the working class, ready to transform our economy in the 
interests of fairness? If there is any truth at all to this rhetoric, the 
government would offer more than gestures. They would tighten up the law on 
pensions and takeovers to make the fate ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> a thing of the past. They would take 
on a corporate culture in which short-term greed prevails over long-term 
investment. And they would require companies to attend to all stakeholders, 
rather than just a narrow group of shareholders.

They would make sure the system rewards the wealth creators.

But for the last six years, the Tories have implemented the harshest attack on 
living standards in a generation, while dishing out corporate welfare and 
turning a blind eye to conduct that is easily equal to Green’s. To call them 
the party of the working class is fanciful.

I hope yesterday’s vote will help to hold Green to account. I hope even more 
that it serves as a wake-up call to start addressing the deeper problems with 
how our economy is governed. Let’s see if the prime minister takes this 
opportunity to show that her conversion to Labour’s values is more than just 
rhetorical.
 