
AC/DC’s former drummer Phil Rudd hopes to rejoin the band after his home 
detention sentence.

“I’m going to be back,” he told TV3’s 3D <http://www.3news.co.nz/TVShows/3D> 
show. “I’ve never been fitter, I’ve never felt better, I’ve never been 
psychologically or physically in better shape my whole life.”

The drummer was sentenced last month to eight months of home detention after 
pleading guilty to threatening to kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/21/acdc-drummer-phil-rudd-pleads-guilty-threatening-to-kill-drug-charges>
 a man who used to work for him, along with possession of methamphetamine and 
marijuana. In spite of the ongoing case, Rudd says he’s determined to “get my 
job back, go back on the road, make a lot of money”.

AC/DC review – rock'n'roll reduced to its purest essence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/06/ac-dc-review-wembley-stadium-essence-of-rock-and-roll>
Although Rudd, 61, is appealing his sentence, he was back in court last week 
after he was arrested and charged with breachinghis home detention alcohol ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/03/phil-rudd-denies-breaking-home-detention-alcohol-ban>
.

The band are currently on their Rock or Bust tour with Chris Slade on drums, 
and have previously stated that Slade will play withAC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc> until December.

“Chris Slade’s a good drummer but I’ve got no idea what he’s doing up there, 
Rudd saidof his replacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/13/acdc-confirm-chris-slade-will-replace-phil-rudd-2015-tour>
. “Trust me, I know what I’m talking about. I got nothing against Chris. It’s 
just he hasn’t got a permanent job. I hope! That’s all.”

As well as admitting to seeking treatment for “anxiety and a lot of 
insecurities, depression and stuff,” Rudd spoke of his optimism for the future, 
claiming that AC/DC’s tour was not their last.

“I’ve grown up, but not grown old. I hope there’s a difference,” Rudd said. “I 
still want to play the drums. I’ve got a lot of game left and I reckon I’m just 
starting to fucking get cleared up. So I just want a chance to get back in with 
the boys and just carry on from there. This last tour bullshit, you know, sure. 
Last tour, AC/DC will never retire, Angus [Young] will never retire.”
 