
A deal to keep Nissan making cars in the north-east will not add to the 
government’s liabilities, according toPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, who said any costs would 
be kept within current spending limits.

The chancellor said promises made to the Japanese firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/nissan-in-uk-treasury-refuses-to-tell-obr-if-cost-attached>
 avoided weighing down the Treasury with significant extra subsidies in the 
wake of the Brexit vote.

However, in a letter to an influential all-party committee, Hammond refused to 
say how much the commitments made toNissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> would add to the public finances, 
saying only that any subsidies were “entirely within state aid and WTO rules”.

In Brexit Britain there will be no benefit caps for the multinationals | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/in-brexit-britain-welfare-will-be-for-multinationals>
Hammond said in a letter to Andrew Tyrie, the chair of the Treasury select 
committee, that “no new contingent liabilities have been created in respect of 
government reassurances provided to Nissan”.


Hammond added: “In any case, we expect any commitments incurring costs to be 
managed within existing overall departmental expenditure limit totals.”

Tyrie wrote to the chancellor after the government refused to disclose to the 
Office for Budget Responsibility whether it made any financial promises to 
Nissan ahead of the autumn statement.

The OBR’s economic outlook report, released alongside the mini-budget, 
revealed that the fiscal watchdog “asked specifically whether any contingent 
liabilities had been created in respect of assurances provided to Nissan” and 
that the Treasury declined to say.


In October Nissan said it will build the next Qashqai and X-Trail models in 
Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-to-make-new-qashqai-and-x-trail-models-in-britain>
 amid rising speculation that it could ditch the UK following the country’s 
decision to quit the European Union.

The move secured 7,000 jobs, but prompted concerns that a “sweetheart deal” 
between with the carmaker and the government had been struck.

Hammond also reiterated business secretary Greg Clark’s statement in the 
Commons, in which he said four commitments were made to Nissan.

These included to continue providing grants to the automotive industry, to 
support the research and development and takeup of ultra-low emission vehicles 
and to “emphasise the common ground that exists between ourselves and EU member 
states to ensure that trade between us can be free and unencumbered”.

Asked by Tyrie if the latest letter from the chancellor gave him the assurance 
he needed on the impact of the deal, OBR chairman Rober Chote said: “I would be 
more reassured than not having had anything at all.”

He said it showed that the government expects the impact to be limited, though 
the Treasury’s statement appeared to be based on an assessment by the business 
department.

“It remains open to the interpretation that this is the Treasury simply 
reporting the decision of the Business department and not making a judgment of 
its own,” he said.
 