
The coincidence of the closure of the last 22 BHS stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
 with the revelation that Sir Philip Green has come up witha ploy to stymie an 
investigation by the pensions regulator 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/green-offers-300m-to-bhs-pension-pot-to-avoid-lawsuit-0jcr3nxbs>
 was greeted with another round of negative newspaper headlines and editorials.

It is doubtful that he bothered to read them while cruising the Mediterranean 
on his “£100m superyacht”, but the mainstream media message could not be 
clearer. Green is the hate figure of the moment.

I don’t think too many people will share the view of Forbes commentator Tim 
Worstall that it amounts to a witch hunt. 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2016/08/27/sir-philip-and-lady-tina-no-way-will-they-pay-700-million-to-bhs-pension-scheme/#7e3ae79b7b6e>
 National newspaper editors obviously disagree with him.

The Daily Mail’s front page on Monday, “Sir Shifty bids to ‘blackmail watchdog’
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3762419/Sir-Shifty-says-ll-make-voluntary-contribution-BHS-pension-pot-regulators-drop-probe-fund-s-missing-millions.html>
”, was echoed in other papers: “After 88 years, doors close on high st icon 
destroyed by one man’s greed 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/bhs-closes-final-time-philip-8725122>” 
(Daily Mirror); “Green is ‘evil’ and an ‘asset stripper’, claims MP 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/evil-sir-philip-green-is-an-asset-stripper-claims-mp-a7214076.html>
” (The Independent); “Green in the firing line” (i).


The Sun ran a picture of a sobbing BHS employee overprinted with the headline “
Now give back the Green stuff... and the knighthood, too 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1686291/sir-philip-green-wants-probe-into-bhss-571million-blackhole-dropped-if-he-helps-plug-pension-deficit-gap-as-shoppers-scrape-the-shelves-on-final-day/>
”.

The Daily Express carried pictures of demonstrators outside a BHS store 
calling on Green to sell his luxury yachts 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/704748/BHS-closure-Sir-Phillip-Green-protesters-luxury-yachts-pension>
 in order to live up to his pledge to MPs to “sort” the pensions deficit.

The Times reported that Green “is trying to end the threat of legal action 
against him 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/green-offers-300m-to-bhs-pension-pot-to-avoid-lawsuit-0jcr3nxbs>
... by writing a cheque for more than £300m that would help to plug a hole in 
the company’s pension fund.”

But the shortfall totalled £571m, which is now thought to have reached £700m 
because of lower interest rates that have resulted from changes in monetary 
policy by the Bank of England.

Several editorials reiterated their dislike for Green’s conduct. The Sun 
wondered if there wasany limit to “smug tycoon” Green’s “arrogance” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1689579/philip-green-has-spent-the-summer-cruising-around-the-med-despite-promising-to-sort-out-bhs-mess-in-june/>
 and accused him of trying to wriggle out of an investigation. It said:

“Green is trying to keep his wife – who controls the family fortune – out of 
the firing line. But the probe by the regulator must reach its conclusion, if 
only to deter future attempts at asset stripping successful companies...

Sir Philip has lost the respect of his peers in business, he’s lost most of 
his celebrity pals, and – if he continues to fight against paying the debt he 
owes – he should lose his knighthood.”

The Mirror agreed. The BHS closures are “not the closure of this scandal” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/voice-mirror-workers-not-well-8725600>, 
it said:

“Huge debts are still to be settled with a shop full of unsavoury characters - 
from shifty tycoon Philip Green and his tax haven-based wife Tina to three-time 
bankrupt Dominic Chappell, accused of short-changing loyal staff, company 
pensioners and suppliers.

None of them must be allowed to walk away from deals which expose how 
capitalism shouldn’t work.”

And the Mail was similarly exercised by Green’s offer to pay £300m “but only 
if the watchdog drops its probe into his business practices” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3762898/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-t-bully-away-justice-Sir-Shifty.html>
. The paper said:

“Does he think Britain is a banana republic, where justice is negotiable and 
money can buy immunity from investigation for possible wrong-doing? If so, he 
must be made to think again.

Indeed, it is vital that the regulator continues its scrutiny of Sir Shifty’s 
dealings, which could have worrying implications for members of other pension 
schemes in his retail empire, nominally owned by his tax-exile wife.”

Could Green have saved himself from this ignominy? According to a fascinating 
story in the Financial Times at the weekend 
<https://www.ft.com/content/ced377a2-6ba4-11e6-ae5b-a7cc5dd5a28c>, he might 
have done so.

It revealed that former business journalist Jeff Randall was approached months 
ago by Frank Field, the Labour MP who chairs the work and pensions select 
committee, to broker a deal with Green.

Randall, the former Sunday Times business editor, Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> editor-at-large, BBC 
business editor and presenter of an eponymous Sky News show, is a friend of 
Green’s.

The FT article stated that the talks “fizzled out at the end of May, when it 
became clear that the distance between two sides was only growing wider.”

It reported that Randall - who received no payment and had no formal advisory 
role - “spoke to both men several times and was confident at first that he 
could get them to agree.” The article continued:

“At one point he suggested to Sir Philip that he deposit a large sum in an 
escrow account, which could be added to or reduced following a final deal.

But people briefed on the discussions said it soon became apparent that the 
gap between the two men was widening.”

Randall was quoted as saying, with typical self-deprecating humour: “I tried 
to help but I failed. My future career as an honest broker is clearly limited.”
 