
The novel, of course, owes equally to the romance and the history; Don 
Quixote, especially the second volume, can be seen as the history of a man who 
took romances too much to heart. Many early novels, to distinguish themselves 
from romances and to stake their claim to truthfulness, present themselves as 
histories (in several languages, notably French and Icelandic, the words for 
"history" and "story" are the same - histoire and saga, respectively).Aphra Behn
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aphrabehn>, the first woman to make a 
successful career as a writer in England (1640-89), placed her short novel 
Oroonoko squarely in the category of a history by attesting that she herself 
had known Prince Oroonoko during her stay in Surinam, and that he had related 
the facts of his earlier life to her himself.

Various commentators over the years have used her assertions against her 
(there is more evidence supporting them than contradicting them), either to 
claim that she lied or to deny her skills as a literary artist, but claiming to 
be merely reporting a true story is a standard novelist's assertion. Behn had a 
specific polemical purpose in telling her story, which was to expose the slave 
trade between Africa and the New World. She could only make a splash by 
asserting the truthfulness of her account (many of the same issues were to come 
up 170 years later, with Uncle Tom's Cabin). She was well aware that her 
material was controversial, and it remains so, even though her novel is short, 
obscure, and entirely the province of academic specialists.

The history of Oroonoko is rather simple. The prince of a populous and 
prosperous but warlike tribe in West Africa, he falls in love with a beautiful 
maiden of the same tribe, Imoinda, who is also desired by his grandfather, the 
king, who although he is impotent designates her as his partner. For customary 
reasons, Imoinda cannot thereafter become the wife of Oroonoko, but they don't 
forget each other, and during a ceremonial dance she stumbles into his arms, 
arousing the suspicions of the grandfather, who later that evening discovers 
the two having a tryst. Imoinda is sold into slavery. Not long after, Oroonoko, 
too, ends up on a slave ship heading for the New World, as a result of the 
treachery of the English captain of the ship (who had invited Oroonoko onto the 
ship as his guest, then put him in chains).

Oroonoko ends up at Aphra Behn's plantation in Surinam, where he meets up with 
Imoinda. Behn takes an active interest in his story and his fate. He and 
Imoinda are married and she becomes pregnant. They now want to buy their way 
out of slavery before their child is born a slave, and the English slave owners 
agree to allow this, but repeatedly betray their word and refuse to free them. 
Oroonoko (renamed Caesar) leads a slave revolt. Thinking that he will surely 
die, he kills Imoinda (with her full cooperation) and then is captured. The 
uprising is put down; he is tortured, killed, and dismembered, stoic to the 
last.

In fact, Oroonoko owes quite a bit to the romance. Behn clearly imagines 
conditions in Africa, which she has never seen, to be somewhat like conditions 
at an elaborate European court, where power, convention, taboo and intrigue 
dictate the tragic outcome of romantic personal attachments, and the most 
worthwhile characters are the best-looking and the highest-born. Imoinda and 
Oroonoko conform to standard European ideals of male and female virtue - she is 
beautiful, loving and submissive, and he is doughty, handsome and virtuous. 
Conditions in Surinam are depicted with a greater sense of authenticity, and 
Behn spends some of her short narrative describing the Indian population as 
well as the landscape, flora and fauna. She also alludes to the cession of 
Surinam to the Dutch - Oroonoko's story takes place entirely within a 
recognisable historical context - but Oroonoko remains a romantic hero; his 
uniqueness is too great and his fate too dramatic for the reader to feel that 
she comes to know or understand him.

Behn does not use dialogue - every scene is narrated - and so Oroonoko's and 
Imoinda's voices are absent from the narrative (as are the voices of the 
English slave traders and slave owners). Behn was a dramatist and her other 
narratives make use of dialogue, but her technique wasn't sophisticated enough 
- and perhaps her polemical purpose was too great - to risk allowing Oroonoko 
to speak for himself (though she testifies that he speaks several languages as 
a result of exposure to Europeans in Africa). Undeniably, though, the tale she 
tells is a horrifying one; the reader doesn't have to feel for Oroonoko and 
Imoinda as individuals to recoil at their fate. What happens to them gains 
power insofar as it is shown to be representative of the way slaves are treated 
by their English masters in Surinam (and elsewhere, of course). The treacheries 
and brutalities of the English have a believable idiosyncratic cast that makes 
the reader nod and believe.

Behn's "The Fair Jilt" is a more traditional tale, and is in fact reminiscent 
of some of the darker tales of The Decameron. Miranda, a wealthy young woman 
who has lost her parents, is beautiful but secretly promiscuous. Her first 
victim is a young man who has gone into the Franciscan order because his 
brother has stolen his beloved and married her. Miranda throws herself at him, 
then accuses him of rape when he rejects her advances. He is put in prison. She 
then falls for Tarquin, who may or may not be the wealthy pretender to the 
throne of the Roman empire. He truly loves her, in spite of her evil nature, 
and they collude to rob her younger sister of her half of the family fortune by 
twice attempting to kill her so the money will revert to Miranda. Tarquin is 
tried and set to be beheaded, but the executioner misses his aim, and Tarquin 
is saved, only to demonstrate when he revives that he still loves Miranda, evil 
though she may be. Through various legal manoeuvres they are preserved from 
execution (though now impoverished) and they learn their lesson, going off to 
live peacefully together until they die of old age. Miranda's first victim is 
redeemed and released triumphantly from prison as well.

Behn doesn't fully explore the moral implications of this outcome or Miranda's 
transformation. Like Boccaccio, Behn accepts the existence of evil people. She 
is less interested in their moral improvement than she is in their adventures 
and their effects on those around them. She is not a psychological novelist as 
her near-contemporary Madame de La Fayette is, because Behn is more interested 
in actions than in reasons, or even in plausibility. That people act, and how 
these actions affect others, are as far as she goes. But Behn's work is worth 
reading not only for historical interest but also because she had an eye for 
what you might call the wonders of life. She was drawn to strong drama and 
didn't shrink from depicting violence and treachery, nor from expressing 
"feminine" feelings and thoughts about it. Her work is unusually bold and 
sometimes startlingly frank. 13 Ways of Looking at the Novel byJane Smiley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jane-smiley> is published by Faber at Â£16.99.
 