
I first came across Catherine LePage’s illustrated book browsing the aisles of 
my local bookstore. I do this most days, as a way to get myself out of bed, out 
of the house. After months of holding down temporary and contract jobs, I’d 
recently landed a full-time job, quit after a week in a fit of panic, and now 
found myself unemployed, unsure and more anxious than I’d been in my entire 
life.


I found it propped up in the small self-help section, tucked away in the back 
corner of the store. On approach, a young woman, flicking through a book on 
self-esteem, averted her gaze: a sign of mutual respect, sympathy or 
occasionally fear that I’d become accustomed to in frequenting this section 
over the past months.

Among titles on self-compassion, mindfulness and personal transformation, 
LePage’s book caught my eye: a small hardback with an illustration of a 
porcupine trapped in a sea of hovering red balloons.

How to talk to someone with anxiety | Guardian readers and Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/how-to-talk-to-someone-with-anxiety>
I picked it from the shelf, opened the first page and read the opening line: 

“Are you anxious?”

I turned the page. 

“I am.”

What follows is a kind of illustrated guide to the everyday experience of 
living of anxiety. With her delicate sketches and personal observations, LePage 
seeks to capture our traits and thought patterns, our weaknesses and habits, 
and lay them bare on the page.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e18d669369af0c1081a499512147eb6df1c646%2F0_0_1531_2023%2F1531.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e18d669369af0c1081a499512147eb6df1c646%2F0_0_1531_2023%2F1531.jpg>
 Illustration by Catherine LePage: the Periodic Table of the Elements of 
Response. Photograph: Catherine Lepage/Chronicle Books 
On one page she maps out the Periodic Table of the Elements of Response: a 
tangled flow diagram of the word “If” linked in sprawling arrows in every 
direction. “Making a simple decision becomes impossible,” she writes. “I always 
simultaneously see two sides of the same coin. And sometimes find even more 
sides.”

An illustration of two coins, one reading “the good side” and the other “the 
bad side” are joined in pencil to depict a pair of spectacles, looking out into 
the world.

LePage illustrates the habits that trigger her anxiety – accruing fatigue, 
repressing emotions, setting too-high goals, accumulating responsibilities – 
and asks the question: “since I know the causes of my anxiety, why do I keep 
repeating unhealthy behaviours?”


Like a storybook unfolding, she depicts the rise and fall of those with 
recurring anxiety, drawing the reader into a world where tiny figures jump and 
twirl and play with fire until, like a wind-up toy, they slump and fall.

“It always ends up the same, and I have to face my biggest fear. Emptiness.”

 A girl cast overboard from her row boat tries to keep going but can only 
tread water. A lone figure stands trapped in a house of cards, living through 
other people’s eyes, afraid of judgment. An ice hockey player is captured 
mid-skate, frozen by indecision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e5e945381d9f9c0f430c39047785b8936c3b5d%2F0_0_2871_2342%2F2871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e5e945381d9f9c0f430c39047785b8936c3b5d%2F0_0_2871_2342%2F2871.jpg>
 ‘Making a simple decision becomes impossible,’ writes Lepage. Photograph: 
Catherine LePage/Chronicle Books 
We reach the emotional peak in the form of a confessional. “I’ve spent so many 
years repressing my feelings that I’ve lost touch with my emotions,” LePage 
writes. “I would like to change but I don’t know how and so I feel guilty for 
not being well.Me, the privileged one who has everything in life. Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, love, everything.”


Like the experience of anxiety itself, the revelation does not offer release, 
and the book ends a few pages later: “I’m never satisfied. Finally, I’m only 
human.”

Standing in the self-help aisle, I committed the first sin of bookstore 
browsing: I read the whole book. And, further insulting bookstore etiquette, I 
found myself crying.

In a world where “worries” about money, relationships and success are normal 
markers of experience – where mental health is as best misunderstood and at 
worst stigmatised – it’s incredibly rare to find others who understand the 
experience of generalised anxiety. Trying to explain to friends that I’m 
cancelling dinner plans because I physically can’t muster the confidence to 
leave the house. Trying to hide my exhaustion at work, depleted from sleepless, 
worried nights. Physically drained from the constant wringing of hands and 
feet, the grinding of teeth, the constant racing heart.

It’s almost impossible to explain the pervasive feeling of all things – all 
decisions, all possible outcomes, past, present and future – cascading through 
my mind, folding into themselves, forming a tighter and tighter ball until it 
feels as though all room to move or act or breathe has been squeezed out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e400f44f50faa174e852ce29157f08a65455b67%2F0_722_2536_2454%2F2536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20you%20anxious%2C%20asks%20a%20picture%20book%2C%20then%20helps%20me%20face%20my%20answer%7C%20Rebecca%20Slater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fare-you-anxious-asks-picture-book-helps-me-face-my-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e400f44f50faa174e852ce29157f08a65455b67%2F0_722_2536_2454%2F2536.jpg>
 ‘I physically can’t muster the confidence to leave the house’. Illustration by 
Catherine LePage. Photograph: Catherine Lepage/Chronicle Books 
And on top of it all is that paralysing guilt of being anxious, being 
miserable and wanting, despite my privilege and comfort in life. Explaining 
that is hard. But somehow, through her simple words and pictures, LePage has 
found a way.

The back cover of the book reads: “Thinly sliced and illustrated emotions are 
much easier to digest”, and perhaps LePage is onto something. You can find 
dense academic texts on the wiring of the anxious brain, and instructional 
tapes on breathing and mindfulness – but the power of LePage’s book lies not 
just in capturing the psychological condition, but the emotional experience 
that goes with it. To break down the everyday thoughts and moments of 
generalised anxiety – to lock them down on a page, to colour them in – somehow 
makes them feel a little less overwhelming.

Before long, I’d passed the book on to my partner, my family, a few close 
friends, as a way of explaining myself and how I was feeling. They recommended 
it to others, started conversations, flipped through the pages and said, “Talk 
to me about this one”.

And this, I thought, is all I was really looking for, browsing the self-help 
aisle that day. A book that not only helped me understand myself, but helped 
others understand me – and that, even for a moment, made me feel a little less 
alone.

• Thin Slices of Anxiety by Catherine LePage is out now through Chronicle 
Books, distributed in Australia byHardie Grant 
<http://www.hardiegrant.com.au/publishing/bookfinder/book/thin-slices-of-anxiety-by-catherine-lepage/9781452145792>

 