
The Pirate Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pirate-bay> founder 
Peter Sunde is teaming up with the creators of the world’s most popular 
adblocker to give web users a way to make small donations for articles, music 
and videos they enjoy.

The tie-up between Sunde’s startup Flattr and AdBlock Plus maker Eyeo, Flattr 
Plus is designed to solve a problem the companies claim has been present since 
the web’s invention 27 years ago.

Rather than requiring users to allocate donations manually, Flattr Plus will 
automatically assign payments from a pool set by a user based on how much the 
use a particular site.


Fears of adblocking ‘epidemic’ as report forecasts almost 15m UK users next 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/20/adblocking-uk-web-users> 
The companies said the aim was to reach 10 million users each paying about $5 
(£3.41) a month by 2017, at which point they say they would be able to pay out 
around $500m to publishers. Flattr and Adblock will take a cut of around 10%.

Adblock Plus head of operations and communications Ben Williams said the 10 
million user figure was “ambitious” but “not so far fetched” given Adblock Plus 
already had 500 million users who could be encouraged to sign up.

He added that the idea was an attempt to find a “holistic solution” that 
complemented Adblock’s existing service.

Williams said: “People forget a lot of times that the web was established as 
an information sharing platform. A public good.Advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> came second. Some of the early 
founders of the web tossed around the idea of having some direct way for users 
to fund content.”

“What happened in place was advertising people, even adblockers, we all had 
the false impression that advertising is what pays for content online.”

Eventually, Williams said, the plan was to integrate Flattr Plus into the 
Adblock software.

Though the new service promise an easy way for publishers to get paid directly 
by their readers, many will treat the initiative with caution in part because 
of the people behind it.


Sunde’s background with Pirate Bay made him a bugbear for anyone trying to 
make money from content such as films and music, and AdBlock has taken on a 
similar role for digital publishers by helping readers block the ads that many 
rely on to fund their work.

Flattr was founded in 2010, and claims to have paid 30,000 “creators”. Shortly 
after launch it stepped in to provide a way for people to donate to Wikileaks 
after Visa, Mastercard and PayPal froze access to its funds.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9zrMlEEWBgY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9zrMlEEWBgY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9zrMlEEWBgY&media=>
 Flattr promotional video 
Along with his co-founders, Sunde was imprisoned in Sweden for setting up and 
running Pirate Bay, which was one of the most popular ways for people to find 
films, TV shows music and computer games to download illegally.

Sunde has since distanced himself from the site. Writing when ThePirateBay.org 
went offline following a police raid in late 2014, he welcomed its 
disappearance, saying he had “not been a fan of what The Pirate Bay has become”.

However, although the original site has remained offline, numerous copies have 
sprung up faster than authorities can get them eliminated.
 