
Stay with Santa, Finland

Deliver your kid's wishlist personally on a ski 'n' Santa trip to Levi in 
Finnish Lapland. It has snow-sure slopes, great beginner, intermediate and 
cross-country routes, cheap lift passes and unique cultural activities.

• Neilson (0870 333 3356, neilson.co.uk <http://www.neilson.co.uk>), Dec 20-27 
at Levi Alphouse Apartments, £555pp self-catering inc flights.

Traditional alpine, France

Fantastic skiing, chocolate-box architecture, delicious food, roaring fires . 
. . Chalet Atilla in La Tania ticks all the boxes. The inexpensive Three 
Valleys alternative to Courchevel and Méribel has superb slopes for all 
abilities and a quaint village for après-ski.

• Snowline (0844 557 3118, snowline.co.uk <http://www.snowline.co.uk>), Dec 
21-28, £729pp half-board inc flights and three days' ski hosting.

Luxe for less, Bulgaria

For five-star pampering in a perfect setting, it's hard to beat the Kempinski 
Hotel Grand Arena in Bulgaria's Bansko region, which has retained its cultural 
identity despite a building boom. The Kempinski, at the foot of the slopes, 
offers a luxurious spa, with an array of pools, hot tubs, steam rooms and 
saunas, a flotation tank and a snow room - not to mention affordable massages.

• Balkan Holidays (0845 130 1114, balkanholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.balkanholidays.co.uk>), Dec 20-27, from £671pp inc flights, B&B and 
Christmas dinner.

Ski and ride, Austria

Spend mornings on Heiligenblut's 55km of snow-sure slopes and afternoons 
trotting through the trees. Non-riding partners can join in the four-legged fun 
on a sleigh ride.

• The Riding Company (020 7917 9880, theridingcompany.com 
<http://www.theridingcompany.com>), Dec 20-27, £691pp (£546 for non-riders) 
half-board at the three-star Schlosswirt Hotel, inc 10 hours' riding, 
Klagenfurt airport transfers, exc flights.

Shop 'n' ski, Italy

Beginners, intermediates and bargain-hunters flock to Livigno for its wide, 
easy slopes and duty-free prices. Leave some of your Christmas shopping for 
your arrival. You'll find real deals here, especially on electricals, perfume 
and booze. Skiing in the Dolomites is excellent, with pretty scenery and 
well-groomed slopes, and the villages have their share of Italian chic. Save 
money to spend in the shops by staying in Casa Pozzi, just 700m from the ski 
lifts.

• Collett's Mountain Holidays (01763 289660, colletts.co.uk 
<http://www.colletts.co.uk>), Dec 21-28, £325pp self-catering inc Venice (Marco 
Polo or Treviso) transfers, exc flights.

All the family, France

Check into a chalet in Les Gets and the kids get looked after with inclusive 
childcare, leaving you plenty of time to explore the large ski area shared with 
pricier Morzine. And grandparents get a bargain holiday - half price for 
Christmas week only.

• Ski Famille (0845 644 3764, skifamille .co.uk <http://www.skifamille .co.uk>
), Dec 20-27, £715pp self-catering for adults, £615pp for children aged two to 
12 or £395pp for under twos with five days' childcare, Channel crossing or 
Geneva airport transfer, exc flights.

Skiing solo, Andorra

On this Christmas break for single travellers aged 27-49, you'll share a room 
with a same-sex stranger. But don't worry - by the end of the week, you'll be 
glugging Glühwein together at the nearby bars. The Hotel Refugi dels Isards is 
a stone's throw from the vast, sunny slopes of Pas de la Casa.

• Speedbreaks (0800 612 2202, speedbreaks.co.uk <http://www.speedbreaks.co.uk>
), Dec 21-28, £599pp half-board inc flights.

For a few euros less, France

For a Christmas bargain, the French Pyrenees are hard to beat. Stay in the 
comfortable Helios apartments in Barèges, an attractive village with the 
largest ski area in the region and a thriving nightlife scene. Expect quiet 
slopes, short queues and good skiing for all abilities, especially 
intermediates. Best of all, prices are 25%-50% cheaper than the Alps.

• Borderline Holidays (0033 5 62 92 68 95, borderlinehols.com 
<http://www.borderlinehols.com>), Dec 20-27, £215pp self-catering, inc Lourdes 
or Pau airport transfers, exc flights.

Swiss family, Switzerland

Verbier's less expensive neighbour, Nendaz, is ideal for kids. There are wide, 
easy nursery slopes, family lift pass discounts, exceptional children's ski 
schools, pushchair-friendly winter walks and toy libraries. And as part of the 
vast Four Valleys, with 412km of slopes, all ski levels will be happy here, 
especially experts, off-pisters and snowboarders.

• Crystal Ski (0871 231 5659, crystalski .co.uk <http://www.crystalski .co.uk>
), Dec 20-27, £458pp self-catering inc flights and transfers.

Teens only, Austria

Send the kids off for a week learning to ski or snowboard with other 13-17 
year olds in the Europa-Sportregion. The coach leaves on Boxing Day, so you can 
give the holiday to them as a present.

• PGL (0870 055 1551, pgl.co.uk <http://www.pgl.co.uk>), Dec 26-Jan 2, from 
£799pp, full-board inc coach transport, lift passes, equipment hire, lessons, 
activities, insurance and full adult supervision.

· This article was amended on Monday November 3 2008. 
 