
I return to it
again: avid faces,
conscious of the threads
fate has spun; fingers
with scissors to cut
those threads and release
the garment towards which
the muscular lover
helplessly is being drawn.


RS Thomas was always keen on the ekphrastic genre (literature about other 
artforms). His wifeMildred “Elsi” Eldridge 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-21714220>, was herself a gifted artist, and 
he responded to a wide variety of paintings. Many, he admitted, took the form 
of reproductions – sometimes even postcards, with which the Thomases would play 
an art-history version of Happy Families. But they stimulated his imagination 
in periods of what he termed “poetic driness” and gave him new angles on the 
metaphysical questions that absorbed him.


 A collection of ekphrastic poems, Ingrowing Thoughts, appeared in 1985. But 
this particular vein turned out to be far from exhausted. All the poems inToo 
Brave to Dream: Encounters with Modern Art 
<http://www.bloodaxebooks.com/ecs/product/too-brave-to-dream-1122> are recent 
discoveries <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-37861719>. Some 16 years after 
the poet’s death, whenthe RS Thomas Centre <http://rsthomas.bangor.ac.uk/> at 
Bangor University acquired his personal library, untitled works in Thomas’s 
hand were found between the pages of two books,Herbert Read’s Art Now 
<https://burlingtonindex.wordpress.com/2016/11/22/herbert-read-pope-of-modern-art-and-editor-of-the-burlington-magazine-1933-1939/>
 (1933) and the essay collection Reed edited, Surrealism (1936). The poems were 
composed between 1987 and 1993.

 I should declare an interest before going on: I’m employed by Bangor 
University. I was never to meet Thomas, as I’d hoped; the news of his death was 
announced the day I started. With the edgy narcissism of the stranger in town, 
I began to wonder if Thomas had turned his back on me personally by dying. 
Well, it was raining heavily, and there’s nothing like the rain of north Wales 
to darken one’s mood irrationally. But then the rain mostly stopped, the sun 
mostly came out and a rainbow appeared over the university tower. My mood 
soared: I imagined I’d got a reluctant thumbs-up from the great Welsh poet in 
the sky.

 I’m glad to be revisiting his work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jun/17/luminary-rs-thomas-poem-week>
 with this week’s poem. It’s not often that some three dozen new poems by a 
major poet are discovered. And this is the first time, I think, that a Poem of 
the week has been especially written for the accompanying picture.

 Introduced and annotated in scrupulous detail by Tony Brown and Jason Walford 
Davies, Too Brave to Dream includes paintings by George Grosz, Graham 
Sutherland, René Magritte, Salvador Dalí, Pablo Picasso and Grace W Pailthorpe. 
Thomas writes about war and mechanised violence: for example, the people “too 
brave to dream” are Londoners whom Thomas imagines caught in the Blitz raging 
beyond the subway refugeHenry Moore depicted in his 1941 Shelter Drawings 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Henry+Moore+depicted+in+his+1941+Shelter+Drawing&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiOucqrtu7QAhVILcAKHZwYAo0QsAQIGw&biw=1763&bih=1022>
. Other poems contain broader observations of “the human condition”. All 
complement the pictures in a vivid, taut-nerved, almost intuitive way, closer 
to improvisations or quick sketches than to complex parallel compositions. Like 
little springboards, they impel the reader back to the painting, to see it with 
a second pair of eyes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpoem-of-the-week-rs-thomas-on-the-dressmakers-by-william-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeee99f01f33e4c1f2facde8745d4b489c4faec8%2F0_0_2771_3543%2F2771.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poem%20of%20the%20week%3A%20RS%20Thomas%20on%20The%20Dressmakers%20by%20William%20Roberts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpoem-of-the-week-rs-thomas-on-the-dressmakers-by-william-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poem%20of%20the%20week%3A%20RS%20Thomas%20on%20The%20Dressmakers%20by%20William%20Roberts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fpoem-of-the-week-rs-thomas-on-the-dressmakers-by-william-roberts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeee99f01f33e4c1f2facde8745d4b489c4faec8%2F0_0_2771_3543%2F2771.jpg>
 The Dressmaker (oil on canvas). Click on the image to see the painting in full 
size. Photograph: Courtesy of the William Roberts Society 
 This week’s poem responds to a striking work by an artist of Isaac 
Rosenberg’s generation,William Roberts 
<http://art.bathnes.gov.uk/ow23/collections/voir.xsp?id=00101-5014&e>. What 
Thomas instantly sees in The Dressmakers is thread-spinning fate. So the 
absorbed and slightly sinister seamstresses come to resemble the threeMoirai of 
Greek mythology <http://www.theoi.com/Daimon/Moirai.html>: Clotho, who spins 
the thread of an individual’s life, Lachesis, who draws lots to determine its 
length, and Atropos, who delivers death by cutting the thread. The painting 
doesn’t precisely fit such a scenario. Yet Thomas captures the mood of it with 
his idea of fate and emphasises its two most significant oppositions: the 
fierce, greedy cunning of the thickset figure in blue and the sensuous 
trance-like acceptance of the woman she attends.

 Thomas goes beyond Roberts with an arresting, perhaps surrealism-influenced 
image: he imagines the threads, when cut, “release / the garment”. Is the 
garment that stripy, flimsy shift the woman on the right is already wearing? 
The item of clothing Thomas imagines is more likely to be metaphorical, and 
even identifiable as Death.

 While “the muscular lover” could be outside the picture’s frame, I take 
Thomas’s term to refer to the shift-wearing woman. The painting suggests 
perhaps that she’s also being prepared for some bridal ceremony, the nail 
scissors wielded by the leading dressmaker symbolising the breaking of the 
hymen. We can’t see her face but, as the poem implies, there is no protest. She 
is “helplessly being drawn” (the pun on the passive verb intensifies the 
helplessness) towards her fate, Eros – which is alsoThanatos 
<http://www.theoi.com/Daimon/Thanatos.html>.

 It’s always difficult to know whether, in a single-stanza poem, a syllabic 
pattern is intended. Thomas begins with a five-syllable line, and there are 
five more lines of five syllables at the core, if you pronounce “towards” in 
line seven as a monosyllable. No line has more than seven syllables. This 
emphasis on five seems to mirror the extraordinarily expressive fingers and 
hands Roberts has painted.

 Faces, threads, fingers, scissors and the garment itself are central images, 
almost functioning as archetypes. With less connective narrative than Roberts 
brings to his ensemble, these images enact in the poem an exposed, bare ritual. 
At the same time, the syntax has a consenting, graceful flow. Thomas’s speaker 
doesn’t condemn what’s happening, though it’s clear from his lingering closing 
line that he sympathises with the lover. His “garment” may be an allusion to 
the frailer dress of mortal flesh. The artist evokes a certain dramatic menace, 
despite those cheery tulips – but the poet seems quietly unalarmed: fate, for 
him, simply does what it has to do.

 Thomas regretted that the images accompanying his earlier ekphrastic poems 
were monochrome. How delighted he’d have been with this gloriously 
full-coloured edition, a gift for anyone, not least at Christmas time, with an 
interest in poetry and art.
 