
Police fired percussion grenades inside the Estádio Castelão as fans fought at 
the 2014 World Cup stadium on Sunday following the end of the Ceara state 
championship final. The 2-2 draw gave the title to Fortaleza, who had beaten 
their city rivals Ceara 2-1 in the first leg last week.

Fortaleza fans invaded the pitch to celebrate but attacked their rivals with 
sticks, seats and even parts of the stage being prepared for the prize-giving 
ceremony. Police fired smoke bombs in a bid to try and clear the pitch.

“The stadium’s infrastructure wasn’t made for Brazilian football fans,” Lt Col 
Aguinaldo, the commander of events policing for the state police, told the 
Globoesporte web site. “It’s easy for fans to invade the field like this. 
Holding back a rebellious mob is difficult.”

The 63,000-seat stadium was completely rebuilt for the World Cup last year and 
hosted six games, including two that featured the host nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fpolice-fire-grenades-world-cup-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430737800590%2Ffc345960-b03a-4933-b7e8-3e55c6820183-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20fire%20percussion%20grenades%20as%20fans%20riot%20in%20Brazil%E2%80%99s%20World%20Cup%20stadiums&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fpolice-fire-grenades-world-cup-stadiums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20fire%20percussion%20grenades%20as%20fans%20riot%20in%20Brazil%E2%80%99s%20World%20Cup%20stadiums&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F04%2Fpolice-fire-grenades-world-cup-stadiums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F4%2F1430737800590%2Ffc345960-b03a-4933-b7e8-3e55c6820183-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Estádio Castelão in Fortaleza hosted two of Brazil’s matches in the 2014 
World Cup, including the quarter-final game against Colombia. Photograph: Fabio 
Lima/AP 
There was also trouble at a World Cup venue in Porto Alegre, where Grêmio fans 
ripped up seats in Internacional’s Beira-Rio stadium after their team had lost 
the state title. Police used pepper spray to prevent more trouble.

The incidents came on a day of state championship finals across Brazil. The 
most notable result came in the southern state of Parana, where Operario beat 
Coritiba 3-0 away from home to lift the first state title in their 103-year 
history.

Santos beat Palmeiras on penalties to take their 21st São Paulo state 
championship after winning the match 2-1 and level up the tie 2-2 on aggregate.

In Rio, Vasco beat Botafogo 2-1 in front of 66,000 people at the Maracanã to 
lift their first Carioca title since 2003.

The win means the Vasco coach, Doriva, becomes the first manager to win 
back-to-back titles in Rio and São Paulo, a year after lifting the Paulista 
trophy with Ituano.

The other big win was in Salvador, where Bahia beat Vitória da Conquista 6-0 
to overturn a 3-0 first leg deficit.

Atlético Mineiro won the Minas Gerais state title by beating Caldense 2-1. 
Former Manchester City and Everton striker Jô got the winner with his first 
goal for more than a year.
 