
Police departments will be required to give the US justice department full 
details of deadly incidents involving their officers each quarter, under a new 
government system for counting killings by police that was influenced by the 
Guardian.


Announcing a new program for documenting all “arrest-related deaths”, federal 
officials said they would actively work to confirm fatal cases seen in media 
reports and other open sources rather than wait for departments to report them 
voluntarily.

The Counted: people killed by police in the United States – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
The methodology of the new system, which aims to replace a discredited count 
by the FBI, mirrors that ofThe Counted, an ongoing Guardian effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/counted-us-police-killings> to 
document every death caused by law enforcement officers in 2015 and 2016.


Writing in the Federal Register 
<https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2016/08/04/2016-18484/agency-information-collection-activities-proposed-collection-comments-requested-new-collection#furinf>
, Department of Justice officials said their new program should increase 
transparency around the use of force by police and improve accountability for 
the actions of individual officers.


“Accurate and comprehensive accounting of deaths that occur during the process 
of arrest is critical for law enforcement agencies to demonstrate 
responsiveness to the citizens and communities they serve,” their notice said.


The federal government has kept no comprehensive record of killings by police 
officers, even as a series of controversial deaths set off unrest in cities 
across the country over the past two years. An annual voluntary count by the 
FBI of fatal shootings by officers has recorded only about half the true number.


The new system is being overseen by the department’s bureau of justice 
statistics (BJS). It would, like the Guardian’s, document deaths caused by 
physical force, Taser shocks and some vehicle crashes caused by law enforcement 
in addition to fatal shootings by officers. A Washington Post tally counts 
fatal shootings by police.


In their Federal Register article, officials cited their authority under the 
death in custody reporting act 
<https://www.congress.gov/113/plaws/publ242/PLAW-113publ242.pdf> – a law that 
states local departments must report all deaths in custody to the justice 
department or lose 10% of their federal funding. The law has been largely 
ignored since being reauthorized in December 2014.


The BJS carried out a trial of its new system that monitored deaths between 1 
June and 31 August last year. Officials working on the pilot programcited The 
Counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/justice-department-database-police-killings-counted-statistics>
 as an influence on the initiative and a source for its information.

Officials estimate that this year there will be about 2,100 arrest-related 
deaths across the US involving 1,066 different police departments. The BJS 
criteria includes a wide range of deaths including suicides and natural causes.
Last year the Guardian counted 1,146 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
 deaths caused by police in narrower terms.

According to the announcement, police departments will be asked later this 
year to report once for all arrest-related deaths during 2016, before moving to 
the quarterly reporting process next year.

Under the new government program, all 19,450 American law enforcement agencies 
will be senta form 
<http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/DownloadDocument?objectID=59326201> by the 
BJS that requires information on all the department’s arrest-related deaths in 
the past quarter of the year.

Deaths that were already noticed in media reports will be listed by the BJS 
for confirmation or correction by the local departments. Space will be included 
for the local department to list additional deaths that were not previously 
noticed. Departments that have seen no arrest-related deaths that quarter will 
be asked to return “an affirmative zero” saying so.

A second form 
<http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/DownloadDocument?objectID=59326401> seeking 
extensive information about the circumstances of each death will be sent to the 
local department responsible. It will require local officials to detail similar 
data to that logged by The Counted, such as demographic information on every 
person killed, how the deadly encounter began and whether the person was armed.

Other <http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/DownloadDocument?objectID=59326501> 
forms <http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/DownloadDocument?objectID=59326701> 
will be sent to the 685 medical examiner’s and coroner’s offices asking them to 
also confirm details of deaths that have been noticed in public sources. They, 
too, will be asked to return forms with details of any other deaths that went 
unnoticed.


The BJS ran a previous arrest-related deaths count that was shuttered in April 
2014, four months before the issue of killings by police became a national 
controversy following the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black 
18-year-old, in Ferguson, Missouri.


FBI chief: 'unacceptable' that Guardian has better data on police violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/fbi-chief-says-ridiculous-guardian-washington-post-better-information-police-shootings>
Officials acknowledged in a review of the previous program that its 
census-style method led to an under-documenting of deaths. They argue that 
their new “hybrid approach” – proactively seeking out fatal cases using open 
sources such as news reports, while also asking police to alert them to 
unnoticed cases – will lead to more comprehensive data.


There will also be a two-month consultation period inviting comments on how it 
might work, particularly from law enforcement agencies and medical examiners 
who would be affected.

The FBI said at the end of last year that it planned to overhaul its 
discredited system for counting shootings by officers to include other uses of 
force and non-deadly incidents. The FBI program, however, is expected to remain 
voluntary.
 