
A former senior federal Liberal party official has branded the practice of 
funnelling allegedly prohibited developer donations to theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> branch through the 
Free Enterprise Foundation (FEF) “unacceptable”.

Michael Yabsley, who was the honorary federal treasurer of the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> from 2008 to 2010, 
has admitted knowledge of the practice was widespread.

In 2014 the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption found a range of 
verbal and documentaryevidence that showed the NSW party was sending donations 
from property developers to the foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/02/a-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals>
 and arranging to have them funnelled back. State law had banned donations from 
property developers from January 2010.

A tale of two charitable foundations, and a flood of donations to the Liberals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/02/a-tale-of-two-charitable-foundations-and-a-flood-of-donations-to-the-liberals>
According to an ABC report, Yabsley told Four Corners 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-23/former-liberal-treasurer-calls-for-donation-overhaul/7435856>
: “Now looking back on it … those practices are not acceptable and should not 
have been acceptable in the past.”

Asked if he was aware at the time that donors who were prohibited from 
donating in NSW were being asked to do so through the FEF, Yabsley replied: “In 
a couple of cases, yes, and you know there we’re talking about property 
developers, owners of certain licensed premises.

“Yes, I don’t think it was a great secret about the fact that that was 
happening.”

Asked about the lawfulness of the practice, Yabsley said: “It struck me as 
being something that had been happening over a long period of time, and there 
was no particular reason to suggest that it was unlawful in a way that was 
different with what had been done in the past.”

Yabsley said reputations of individuals, companies and major political parties 
had been damaged by controversies over donations. “It all points to the 
absolute case to do away with the system of political fundraising that we 
currently have,” he said.

According to the report, the foundation denied it had ever broken the law or 
breached its regulatory requirements because the gifts it received were not 
political donations and the funds were not subject to the direction of the 
original donor.

Arthur Sinodinos, the party’s treasurer and chairman of its finance committee 
at the time,has denied knowing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/02/arthur-sinodinos-under-constant-stress-over-nsw-liberal-donations-revelations>
 that a “substantial” amount of the $700,000 donated by the foundation had come 
from property developers.

Political donations: Liberals provide list of those who gave to Free 
Enterprise Foundation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/icac-new-south-wales-liberals-provide-list-of-free-enterprise-foundation-donors>
Sindinos told Icac he accepted no responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/arthur-sinodinos-says-donation-laundering-scheme-didnt-pass-pub-test>
 for the events. Earlier this year Icacreportedly advised Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/21/arthur-sinodinos-reportedly-cleared-by-icac-over-corruption-claims>
 that no corruption findings had been made against him. Icac has yet to bring 
down its final report.

In May the Liberal party provided the NSW Electoral Commission with a list of 
donors to the foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/11/icac-new-south-wales-liberals-provide-list-of-free-enterprise-foundation-donors>
 after the commission announced it would withhold $4.4m in public funding if it 
did not do so.

Asked about Yabsley’s comments, Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> federal campaign 
spokesman Mathias Cormann said they were state matters and referred them to 
state authorities.

“All political parties need to comply with all the relevant laws,” he said. 
“The rules are there for all to see, and all parties ought to comply with the 
rules.”

The NSW Liberal party has been contacted for comment.
 