 The Massacre of 18 men, women and children in a Mexican suburb near the United 
States border last week has been followed by new evidence that the authorities 
have been implicated in the drugs trade with which the killings have been 
linked.
Last Thursday gunmen stormed three homes in Ensenada, 60 miles from 
California, lined three families against a wall and shot them. One woman was 
executed holding her baby, who also died.

Federal state attorneys said a 38-year-old rancher, Fermin Castro, was the 
target of the attackers, who were dressed in black, the colour of federal 
police uniforms.

They tortured him before shooting him along with 18 relatives and neighbours; 
Castro survived and is in a coma. A 12-year-old boy and a pregnant 15-year-old 
who survived have been placed under army protection.

Authorities believe Castro led a small criminal organisation that specialised 
in guiding drug planes into desert airstrips and unloading their cargo on to 
trucks for cocaine shipments across the border.

The Castro family was believed to be linked to a cartel based in the border 
city of Tijuana led by the notorious Arellano Felix brothers.

The killings have been accompanied by two disclosures linking Mexican 
authorities to the cartels. The New York Times reported last week that senior 
officials of an elite American-trained police unit may have had ties to the 
traffickers. Most were implicated by lie-detector tests conducted by US 
investigators.

The paper reported that an inquiry by Swiss police had concluded that Raul 
Salinas, brother of former President Carlos Salinas, played a key role in 
Mexico's cocaine trade, raking in huge bribes to protect the flow of drugs into 
the US. Swiss officials said they expected it to be the basis for a seizure of 
more than $130 million (about Â£800,000) that Salinas deposited in Swiss banks.
 