
For anyone interested in theatre and politics – and the relationship between 
the two – there was a fascinating juxtaposition of shows in Glasgow and 
Edinburgh this week. Kicking off the polemicalMayfesto programme 
<http://www.tron.co.uk/mayfesto/> at the Tron in Glasgow, It's a Dead Liberty 
<http://www.tron.co.uk/event/its_a_dead_liberty/> reunited the old musically 
minded lefties of Wildcat and 7:84 theatre companies – both long since defunct 
– for a blues-inflected socialist cabaret.

At the Traverse in Edinburgh, for election day only, a hastily written 
"guerilla theatre" sketch show calledWelcome to the Hotel Caledonia 
<http://www.traverse.co.uk/shows_election_special.htm> attempted to capture the 
mood of the moment – banking crisis, AV referendum, Scottish parliamentary 
elections and all.

In Glasgow, we had the stalwarts of a strand of popular theatre that had its 
heyday in the 1970s and 80s and ploughed on until theScottish Arts Council 
<http://www.scottisharts.org.uk/> withdrew funding, first from Wildcat in 1998 
and finally from 7:84 in 2008. The show was an exercise in nostalgia, featuring 
songs aboutdisappearances in El Salvador 
<http://hrbrief.org/2009/12/el-salvador-acknowledges-and-apologizes-for-forced-disappearances-of-children/>
 and the bourgeois changes brought about by Glasgow's appointment as the 1990 
European capital of culture. It was a surprise not to see a collection for the
Nicaragua Solidarity Campaign <http://www.nicaraguasc.org.uk/> on the way out.

In Edinburgh, we had a group of writers – Peter Arnott, Alan Bissett, David 
Greig <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/davidgreig>, David Ireland, Rona Munro, 
Morna Pearson and Alan Wilkins – who had their ideas about theatrical politics 
shaped, either directly or indirectly, by the Wildcat/7:84 generation. A case 
in point is Alan Bissett, who was only 23 when Wildcat closed, yet contributed 
to both shows. His turn as aTaxPayers' Alliance 
<http://www.taxpayersalliance.com/> spokesman with a grudge against supply 
teachers was one of the highlights of It's a Dead Liberty. Peter Arnott also 
wrote for both.

It was heartening to see Old Labour veterans and the next-generation 
playwrights still believing the stage is a natural home for public discourse. A 
discourse, that is, laced with broad comedy, heavy satire and big band numbers 
– all part of the popular tradition – but a discourse nonetheless.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> has an immediacy and intimacy that 
isn't possible in the mass media, which is why even the act of gathering an 
audience can seem like a political gesture. As one character in Hotel Caledonia 
says: "There are people up here [in Scotland] prepared to pay good money to see 
half-written plays about the state of the nation".

The potential and willingness is there to keep alive a spirit of theatrical 
subversiveness – and I'm all for that. What is strange about our political 
situation, however, is that it seems to make satire difficult. The best scene 
in the Traverse show involved David Cameron – having adapted his "calm down, 
dear" gaffe to a gangster-style "why you mad?" – failing to notice the tirade 
of class hatred being directed at him by a furious prostitute. It encapsulated 
our sense of impotence and rage.

Elsewhere, though, there was little mileage either comic or political to be 
had from Scottish Labour leaderIain Gray 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/iain-gray>'s lack of charisma and George 
Galloway <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/georgegalloway> looking ridiculous 
on Celebrity Big Brother. The AV campaign has been so half-hearted, it's little 
wonder it produced only an indifferent joke about a sleazy hotel worker 
chatting up three women at once to keep his options open.

It's a Dead Liberty hit nearer the mark with a funny and pointed routine about 
Stephen Hawking being interviewed regarding his disability benefits. What 
seemed to capture the political mood of the moment most, however, was not anger 
or irony but a plangent recurring line in Hotel Caledonia about hope. West 
coast and east, these generations of artists are refusing to be 
disenfranchised, and clinging on to the possibility that they can change the 
world yet.
 