On 8 August 2002, Co-Op funeral services announced their list of the most 
popular songs to be played at funerals. Which song was the one most commonly 
used to commemorate the passing of a loved one?  Pearl Jam – Alive  Bette 
Midler – Wind Beneath My WingsAnother One Bites the Dust was on the list of the 
most popular songs, though. Tasteful.  Queen – Another One Bites the Dust  
Belinda Carlisle – Heaven Is a Place on Earth Happy birthday, The Edge out of 
U2, who turned 55 this week. What unusual feature of his plectrums contributes 
to their unique sound?  The grip is covered with dimples, and then he holds 
them upside down so the dimples hit the stringsYou can learn very dull things 
on guitar websites.  He covers the tip with a specially made grease made for 
him by Vaseline, which enables them to slide across the strings more quickly  
Titanium wire is embedded in the plastic to produce a metallic sound  He makes 
them himself, using only plastic from Fairy Liquid bottles produced between 
1978 and 1984. He believes this source of plastic will run out in 2018. This 
week in 1980, AC/DC’s Back in Black went to No 1 in the UK album charts – their 
first chart-topper. Which of the following is Brian Johnson not up to during 
the course of the song?  Hitting the sack  Beating the flack  Getting back on 
the track  Waxing the crack Back in Black is the second best-selling album of 
all time, fact fans. Anthony H Wilson, famed for his work with Factory Records, 
died on 10 August 2007. Which of the following items was never given a Factory 
catalogue number?  Wilson’s favourite “World’s Greatest Boss” mug Factory once 
gave a catalogue number to its staff Christmas party.  A poster for a cancelled 
Durutti Column gig  An unused sleeve for a single by Crawling Chaos  A legal 
case involving Martin Hannett Death Cab for Cutie’s Ben Gibbard blew out 40 
candles on his birthday cake this week. Which of the following is not a Death 
Cab for Cutie lyric?  I put on my overcoat and walked into winter  I matched my 
socks and ironed my T-shirtsPoet of the everyday or boring solipsist? You 
decide!  I rearrange the furniture as you sleep  I drank from a faucet and I 
kept my receipts Led Zeppelin rehearsed together for the first time on 12 
September 1968, in a building on a London street now most famous for what?  
Chinese restaurantsGerrard Street is the heart of Chinatown, in Soho.  Theatres 
 Gay bars  Being the most polluted street in Britain Four years ago on Friday, 
the London Olympics closing ceremony was held. Which of the following top stars 
did not play live during the show?  Taio Cruz  Richard Jones out of the Feeling 
 Noel Gallagher’s High Flying BirdsThat honour went to Liam’s band, Beady Eye.  
Jessie J Fleetwood Mac played their first gig this week in 1967. How many 
official members have they had during that time?  Nine  11  16 Only drummer 
Mick Fleetwood has been there the whole time. John McVie was not on their first 
single.  39 On 14 August, 2003, the One True Voice – the boyband created 
alongside Girls Aloud on the TV show Popstars: The Rivals, One True Voice – 
split up. Their mentor, Pete Waterman, refused to call them a boyband. What 
term did he use instead?  My lovely boys  Useless bunch of wasters  
Groundbreaking pop combo  Male vocal harmony group They were a boyband, Pete. 
Live with it. David Crosby turns 75 on Sunday. In 1994 he had a liver 
transplant – which fellow rock star helped pay for it?  Phil Collins His liver 
problems were caused by hepatitis C  Neil Young  Joni Mitchell  Simon Le Bon  
You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  