
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has lambasted 
media organisations that focus on scandals and smears and promote fake news as 
a means of discrediting people in public life. Spreading disinformation was 
“probably the greatest damage that the media can do”, the pontiff told the 
Belgian Catholic weekly Tertio. It is a sin to defame people, he added.

Using striking terminology, Francis said journalists and the media must avoid 
falling into “coprophilia” – an abnormal interest in excrement. Those reading 
or watching such stories risked behaving like coprophagics, people who eat 
faeces, he added.


Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
The pope excused himself for using terminology that some might find repellent. 
“I think the media have to be very clear, very transparent, and not fall into – 
no offence intended – the sickness of coprophilia, that is, always wanting to 
cover scandals, covering nasty things, even if they are true,” he said. “And 
since people have a tendency towards the sickness of coprophagia, a lot of 
damage can be done.”


He also spoke of the danger of using the media to slander political rivals. 
“The means of communication have their own temptations, they can be tempted by 
slander, and therefore used to slander people, to smear them, this above all in 
the world of politics,” he said.


“They can be used as means of defamation. No one has a right to do this. It is 
a sin and it is hurtful.”

Disinformation was the greatest potential harm the media could cause, he said, 
because “it directs opinion in only one direction and omits the other part of 
the truth”.


Wednesday’s interview was not the first time Francis has made the same point 
in unusual language. A year before being elected pope, hetold the Italian 
newspaper La Stampa 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/pope-warns-journalists-of-coprophilia-2013-3?IR=T>
: “Journalists sometimes risk becoming ill from coprophilia and thus fomenting 
coprophagia, which is a sin that taints all men and women – that is, the 
tendency to focus on the negative rather than the positive aspects.”


The pope’s latest comments on disinformation were made against a backdrop of a 
global debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
 over the proliferation of fake news websites and stories that present events 
through a highly partisan lens.


In the US, some observers have suggested that fake news could have swayed the 
presidential election in favour of Donald Trump. On 19 November the Facebook 
CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, announced new steps to counter fake news on the platform, 
marking a departure from his scepticism that online misinformation was, as 
Barack Obama has put it,a threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/barack-obama-fake-news-facebook-social-media>
 to democratic institutions.

The “Pizzagate” conspiracy theory, which led to a self-radicalised gunman 
discharging his weapon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/washington-pizza-child-sex-ring-fake-news-man-charged>
 in a popular pizza restaurant in Washington DC on Sunday, was spread with the 
help of fake news stories falsely accusing the owners of being part of a 
nonexistent paedophile ring with supposed ties to Hillary Clinton.
 