
Pope Francis has launched a last-ditch appeal to Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, urging the Syrian 
president to respect international humanitarian law and to protect the rights 
of civilians in the country’s bloody civil war.

Francis’s message was contained in a letter delivered directly to Assad on 
Monday by Cardinal Mario Zenari, the Vatican’s top diplomat inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Forces loyal to the Assad regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
 are moving closer to taking the remaining rebel-held areas of Aleppo after 
intense artillery shelling and airstrikes that have killed or displaced 
thousands. Hundreds of thousands of people in east Aleppo have been living with 
dwindling food supplies, a lack of fuel, water and electricity and no access to 
hospitals.

The Vatican said the letter contained an appeal to the president and the 
international community to end the violence and condemned “all forms of 
extremism and terrorism from whatever quarter they may come”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Faleppo-under-heavy-bombardment-as-syrian-army-advances-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20under%20heavy%20bombardment%20as%20Syrian%20army%20advances%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Faleppo-under-heavy-bombardment-as-syrian-army-advances-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20under%20heavy%20bombardment%20as%20Syrian%20army%20advances%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Faleppo-under-heavy-bombardment-as-syrian-army-advances-video&media=>
Aleppo under heavy bombardment as Syrian army advances – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/12/aleppo-under-heavy-bombardment-as-syrian-army-advances-video>
It said Francis was appealing “to the president to ensure that international 
humanitarian law is fully respected with regard to the protection of the 
civilians and access to humanitarian aid”.

On Sunday in a message delivered in St Peter’s Square, the pope called on 
followers not to forget the suffering of civilians in Aleppo, particularly 
families, children and sick and elderly people.

The Guardian view on the fall of Aleppo: it will not end the suffering | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/the-guardian-view-on-the-fall-of-aleppo-it-will-not-end-the-suffering>
“Unfortunately, we have become accustomed to war, to destruction; but we must 
not forget Syria is a country full of history ... we cannot accept that this is 
negated by war, which is a pile of abuses and falsehoods,” he said.

The Vatican initially declined to confirm the existence and contents of the 
letter after it was initially published by a Syrian news website alongside a 
picture of Assad sitting next to Zenari.

It is not common practice for the Vatican to release private correspondence by 
the pope, but it decided to reveal more details after Syrian and Russian news 
sites suggested the letter was an expression of sympathy for Syria but failed 
to report that it included a call for Assad to respect humanitarian laws.
 