
Pope Francis celebrated an active if low-key 80th birthday on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/17/happy-birthday-pope-francis-world-sake-do-not-retire>
, sharing breakfast with eight homeless people before celebrating mass with 
cardinals as greetings poured in from around the world.

The pontiff received more than 70,000 email messages wishing him a happy 
birthday, as well as telephone calls and telegrams from world leaders and 
religious figures.

His predecessor, 89-year-old Emeritus Pope Benedict XVI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/pope-benedict-god-resign-mystical-experience>
, sent a “very affectionate” written greeting the Vatican said was 
“particularly appreciated,” followed by a personal call in the afternoon and 
three small gifts that bore “very personal and significant meaning for both”. 
The Vatican did not otherwise divulge the nature of the gifts.

Happy birthday, Pope Francis – for God’s sake don’t retire | Paul Vallely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/17/happy-birthday-pope-francis-world-sake-do-not-retire>
At breakfast, Francis chatted individually with each of the homeless guests; 
four Italians, two Romanians, a Moldovan and a Peruvian at theVatican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> hotel where he resides, and shared 
Argentinian cakes with them. The guests offered the pope a bouquet of 
sunflowers. They were invited from among those staying around Saint Peter’s 
Square and at nearby showers for the homeless established by the pope’s 
almsgiver. The pope also sent enough birthday cakes for 1,500 people to 
kitchens serving the poor and homeless in Rome.

Speaking to the cardinals, Francis contemplated the aging process. “For some 
days now, I have had in mind a word that seems ugly: Old age, a thought that 
frightens,” he said. But thenhe recalled his own words during his first papal 
greeting in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/19/pope-francis-rallies-faithful-mass>
, when he said: “Old age is the thirst for knowledge.” He added: “I hope it 
will be the same for me.”

Saturday is a working day at the Vatican and Francis kept up his usual pace. 
He met with Malta’s president and held an audience with members of the 
Nomadelfia community, a secular group whose lifestyle emulates early 
Christians, who sang “Happy Birthday” to the pontiff.

The pope experienced the day “with great joy. He was particularly happy by the 
presence of many children and youths at the audience with the Nomadelfia 
community,” the Vatican said.

Greetings arrived from all corners of the globe, both personal messages and 
succinct tweets with the hashtag #Pontifex80.

Pope Francis compares fake news consumption to eating faeces
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/pope-compares-fake-news-consumption-to-eating-faeces-coprophilia>
US President Barack Obama said Francis “has inspired people around the world 
with his message of compassion, hope and peace,” while Italian President Sergio 
Mattarella recalled the pope has called on Europeans to show solidarity with 
the less fortunate, in particular “migrants and all those who live at society’s 
margins”.

Russian President Vladimir Putin sent Francis a telegram and followed it up 
with a phone call in which he “remarked on the big contribution he has 
personally made to strengthen ties between Russia and the Vatican, which moved 
to a significantly new level in the recent years,” the Kremlin said.

The Kremlin said Putin and the pope “exchanged opinions” on the plight of 
Christians caught in armed conflicts around the world and the importance of an 
interfaith dialogue.

Earlier this year, Francis met with Russian Patriarch Kirill in the first 
meeting of the head of the Roman Catholic church and the leader of the world’s 
largest Orthodox Christian flock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/pope-francis-russian-orthodox-patriarch-kirill-make-history-cuba-first-meeting-in-1000-years>
. The patriarch’s office said on Saturday that Kirill had sent a congratulatory 
message to Francis and lauded him for improving ties between the Russian church 
and the Vatican.
 