
So now the challenge is in plain view: we face the globalisation of 
anti-globalisation, a popular front of populists, an International of 
nationalists. “Today the United States, tomorrow – France,” tweetsJean-Marie Le 
Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/27/jean-marie-le-pen-endorses-donald-trump>
. It will be a long, hard struggle to defeat them, at home and abroad, and we 
may now have to look elsewhere for the “leader of the free world”. But defeat 
them we will.

In Vladimir Putin’s Russia we have something very close to fascism. Recep 
Tayyip Erdoğan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>’s 
Turkey is rapidly crossing the line between illiberal democracy and fascism, 
whileViktor Orbán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/hungary-future-europe-far-right-viktor-orban>
’s Hungary is already an illiberal democracy. In Poland, France, the 
Netherlands, Britain and now the US, we have to defend the line between liberal 
and illiberal democracy.

In Britain that means standing up for the independence of the judiciary, the 
sovereignty of parliament and the impartial strength of the BBC. In the US we 
shall now witness the biggest test of one of the strongest, oldest systems of 
liberal democratic checks and balances. Even though Republicans dominate 
Congress and, fatefully,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will be able to make key 
political appointments to the supreme court, that does not mean the new 
president will have it all his own way.

What we see in all these nationalist populisms is an ideology that claims that 
the directly expressed will of “the people” trumps all other sources of 
authority. And the populist leader identifies himself – or herself, in the case 
of Marine Le Pen – as the single voice of the people. Trump’s “I am your voice” 
is a totemic populist line. But so is theDaily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/07/does-the-daily-mail-really-want-the-people-to-elect-judges>
’s front page denouncing the three British judges who ruled that parliament 
must have a vote on Brexit as “enemies of the people”. So is the Turkish prime 
minister rebuking EU claims that a red line has been crossed in his country’s 
brutal repression of media freedom by saying: “The people draw the red lines.”

On closer examination, it turns out that “the people” – Volk might be a more 
accurate term – is actually only a part of the people. Trump perfectly 
exemplified this populist sleight of hand in an impromptu remark at a campaign 
rally.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20cb16e4186910291640560ffad8ca02158b2232%2F0_186_3807_2284%2F3807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Populists%20are%20out%20to%20divide%20us.%20They%20must%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Timothy%20Garton%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Populists%20are%20out%20to%20divide%20us.%20They%20must%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Timothy%20Garton%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20cb16e4186910291640560ffad8ca02158b2232%2F0_186_3807_2284%2F3807.jpg>
 ‘The populist leader identifies himself – or herself, in the case of Marine Le 
Pen – as the single voice of the people.’ Photograph: Boris Horvat/AFP/Getty 
Images 
“The only important thing is the unification of the people,” he said, “because 
the other people don’t mean anything.” It’s not the Others, you see: the Kurds, 
Muslims, Jews, refugees, immigrants, black people, elites, experts, 
homosexuals, Sinti and Roma, cosmopolitans, metropolitans, gay Europhile 
judges. Ukip’sNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/nigel-farage-ugliness-bullet-fired>
 announced that Brexit was a victory for ordinary people, decent people, real 
people – 48% of those who voted in the referendum being thereby declared 
neither ordinary nor decent nor real.

Does history teach us anything about such wave-like phenomena, appearing at 
roughly the same time in many places, in different national and regional forms, 
but nonetheless having common features? Nationalist populism now, globalised 
liberalism (or neoliberalism) in the 1990s, fascism and communism in the 1930s 
and 40s, imperialism in the 19th century. Two lessons perhaps: that these 
things usually take a significant period of time to work themselves out; and 
that to reverse them (if the wave is of a kind you want to see reversed) 
requires courage, determination, consistency, the development of a new 
political language and new policy answers to real problems.

A great example is the development of western Europe’s combination of market 
economy and welfare state after 1945. This model, which finally saw off the 
waves of communism and fascism, needed the intellectual genius of a John 
Maynard Keynes, the policy know-how of people likeWilliam Beveridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
 and the political skill of people like Clement Attlee. I say “people like” 
because other names could be inserted for the versions adopted in other west 
European countries. But what an ocean of blood, sweat and tears we had to swim 
through to reach that point.

We must therefore brace ourselves for a long struggle, perhaps even a 
generational struggle. This is not yet a “post-liberal world”, but it could 
become so. The forces behind the popular front of populism are strong, 
traditional parties are often weak, and such waves are not reversed overnight.

For a start, we need to defend pluralism at home. We also need to understand 
the economic, social and cultural causes of the vote for populists. Not just 
the left but liberals and moderate conservatives must seek a new language to 
appeal, emotionally as well as substantively, to that large part of the 
populist electorate that is not irredeemably xenophobic, racist and misogynist. 
(Not calling half of them a “basket of deplorables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/hillary-clinton-trump-supporters--bigoted-deplorables>
” is a good place to start.) Rhetoric alone obviously won’t do it. What are the 
right policies? Is it really free trade agreements and immigration that are 
undermining people’s jobs, or is it mainly technology? If the latter, what do 
we do about that?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4fbca1770e1f06cd65481519bbe6a600f616de%2F0_148_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Populists%20are%20out%20to%20divide%20us.%20They%20must%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Timothy%20Garton%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Populists%20are%20out%20to%20divide%20us.%20They%20must%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Timothy%20Garton%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fpopulists-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4fbca1770e1f06cd65481519bbe6a600f616de%2F0_148_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
 Angela Merkel: new leader of the free world? Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty 
Images 
Elsewhere, the first challenge is to prevent the erosion of existing elements 
of liberal international order – hard-won agreements on climate change, for 
example, and current free-trade agreements. Philosophically, presidentXi Jinping
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> of China might welcome a 
Trumpworld of strong, assertive, nationalistic sovereign states, but 
practically both leaders should recognise that a return to the economic 
nationalism of the 1930s – 45% tariff barriers on Chinese imports were promised 
by campaigner Trump – would be disastrous for everyone. The one good thing 
about an International of nationalists is that it’s ultimately a contradiction 
in terms.

We must also hope that serious, experienced Americans do go to work shaping 
the foreign and economic policy of the new administration, however morally 
distasteful Trump is. It’s time for holding your nose and Max Weber’s “ethics 
of responsibility”. Yet even if they do, this is likely to be a bombastic, 
erratic and unpredictable presidency.

A greater burden therefore falls on other leading democracies: many in Europe, 
but also Canada, Australia, Japan and India. If we in Europe feel it is vital 
for the Baltic states to be protected against any possible kind of aggression 
by Putin’s Russia, we must work through Nato and the EU to ensure that. We 
can’t rely on a Putin-praising Trump.

If we Europeans think it important to keep an independent Ukrainian democracy 
alive, we must see to that ourselves. Britain having sidelined itself as a 
result of its own version of nationalist populism, a special responsibility 
lies with French and German voters. If we have a French president Alain Juppé 
and a re-elected chancellorAngela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> at the end of next year, 
Europe may still be able to pull its weight.

Merkel made by far the most dignified response I have seen to Trump’s 
election. “Germany and America,” she said, “are tied by values of democracy, 
freedom and respect for the law and human dignity, independent of origin, skin 
colour, religion, gender, sexual orientation or political views. I offer the 
next president of the United States, Donald Trump, close cooperation on the 
basis of these values.” Magnificent.

The phrase “leader of the free world” is usually applied to the president of 
the United States, and rarely without irony. I’m tempted to say that the leader 
of the free world is now Angela Merkel.
 