
"America for business. France for love," proclaims one of the characters at 
the end ofPopulaire <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154532/populaire>, 
one of the latest batch of foreign-language releases snapped up for the US by
the Weinstein Company <http://weinsteinco.com/>. It's like the chap is 
parroting the business credo – use ruthless US commercial nous to identify and 
exploit passionate film-making from overseas – that helped Bob andHarvey 
Weinstein <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/harvey-weinstein> climb to the top of 
the independent pile in the 1990s with their first company, Miramax, then do it 
all over again.

Not much work was required to make Populaire, which started life with several 
French production companies, fit for purpose: this glassy-eyed tale of a plucky 
typist (Deborah François), with its mechanically aspirational plot, cute retro 
rhythms and New York finale, is pleading to be exported. Its eagerness to 
please is a reminder of the long shadow cast by the Weinsteins over the 
mainstream end of foreign-language cinema down the years – something that's 
beginning to loom once again.

Their early time at the Weinstein Company, formed in 2005, was spent 
consolidating their hold with English-speaking films. But the last couple of 
years have seen a shift: recent acquisitions for the US of Oscar-winnerThe 
Artist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist> and The Intouchables
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149158/untouchable>, the highest 
grossing foreign-language release ever. As well as Populaire, in 2013 the 
brothers are cueing upWong Kar-Wai <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/wongkarwai>
's glorious-lookingThe Grandmaster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146655/grandmaster>, Boon Jong-ho's 
multicultural sci-fiSnowpiercer <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1706620/>, 
Norwegian raft epicKon-Tiki <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e4DZ7svBw7I> (the 
most expensive Scandinavian film to date), and others.

The Weinsteins seem to be after the same kind of global influence with their 
new company as they enjoyed with Miramax. Beginning with the purchase of 
Mexican dramaErendira <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Er%C3%A9ndira> in 1983, 
Miramax built its reputation for upmarket indie as much through shrewd 
cherrypicking from abroad as its own productions. The Danish-Swedish dramaPelle 
the Conqueror <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AucsvrC9V68> won Miramax its 
first Oscar in 1988;Cinema Paradiso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76427/cinema.paradiso>, unloved in Italy, 
was recut by Harvey the following year, and raised to pantheon status in the 
process. And a stream of discoveries followed:Like Water for Chocolate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76886/like-water-for-chocolate>, Il 
Postino <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/56529/postino>, Life Is Beautiful 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/56529/postino>, Amélie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89588/amelie>, City of God 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94028/city.of.god>, Hero 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92701/hero> – just to name the biggies.

There's no doubt that Miramax enticed US audiences to less familiar fare. But 
in order to do that, the brothers had to meet America halfway. Pelle – actually 
a sombre 19th-century period drama – was sold with a touch of sexploitation, a 
topless peasant girl on the poster. This kind of repackaging became the 
Weinsteins' stock-in trade, their habit of imposing their own edits on their 
purchases helping to earn the elder brother his "Harvey Scissorhands" 
soubriquet. He wasn't necessarily re-cutting to push the racier aspects of 
foreign works, but to make them more America-friendly. Often driven by test 
screenings, this led to what author Peter Biskind describes in his bookDown and 
Dirty Pictures 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/film/9780747565710/down-and-dirty-pictures>
 as a kind of "McMiramax" version of world cinema.

Biskind elaborates: "Boning foreign films into easily digested fillets, safe 
from the kind of cultural idiosyncracies that might stick in the throats of 
American audiences made less sense [than mere dialogue dubbing]; arguably it is 
just those unfamiliar customs, linguistic usages or behavioural tics that 
contribute to the sense of difference that makes foreign films foreign, windows 
onto unfamiliar worlds, and not just another mirror held up unto ourselves."

If they narrowed the scope of foreign cinema, keeping these kind of commercial 
blinkers in place sometimes blinded the Weinsteins, too. They initially failed 
to see any potential in City of God, and only agreed to finance it as a 
sweetener toWalter Salles <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0758574/>, who was making 
another, much more expensive, film for them; after that collapsed, director
Fernando Meirelles <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0576987/> paid for the favela 
epic himself. When Miramax watched the finished product, Mereilles claims they 
bullied him into selling the rights back at a meeting that went on for 12 hours.

It's unclear if similar levels of pressure were put on Chinese directors they 
have distributed, but Weinstein adulteration of Chinese work down the years is 
what some have suggested is really responsible for the recentrough treatment of 
Django Unchained 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/11/django-unchained-pulled-chinese-cinemas>
 by that country's censors. Arguably, this insistence on Americanising foreign 
films eventually damaged Miramax. By the turn of the millennium, they were 
cornered in the kind of glossy, consensus-chasing, crossover territory – 
Amélie, Chocolat, etc – the major studios were increasingly dabbling in, with 
far more cash at their disposal. And so Miramax didn't pick up more intrepid 
noughties overseas work, such as Y Tu Mamá También, Oldboy and The Devil's 
Backbone (by Guillermo del Toro, another director with Weinstein scorchmarks, 
from his time onMimic <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119675/>), which were 
bought by other distributors.

But you can't knock the Weinsteins' long-term influence. Because Miramax 
specialised in foreign-language releases in the US, and were such assiduous 
marketers and Oscar campaigners, they had a major impact on which 
foreign-language releases crossed over from mere "world cinema" and "arthouse", 
and got talked about globally. That kind of attention seemed to mean high 
production values, unambiguous characterisation, a sentimental undertow – a 
formula that has become the blueprint for much of the non-English-language 
cinema permitted to break into the mainstream from the noughties onwards.The 
Lives of Others <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0119675/> is a perfect example; 
Populaire is more proof that many film-makers have those criteria in mind to 
start with these days.

So it could be the perfect time for the brothers to make their return to the 
foreign-language business. It's difficult to separate their influence from the 
surrounding, immense gravitational force of US cinema in general, but it does 
seem like they helped mould the overarching international market that floats 
above individual cinema territories; especially the terms on which the odd 
foreign challenger could gained entrance to take on Hollywood blockbusters. As 
that international market builds in importance, the Weinsteins are in a fine 
position to act as gatekeepers.

That means acquiescing to the judgment of these burly doormen of cinema. 
Populaire isn't the only one dressing to please them: Kon-Tiki has been filmed 
in Norwegian and English versions (surely, with TV audiences devouring 
foreign-language programming, we're past that kind of thing now?). But then 
their sharp eyes on the queue of mainstream wannabes are still capable of 
picking out a concealed prospect.The Artist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142801/artist>, ditched by Warner Bros in 
mid-development because a black-and-white silent was regarded as too risky, 
benefitted from the brothers' sharp elbows and stardust sales patter. They 
stamp their mark on, and exact their price from, everything they touch. But 
that's why the Weinstein DNA lives on.

• Populaire is out on Friday.

• Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? 
Let us know in the comments below.
 