
The Post Office <https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> is to close 
and franchise a further 37 of its flagship crown offices, with the loss of 300 
staff, and cut 127 financial specialist roles, workers have been told.

The Communication Workers Union said that, on top of the 62 branches announced 
for closure and franchise in 2016, the job cuts brought more “misery” to Post 
Office workers and their customers.

The general secretary, Dave Ward, said: “The latest round of closures is 
further evidence that the Post Office is in crisis and that the board of the 
company, backed by the government, is simply pursuing a strategy of slash and 
burn.

“Today’s announcement comes less than three weeks after the closure of a major 
government consultation on the future of the Post Office and sticks two fingers 
up to everyone who took part in this.”

He said members of the public had sent 75,000 signed postcards to the 
government calling for an end to the closure and franchise programme: “The Post 
Office and the government have completely ignored their views.”

The union has staged strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/post-office-workers-to-strike-for-five-days-in-lead-up-to-christmas>
 in protest at the closure of crown post offices – the larger branches usually 
sited on high streets. In one protest, outside the business department before 
Christmas, sacks full of postcards from the public were delivered supporting 
the union’s campaign.


Ward said: “While the government spent yesterday talking about building a 
shared society, today’s announcement pressing on with the destruction of yet 
another public service shows we are reaching the point where we will have 
little left to share.


“The CWU will not accept this and we will be stepping up our political and 
industrial campaign to fight for the future of the Post Office.”


The deputy general secretary, Terry Pullinger, said: “The Post Office network 
has been reduced by more than 50% over the past 30 years and continues to be 
run down. It requires a proper business plan for growth and investment, which 
is being ignored.


“Its IT platform is being held together with sticky tape and it continues to 
outsource and close its outlets, yet they dress it up as a success and honour 
its directors.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpost-office-to-cut-more-than-420-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0fade898b71a010d01d6676a273669d866ffb%2F0_51_5208_3124%2F5208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Post%20Office%20to%20cut%20more%20than%20420%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpost-office-to-cut-more-than-420-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Post%20Office%20to%20cut%20more%20than%20420%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpost-office-to-cut-more-than-420-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0fade898b71a010d01d6676a273669d866ffb%2F0_51_5208_3124%2F5208.jpg>
 Dave Ward, of the Communication Workers Union, addresses supporters during a 
protest outside the Department for Business in December. Photograph: Carl 
Court/Getty Images 
“A con is a con regardless of how it’s dressed up and the British public and 
our members are being conned on a grand scale into believing that a Post Office 
without modern new products and services and the right investment can survive.”


The Post Office said it would be seeking “partners” for 37 of its directly 
managed branches, in addition to 93 announced in the past calendar year, nearly 
half of which have now relocated into retail stores.


Roger Gale, the sales and trade marketing director, said: “We’re committed to 
maintaining the Post Office’s special place on the high street and the changes 
we are making underpin our continued commitment to give communities in every 
part of the country access to essential services.


“The Post Office’s network of more than 11,600 branches is easily the largest 
in the UK, with 17 million customer visits a week. The vast majority of these 
branches are run with partners, and in the locations announced today we believe 
this will also be a more sustainable approach for the long term.


“With consumer habits changing, and the high cost of maintaining premises in 
prime high street locations, franchising helps us to keep services where our 
customers want and need them.


“We will take time to identify the right partners over the coming months and 
all proposals will be subject to local consultation.


“Post Office has a strong record of supporting people through change and we 
will be keeping affected staff fully informed as we develop our plans.”


Brian Scott, a Unite officer, said it was “salami slicing of a much respected 
and valued national institution in pursuit of profit”, adding: “The public will 
suffer as services are continually and systematically eroded.


“This is another nail in the coffin of the Post Office and a move to online 
will make the crown office network superfluous to requirements. Customers who 
want to take up the services that the Post Office is offering will have to do 
it online or on the phone.


“This lack of the personal touch goes against the public purpose and ethos of 
the Post Office. It also paves the way for further franchising of the rapidly 
diminishing number of crown post offices, which currently number about 300.


“This will make it more difficult for the ordinary consumer, many of them who 
are elderly, to access quality services.”
 