
Our apocalypses have been getting cosier for quite a while, with enough 
downtime amid the brimstone for celebrity encounters (Zombieland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131768/zombieland>), unlikely romance (
Seeking a Friend for the End of the World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148376/seeking-a-friend-for-the-end-of-the-world>
 ), and growth opportunities for the James Franco brand (This is the End 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155492/this-is-the-end>). And what about 
the aftermath? It looks like the post-apocalypse might not be the 
scorched-earth, cannibal-biker-gang free-for-all we all feared, but instead a 
nice opportunity to stretch your legs in the world's largest natural park: the 
world.

Two recent films, Oblivion 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/133030/oblivion> and After Earth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151028/after-earth> , revel in the 
spectacle of a depopulated planet Earth returned to a stunning Eden-like 
paradise. In the first, Tom Cruise, apart from some niggling memories of Olga 
Kurylenko, seems to be on Easy Street in his job as a kind of planetary 
janitor; in the other, one ofJaden Smith's <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1535523/>
 first jobs as leading man is to gaze awestruck at a CGI vista chock full of 
migrating fauna. There's been plenty of solitude and wilderness before in 
post-apocalyptic films, but this is the first time it's seemed like it might be 
a good thing.

You could see the abandoned-Earth trope – a classic return to innocence – as a 
reaction to current global issues such as overpopulation and environmental 
pressures. But it's still heavily marked by 21st-century, globalised attitudes. 
This is the post-apocalyptic landscape as drawn up by sustainability-policy 
committee: concerned with nature, but somehow hovering above it. In Oblivion, 
Cruise has his communications officer, Andrea Riseborough, constantly 
whispering flirty sweet nothings in his ear-piece, like some kind of sci-fi
Nescafé Gold Blend advert <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fG9N-LyrGrE> , as he 
goes about his repair work down on the plains. With After Earth, it's Will 
Smith technologically assisting son Jaden on his quest for a lost homing beacon 
– Supernanny meets David Attenborough (possibly with a bit ofL Ron Hubbard 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/a-scientologist-reviews-earth-guest-561310>
).

Oblivion in particular, with its emphasis on work, comes over as the daydream 
of some Ernst & Young IT contractor – withTom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> in continuous transit, forever 
pining after his lakeside pied à terre. He is Wall-E for the corporate crowd. 
After Earth, with its battle against tooth-and-claw nature, resembles the more 
traditional post-apocalyptic tale. But the abandoned-Earth trope offers a 
variant of the genre in the sheer magnitude of the setup. They're not simply a 
trudge through a ravaged locale; the idea of the entire planet emptied out and 
restored to prelapsarian purity is central to them. It's a concept with a 
spherical absoluteness; paradise-Earths are the doubles, the redeemed twins, of 
our own, in its current sullied state.

Literal twin blue planets hoved into view in 2011 in the indie films 
Melancholia <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141827/melancholia> and 
Another Earth <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143611/another-earth> – 
with all the disturbing connotations of the double. In his 1919 essayThe Uncanny
 <http://web.mit.edu/allanmc/www/freud1.pdf>, Freud writes that the motif of 
the double, produced by a mature mind, often appears as a "ghastly harbinger of 
death" – an unsettling entity observing and judging its twin. That seems to 
what the spectre Earths do, hanging above the characters and theirfirst-world 
problems <http://first-world-problems.com/> – wedding-day alienation, worn-out 
souls in young bodies, rootless anxiety – in those two torpid movies.

Freud also writes about a more primitive use of the double, as a narcissistic 
self-projection a child might produce as a kind of talisman against its first 
realisation of death. Is this what is going in the radiant, big-budget visions 
of an abandoned and rehabilitated Earth? There's definitely something wishful 
and immature about the idea that our planet could revert, just like that, to a 
giant garden for Tom Cruise to romp around in in his toy hoverplane.

But Hollywood is grownup as well as childish; its movies mix up both uses of 
the double. They might be escapist, but they are also conceal (Freud would have 
called it repress) the responsibilities and traumas of an adult society. Key to 
the psychoanalyst's description of the double is the simultaneous sense of 
something foreign yet familiar; the underlying feeling of the uncanny gets its 
power from the tension produced by dawning awareness of a long-buried truth.

Long-buried truths don't come much bigger than the Statue of Liberty up to her 
chest in sand. And uncanny is exactly the feeling in a superb last sequence 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPfcim_p38w> of Planet of the Apes as Charlton 
Heston rides along the shore. Towards his "destiny", as Dr Zaius points out – 
and also ours.

The scene has become a key visual influence on the post-apocalyptic oeuvre, 
and has a special psychological importance for the abandoned-Earth sort. Shots 
of iconic monuments of progress reduced to beach flotsam are utter clichés 
these days. But they are clues to the uncanny impulse – the crashing instant of 
self-recognition – doppelganger-Earth films are compelled towards. If Tom 
Cruise in the ruins of the New York Jets stadium wasn't enough, Oblivion's 
amnesia plotline, recycled from Philip K Dick, hammers it home. The land might 
look virgin, but the footprints are out there waiting.

• After Earth is out now. Next week's After Hollywood will look at the world's 
most pessimistic national cinema. Which global cinematic stories would you like 
to see covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 