
Village Pharmacy in Harare’s upper income Borrowdale Shopping Centre is clean 
and quiet. There’s a faint antiseptic smell. Its shelves are neatly stacked 
with imported bath foam, sun cream, lotions and vitamins. The queue is short 
and a smiling attendant in crisp white uniform asks politely what I’m looking 
for. Zyrtec, an anti-rash medication? You need a prescription for that.

That’s odd, I think, and irritating. I got the same medication at Greenwood 
Pharmacy six months or so ago and didn’t need a prescription for it. But a 
situation like this is frustratingly typical for Harare, where double standards 
and shifting goal posts are the norm.

As I drive across town, I pass the Borrowdale Wetland, where development is in 
full swing. The new road is getting a fresh coat of tar, and a fence is going 
up around an area the size of three football fields. In a few years’ time, the 
open space will be a housing development and shopping mall. Yes, it’s a 
wetland. And yes, there’s legislation that says that wetlands cannot be 
developed. But this particular wetland was given away as part of a construction 
deal for the airport road. The road still isn’t completed, and the Borrowdale 
wetland is collateral damage.

At Greenwood Pharmacy in Kamfinsa Shopping Centre, the offerings are a bit 
more basic. The shopping centre isn’t thriving in the same way Borrowdale is, 
and the clientele isn’t as affluent. The lights are dim in the pharmacist’s 
area and on the shelves are bandages and plasters, painkillers and 
decongestants. Zyrtec? Oh yes of course. It’s out of stock at the moment. You 
might want to try Ballyntyne Park. Or Trinity in the Avenues.

Reaching the Avenues involves skirting Harare’s Central Business District 
(CBD), which requires both courage and patience. The streets were designed by a 
colonial government when motor vehicle traffic was light and a public bus 
system handled the majority of traffic in and out of the city’s high density 
residential suburbs. Today, the public bus service has collapsed and 16-seater 
minivans (“Emergency Taxis”) and private cars dominate the roads. The same 
shortchanging of infrastructure that brought Harare its unfinished airport road 
means traffic lights are often out of order, and burst water pipes, potholes 
and rubbish often block the roads. Zimbabwe’s government has recently suggested 
setting up an urban tolling system to charge motorists for entering the CBD. 
They claim the intention is to reduce unnecessary traffic into town, in order 
to decongest the roads and make driving in town easier. But as it stands, no 
one drives into town unless they have to: the experience itself provides enough 
discouragement as it is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpostcard-from-zimbabwe-harare-in-four-pharmacies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61c612047aa1d86dfb2c0e5a0c98d4655def1f2f%2F0_0_3008_2000%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Postcard%20from%20Zimbabwe%3A%20Harare%20in%20four%20pharmacies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpostcard-from-zimbabwe-harare-in-four-pharmacies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Postcard%20from%20Zimbabwe%3A%20Harare%20in%20four%20pharmacies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpostcard-from-zimbabwe-harare-in-four-pharmacies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61c612047aa1d86dfb2c0e5a0c98d4655def1f2f%2F0_0_3008_2000%2F3008.jpg>
 ‘In a few years’ time, the open space will be a housing development and 
shopping mall. Yes, it’s a wetland. And yes, there’s legislation that says that 
wetlands cannot be developed.’ Photograph: Bev Clark 
Adding to the challenge, the collapse of Zimbabwe’s formal economy has pushed 
more and more people into the informal sector. Zimbabweans vend – standing at 
intersections to sell newspapers, airtime recharge cards, hats, sunglasses, 
windscreen wipers, cellphone chargers, flags, and steering wheel covers, and 
sitting to sell vegetables, fruit, sweets, biscuits, nuts, fish, drinks, shoes, 
clothes, and many other items. In Harare’s city centre, the sprawl of vendors 
across the pavements and at intersections has generated hostility and tension 
among local businesses, motorists and pedestrians, who resent the extent to 
which the growing presence of vendors makes it difficult to walk through town 
or get into “proper shops.” To combat this, Harare city council has ordered 
vendors to move to registered vending sites.

Rather than head to the Avenues, I opt for Ballyntyne Park Pharmacy. The 
shopping centre is rundown – the lines in the car park are faint and the tar is 
potholed. It looks like there are more vendors outside than actual shops. But 
inside the chemist it’s another story completely: it’s even larger than Village 
Pharmacy, and even more neatly stocked with luxury items. Fancy some lube or a 
flavoured condom? This is the place to come. Want some Clinique or Lancome make 
up? Hugo Boss perfume? Ralph Lauren cologne? Solgar vitamins? In Zimbabwe’s 
bifurcated economy, Ballyntyne Park Pharmacy is the chemist of the comprador 
class. Zyrtec? You need a prescription for that. Here, try this substitute 
instead.

So I set off for Trinity Pharmacy. En route, I pass Montagu Shops, which ten 
years ago had a relatively classy pizzeria where I would often go and read or 
meet people. On the edge of the Avenues, it catered to the shrinking “young 
professional” demographic. Now, the shopping centre looks even worse off than 
Ballantyne Park. There’s an active bottle store, and a busy service station, 
and that’s about it. An empty lot hosts a half hearted used car dealership. On 
my right I pass one run-down block of flats after another. These are small 
complexes that in the past would have held attractive, reasonably-priced garden 
flats. Or four-storey blocks of flats housing small families. Now they need a 
coat of paint or three, roof repair, a new wall. Many host signs for small 
businesses: cell phone shop, appliance repair, business services. In others, 
washing flaps on the burglar bars outside the windows. Every flat has its own 
small satellite dish.

A postcard from Durham, keeping it dirty in North Carolina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/29/a-postcard-from-durham-keeping-it-dirty-in-north-carolina>
I find Trinity on Third Street. There isn’t a car park so much as a dusty bit 
of verge off set from the wide street with jacarandas growing up the middle. 
Between the dust and the chemist is a low brick wall, the right height for 
sitting on while you wait for someone. In white paint is old graffiti in 
English and Shona: “White People Go Away.” I go up the stairs to the chemist. 
It is a small narrow space the size of a living room, maybe, smaller by far 
than any of the chemists I’ve seen all day. On one side of the room, three 
chairs line the wall. They are occupied: an elderly woman with a walking stick, 
a mother and infant, a middle-aged woman looking exhausted. Another fifteen or 
so people stand and fill the open space in the pharmacy, pushed up against one 
another and the walls and counters to make room. Down the middle of the room, a 
glass cupboard separates the public area from the cashier. Behind the cashier 
is a wall of shelves with basic, essential medication: blood pressure tablets, 
pain killers, flu medicine. At the back of the room, two pharmacists fill 
orders behind a wire screen. Customers push their way through the crowd or into 
the room to get to the cashier. As people enter they ask one another where to 
stand depending on what they are looking for. Five customers come and go – 
questions asked, phone calls taken, instructions given, payments made. With 
each the cashier is patient, calm, attentive. There might be fifteen more 
people waiting, but she takes her time with each one. Finally, it is my turn to 
be served. Zyrtec? I ask. Never heard of it.


 * Amanda Atwood has lived in Harare since 1999. She’s recently co-founded All 
the Birthdays (allthebirthdays.com <http://allthebirthdays.com/>). For your 
birthday, don’t just think about what you can get. Also think about how you can 
give back. 
 * Public Streets is a series curated by Ellis Avery for Public Books 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/>.
 