
South African retail group Steinhoff is to buy Poundland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/poundland-discount-retail> for more than 
£610m after shareholders in the discount retailer approved the deal, despite an 
intervention by hedge fund Elliott Advisors.

Almost 98% of votes were cast in favour of the deal at a meeting of Poundland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/poundland-discount-retail> shareholders, 
with 79% of shareholders voting.

The vote means Steinhoff is poised to finally complete a takeover of a 
British-listed retailer, after its attempts to buyHome Retail Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup>, the owner of Argos, and 
Darty, the French electrical retailer, were rebuffed.

Steinhoff is backed by Christo Wiese, the South African retail billionaire, 
who haspublicly stated his ambition to expand his interests in Britain. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/christo-wiese-south-african-billionaire-prepares-for-move-to-uk>
 Steinhoff already owns furniture chains Harveys and Bensons for Beds in the UK.

Steinhoff’s takeover of Poundland was thrown into doubt when aggressive US 
hedge fund Elliott, which was an investor in electrical retailer Cometbefore it 
collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/16/comet-collapse-bill-government>
, built up a stake of almost 25% in the discount chain.

This led to Steinhoff increasing its offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/steinhoff-boosts-offer-for-poundland-after-rebel-investor-raises-stake>
 from 222p per share to 227p per share, including a dividend.

Poundland boss offered £2.7m in shares to stay on under Steinhoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/12/poundland-boss-is-offered-27m-in-shares-to-stay-on-under-steinhoff>
It is understood that Elliott voted in favour of the deal. The hedge fund is 
estimated to have made a profit of at least £3m.

The offer price represents a premium of 43% to the Poundland share price 
before news of Steinhoff’s interest emerged.

However, it is well below the 300p per share that Poundland floated at two 
years ago. The company hasstruggled since buying rival chain 99p Stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/poundland-admits-buying-rival-99p-stores-hit-sales>
 and finding it in a worse state than expected. It is also under growing 
pressure from other discount retailers such as B&M, and from a price war among 
the “big four” supermarket chains, Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons.

Steinhoff’s takeover of Poundland is now scheduled to be legally completed on 
16 September. It has already been approved by the European commission.
 