
My partner and I had a fulfilling sex life for years, and then I fell 
pregnant. Our sex life began to dwindle due to morning sickness and me finding 
it hard to accept my body shape – I’ve always struggled with self-esteem. Our 
baby is now eight months old and we both thought I would have returned to 
“normal” by now, but I’m not convinced I miss sex all that much.

Your concern is very common and understandable; you want to take care of your 
babyand be as sexually invested as you were pre-pregnancy. At this point in 
your life as a mother, however, the two roles are mutually exclusive, so stop 
putting so much pressure on yourself. The reasons for your lack of libido are 
natural and normal, and it is important that both you and your partner 
understand that. Hormonal changes may still be playing a part, and the 
exhaustion you are experiencing as a new mother is bound to turn you off. These 
things are transient.

The process of bonding with a new baby is meant to take priority over a 
woman’s sex life, but you will feel more like having sex eventually. What is of 
most concern is your sense of body image, and complaint of low self-esteem. 
Sometimes these issues accompany or herald depression, so seeking an evaluation 
would be wise. Post-partum depression can interrupt the return of desire and 
arousal and, for that and many other reasons, it needs to be taken seriously.

• Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist specialising in 
sexual disorders.

• If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, 
send us a brief description of your concerns toprivate.lives@theguardian.com 
<mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please don’t send attachments). Each 
week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online and 
in print. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
 