
A Daily Telegraph story about a welfare rights group helping “an army of 
bludgers” to rort the disability pension was unfair, inaccurate and breached 
standards, the Australian Press Council has ruled.

Headlined “Rorters sharing tips to get on disability pension: Bludge School, 
how to fudge a bludge”, the article claimed an online forum run by the National 
Welfare Rights Network and other agencies was giving would-be “bludgers” tips 
on how to persuade doctors to put them on the pension.

Disability pensioners were described as an “army of bludgers” costing 
taxpayers $17bn a year.


“The website forums the Daily Telegraph has quoted from are run by Acon, the 
National Welfare Rights Network, notcrazy.net andboredofstudies.net 
<http://boredofstudies.net>,” the Daily Telegraph said 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/its-so-easy-to-fudge-a-bludge-online-guides-used-to-con-doctors-into-giving-out-disability-support-pensions/story-fni0cx12-1227074497646>
.


But a press council investigation 
<http://www.presscouncil.org.au/document-search/adj-1647/> found the welfare 
rights network did not run any such forum and the quotes in the article did not 
come from its website.


The article also alleged the National Welfare Rights Network website carried a 
form letter which helped rorters “con” doctors, but the press council accepted 
that the letter was a “neutrally worded document, intended to assist claimants 
and their doctors in providing all relevant information needed byCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> to assess a claim”.


The online headline – “It’s so easy to fudge a bludge: online guides used to 
con doctors into giving out disability support pensions” – was even stronger in 
implying the network provided online guides, the council said.


The newspaper’s handling of a complaint by the network was also found wanting 
because rather than agreeing to run a correction the publication included 
comments from a letter of complaint from the National Welfare Rights Network in 
a follow-up article headlined “Bludging guides to stay on”.


“The complainant said that when the NWRN complained again, the publication 
offered to run the organisation’s full letter in its letters section,” the 
adjudication said. “The complainant said it rejected this offer because the 
letters section is in the rear of the paper, away from the front news section 
and not prominent enough.”


The ruling echoes one made against an earlier Daily Telegraph article, the 
infamous “Slackers & Slouch Hats” front page 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/nsw-disability-support-pensioners-now-outnumber-australias-total-war-wounded-by-more-than-44000/story-fncynjr2-1226926318057>
 in May 2014.


That article, which stated there were more disability pensioners than 
Australians wounded in war, was alsofound to have breached standards of 
accuracy, fairness and balance 
<http://www.presscouncil.org.au/document-search/adj-1627/>.


Both articles are still online but now carry a link to the adjudication from 
the press council, which was also published in full in the print edition.
 