
When Smarty Jones ran for the Triple Crown in 2004, spectators at Belmont Park 
faced long lines for betting, bathrooms, and concessions; they waited hours for 
Long Island Rail Road trains after the races were over. When Big Brown ran for 
the Triple Crown in 2008, spectators sat in extreme heat and humidity and the 
plumbing failed, leaving bathrooms inoperable for most of the afternoon.

Reaction was vociferous but largely local; the bad experiences were stamped in 
the minds of the people who suffered through them, some of whom swore they’d 
never return to Belmont on a Triple Crown day, but they didn’t necessarily make 
headline news.

But when California Chrome ran for the Triple Crown last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/triple-crown-eludes-california-chrome>
, and when spectators found unticketed patrons in their seats, a shortage of 
food and beverages, and hours-long waits to get on a train or out of the 
parking lot, they did something that those 2004 and 2008 patrons could not: 
they took to Twitter.

Facing last year’s firestorm of criticism, the New York Racing Association, 
which runs Belmont Park, has taken what some see as extreme measures to ensure 
that the people who show up Saturday to watchAmerican Pharoah’s bid for the 
Triple Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/american-pharoah-draws-no5-post-in-bid-for-triple-crown-at-belmont>
 have an experience that they won’t forget, but for all the right reasons this 
time.

In past years, Triple Crown attempts have attracted more than 100,000 people; 
last year’s official attendance was announced by NYRA as 102,199, a number 
recently characterized by NYRA president and CEO Chris Kay as far short of the 
actual number of people who attended, which he said was closer to 115,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpressure-on-belmont-park-to-get-it-right-after-last-years-triple-crown-chaos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F788c9a36079752e83219b95ce6bf419d8a70204f%2F0_0_1667_2496%2F1667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pressure%20on%20Belmont%20Park%20to%20get%20it%20right%20after%20last%20year's%20Triple%20Crown%20chaos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpressure-on-belmont-park-to-get-it-right-after-last-years-triple-crown-chaos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pressure%20on%20Belmont%20Park%20to%20get%20it%20right%20after%20last%20year%27s%20Triple%20Crown%20chaos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpressure-on-belmont-park-to-get-it-right-after-last-years-triple-crown-chaos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F788c9a36079752e83219b95ce6bf419d8a70204f%2F0_0_1667_2496%2F1667.jpg>
 Officials are predicting up to two-and-a-half-hour waits for fans leaving this 
Saturday’s Belmont Stakes. That’s an improvement over last year, when some 
people waited in lines for three hours or longer. Photograph: Julia Weeks/AP 
Following record-breaking crowds at this year’s Kentucky Derby and Preakness, 
NYRA has capped this year’s attendance at 90,000 and announced last week that 
no tickets would be sold at the gate on Saturday, an unprecedented move. Though 
general admission tickets are not yet sold out, NYRA spokesman John Durso Jr 
said that that policy would not be reconsidered, even if tickets remain unsold 
on Saturday morning.

To alleviate last year’s dangerous overcrowding on train platforms, NYRA and 
the Long Island Rail Road have committed $5m – 80% funded by the LIRR – to 
upgrading the Belmont Park train station, lengthening the platforms to 
accommodate longer trains and securing the walkway from the racetrack, which 
last year had to be evacuated because of concerns that the structure was 
unstable.

According to LIRR president Patrick Nowakowski, the longer trains will be able 
to accommodate approximately 250 more passengers per train, though he cautioned 
that they would still likely have a two to two-and-a-half-hour wait before 
being able to exit Belmont Park.

To encourage patrons to stagger their departure after the running of the 
Belmont Stakes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/belmont-stakes> at 6.50pm on 
Saturday, NYRA has carded a concert and two additional races, the last one with 
a post time of 8.12. It will be followed by a short performance by the Goo Goo 
Dolls on the track apron.

Among other improvements NYRA has implemented for this year’s Belmont Stakes:

 * Significantly improved cellular and Wi-Fi capacity. Verizon and AT&T will 
add three new towers on Belmont property, while Wi-Fi capacity will be 
increased by 75%. 
 * Additional betting windows will be installed in Belmont’s backyard for 
general admission customers. 
 * More than two dozen food trucks will be stationed in the backyard and near 
the top of the stretch. 
 * Points of sale for concessions will be increased by 30%. 
In addition, increased security personnel will be on hand to prevent 
unticketed customers from gaining access to the reserved seats area.

And if Twitter last year proved to be NYRA’s undoing, the Association this 
year hopes to use the social media platform this year to its advantage, should 
customers experience less than satisfactory service.

“We’re setting up a social media command center that will be monitoring not 
only issues related to transportation, but also complaints coming in from 
customers,” said Durso. “Continue to follow @BelmontStakes on Twitter. If there 
are issues related to your experience, do not hesitate to engage with our 
social media team.”

The NYRA’s main Twitter account is @TheNYRA.

Durso said that he expects all tickets to be sold out by Friday evening. If 
they are not, and if racing fans have somehow not gotten the message that they 
cannot buy tickets on Saturday – a message that Durso said will be plastered 
throughout the area and which NYRA representatives have been reiterating 
through local media – NYRA might find itself having to explain itself again, 
this time for why they turned away what will undoubtedly be angry potential 
customers, and for why one of the biggest events on the sporting calendar, an 
event of potentially historic import, failed to sell out.
 