
Nearly a million prescriptions for Ritalin and related drugs for attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) were dispensed last year – more than 
double the number of a decade ago.

The figures have prompted a damning indictment of the system from experts who 
claim that the running down of mental health services has led to children being 
misdiagnosed and inappropriately prescribed drugs.

There were 922,200 prescriptions last year for methylphenidate hydrochloride, 
the chemical name for Ritalin, and similar products. In 2010, 661,000 were 
dispensed compared with 359,100 in 2004. Guidelines from the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence suggest that the use of these drugs should only 
be a last resort. There have beenrepeated warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/30/children-hyperactivity-not-real-disease-neuroscientist-adhd>
 from experts that clinicians were too readily prescribing psychostimulants to 
children when the evidence suggested there were no long-term benefits. Animal 
studies have also raised concerns over the potential for damage.

Tony Lloyd, chief executive officer of the ADHD Foundation, which offers 
support for children with the condition, said children were being let down by a 
cash-starved system.NHS spending on children’s mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/20/youth-mental-health-is-the-government-doing-enough>
 services in England has fallen by more than 6% in real terms since 2010.

“The guidelines are clear that drugs should be dispensed as a last resort. But 
that is clearly not what is happening,” said Lloyd. “They are prescribing 
because child mental health services are overwhelmed. There are very few 
services like ours.

“There has been a 41% increase in the number of children under the age of 16 
admitted to hospital with self-harm in just the last five years, and so the 
small budget for mental health services is being focused on that.”

ADHD, which is suffered by well-known figures 
<http://www.sec-ed.co.uk/best-practice/teaching-pupils-with-adhd> such as the 
world champion racing driver Lewis Hamilton and the actor Emma Watson, has 
symptoms such as inattentiveness, hyperactivity and impulsiveness over a 
sustained period.

The psychostimulants prescribed by doctors are thought to stimulate a part of 
the brain that changes mental and behavioural reactions.

Kate Fallon, chief executive of the Association of Educational Psychologists, 
said medicines were being prescribed by “harassed paediatricians”.

She added: “These figures show an exponential growth.

“We hear stories of teachers who had no idea that one of their pupils had ADHD 
until Mum appears with Ritalin. Conversely, we hear of teachers telling 
parents, ‘We can’t deal with this child, so you should go to the doctor’.”

ADHD is normally diagnosed between the ages of three and seven. It is believed 
toaffect around 5% of schoolchildren in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/may/06/ritalin-adhd-shocks-child-psychologists>
. The surge in prescriptions to treat the condition mirrors the situation in 
the US, where there was an 83% increase in sales of the drug between 2006 and 
2010.

The use of Ritalin for a year would be likely reduce a child’s growth by 
three-quarters of an inch. There is also evidence that it can precipitate 
self-harming behaviour.

 * This article was amended on 19 August 2015 to include a clause in a quote 
from Dr Tony Lloyd which was inadvertently removed in the editing process.
 