
Prince’s death appeared to confirm what many people have been saying: 2016 is 
proving to be annus horribilis for celebrities.

The year was not even a fortnight old when the news that shocked the world 
broke:David Bowie had died from cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
 at the age of 69 in New York City. Almost no one had known Bowie was ill – he 
had gone to great lengths to conceal the fact from even close friends.

The musician “died peacefully, surrounded by his family” after an 18-month 
battle with cancer. His death camejust three days after the release of Blackstar
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/11/was-david-bowie-saying-goodbye-on-blackstar>
 on his 69th birthday as a parting gift to his millions of fans.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&media=>
The Guardian’s Caspar Llewellyn Smith, Harriet Gibsone and Michael Hann look 
back at the extraordinary career of David Bowie who has died at the age of 69 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
Alan Rickman’s death – coming just four days after Bowie’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69>
 – upset the young and old alike. After his first big film role in Die Hard in 
1988, the British actor won a new generation of fans with his portrayal of 
Severus Snape in the Harry Potter films. He suffered a stroke last August, but 
again decided to keep his health a private matter. Like Bowie, he died at the 
age of 69 from pancreatic cancer.

As well as Bowie and Rickman, January also brought with it the death of 
British television and radio personality Sir Terry Wogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan-dies-aged-77> on 
the very last day of the month. He died after a short illness at the age of 77. 
A hint came last November, when hepulled out of hosting BBC1’s Children in Need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/sir-terry-wogan-drops-out-of-children-in-need>
 appeal for the first time in its 35-year history due to poor health. As well 
as serving up acerbic commentary for the Eurovision song contest, Wogan 
presented the Radio 2 breakfast show for 12 years from 1972 and again from 1993 
until 2009.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Blankety%20Blank%20to%20Wake%20Up%20With%20Wogan%3A%20Terry%20Wogan%E2%80%99s%20career%20in%20the%20spotlight%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Blankety%20Blank%20to%20Wake%20Up%20With%20Wogan%3A%20Terry%20Wogan%E2%80%99s%20career%20in%20the%20spotlight%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video&media=>
From Blankety Blank to Wake Up With Wogan: Terry Wogan’s career in the 
spotlight – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/jan/31/from-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video>
Exactly two months later, another star closely associated with the BBC – 
comedian Ronnie Corbett –died aged 85 in hospital in south London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/31/ronnie-corbett-dies-aged-85>
, surrounded by his family.

His double act with Ronnie Barker made the pair some of the most successful 
entertainers of the 1970s and 80s.

Corbett’s death came a few days after the death of an international football 
superstar – Johan Cruyff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-dies-aged-68-holland-football-legend>
. The Dutch maestro, famed for a piece of skill named in his honour,the Cruyff 
Turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/mar/24/what-is-a-cruyff-turn>
, died aged 68 of cancer at his home in Barcelona.

And on the day before Prince added his name to this list, the British comedian 
actor and writer Victoria Wooddied of cancer at home with her family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-dies-aged-62-comedian>
. She was 62 and also hadnot made public the state of her health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/21/victoria-wood-kept-her-cancer-secret-says-friend>
.

The tally of deaths is significant, and 2016 is not yet four months old. The 
Guardian has given over the front page of its print edition to all of these 
public figures – except Cruyff, to whom the Sports section dedicated its front 
page.

The Guardian’s obituaries page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/obituaries>, according to 
its editor, is no longer able to fit in all the public figures who would have 
historically figured on the page because of the rise in high-profile deaths. 
The nature of fame and celebrity has changed radically in the past decade, with 
the rise in internet use and mobile devices such as smartphones, along with the 
plethora of television channels available.

As well as actors, musicians, royalty, sporting figures, politicians and the 
like, there are now hundreds of reality TV stars, comedians, game show hosts, 
mavericks and people famous simply for being famous. That means there are far 
more celebrities whom more people will have heard of when their number is up.
 