
Prince Charles <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> and Waitrose 
have been criticised by health campaigners for the high level of sugar in 
Waitrose Duchy Organic ice cream.



The ice cream – sold exclusively at Waitrose – contains almost twice as much 
sugar as some other brands.

It was singled out by researchers as an example of the differing levels of 
sugar in exactly the same kinds of foods which appeal to children.

Action on Sugar is urging companies to support Public Health England’s 
voluntary reformulation programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/industry-attends-phe-briefing-on-reduction-and-reformulation>
 to help tackle the childhood obesity epidemic, which it claims is the biggest 
public health crisis facing the UK.

The survey of foods commonly consumed by children including breakfast cereals, 
yoghurts, biscuits, cakes, confectionery, pastries, ice creams and chocolate 
spreads shows that products containing less sugar are in plentiful supply.

More than two sugary drinks a day greatly increases diabetes risk, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/sugary-soft-drinks-increases-diabetes-risk-study-autoimmune>
For example, Duchy Organic vanilla ice cream, with 14.5g of sugar per 100g, 
was found to have 84% more sugar than Asda’s “smart price” vanilla ice cream, 
with 7.9g sugar.

Duchy Organic is a partnership between Waitrose and Duchy Originals, founded 
by the Prince of Wales. Waitrose is the owner of the brand licence and is 
responsible for product formulation under that licensing agreement.

Data was collected by visiting Aldi, Asda, Co-operative, Lidl, Marks & 
Spencer, Morrisons, Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Waitrose using theFoodSwitch app 
<http://www.foodswitch.co.nz/content/about-foodswitch> to collect data on 
nutritional information. The survey was carried out during August and products 
were checked again during September.


Tam Fry, spokesman for the National Obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/obesity> Forum and an expert advisory team 
member of Action on Sugar, said: “George Osborne’s sugar levy announcement in 
March must be regarded as his swansong as chancellor.

“At a stroke, he concentrated the mind of sugar-happy soft drink manufacturers 
seriously to consider reformulating their products to an acceptable level.

“As Action on Sugar’s research shows, many food manufacturers got the message, 
too. All, and Prince Charles in particular, should now follow their lead. The 
added bonus is that they will have dramatically aided the health of millions of 
people, let alone the NHS.”

A spokesperson for Waitrose said the Duchy Organic vanilla ice cream was an 
“indulgent” treat not aimed at children, adding: “The sugar content is clearly 
labelled and we sell a range of vanilla ice creams with a significantly lower 
sugar content, which our customers can choose if they want a healthier option.

“Reducing sugar is a top priority and we have an extensive reformulation 
programme to achieve this, which has already included significantly reducing 
sugar in chilled juices, cereals, yoghurts, soups, cordials and fizzy drinks.”

Kawther Hashem, a nutritionist and researcher at Action on Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar>, said: “Unhealthy foods are the 
biggest cause of death and disability in the UK and it is time the food 
industry took their responsibility for this seriously.

Young children copy parents' sugary drinks habits, study suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/young-children-copy-parents-sugary-drinks-study-suggests-fizzy>
“They now need to make this a priority and ensure children are not eating 
three times their daily maximum intake of sugar.”

Graham MacGregor, professor of cardiovascular medicine at Queen Mary 
University of London and chair of Action on Sugar, said reformulation was one 
of the most effective ways of reducing sugar and, if done properly, meant the 
UK could lead the world in this area.

“We therefore urge the prime minister, Theresa May, to fully support it and 
commit the government to both fat reformulation, as it’s the biggest source of 
calories than sugar, and to start restrictions of marketing, advertising and 
promotion of unhealthy foods.”


In August, leading retailers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/childhood-obesity-retailers-urge-mandatory-cuts-to-food-sugar-levels>
 criticised the government’s watered-down childhood obesity strategy just days 
after its publication, arguing it would be better if ministers imposed 
mandatory cuts to sugar levels in food rather than leaving it up to voluntary 
initiatives by manufacturers.


• This article and the headline were amended on 25 October 2016 to clarify 
that Duchy Organic is a partnership between Waitrose and Duchy Originals, 
founded by the Prince of Wales. Waitrose owns the brand licence and is 
responsible for product formulation.
 