
There has been a flurry of newspaper interest in the supposed romance of 
Prince Harry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> with an American 
actor, Meghan Markle.

Is it a rumour? Who knows? But what the hell. Since the “secret” was revealed  
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/726701/prince-harry-meghan-markle-suits-actress-girlfriend-royal-family-relationship-secret-lover>
 by the Sunday Express’s Camilla Tominey it has taken off.

And not just in the pop papers. The Daily Telegraph featured a large picture 
of Markle on its front page on Monday, witha page lead inside 
<http://www.pressreader.com/uk/the-daily-telegraph/20161031/281479275967343>, 
yetanother a page lead 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/31/prince-harry-met-new-girlfriend-while-she-was-still-dating-celeb/>
 on Tuesday plus a full-page feature,Could Harry marry a divorcee (when 
Margaret couldn’t)? 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/could-prince-harry-ever-marry-divorce-meghan-markle-there-are-ro/>
.

The Independent, once so fastidious about ignoring royal family matters, 
thought her worthy of an article 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/meghan-markle-who-is-she-prince-harry-rumours-suits-actress-campaign-work-a7389571.html>
. And the Times decided it should get in on the act with a teasing T2 piece,
Everything you (secretly) wanted to know about Prince Harry’s ‘friend’ 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/times2/oh-meghan-the-royal-family-needs-you-067w6jbrx>
.

Note the single quotes. They act as a get-out should the tale turn out to be, 
well, a tale. But what caught my eye in the Times’s piece, by Hilary Rose, were 
her remarks about the TV series in which Markle is featured,Suits 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suits_(TV_series)>:

The show seems mainly to consist of pretty people saying inane things with the 
utmost gravity which, when you think about it, is pretty much what the royal 
family do.

Off to the Tower with her! By contrast, the loyal Telegraph took the matter 
more seriously by observing that the fact she is American and a divorcee will
“have raised eyebrows in Buckingham Palace” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/31/prince-harry-met-new-girlfriend-while-she-was-still-dating-celeb/>
.

The paper even has “sources” who evidently pointed out that it is still “early 
days”, adding that “if it got to the stage where the prince wanted to marry 
Miss Markle, he would need the Queen’s permission”. So that royal prerogative 
still holds in 2016, eh?

Is it not bliss to put Brexit, Trump and Putin to one side in order to enjoy 
the real things that matter in life?
 