
One of the great storytelling challenges of the 21st century has been 
describing the intangible phenomenon of the internet, especially in a visual 
medium such as film. Early websploitation movies like Hackers envisioned 
cyberspace as a kaleidoscopic theme park, while more recent dramas such as The 
Fifth Estate have imagined a Brazil-like world of interconnected but anonymous 
bodies. In this year’sHyperNormalisation 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p04b183c/adam-curtis-hypernormalisation>, 
Adam Curtis joined the dots between the social isolation engendered on the web 
and the literal isolation of a remote algorithm farm.

Laura Poitras: using art to illuminate a world that would rather remain unseen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/04/laura-poitras-astro-noise-whitney-the-art-of-surveillance>
Few film-makers, though, have adequately captured the dichotomous nature of 
the internet as something both omnipresent and entirely abstract, like the air 
we breathe. That’s whatCitizenfour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XiGwAvd5mvM>
 director Laura Poitras attempts in Project X, a remarkable new short made in 
collaboration with Henrik Moltke, which launches this Monday on 
video-journalism platform Field Of Vision. In it, she zeroes in on a single 
building in lower Manhattan to reveal the invisible pervasiveness of internet 
surveillance around the globe.

33 Thomas Street is a 550ft skyscraper operated as a telephone exchange by 
AT&T. According to a joint investigation by Field Of Vision and The Intercept – 
an online mag whose editors include former Guardian reporter Glenn Greenwald – 
it is also an NSA spy hub. In Project X, Poitras and co-director Moltke draw 
from three NSA sources – a handbook for undercover domestic travel, a leaked 
engineering report and an internal newsletter – to trace the journey of an 
imagined NSA employee from the agency’s headquarters in Maryland to its alleged 
New York City outpost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fproject-x-laura-poitras%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73eecf31303343e78f1bc1b41c16597917d3a2d8%2F59_0_865_519%2F865.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Project%20X%3A%20Laura%20Poitras%20homes%20in%20on%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fproject-x-laura-poitras%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Project%20X%3A%20Laura%20Poitras%20homes%20in%20on%20the%20dark%20side%20of%20the%20internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fproject-x-laura-poitras%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73eecf31303343e78f1bc1b41c16597917d3a2d8%2F59_0_865_519%2F865.jpg>
 Hiding in plain sight… 33 Thomas Street 
Monotone voiceover performances from Rami Malek and Michelle Williams evoke 
the whistleblowers and government operatives of 70s American spy thrillers, as 
does a pulsating electronic score. Movie buffs who appreciate these allusions, 
however, will be disappointed to learn that Project X’s title comes not from 
the 1987 Matthew Broderick chimp movie nor the 2012 teen comedy, but the 
original architectural code name of the building at its centre.

Before watching the film, I recommend visiting 33 Thomas Street on Google 
Street View 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/AT%26T+Long+Lines+Building/@40.7164322,-74.0064602,3a,75y,67.39h,137.89t/data=!3m7!1e1!3m5!1sYa7wXGOno4AQaMMnaq8D4w!2e0!6s%2F%2Fgeo0.ggpht.com%2Fcbk%3Fpanoid%3DYa7wXGOno4AQaMMnaq8D4w%26output%3Dthumbnail%26cb_client%3Dmaps_sv.tactile.gps%26thumb%3D2%26w%3D203%26h%3D100%26yaw%3D50.928616%26pitch%3D0%26thumbfov%3D100!7i13312!8i6656!4m5!3m4!1s0x89c25a202dafa537:0xc3a7ddcb8a1c1559!8m2!3d40.7165287!4d-74.0059204>
. Despite the building’s immense size and prominent location, its windowless 
facade and proximity to other New York skyscrapers render it inconspicuous in 
daylight. Under nocturnal observation in Poitras’s film however, the faceless 
brutalist tower transforms into a real-life Death Star, a vast nothingness 
blotting out the twinkling stars and city lights. Visible only by inference, 
it’s a fitting metaphor for our uneasy relationship with the web.

• This article was amended on 1 December 2016 to add a credit to Project X’s 
co-director, Henrik Moltke.
 