
Government proposals to impose heavy fines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/firms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines>
 on banks, accountants and lawyers who market tax avoidance schemes will fail 
without more resources for HM Revenue & Customs to pursue offenders, 
campaigners have said.

The Treasury is suggesting that professionals who facilitate unlawful tax 
avoidance should pay penalties of up to 100% of the tax owed if schemes are 
defeated in tribunals. Underproposals published on Wednesday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/strengthening-tax-avoidance-sanctions-and-deterrents-discussion-document>
, the tax office could also name and shame repeat offenders.

“In principle what this government is proposing sounds good, but the means are 
not there to deliver it,” said Prem Sikka, professor of accounting at the 
University of Essex and a leading voice in the tax reform debate.

“We simply do not have the judicial capacity to deal with this. It needs court 
time, and these proposals are are not curbing giving advice on tax avoidance, 
only if that advice is deemed unlawful will a penalty be imposed. So the game 
continues.”

Firms giving advice on aggressive tax avoidance could face large fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/firms-giving-advice-on-aggressive-tax-avoidance-could-face-large-fines>


Vicky Johnson, the president of the Association of Revenue and Customs, called 
on the government to “provideHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> 
with the investment it needs to be properly resourced”.

The rate at which government tax inspectors are leaving the civil service for 
far better paid jobs at big accountancy firms is increasing, Johnson said. 
After rounds of job cuts, pay caps and more recently pay freezes, HMRC was 
facing the “perfect storm”, she said, with a sizeable group of senior 
inspectors nearing retirement and younger trainees, recruited in their hundreds 
since 2012 to replace them, ready to take private sector jobs.

The proposals to fine enablers are designed to target a small group of repeat 
offenders. They will apply to banks, trustees, accountants, lawyers, financial 
advisers and company formation agents such as Mossack Fonseca, the law firm at 
the centre of thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, an unprecedented leak 
of 11.5m files from the database of the world’s fourth biggest offshore law 
firm.

The consultation states: “The vast majority of tax agents, intermediaries and 
others who provide services in relation to the taxation consequences of 
commercial arrangements, or who facilitate their implementation, operate within 
the spirit of tax law and do not enable tax avoidance. But a minority do enable 
tax avoidance.”

An investigation by MPs on the public accounts committee 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmpubacc/788/78805.htm>
 in 2013 found that the commissions paid to the promoters of tax avoidance 
schemes can be up to 20% of the tax saved.

The committee, then chaired by Margaret Hodge, suggested following the example 
of Australia, which requires promoters of avoidance schemes to get a ruling 
from the tax office before implementing them.

It highlighted the abuse of tax breaks for film and video game productions by 
accountants including Ingenious Media. Earlier this month, HMRC claimed victory 
in a four-year battle against Ingenious for a scheme that allowed investors in 
blockbusters including Avatar to claim tax relief.

In 2014, HMRC won its eighth tribunal case against the tax consultancy NT 
Advisors, saying its pursuit of the company had protected £750m in tax. The
radio presenter Chris Moyles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/21/chris-moyles-used-car-dealer-tax-avoidance>
 was among those penalised. He had been an investor in NT’s Working Wheels 
scheme, which involved notional trading in secondhand cars.

KPMG, one of the big four accountancy firms potentially targeted, welcomed the 
new measures. A spokesman said: “Times have changed and the debate around tax 
has changed too. What was seen as acceptable behaviour is no longer regarded as 
appropriate.”

Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister, described the proposals as “very strong 
medicine indeed” in aTwitter post <https://twitter.com/JolyonMaugham>, saying 
advisers who seek to profit from avoidance “should be put at risk”.

HMRC says it wins 80% of cases that go to court, and that it has collected 
more than £2bn from users of tax avoidance schemes under rules introduced by 
the government in 2014, which mean avoiders must pay tax upfront while their 
returns are investigated.

There was, however, a backlog of 27,000 cases waiting to be heard at HMRC tax 
tribunals as of last December.

A spokesman said: “HMRC is tripling the flow of avoidance cases to the 
tribunals over the next two years. ‎The government has given £7m of additional 
funding to HMRC, and an additional £70m to the Ministry of Justice to handle 
the increased flow of cases.”
 