
The doors are reopening on the £35bn of investors’ money locked in commercial 
property funds, after they were suspended in the wake of the Brexit vote when 
panicking investors feared a collapse in values.

Shortly after the EU referendum result, Standard Life halted trading in its 
£2.9bn fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/more-property-funds-suspended-as-brexit-tremors-continue-in-the-city>
, with Aviva, M&G, Henderson and Columbia Threadneedle soon following suit. It 
meant investors could no longer access their cash held in the funds. What’s 
more, most of the funds added a “fair value adjustment”, in effect marking down 
the value of the properties they owned and therefore shrinking investors’ 
holdings. Legal & General slapped a 15% discount on its fund, and Kames 10%, 
while others slashed theirs by around 5%.

Since the EU vote the funds have sold off properties to free up cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/aviva-halts-trading-in-its-property-fund-brexit-standard-life>
 to enable them to pay investors who want to redeem their holdings. Many now 
plan to reopen in October, and some are removing the fair value adjustments. 
But others could remain closed for months, with Aviva saying in August that its 
fund would remain suspended for six to eight months.

Property fund turmoil continues as three more firms cut value
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/property-fund-turmoil-continues-as-legal-and-general-foreign-and-colonial-reveal-cut-in-value>
The £4bn M&G Property Portfolio said it should have enough cash assets to 
reopen within the next six weeks. Henderson said it will reopen its £3.3bn UK 
Property PAIF fund on 14 October, with investors able to place orders to deal 
from this week. Henderson insists that its post-Brexit fire sale of properties 
has not left investors out of pocket, in a sign that the UK commercial property 
market has not been devastated by the vote, as some feared.

The fund’s manager, Ainslie McLennan, says all the sales made over summer were 
at prices higher than they were originally bought for. But it has meant that 
some managers have had to sell their most “liquid” assets – in other words, the 
most desirable ones, with plenty of potential buyers, rather than their 
lower-quality properties which are left lurking in the portfolio and possibly 
dragging down future performance.

Among the properties sold by Henderson was the Amazon distribution centre in 
Peterborough. The fund had only acquired it in December, and McLennan says she 
managed to dispose of it with a positive return of 5%.

Logistics centres such as the Amazon unit are in huge demand from investors, 
as shoppers switch from high streets to buying online. “We managed to sell 
assets at compelling prices. We have not had a single issue with the prices of 
the assets we have sold. On every sale completed we have achieved a positive 
return,” McLennan says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fproperty-funds-back-brexit-vote-closures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a24958573407a9cccc473119ddbf59b1c3909a5%2F0_305_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Property%20funds%20back%20in%20business%20after%20Brexit%20vote%20closures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fproperty-funds-back-brexit-vote-closures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Property%20funds%20back%20in%20business%20after%20Brexit%20vote%20closures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fproperty-funds-back-brexit-vote-closures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a24958573407a9cccc473119ddbf59b1c3909a5%2F0_305_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Amazon’s distribution warehouse in Peterborough was sold with a return of 5%. 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
“We have done these deals in the most orderly way we can, and for the 
situation not to go on too long, so we can reopen the fund. And it’s not just 
about opening for redemptions. There’s actually a queue of people who want to 
get in as well.”

But the crisis in property funds has exposed a long-running controversy over 
the practicality of running bricks-and-mortar properties within a fund, as they 
can never hope to pay out small investors immediately if lots decide to cash in 
at the same time.

Marc Haynes of wealth managers Cohen & Steers said it is the second time 
property funds have had to be suspended, with many closing during the 2007-08 
financial crisis. “The surprise was not the ‘gating’ of these funds, but that a 
key lesson from the last crisis had been ignored. In our opinion, open-ended 
funds are fundamentally inappropriate vehicles for investing in inherently 
illiquid investments such as physical property.

“To paraphrase Oscar Wilde, to have to ‘gate’ once may be regarded as a 
misfortune; to ‘gate’ twice looks like carelessness. Presumably, managers 
thought that things would be different this time and enhanced liquidity buffers 
would provide adequate protection against substantial withdrawals linked to 
market stress.”

But McLennan is adamant they should remain a core fund choice for small 
investors. “They absolutely work. Look, this fund has never been suspended 
before. It was an absolutely extraordinary vote. We did have enough of a cash 
cushion, but there was contagion and we dealt with that. If there’s a lesson, 
then maybe it’s to hold a bit more cash.” The arguments for remaining in 
commercial property funds are secure. “People have had very good long-term 
returns from commercial property and they continue to give a solid income. 
We’ve not wavered on that.”

To paraphrase Oscar Wilde, to have to ‘gate’ once may be a misfortune; to 
‘gate’ twice looks like carelessness

Currently, the annual yield on most property funds is around 3%-4%, an 
attractive figure compared to the near-zero interest rates paid on deposit 
accounts. McLennan adds that much of her portfolio is on 10-year leases, 
meaning the future income stream is secure.

But a report from Moody’s, to be published next week, will forecast that UK 
commercial property prices will decline by around 10% over the next two years. 
Most funds are invested in City of London office blocks, some of which may 
become vacant ifinvestment banks or financial services firms decamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/firms-plan-investment-freeze-amid-brexit-fallout-cbi>
 to Frankfurt or Dublin in the wake of Brexit.

Laith Khalaf at Hargreaves Lansdown is more optimistic. “The fundamental 
trends that led to the popularity of property as an asset class are still in 
place, with interest rates still low and gilt prices still high. Economic 
uncertainty casts a shadow over the sector for sure,” he says. “But as yet we 
lack real data on what the full impact of Brexit will be.”
 