
"Be a bridge!" Those are the Turkish teacher's last words to the Bosnian boy 
he's just pulled out of a surging torrent, before he dives back into the river 
to reach a second pupil. Seconds earlier, the two teenagers had been locked 
together – Muslim v Orthodox Christian, a knife hovering between them. But the 
teacher, doggy-paddling against the current, knows that religion makes no 
difference when lives are at stake. There's a message from on high (and we're 
not talking Allah) about the dangers of division between men: overhead is 
Sarajevo'sLatin Bridge <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_Bridge>, where 
Archduke Franz Ferdinand received his fateful 1914 gunshot.

Turkish religious hit Selam <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMwWPFya89g> 
certainly doesn't shy away from the grand gesture. That's the climax to one of 
its three stories, which all focus on the altruistic deeds of pious teachers in 
different countries; in the other two segments, two lovers find themselves a 
world apart in Senegal and Afghanistan. The first Turkish work to be shot on 
three different continents, it was No 1 in that country for five weeks through 
April, taking nearly $8m so far.

But don't mistake Selam for a mere local concern. It may come in a Turkish 
flavour, but didactic and cheesy though it is, it's also internationalist in 
scope, a kind of MuslimBabel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112357/babel>
 aiming outwards at the world. It has a proselytising zeal, dramatising 
missionary work and partaking itself by making a case for Islamic values in 
life. TheGülen movement <http://www.gulenmovement.us/> – the progressive, 
possibly political, network that some people now rate as the most influential 
Muslim faith organisation worldwide – provided locations and casting support. 
And Selam is one of several projects currently aiming to make a piercing 
statement on behalf of Islam with cinemal, a medium – because of the nature of 
image-making – with which this religious tradition arguably has compatibility 
issues.

There are two big-budget biopics of Muhammad – one Shia, one Sunni – in the 
works, in addition to one other that seems to have fallen by the wayside. That 
qualifies as a glut, since the last similar live-action project was 1976'sThe 
Message <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0074896/>, from director Moustapha Akkad – 
a major difficulty for the aspiring chronicler being the prohibition on 
depicting the prophet. Iranian director Majid Majidi, whose$30m biopic began 
filming in October 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/mar/15/qatar-iran-films-prophet-muhammad>, 
recentlypointed out 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/islam-film-by-iranian-director.aspx?pageID=238&nid=45408>
: "While there are 250 films on Jesus Christ, 120 films on Moses, 80 about the 
other prophets and 40 films on Buddha, there is only one on the life of Prophet 
Muhammad. Unfortunately, we [have] failed to introduce our prophet to the 
western world."

Interest on this side of the planet about the subject matter has probably 
never been higher, but there is also an untapped market of 1.62 billion Muslims 
worldwide who could push this kind of project into blockbuster territory. The 
rival Sunni offering is working with that economy of scale in mind: produced by 
Qatari company Alnoor Holdings, it's not one film, but a projected celestial 
franchise of five to seven instalments aiming to highlight the common ground 
between theAbrahamaic religions 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abrahamic_religions>, with a combined budget of 
$1bn; Barrie Osborne, producer ofThe Matrix 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77528/matrix> and Lord of the Rings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102469/lord-of-the-rings-trilogy>, is on 
board in an advisory capacity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/nov/02/matrix-producer-plans-muhammad-biopic>
.

Producer Azahar Iqbal, a former climate scientist who grew up in Birmingham, 
England, says he is partly inspired by Hollywood's superhero films, but aims 
those kinds of pyrotechnics at the service of more universal, ethical concerns, 
to show that "power is not concentrated in one individual – but in every 
individual".

Islamophobia aside, these grandstanding Muhammad epics, as well as the likes 
of Selam, have the potential to raise the same kind of cynical responses from 
atheists as Mel Gibson'sThe Passion of the Christ 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96587/passion.of.the.christ>. After all, 
you don't have to take the direct route to promote "Muslim values" – and there 
are plenty of Muslim film-makers who have used less strident methods. But even 
if you're uncomfortable about these new projects' proselytising side, they also 
have a healthy focus on interfaith cooperation and cultural dialogue. Iqbal 
says that Alnoor's series will feature Jesus and other non-Muslim figures, and 
that it won't be targeted solely at religious communities. SimilarlyLevent 
Demirkale <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1856701/>, Selam's director, stresses 
that he was motivated by bigger things than his own religion: "What really 
affected us were the humanist universal values, such as cooperation of 
different religions and beliefs, living for other people's happiness, loving 
human beings, and making sacrifices for others."

You'd have to be naïve to think money wasn't also a factor at play in faith 
films, as well as the prestige sought by competing countries for successfully 
putting the cinematic gloss on Muhammad's story. But that story always been 
subject to reinterpretation and debate, from thehadith 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadith> forwards. And with Islam now so prominent 
in global affairs, there's renewed room to pick at this bundle of history and 
legend once again.

Historian Tom Holland <https://twitter.com/holland_tom> ran into some of the 
attendant difficulties with hisrecent revisionist history of the religion's 
birth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/04/in-shadow-of-sword-tom-holland>, 
but perhaps doing the job in a medium largely unused for the purpose, partly 
for a less familiar western audience, will reinvigorate the telling and the 
truth of it. Iqbal claims his team have an innovative "concept" in mind for the 
prophet's person and role, radically different to The Message's unsettling 
gimmick of using POV camera for a Muhammad's-eye-view. This could be an origin 
story with some actual revelations in it.

• Next week's After Hollywood will focus on the Weinsteins' influence over 
world cinema. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in 
the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 