
The neuroticism and cruelty on display in these seven newly translated short 
stories leave you short of breath but entirely absorbed – or, more accurately, 
entrapped. The theme of imprisonment runs through the collection, and Thomas 
Bernhard forces us to confront his characters' sense of confinement with 
dizzying, claustrophobic whirls of syntax. We too feel the craze-inducing 
"sleeplessness" (the word hypnotically repeated throughout the narrative) of 
the new tutor in "Two Tutors", and grasp the pain of Georg's deformity in "The 
Crime of an Innsbruck Shopkeeper's Son": "Every morning he woke up in the 
firmly locked cell of a new age-old day." What translator Martin Chalmers 
describes as Bernhard's "verbal logjam" evokes madness and suffering to the 
extent that we experience them ourselves.

The stories are preoccupied with mental illness and a sense of disappointment 
at the world. Bernhard's loathing of the everyday is palpable. Vienna is 
viciously referred to as a "cemetery" with "silent megalomania". The city is 
busier but no less isolating than jail, physically imprisoning its inhabitants 
and mirroring their mental states. Rural Austria doesn't fare any better; the 
narrator in "Jauregg" spits blood about a small mining community: "general 
exhaustion prevails and a general will to nothing." And while one tale, "Is it 
a comedy? Is it a tragedy?", is specifically about the theatre, thespian 
imagery is used throughout the collection to convey the crudeness of modern 
life, "a repulsive operetta".

In theme and style, Prose, which was originally published in 1967, closely 
echoes Bernard novels such asOld Masters and Concrete. It provides an excellent 
introduction to his work, or a satisfying reading experience in itself for 
those who like angst in small doses.
 