
The campaign to save Kempton racecourse from extinction has made the weakest 
of starts, judging by this first day’s jump racing since midweek news of aplan 
to build 3,000 homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
. Not a placard was waved in anger, nor a banner unfurled as a modest crowd 
trickled through the gates and it was left to a couple of winning trainers to 
make the most forceful points about what is at risk.

Related: Ascot may rival Sandown to host King George after Kempton Park closure
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/sandown-not-guaranteed-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-park>

Was it too much to expect some form of organised protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/kempton-park-jockey-club-development-plan>
 four days after the sensational news that these grandstands might be bulldozed 
in 2021? One journalist who went looking for signs of some eventually stumbled 
across a bedraggled group huddled by an entrance who produced a flyer from 
inside a plastic bag. They turned out to be animal rights activists, who will 
presumably be delighted if horse racing eventually quits this part of Greater 
London.

The argument for keeping Kempton includes the fact that millions of people 
live nearby but, for whatever reason, hardly any of them are in the habit of 
coming here. A fair card of seven races attracted 2,300 souls, barely 200 more 
than on the same day last year, suggesting that few have yet been energised by 
the need to show their support. Almost three times as many went to nearby
Sandown last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/finians-oscar-cheltenham-tolworth-hurdle-sandown-colin-tizzard>
, admittedly for a Grade One race.

Those who resent the Jockey Club’s intention to sell for a nine-figure sum 
found themselves saying that modern protest is conducted largely online and 
that there will be at least four years to form a powerful opposition to lobby 
against development. But there is no sign of organised resistance and a 
surprising number of racing professionals have either backed the Jockey Club or 
adopted a neutral stance.

Alan King, whose Fidux beat an odds-on favourite in the opener, is not among 
their number. “It’s appalling,” the Wiltshire trainer said in the winner’s 
enclosure. “Where the hell are we supposed to go with good horses that want 
respectable ground? We send a lot of horses to Doncaster for that reason but 
you can’t send them all there. A lot of horses want a test of speed. It’s not 
all about grinding it out up a hill.”

Asked about the business case for the Jockey Club’s plans, King said: “I 
haven’t heard one yet. If they want to spend £500m in the next 10 years, why 
don’t they spend £400m and keepKempton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>? We can’t afford to lose another 
racecourse. Since I started in racing, we’ve lost Nottingham jumping, Haydock’s 
half the track it used to be, Windsor’s gone [as a jumps venue]. We need places 
like this, we really do. I love coming here.”

Related: Government announces long-awaited levy reform boost for racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/government-levy-reform-boost-horse-racing>

Nicky Henderson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicky-henderson>, whose 
Vaniteux ground his way to victory in the Listed chase, likened the proposed 
sale to a wealthy family “taking a Rembrandt off the wall. You’ve only got so 
many Rembrandts. There’s only so many of these. It’s one of the crown jewels.”

That analogy did not work for Edward Gillespie, a Jockey Club member whose 32 
years in charge of Cheltenham made him one of racing’s most admired executives. 
“A Rembrandt?” he said, looking up at a grandstand that might be fairly 
described as uncherished.

Attending as part of the syndicate that owns Doesyourdogbite, the beaten 
favourite in the Lanzarote, Gillespie claims a close affinity with Kempton, 
having been manager here 40 years ago. “The very thought of this being part of 
a £500m package is so extraordinary when you consider how little money we had 
in the 70s to put into this place. Jump racing needs investment,” he said, 
predicting that the next generation will thank the Jockey Club if the money 
raised is well spent at Sandown and other tracks.

The Jockey Club is only just beginning to give the details that will be 
necessary to help anyone understand the economic argument for closure. On 
Saturday, a spokesman offered some context for the £100m that is the minimum 
profit they hope to make from the sale, saying it equates to more than a 
decade’s worth of net profits from the Jockey Club group. Of the £500m that the 
Club plans to invest in the decade after the sale, at least half is promised 
for prize money and at least half of that will go to jump racing. The £500m 
planned is “over and above any debt repayments”.
 