
Markets, tycoons tells us 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-jamie-dimon-interview/>, are amoral. 
The ultimate rationale for companies is profit; the rest is verbiage for their 
corporate social responsibility brochures. That basic truth is why public 
service contractors never sound entirely credible. They can dress their staff 
in official-looking uniforms, emblazon their vans with “community” and talk and 
talk about serving the public, but they never quite convince.


 Take Brexit. For public service contractors, what matters aren’t 
personalities or parties and certainly not principle. For them the big Brexit 
question on the morning of 24 June was and remains: does this mean more or less 
business?

 The consultants, as you would expect, were quick off the mark. Cabinet 
secretary and civil service head Jeremy Heywood,as told to former cabinet 
secretary Lord Andrew Turnbull, 
<http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/events/after-referendum-implications-whitehall>
 has been inundated by offers from the big four, McKinsey and others to supply 
the negotiating and other talentWhitehall evidently lacks for the gargantuan 
job ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/24/whitehall-brexit-civil-servants-jeremy-heywood>
.

Whitehall has no roadmap for the gargantuan task of enabling Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/24/whitehall-brexit-civil-servants-jeremy-heywood>
 If in recent days, Nicholas Soames and fellow Tory MPs were agitatedly 
weighing the respective chances 
<https://twitter.com/nsoamesmp/status/747796354878050304> of candidates for 
leader, his brother Rupert, Serco’s chief executive, was engaged with 
spreadsheets. Put bluntly (as his staff certainly have): will Brexit mean more 
people being locked up, and can we turn the key?

 For Rupert Soames, Brexit brings new tougher policies for migration, control 
of UK borders (assuming the UK exists), passports and internal security – all 
fields where his firm has big contracts. MeanwhileIT contractors 
<http://central-government.governmentcomputing.com/news/public-sector-faces-brexit-policy-paralysis-4933910>
 are eyeing HMRC and the prospects of massive post-Brexit changes in VAT 
administration. It’s not all upside.Capita <http://www.capita.com/news/> may be 
getting out of its translation services business: public bodies will be cutting 
back.

 These firms reckon the political climate is set fair. Share prices have been 
yo-yoing in the general uncertainty, but may now stabilise given that all the 
Tory contenders are on side. As prime minister, Theresa May would surely 
appoint a home secretary to carry on herplans for police and fire 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/home-secretary-speech-on-fire-reform>, 
offering lucrative opportunities for contractors. Barring a miraculous recovery 
in Labour’s electoral appeal and a marked change of heart, given the enthusiasm 
of previous Labour governments and local authorities, contracting volumes are 
set to grow.

 Serco, its chief a member of the Churchill family, is thinking about how to 
emphasise its Britishness, in comparison with the likes ofG4S 
<http://www.g4s.com/>, so much of whose business is now offshore. Like them, 
rivalMitie <http://www.mitie.com/> also has big stakes in migrant removal; as a 
Tory peer, its chief executive Ruby McGregor-Smith will hope to get a 
headstart, though she will have to watch what happens to her friend Sajid Javid 
in the Tory party leader election stakes. She will presumably permanently 
shelve recently announced plans to expand in Europe.

The impact of Brexit on UK's £200bn public procurement spend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/13/brexit-uk-200bn-public-procurement-eu-rules>
 Being British is going to count for more. The procurement rulebook will have 
to be redrafted once contracts no longer have to be advertised in theOfficial 
Journal of the European Communities <http://www.ojec.com/>. The Leave campaign 
claimedmassive savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/13/brexit-uk-200bn-public-procurement-eu-rules>
 would follow. What that probably meant is savings would follow deregulation of 
employment contracts and wage levels.

 As things stand only tiny proportions of public contracting 
<http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/SN06029.pdf> (pdf) are European, with 
cross-border public procurement worth only 3% of the total. In 2009-2011, the 
UK awarded only 1.3% of public contracts by value to suppliers based in other 
member states; and UK suppliers do less business elsewhere in the EU. But 
Brexit could have consequences for the bins. Future bids for council contracts 
by the French environmental services firm Veolia could fall foul of moves 
towards protecting the home market.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 