
Public sector professionals such as doctors, senior civil servants and 
university professors in line for pensions worth more than £43,000 a year face 
a steep increase in tax bills in 2016, with financial advisers encouraging high 
earners to protect themselves now.

In the March 2015 budget, George Osborne cut the maximum anyone can save into 
a pension over their working life and still obtain tax relief from £1.25m to 
£1m, taking effect in April 2016.

Many high earners in the public sector are likely to breach the £1m limit and 
then be subject to tax on the excess of up to 55%. This is because the 
government puts a value on their total pension pot equivalent to 20 times their 
annual pension, plus their automatic tax-free cash entitlement – which in 
practice works out at 23 times their pension.

For a GP or dentist in the NHS scheme, it means that if he or she has an 
expected final salary-related pension of more than £43,478 year, they will be 
potentially in breach of the new limits (because 23 x £43,478 is £1m). This 
compares to £53,347 under the current lifetime allowance cap of £1.25m.

The government will impose a tax charge of 25% of the excess above £1m, or 55% 
if the excess money is taken as a lump sum.

Jon Drysdale of chartered financial planners PFM Dental gives an example of a 
doctor or dental practitioner aged 60 who draws their NHS pension of £50,000 in 
May 2016 and who also has a separate personal pension valued at £250,000. Their 
NHS pension “value” is estimated at £1.15m, and once added to their £250,000 
personal pension means they have an excess of £350,000. PFM Dental says this 
will result in an annual £4,375 tax charge taken off their pension every year 
by HM Revenue & Customs. The calculation of the charge is based on 25% of the 
excess, divided by 20.

Before doctors, dentists and academics complain too much, Tom McPhail of 
investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown says the government is actually being very 
generous in its assessment of the value of their pensions.

“Because defined-benefit [final-salary based] pensions are valued on a 20:1 
basis, someone with a £10,000 defined benefit pension would be deemed to have a 
£200,000 pot for lifetime allowance purposes. This is generous compared with 
defined-contribution [stock-market based] pensions, as a £200,000 pot would 
only buy you an inflation-linked annuity income of perhaps £6,000 or £7,000 a 
year.”

If valued on a more realistic basis, doctors retiring on pensions of £50,000 a 
year have a pension pot valued at nearly £2m and would be crippled by the new 
charge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446729306755%2F44fa4871-3f4c-47ca-8c7f-4ca0d9493969-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20sector%20professionals%20under%20threat%20from%20pension%20tax%20relief%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20sector%20professionals%20under%20threat%20from%20pension%20tax%20relief%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446729306755%2F44fa4871-3f4c-47ca-8c7f-4ca0d9493969-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In the March 2015 budget, George Osborne cut the maximum anyone can save into 
a pension over their working life and still obtain tax relief from £1.25m to 
£1m. Photograph: Action Press/Rex Shutterstock 
The government expects the measures to be raising around £600m a year in 
additional tax revenue by the end of the decade. However, there are a few steps 
that higher earners can take to mitigate the impact of the new limits. Any 
investor whose pension savings are already more than the £1m limit on 6 April, 
or who is worried they might soon exceed this limit, can apply for them to be 
protected. “If appropriately advised, the current generation of retirees are 
able to apply forHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> transitional 
protection to mitigate the LTA [lifetime allowance] drop we had in 2014 to 
£1.25m, or the planned 2016 drop to £1m. Unfortunately for dentists and doctors 
just starting out, such protection is of no use,” Drysdale says.

There are more details at 
gov.uk/government/publications/pensions-individual-protection-2014 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/pensions-individual-protection-2014>
 – but broadly this is an area where it pays to take professional financial 
advice.

McPhail says: “For investors who are close to or already over the £1m 
threshold, it may make sense to boost pension funding this year. Note that it 
may subsequently be necessary to suspend any further pension funding 
thereafter. Some investors may also choose to continue membership of a pension 
even if they exceed the lifetime allowance and so will be taxed at 55% on the 
surplus, in order to benefit from continued employer contributions.”

Another option is to defer taking personal pension benefits, as the £1m LTA 
test is only applicable where benefits are actually drawn. But an automatic LTA 
test is applied at age 75, so this is not a long-term solution.

The good news is that the large majority of pension savers won’t be affected 
by the £1m limit. A 35-year-old paying £400 into a pension for the first time 
would, at age 70, be likely to have a fund worth around £475,000. Meanwhile, 
the LTA is likely to be £1.92m if, as expected, it rises in future in line with 
CPI inflation, so the person would fall far short of breaching the limit.

Reductions in pension tax relief? 

Will 40% taxpayers also see the value of their pension contributions shrivel 
later this month if the government slashes tax breaks? Osborne has confirmed he 
will be making an announcement about pension tax relief in the budget next year 
– but advisers are nervous it may be brought forward to the autumn statement on 
25 November.

Part of the reason is that as much as £6bn is already flooding out of the 
Treasury as well-off investors are pouring money into their pensions now to 
grab the tax reliefs while they last.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446729598956%2Fb55b069c-9248-43bd-ba48-f91a8a1249c0-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20sector%20professionals%20under%20threat%20from%20pension%20tax%20relief%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20sector%20professionals%20under%20threat%20from%20pension%20tax%20relief%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpublic-sector-professionals-pension-tax-relief-changes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446729598956%2Fb55b069c-9248-43bd-ba48-f91a8a1249c0-1360x2040.jpeg>
 As much as £6bn is already flooding out of the Treasury as well-off investors 
are pouring money into their pensions. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/EPA 
McPhail says: “We know the Treasury is mindful of the risks of a 
‘buy-now-while-stocks-last’ surge in activity. It is just possible that we will 
see Osborne pull a gremlin out of the hat on 25 November and announce an 
immediate cut in tax breaks for pensions.”

He estimates that higher rate and top rate taxpayers have increased their 
contributions by an average of 40% in the current tax year compared with last 
year, opening a £6bn hole in the Treasury’s finances. “The door is swinging 
shut and we’re already seeing a significant increase in pension contributions. 
We expect a surge in activity ahead of November’s spending review, followed by 
a steady rise in contributions through to April 2016. Based on current data, we 
could see an extra £6bn in tax relief being claimed by higher earners this 
year.”

So what is under threat, and what should you do if you are a higher rate 
taxpayer to benefit from tax reliefs while they last?

The government has been conducting a thorough review of pension taxation, and 
while no one knows for sure, there is widespread expectation of a reduction in 
the tax relief on contributions. Because payments into a pension are free of 
tax, they are very attractive to high earners. If you are a higher rate (40%) 
taxpayer, every £1 paid into a pension only really costs 60p because of the tax 
relief. But for a standard taxpayer (20%), every £1 costs 80p, which has 
prompted accusations that the tax reliefs unfairly go to the better off.

The figures appear to bear this out. The total annual value of tax relief is 
around £35bn, but 59% of all tax relief granted in 2014-15 went to those with 
incomes in excess of £45,000. The expectation is that the government will move 
to a flat rate level of tax relief somewhere between 20% and 40%.

A higher rate taxpayer who is currently paying £10,000 a year into their 
pension could see the value of their tax relief fall from £4,000 to £2,500 if 
the government cuts the relief rate to 25%. If the new pension tax relief rate 
is set at 30%, midway between the two current rates, the higher rate taxpayer 
will lose £1,000. Conversely, standard rate taxpayers will gain as their 
contributions obtain higher tax relief than before.

For better off pension savers the general advice is to increase their 
contributions this tax year, and if they have a lump sum to put it into their 
pension before 25 November. However, the maximum amount that anyone can pay 
into a pension in any one tax year and get tax relief is £40,000. This annual 
allowance could also be cut, although it has been chipped away so much – it was 
£255,000 in 2010-11 – that further reductions are not widely anticipated.

Last week, Osborne said in a reply to a question from Gloucester MP Richard 
Graham: “We are open to consultation on the pensions taxation system at the 
moment. It is a completely open consultation that will lead to a genuine green 
paper, and we are receiving a lot of interesting suggestions on potential 
reform. We will respond to that consultation fully in the budget.”

Retirement prospects


How long you need your money to last in retirement depends on your social 
class and where you live, according tofigures from the Office for National 
Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/subnational-health4/life-expectancy-at-birth-and-at-age-65-by-local-areas-in-england-and-wales/2012-14/stb-life-2012-14.html#tab-Regional-life-expectancy-at-age-65>
.

At age 65, men in Kensington and Chelsea in central London can expect to 
survive another 21.6 years, but for men in Manchester it’s 15.9 years. For 
women life expectancy at age 65 is highest in Camden (24.6 years) and lowest in 
Manchester (18.8 years).

In all areas of the country, life expectancy at age 65 has increased 
significantly since the early 1990s, said the ONS. The greatest increase for 
men was in London and the north-east (both 4.7 years) and for women, in London 
and the West Midlands (3.5 and 3.2 years respectively). For both sexes, the 
slowest improvements in life expectancy were in Yorkshire and the Humber and 
the south-west.

Many individuals run the risk of becoming short of money in retirement after 
cashing in their pension pots, according toSocial Market Foundation research  
<http://www.smf.co.uk/publications/golden-years-what-freedom-and-choice-will-mean-for-uk-pensioners/>
this week. It found that in Australia, which was an early forerunner to Britain 
in allowing individuals to do what they like with their pension money, four in 
10 ran out of cash by age 75, while others had a miserable retirement by 
withdrawing too little.
 