
Britain’s biggest gym operator, Pure Gym, has revealed plans to float on the 
London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>, raising £190m 
to pay off debts and fund expansion.

The no-frills fitness chain said a stock market listing would allow the 
company to raise its profile and increase its network of gyms, as well as open 
the door to more acquisitions.

The private equity-owned company did not say how many shares it intended to 
sell, or their expected price, but the initial public offering is expected to 
take place in October.

Humphrey Cobbold, chief executive, said: “Pure Gym is ready to become a listed 
company. As well as opening more gyms, we will continue to invest in technology 
and the innovation it supports.

“Technological capability has been and will remain fundamental to our success 
and going forward offers opportunities to further differentiate the options and 
services we provide our members.”

The Leeds-based business was founded in 2008 and following a period of rapid 
expansion is now the UK’s largest gym operator, with 163 gyms and almost 
790,000 members across the UK.

Last year it bought rival chain LA Fitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/29/pure-gym-buys-la-fitness> and 
struck up a partnership with OlympianSir Chris Hoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chrishoy>, who is a “special adviser and 
brand ambassador” to Pure Gym.

Pure Gym says its business model is based on offering members affordable fees 
without tying them into fixed term contracts, with gyms accessible at any time 
of day and night.


The chain does not have swimming pools, saunas or cafes, which have high fixed 
costs.

In the first half of 2016 the company opened 27 new gyms, 16 of which were 
conversions of previously acquired LA Fitness premises. Revenue over the six 
months was £76.6m, up 51% compared with the first half of 2015.

Tony Ball, chairman of Pure Gym, said its business model had made gym 
membership accessible for hundreds of thousands of people.

“Pure Gym’s growth from a startup company in 2008 to undisputed market leader 
today is a story of disruption.

“When the company was founded the traditional gym market was moribund. It did 
not cater for modern gym users who are tech-savvy, want to be able to exercise 
at any time of day or night and want gyms they actually use, all without being 
locked into an expensive 12-month contract.”
 