
Christmas marketing campaigns by the major retail brands have become more 
elaborate by the year, with social media now playing an integral part. The 
latest John Lewis ad, featuring Buster the Boxer and a host of wild animals 
trampolining, has been namedthe world’s biggest Christmas TV ad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/06/john-lewis-youtube-christmas-ad-buster-burberry-sainsburys>
 on YouTube. It used Snapchat to drive the campaign and is currently one of the
most shared ads 
<https://unruly.co/news/article/2016/12/01/john-lewis-bustertheboxer-tops-shared-ads-2016/>
 on social media. Snapchat users are given the opportunityto add a lens to a 
photo of themselve 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/john-lewis-christmas-snapchat-lens>s that 
transforms them into Buster the Boxer.

As a small business owner it’s easy to feel disheartened; with limited 
marketing budgets, they cannot compete with the big brands. However, as Ben 
Storey, founder ofDigital Storey <http://www.digitalstorey.com/> points out, 
rather than trying to emulate them, they should learn from them, and then build 
their own successful seasonal social media campaigns.


“You just need to examine the values on which these campaigns are built,” he 
says. “Those that stand out tend to be emotive and warming, and often get 
behind a cause or a charity. Follow in these footsteps, make your small 
business stand for something, and make your social media campaign 
thought-provoking.”


Marks & Spencer’s festive campaign featuring Mrs Claus reflects how far people 
will go to make Christmas special. Launched with the social media tag
#LoveMrsClaus <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23LoveMrsClaus&src=hash>, it also 
set out to reinforce the retailer’s emotional connection with consumers.


Gavin Hammar, founder of social media management platform Sendible 
<https://sendible.com/>, says: “People’s emotions are heightening in the run up 
to the festive season, and social media campaigns should tap into those 
emotions to drive action. The key ingredient is sharing a human moment that 
anyone can relate to. Since people are in the spirit of giving, they are more 
likely to hand over their cash, if they feel a sense of connection with your 
brand.”


It’s also important to adjust campaigns for individual platforms. Twitter 
followers, for example, might want to post content, while Facebook followers 
might want to ask questions. Meanwhile, an Instagram community may want to see 
behind the scenes.

“Instagram campaigns allow brands to engage with customers in ways other 
marketing channels, or even the less visual-centric social platforms, don’t 
allow,” says Romain Ouzeau, CEO ofIconosquare <https://pro.iconosquare.com/> an 
analytics platform for Instagram marketing. “Christmas is all about sharing, 
and in Instagram terms, this means sharing posts, images and videos in order to 
engage customers.”

For example, he explains, travel and tourism brands could ask their Instagram 
followers to share pictures of how they spend Christmas in their country, 
reflecting the company’s international brand strength, or encouraging customers 
to dress up and share their top festive outfits on Instagram, useful for 
fashion brands. Companies from all sectors could simply create a wish list by 
asking customers to post a photo or video explaining what they want for 
Christmas.

Engaging new customers during the peak festive season is important, but an 
effective social media marketing campaign should also aim to retain those 
Christmas customers long after the holidays are over.

“There are lots of simple things you can do, such as using festive-themed 
profile graphics, and running competitions and polls using festive hashtags to 
really engage your followers,” says Sara Robinson, managing director of 
marketing agencyBrighter Comms <http://brightercomms.co.uk>. “Scheduling 
messages for over the Christmas period, even if you’re away from the office, 
will show your followers that you care. But don’t rely on automated postings. 
Make sure your social media channels are being managed by a human being to 
ensure you can monitor mentions and engage with followers. Once Christmas is 
over, use the momentum you’ve created during the festive period and build on it 
by keeping conversations going and posting regularly.”

Shaherazad Umbreen, founder of Shoes by Shaherazad 
<https://www.18hourheels.com/>, launched online earlier this year, runs festive 
social media and marketing campaigns across Facebook, Twitter and social 
commerce website Polyvore, with the aim of boosting seasonal sales and building 
long-term customer loyalty.

For example, she has used a “Mistletoe Kisses Guaranteed” social media hashtag 
strapline targeted at people who have then bought the shoes as a surprise for 
their wives, girlfriends or partners. Her alternative strapline, “I would love 
these heels for Christmas, #husbanddidyouhear” – plays on the idea of 
gift-hinting.

Umbreen includes free gifts in the box all year round, but at Christmas makes 
them more seasonal, for example, a sparkly piece of jewellery. “I include free 
gifts in parcels for loyal customers as a surprise when they open their shoe 
box, and I only discount for loyal and repeat customers. This works really well 
as a huge amount of my sales come from women who have enjoyed a pair of my 
heels and who then treat themselves to another colour.”

Top tips for a last-minute festive marketing campaign

It’s still not too late for small firms to make the most of the festive 
season, with some practical social media and marketing tips from Shaz Memon, 
creative director at web design agencyDigimax <http://www.digimax.co.uk/>.

Create time-sensitive voucher codes. Whether you sell a product or a service, 
a time-limited voucher urges people to take action. Go a step further by 
applying this code to a product or service that may not normally be discounted 
but is in demand or is seasonal.

Showcase your offerings. Use Instagram Stories, Instagram Videos, Facebook 
Videos, and Facebook Live Feeds to demonstrate your product or the benefits of 
what your product can do. Make it seasonal and relevant to this festive period 
and bolt on the time-sensitive offer or giveaway.

Run a social media poll. Make it fun and interesting and get people thinking. 
If your poll is memorable, they will associate this to your brand or product.

Use Hashtags. Social commerce is increasing all the time, and users are making 
buying decisions based on what they see on social media. Use hashtags to appeal 
to your target audience. If you sell hats, hashtag #xmashats #festivehats 
#buyhats #hatslondon etc., and boost interest further by linking a really good 
picture to the product or service you are promoting.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 