
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has been working on 
incorporating elements of China’s Great Firewall into the “Red Web”, the 
country’s system of internet filtering and control, after unprecedented cyber 
collaboration between the countries.


A decision earlier this month to block the networking site LinkedIn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/russia-blocks-access-to-linkedin-over-foreign-held-data>
 in Russia is the most visible in a series of measures to bring the internet 
under greater state control.

Legislation was announced this month that gives the Kremlin primacy over 
cyberspace – the exchange points, domain names and cross-border fibre-optic 
cables that make up the architecture of the internet.

China and Russia: the world's new superpower axis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/china-russia-superpower-axis> 
In the summer, a measure known as Yarovaya’s law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/26/russia-passes-big-brother-anti-terror-laws>
 was introduced, which requires Russia’s telecoms and internet providers to 
store users’ data for six months and metadata for three years.

A group of Kremlin and security officials is driving the offensive against 
internet freedoms. The government fears the web could be used to mobilise 
protesters and disseminate dangerous ideas and information and it is looking 
for ways to switch off connections in times of crisis.

The strategy is being developed in close cooperation with China after a string 
of high-level meetings in Beijing and Moscow this year. At their first 
cybersecurity forum, in April, top Chinese officials and their Russian 
counterparts gathered in Moscow for the talks. Delegates included Lu Wei, the 
head of China’s state internet information office,Fang Binxing, the so-called 
father of the Great Firewall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/06/great-firewall-of-china-blocked-fang-binxing>
 and Igor Shchyogolev, President Vladimir Putin’s assistant on internet issues 
and former minister of communications.

“The principal agreement to have a forum was reached by Igor Shchyogolev and 
Fang Binxing at a meeting in December 2015 in Beijing,” said Denis Davydov, the 
executive director of the misleadingly named League of SafeInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet>, a government-affiliated 
group that has drafted internet-filtering legislation and recruited teams of 
volunteers to patrol the web for “harmful content”.

Earlier this year, the security council secretary, Nikolai Patrushev, who was 
head of the Russian Federal Security Service during Putin’s 2000-08 presidency, 
had two meetings with Chinese politburo members on information security; and in 
June, Putin went to Beijing to sign a joint communique about cyberspace.


What the Russians want most from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is technology. Russia has no means of 
handling the vast amounts of data required by Yarovaya’s law, and it cannot 
rely on western technologies because of sanctions.

However, the Chinese are willing to lend a hand. In August it was reported 
that Bulat, the Russian telecoms equipment manufacturer, was in talks with 
Huawei, the Chinese telecoms company, to buy technologies for data storage and 
produce servers to implement Yarovaya’s law.

The Chinese officials also ensured senior Huawei staff were present at key 
information security conferences in Russia, and the company was the major 
sponsor of the Russian information security forum held in Beijing in October.

“Huawei is essentially an arm of the Chinese state, whoever nominally owns 
it,” saidGordon Chang, author of The Coming Collapse of China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2002/mar/10/politics>. “Its origins 
are murky, its growth far too fast for a private company in China, state 
officials support its efforts, and the absence of competition from state 
enterprises is another important tell.”

The Russians apparently see no other option than to invite Chinese 
heavyweights into the heart of its IT strategy. “China remains our only serious 
‘ally’, including in the IT sector,” said a source in the Russian information 
technology industry, adding that despite hopes that Russian manufacturers would 
fill the void created by sanctions “we are in fact actively switching to 
Chinese”.

In Russia, the strategy for greater collaboration with China has been 
developed and promoted by top-level Kremlin officials, generals and 
businessmen. These include Patrushev, Shchyogolev and Konstantin Malofeev, the 
billionaire founder of Orthodox channel Tsargrad TV who is the subject of EU 
sanctions for his connections to separatists in Ukraine. The group is believed 
to be the driving force behind Yarovaya’s law.

On 7 November, China adopted a controversial cybersecurity law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/chinas-new-cybersecurity-law-sparks-fresh-censorship-and-espionage-fears>
 that revived international concerns about censorship in the country. In a sign 
that collaboration between the countries is mutually beneficial, the 
legislation echoes Russia’s rules on data localisation and requires “critical 
information infrastructure operators” to be stored domestically – the law 
LinkedIn fell foul of. It seems the exchange of ideas has already borne fruit.
 