
PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> has been fined 
£2.3m by the accountancy watchdog over its auditing of the subprime lender 
Cattles and its biggest division, Welcome Financial Services, in 2007.

The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) also issued the accountancy firm with a 
severe reprimand. The fine was reduced from £3.5m after mitigation and a 
settlement discount. In addition, PwC has to pay £750,000 towards the FRC’s 
costs.

The FRC said the £3.5m original fine would have been the largest ever. In 
early 2015, Deloitte was fined £3m over its dealings with the collapsed 
carmaker MG Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/13/deloitte-appeal-over-mg-rover-collapse-sees-14m-fine-cut-to-3m>
 after that was reduced from a £14m penalty following an appeal.

Simon Bradburn, PwC’s then audit engagement partner, was fined £75,600, 
reduced from £120,000 as part of the settlement, and also received a severe 
reprimand.

The penalties come nearly a year after Cattles settled a lawsuit with PwC that 
alleged the accountants acted negligently in its auditing of the Yorkshire firm 
during the financial crisis. Cattles, whichalmost went bankrupt over accounting 
irregularities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/15/dennis-nally-pwc-auditors-pay-more>
, claimed that the loan book of Welcome was much weaker than stated in PwC’s 
audit. The lawsuit was brought on behalf of creditors to Cattles, which lent to 
people with poor credit histories and entered into a financial restructuring 
scheme in 2011.

The FRC said that PwC and Bradburn had admitted their “conduct fell 
significantly short of the standards reasonably to be expected of a member firm 
and a member” in respect of the 2007 financial statements.

The watchdog said: “PwC had insufficient audit evidence as to the adequacy of 
the loan loss provision and had failed to identify the fact that the impairment 
policy was not adequately disclosed and that the disclosures in those financial 
statements were not in compliance” with accountancy rules.

Gareth Rees QC, executive counsel to the FRC, said: “The substantial fines 
imposed in this case reflect the seriousness of the audit failings in relation 
to the critical area of impairment provisioning in a subprime lender and will 
send a strong signal to the audit community of the importance of upholding high 
standards of professional conduct in audit work.”

He welcomed PwC’s and Bradburn’s “constructive approach, which has enabled us 
to reach this settlement. The admissions of misconduct have resulted in a 
significant saving in time and costs and the fines ultimately imposed have been 
reduced accordingly.”

PwC said: “While the FRC has acknowledged that we had been deliberately misled 
by third parties, we recognise that certain aspects of this 2007 audit fell 
short of expected standards. Audit quality is of paramount importance to PwC 
and the FRC’s annual audit quality assessments have shown a trend of 
improvement in our work over several years.”
 