
Arthur Sinodinos appeared to give unenthusiastic support for both the actions 
of George Brandis and the future leadership ofMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> on the ABC’s Q&A 
on Monday night – refusing to rule out the return of Tony Abbott.

Just hours earlier, the solicitor general, Justin Gleeson, announced he would 
resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/solicitor-general-justin-gleeson-quits-over-broken-relationship--george-brandis>
 over his “irretrievably broken” relationship with the attorney general, which 
deteriorated after Brandis made a binding legal direction that all government 
requests for Gleeson’s advice would have to be approved by Brandis’s office.

Malcolm Turnbull's support lower than Tony Abbott's before ousting, Newspoll 
shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/malcolm-turnbulls-support-lower-than-tony-abbotts-before-ousting-newspoll-shows>
When Sinodinos was asked whether Brandis had been to blame for the broken 
relationship, he responded: “If the attorney general had done something wrong 
which necessitated his dismissal, the PM would have dismissed him.”

The cabinet secretary went on to say that the media focus on the issue 
heightened the tension between the pair, and made reconciliation difficult.

Tanya Plibersek <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, 
deputy leader of the opposition, said Brandis should have resigned. “The office 
of the solicitor general has been about for around 100 years. It’s critical the 
solicitor general can give frank and fearless advice to government,” she said.

“The idea the solicitor general should have to go through the attorney general 
to give advice to the PM, to the governor general, to departmental heads, to 
ministers is extraordinary. What if the minister that’s going to the solicitor 
general thinks the attorney general’s corrupt?”

The former editor in chief of the Australian, Chris Mitchell, said Turnbull 
was running a shambolic government but, when asked whether that was a risk to 
Turnbull’s leadership, he said he didn’t think Abbott would make a comeback.

“Look, my feeling is that Tony probably isn’t somebody who could rally the 
numbers,” Mitchell said.

Sinodinos said it was unlikely but left the possibility open. “Will we ever go 
back to Tony? In politics I’ve learned through bitter experience you never rule 
anything in or out,” he said.

“If I had to put money on it, I wouldn’t put money on it for the reasons I 
mentioned before. But I’m always careful in these things because in life I’ve 
learned in politics it’s the thing you least expect that can come back.”
 