
With Queen Of Katwe, Mira Nair has come full circle, returning to the 
shanty-slum world of her 1988 feature debut Salaam Bombay!. But here the slum 
is east African, not Indian, the district of Katwe, an overpopulated sinkhole 
of poverty and decay within sight of the glittering skyscrapers of Kampala, 
Uganda; another outpost, or eruption, of the global favela we’ve seen in movies 
fromBlood Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/28/leonardodicaprio.thriller> to 
City Of God <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jan/03/artsfeatures2> and 
Slumdog Millionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/09/slumdog-millionaire-review-danny-boyle>
.

On my radar: Mira Nair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/apr/28/mira-nair-on-my-radar-interview>
This being a Mira Nair movie, however, we find ourselves in an Africa very 
different from the one seen inBeasts Of No Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/11/beasts-of-no-nation-review-idris-elba>
 orThe Constant Gardener <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/11/3>. 
Here, there are no child armies or genocidal pharmacy conglomerates, just 
poverty and struggle. Phiona and her brothers sell corn on the streets of 
Kampala, barely getting by. Once relatively comfortable, the death of their 
father has put all the weight on their mother Nakku (Lupita Nyong’o), who keeps 
the kids on a tight leash but fails to stop Phiona’s elder sister from drifting 
into prostitution. Phiona’s one refuge is a kids’ chess club run by Robert 
Katende (David Oyelowo) who soon intuits she can see eight moves ahead and is a 
grandmaster in embryo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzP-odj0rEE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzP-odj0rEE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzP-odj0rEE&media=>
The Reluctant Fundamentalist – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/19/reluctant-fundamentalist-review-mira-nair>
Nair and screenwriter William Wheeler deftly outline the social and financial 
obstacles she must overcome. The posh wannabe-English public school that runs 
the regional chess league doesn’t want these ghetto kids coming around, even 
less so after they suffer a righteous chessboard thrashing at the same ghetto 
kids’ hands. Little by little, through Robert’s labours, sly con-tricks and 
minor deceits, they pass up the rungs of chess success: African finals in Sudan 
(a first plane ride for the kids), grandmaster face-offs in Russia (their first 
sight of snow). Here and there, some fairly Disney-ish life lessons are doled 
out straight from the chess manual: “In chess, the small one may beat the big 
one,”; “Never tip your king too soon.” The movie is filled with much the same 
kind of uplift that one finds in its Disney sibling-movie, 2014’sMillion Dollar 
Arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/million-dollar-arm-review-mark-kermode-not-slumdog>
, about cricketing Indian kids recruited as major-league pitchers.

Thus far, then, a fairly conventional sports movie with an exotic setting, 
besieged characters and high stakes. What lifts it up is a winningly 
effervescent cast and the ensemble of kids – mostly amateur street children 
playing people like themselves – all anchored and held in check by two very 
adept professional performers. At the heart of it is a full-fledged, richly 
detailed performance from Lupita Nyong’o as a kind of universal Mother Courage 
of the shanties. If there’s any justice, this will remind people what a fine 
actor she is, and we’ll see a lot more of her.

Queen Of Katwe is in cinemas from Friday
 