
Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro> has spent most of 
his life in his brother’s shadow, but he has proved a more than capable 
successor as Cuban president.

A cautious pragmatist to Fidel’s charismatic ideologue, many felt the younger 
sibling was a mere stopgap when heformally assumed power in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/19/cuba>.

But he has subsequently made his own very distinctive mark on the island’s 
history with a program of economic reforms, an easing of travel restrictions 
and therestoration of diplomatic relations with the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
.

The death of Fidel and the looming presidency of Donald Trump, whose Cuban 
policy remains unclear, are uncharted waters which will test Raúl’s nerve and 
judgment as never before.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20brother%20announces%20death%20on%20Cuban%20state%20television%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20brother%20announces%20death%20on%20Cuban%20state%20television%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video&media=>
Fidel Castro’s brother announces death on Cuban state television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/fidel-castros-brother-announces-death-on-cuban-state-television-video>
On Monday, Trump threatened to reimpose sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-cuba-sanctions-reforms-fidel-castro-death>
 on Cuba, but gave no details or explanation.

Castro’s legacy: how the revolutionary inspired and appalled the world
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-legacy>
Some analysts said they did not expect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/trump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown>
 Trump to rescind the executive orders that relaxed the half-century embargo on 
Cuba since Castro came to power, citing the pro-business lobby in the 
Republican party and Trump’s own commercial instincts.

However, conservative Cuban Americans – including Mauricio Claver-Carone, a 
hardline member of Trump’s transition team – have said that the regime run by 
Raúl Castro is just as repressive as his brother’s, and argue that some or all 
of the sanctions should be reinstated.

Since taking the helm Raúl has cemented his own personal power, maintained the 
hegemony of the Communist party and laid to rest the once widely held belief 
thatCuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> would implode with the death 
of Fidel.

“Raúl is a transitional president between the old guard and the future and in 
that sense he has performed well. He has kept the country stable,” said Volker 
Skierka, a Fidel biographer and Cuba expert.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55f16d2c86c02dab1cfd4dafe8b549f7be114f54%2F216_466_4369_2623%2F4369.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel's%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel%27s%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55f16d2c86c02dab1cfd4dafe8b549f7be114f54%2F216_466_4369_2623%2F4369.jpg>
 Raúl Castro with his brother Fidel, left, and Che Guevara, right. Photograph: 
Giovannetti/IPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Like his brother, he has also ensured this small island maintained a 
disproportionate amount of global attention.Groundbreaking visits to Havana by 
Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
 and Pope Francis made headlines around the world anddrove home the message 
that Cuba was changing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/19/pope-francis-cuba-us-reconciliation-havana>
 – albeit on its own terms. Under Raúl’s leadership, Cuba also hostedpeace 
talks between the Colombian government and Farc insurgents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/colombia-government-farc-rebels-peace-deal-52-year-war>
 that may end the bloodiest conflict in Latin America.

In his later years, Fidel expressed his unease with some of these developments 
in critical commentaries in Granma, the Communist party newspaper, but his 
influence was waning and what was left of the revolution had already moved on.

US policymakers have been forced to abandon their once cherished “poof moment” 
theory that the communist party’s grip on power would slip without Fidel. “As 
much as we wish otherwise, I don’t see it happening,” said one US diplomat in 
the region.

For Cubans, the struggle to supplement meagre rations is a consuming obsession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/cubans-food-struggle-rations-consuming-obsession>
European diplomats went further. “We won’t see a huge shift of Cuban politics 
after Fidel’s death. More significant would be if Raúl dies, because he put his 
leadership on the line for reform.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98He%20led%20a%20humble%20life%E2%80%99%3A%20Fidel%20Castro%E2%80%99s%20biographer%20on%20the%20legacy%20of%20a%20revolutionary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fhe-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video&media=>
‘He led a humble life’: Fidel Castro’s biographer on the legacy of a 
revolutionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/26/he-led-a-humble-life-fidel-castros-biographer-on-the-legacy-of-a-revolutionary-video>
Marginalised and intimidated dissidents pose little threat to the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/21/cuba-dissidents-caution-assumptions-complacency-political-opposition>
. They resonate internationally as symbols of opposition but foreign diplomats 
in Havana write them off as politically irrelevant on the island.

Raúl has released most political prisoners and allowed prominent critics such 
as Rosa María Payá andYoani Sánchez 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/16/yoani-sanchez-dissident-cuban-blogger>
 to travel abroad. But organised opposition at home is still often met with 
arrests and beatings.

Raúl’s biggest test is raising living standards for the island’s 11.2 million 
people. The average monthly wage is less than £15 ($20), obliging people to 
scrabble for decent food and basics such as soap, and there are crippling 
shortages of housing and transport.

“The economy is what’s most on people’s minds,” said Susan Kaufman Purcell, 
director of the Centre for Hemispheric Policy at the University of Miami.

Raúl has studied Vietnam and China as models of communist parties which have 
retained control while freeing their economies. He has trimmed the vast state 
bureaucracy and laid off hundreds of thousands of workers, saying the old 
system was bloated and unsustainable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749cb0ae64ec170fec47b27a6d0c981e8fe115f5%2F0_202_3999_2400%2F3999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel's%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel%27s%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F749cb0ae64ec170fec47b27a6d0c981e8fe115f5%2F0_202_3999_2400%2F3999.jpg>
 Raúl Castro has laid to rest the belief that Cuba would implode with the death 
of Fidel, but his biggest challenge will be to raise living standards. 
Photograph: Yamil Lage/AFP/Getty Images 
To soak up these workers and create opportunities for the young, he has 
encouraged personal initiative and licensed hundreds of different types of 
micro-businesses. He has told Cubans to stop blaming the US embargo for their 
ills and to be “fearless” in criticising corruption, bureaucracy and 
inefficiency.

The reforms have allowed small new businesses to bloom, notably restaurants, 
guesthouses and stalls which have livened up Havana’s sleepy streets, but 
efforts to boost agriculture have fallen flat, with farmers complaining of 
multiple obstacles. Shortages of basic foodstuffs remain the norm for most 
Cubans.

Close but no cigar: how America failed to kill Fidel Castro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cia-cigar-assasination-attempts>
The challenge is to deliver material improvements while retaining the free and 
universal access to education and healthcare that are the revolution’s proudest 
boast and main pillar of legitimacy.

In contrast to Fidel’s marathon speeches and nocturnal workaholic habits, Raúl 
is a family man who speaks briefly and likes to be home for dinner. He 
delegates decisions to a small, trusted cabal. Raúl’s power base is the 
military, an institution he forged during 47 years as defence minister.

For the past decade, Venezuelan oil subsidies have been crucial to Cuba’s 
economy. President Nicolás Maduro,who succeeded the Fidel-worshipping Hugo 
Chávez, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/06/nicolas-maduro-post-chavez-bluster>
 is close to Raúl. With the aid of Cuba’s G2 intelligence service he keeps 
close tabs on Venezuela, whose economy is collapsing. Should Maduro fall, alarm 
bells will sound across Havana.

Cuba learned the hard way not to become too dependent on a single sponsor. In 
the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the island’s economy was in 
tatters and many of its citizens struggled to feed themselves. Ever the 
pragmatist, Raúl has spent his years as president hedging against this 
possibility by nurturing ties with China, Russia, Latin America, the European 
Union and even the US.

But nobody should mistake that for a shift of ideology. In his 2016 speech to 
the party congress, Raúl echoed his brother’s calls for unity in the face of 
capitalist US influence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc1dfa33a38bdb4610f1f5adec71f67fb2a8e147%2F0_60_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel's%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ra%C3%BAl%20Castro%3A%20where%20will%20Fidel%27s%20brother%20and%20successor%20take%20Cuba%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fraul-castro-fidel-brother-successor-cuba-what-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc1dfa33a38bdb4610f1f5adec71f67fb2a8e147%2F0_60_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
 Under Raúl’s leadership relations between the US and Cuba have warmed, marked 
by Barack Obama’s historic visit. Photograph: Ramon Espinosa/AP 
“If one day they manage to fragment us, that would be the beginning of the end 
of the revolution, of socialism and independence in our homeland,” he said.

Raúl’s other outstanding task is grooming a successor. He has repeatedly 
insisted a generational change is long overdue, most recently at the 2016 
Communist party congress when he saidnobody should be over the age of 60 when 
they join the country’s top decision-making body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/raul-castro-us-democracy-cuban-communist-party>
.

But for the moment, his inner circle is dominated by octogenarians. One reason 
for the hesitancy is younger colleagues lack the cachet of involvement in the 
1959 revolution that overthrew the Batista dictatorship, another pillar of 
legitimacy. Without that whiff of history they are just unelected officials.

Nonetheless, the Cuban president has said he will stand down as president in 
2018 and his first vice-president, Miguel Díaz-Canel, is widely tipped to 
assume his mantle. Fidel’s death – expected to be more of an emotional than 
political earthquake for Cuba – is unlikely to change that, but it could make 
change easier for the next generation of Cuban leaders.

Additional reporting by Julian Borger
 