
Yesterday morning on Radio 4's Today programme a discussion over the 
cancellation of Home Truths became a dispute over the very nature of the 
station after DJAndy Kershaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-kershaw> 
claimed there were a large number of programmes the station could do without. 
Below he explains his criticisms and suggests some possible remedies

Here's another one for the list: Veg Talk. It's on every Friday between 3 and 
3.30 in the afternoon. Two faux, cockney barrow, boys talking about turnips. To 
my mind there's only so much you can say about vegetables, but this show's been 
going on for seven years! "Call in with your experience of turnips!" they say. 
Who in their right mind has an experience of turnips? And who would call in 
with it? It's exactly the same type of whimsy that did for Home Truths. And I 
think there's a conflict of interest at work too - one is a vegetable 
wholesaler.

There are more and more consumer programmes on Radio 4. It is fascinated with 
them. Shop Talk, Veg Talk, You and Yours for an hour every day; they are all on 
because they are cheap. The only problem is that while they don't cost 
anything, they end up with people begging for phone calls about vegetables. I 
really have no idea who wants these programmes. Even as I speak there's another 
one starting about how to deal with a sore throat!

Since the events of yesterday morning I've seriously considered going into 
hiding for a few days. But I want to make clear that I'm coming at this from 
the view of a fan. I have a great love of Radio 4 - from In our Time (which was 
excellent about the Peterloo massacre yesterday) to From Our Own Correspondent, 
Thinking Aloud with Laurie Taylor, Analysis, the Moral Maze and, of course, the 
Today programme.

John Humphrys asked me what I'd put in place of Home Truths and it's a simple 
answer: debate. There's an enormous appetite for it, for public speaking and 
public meetings, one that is largely unsatisfied. When Christopher Hitchens 
(who's a pal of mine, he likes to call me "Dear old thing") was debating Tariq 
Ali in a London college last year, people were queueing around the block to get 
in. I would almost go so far as to say that debating is the new rock'n'roll, 
but that might get me in Private Eye.

There is one more thing Radio 4 could do, and that's rehabilitate the career 
of Britain's greatest living broadcaster. His name is Ray Gosling and he's been 
ostracised from the station since the disastrous regime of controller James 
Boyle. Gosling is a national treasure and if anyone deserves to fill John 
Peel's shoes, then it's him

Â· Andy Kershaw is a broadcaster and Radio 3 presenter. He has nine Sony Gold 
radio awards in his stairwell. He was talking to Paul MacInnes.
 