
The Radio Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times> is poised to 
go into foreign ownership, as German publisher Hubert Burda finalises a deal to 
buy its parent company.

Immediate Media, which struck a £121m deal with BBC Magazines <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/16/bbc-completes-magazines-sell-off> 
to buy, license or contract publish titles including Top Gear, Top of The Pops 
and Match of the Day magazines in 2011, could announce the deal before 
Christmas.


Hubert Burda, which in the UK owns titles including Your Home and HomeStyle, 
will require final consent fromBBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>, the corporation’s commercial 
arm, before it can take formal control of the titles. The deal is potentially 
worth as much as £275m.


Top Gear magazine's sales hit skids during Chris Evans era
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/11/top-gear-magazine-sales-chris-evans-bbc-worldwide-radio-times>
Immediate Media, which is owned by UK private equity company Exponent, 
publishes about 60 magazines and digital brands including 220 Triathlon and You 
and Your Wedding.


However, the jewel in its crown is Radio Times, which the BBC published from 
1923 until thesale in 2011 <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/16/bbc-completes-magazines-sell-off>
. The TV and radio listings title, which is in the process of developing its 
digital content operation, still sells 660,000 copies a month in print and 
generatesas much as 60% of Immediate Media’s profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/19/radio-times-immediate-media>.


The Radio Times circulation reached a peak of nearly 9m in the 1950s and, even 
25 years after the deregulation of UK TV listings which resulted in the launch 
of numerous competitors, it remains the UK’s third most popular paid-for 
magazine after TV Choice and What’s on TV.

Exponent, the previous owner of media jobs website Gorkana and the Times 
Educational Supplement, set up Immediate Media to take control of 34 magazines 
from theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in a complex deal in 2011.


The Radio Times was one of 11 titles sold outright by the BBC, along with 
others including food magazine Olive and Gardens Illustrated.


Eighteen BBC programme-branded titles, such as Gardeners’ World and BBC 
Wildlife, were licensed to Immediate Media.


A third group of titles, including Top Gear and Good Food, were retained by 
BBC Worldwide but published by Immediate Media under a contract publishing 
agreement.

Immediate Media, which is run by chief executive Tom Bureau, was formed by 
Exponent merging it with other publishers it owned, Magicalia and Origin.


The sale of Immediate Media, which several sources said probably would not go 
through before the new year, to Hubert Burda wasfirst reported by Sky News 
<http://news.sky.com/story/german-media-giant-burda-swoops-on-radio-times-in-163260m-deal-10702453>
.


DC Advisory, which is advising Exponent on the sale, declined to comment. 
Exponent and Burda could not be reached for comment. BBC Worldwide declined to 
comment.

 