
Radical plans to encourage people to save to meet their own social care costs 
in old age have been discussed in government, with a leaked memo warning of the 
potential significant “economic and social distress” of a looming crisis.

Senior sources said the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, is among those who 
favour motivating people to put money aside for social care, as they do for 
pensions. A former minister with knowledge of discussions in government said 
the idea would be that people “should be encouraged to think again about 
spending money on a new car or a cruise”.

With the government having shelved a proposal from Sir Andrew Dilnot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jul/08/elderly-social-care-charities> 
for government to limit people’s financial liability, ministers are becoming 
more aware of the need to offer an alternative.

Ideas include Isa-style savings accounts – known as “care Isas” – with 
preferential interest rates for a pot of up to £75,000, which you would be able 
to withdraw to fund your social care or leave, tax-free, in a will. Another 
plan is that tax incentives could be offered if people wished to take from 
their pensions to meet social care costs.

The scale of the coming disaster in social care is revealed in an internal 
analysis ordered by No 10 that warns that the UK is “well behind the curve on 
actions to avert the crisis”. The memo, written byBaroness Altmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/state-pension-triple-clock-doubts>
 last May, when she was pensions minister, notes a failure by government to 
deal with demographic change. “I’m afraid this really is a looming crisis which 
has been left far too long already,” she writes in a memo to No 10 and Oliver 
Letwin, then a cabinet minister. “This really is an issue that has the 
potential to cause significant social and economic distress. There has been no 
real planning for these demographic realities. No money has been set aside in 
the public or private sector to fund social care if or when the needs arise.”

The memo also warns of huge political risks of allowing the crisis to unfold. 
“There is no money set aside for social care spending by individuals or by 
local authorities – needs have to be funded as they arise, and if the money is 
not there the quality and availability of care is compromised, causing scandals 
and misery that could potentially rebound on policymakers at some point,” it 
says.

Reforms proposed by the present chairman of the UK Statistics Authority, Sir 
Andrew Dilnot, to cap any person’s liability to social care bills at £75,000 
and raise the means test threshold to £123,000 in financial assets have been 
shelved until 2020.

However, it is now understood that they are unlikely ever to be implemented, 
leaving anyone with assets of more than £23,500 to meet their own costs. It had 
been hoped that financial products allowing people to insure costs up to 
£75,000 would materialise from the City, but sources in the Department of 
Health said Hunt had been “very disappointed” in the response from firms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsocial-care-crisis-looms-altmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f4de6cb3dc43a35eb605e69b096485b64a62ce2%2F0_0_3376_2025%2F3376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radical%20plan%20for%20old%20age%20as%20leak%20reveals%20care%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsocial-care-crisis-looms-altmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radical%20plan%20for%20old%20age%20as%20leak%20reveals%20care%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fsocial-care-crisis-looms-altmann%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f4de6cb3dc43a35eb605e69b096485b64a62ce2%2F0_0_3376_2025%2F3376.jpg>
 Baroness Altmann warns that no public or private money has been set aside to 
fund future social care. Photograph: Graham Turner for the Observer 
Altmann acknowledges in her memo the problems with the Dilnot reforms, and 
argues that encouraging people to save for their costs may be the only 
solution. “It seems clear that we cannot rely on insurance companies to devise 
policies that will cover the costs of care for many of the population,” she 
writes.

“I think an alternative approach is probably required to help more people 
prepare for care costs over the coming years. We should consider a 
savings solution.

“We need to encourage people who are already in later life to earmark some of 
their savings to pay for care, should the need arise. We have been successful 
in getting people to save in pensions by using tax incentives and I would 
suggest we need to incentivise care saving too.”

Altmann, who resigned in July, claims that a major goal would be making people 
aware they will need to meet their own costs in old age, as local authorities 
increasingly ration what they offer. “Most savers who have a few tens of 
thousands of pounds in their pension funds are probably the kinds of people who 
are responsible with money, want to look after themselves and their family and 
do not want to throw themselves on the state.

“Unfortunately, if they do not realise how the social care system works and 
that they are likely to want a different standard of care from the basic state 
minimum, they may spend the money and regret it later. An important policy 
objective should be to help as many people as possible understand the benefits 
of keeping money aside for later life, rather than spending it early in 
retirement.”

It is understood there is interest in encouraging better equity release 
products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/06/care-cost-elderly-home>, under 
which people can release cash from the equity in their homes in chunks. Under 
such policies, homeowners pay compound interest on the money they have taken 
out when the house is sold. However, Hunt’s own parents were forced to buy 
themselves out of such a product because of the high costs, and the health 
secretary is dubious about the current products on the market.
 