
Rand Paul, the Kentucky senator who challenged Donald Trump for the Republican 
presidential nomination, says the president-elect “fully supports” repealing
Barack Obama’s healthcare law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/barack-obama-republican-healthcare-repeal-vox-interview>
 only when there is a viable alternative to replace it.

Obama says repealing healthcare law is 'disservice to American people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/barack-obama-republican-healthcare-repeal-vox-interview>
Republican leaders in the GOP-controlled Congress are moving toward a vote on 
repeal legislation but anticipate a transition period of months or years before 
a replacement is in place. Some Republicans areexpressing reservations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
 about scrapping the law, which now covers 20 million people, without a 
near-term replacement.

Paul said in a tweet late on Friday 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/817557831683608576> that he had had a 
conversation with Trump and that the president-elect agreed with his approach.

“I just spoke to [Donald Trump] and he fully supports my plan to replace 
Obamacare the same day we repeal it,” Paul tweeted. “The time to act is now.”

Trump aides did not immediately respond questions about the conversation and 
how it had come about.

Nothing about revamping the nation’s $3tn-a-year healthcare system will come 
easily, but GOP leaders want congressional committees to have legislation 
dismantling much of Obama’s overhaul ready by late January.

They are hoping Congress can quickly send a measure to the incoming president 
that would phase out the law, perhaps a couple of months later.
Senator Rand Paul (@RandPaul) 
I just spoke to @realDonaldTrump <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> and he 
fully supports my plan to replace Obamacare the same day we repeal it. The time 
to act is now.
 <https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/817557831683608576> January 7, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/RandPaul/status/817557831683608576> 
Crafting a replacement probably will take more time, thanks to Republican 
divisions and solid Democratic opposition. It would be a political nightmare for
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> to repeal the 
Affordable Care Act and then fail to pass a new version of the law.

Senator Bob Corker, of Tennessee, told reporters on Friday that Republicans 
might find themselves in a “box canyon” if they erase the law without a 
substitute in hand.

One part of Obama’s law Republicans are eager to repeal is its tax increases 
on higher-earning people and segments of the healthcare industry that help 
finance expanded coverage.

Corker said that if those taxes are voided but Republicans temporarily 
continue subsidies to help people buy coverage, “that means Republicans would 
have to vote for a tax increase” to pay for them – usually a non-starter for 
the GOP.

Senator Ron Johnson, of Wisconsin, said that if he had his way, “I would start 
bringing up those elements that start repairing the damage and I would start 
taking votes on those right now.”

Johnson also expressed concern that Democratic opposition could scuttle the 
effort. Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer has said that if Republicans void 
Obama’s bill, Democrats won’t help them pass alternative legislation.

Republicans probably will need just a simple Senate majority to approve their 
repeal bill, but for procedural reasons replacement legislation likely will 
need 60 votes. Republicans hold a 52-48 edge in the Senate. That means a need 
for at least eight Democratic votes and there will be pressure on 10 Democrats 
facing re-election next year from states Trump won in November.

The Republicans who are not totally enthusiastic about repealing Obamacare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
“I take Minority Leader Schumer at his word that if we do this we’re not going 
to get any Democratic support. In order to actually pass a replacement, we need 
Democratic support,” Johnson told reporters.

After repeatedly trying to repeal Obama’s law since its 2010 enactment, 
Republicans are under tremendous pressure from their voters to annul it swiftly.

But GOP leaders have talked about their repeal not taking effect for perhaps 
two or three years. They are discussing providing some type of revenue during 
that period to maintain coverage for people and perhaps for insurers so they 
will not immediately abandon markets.

Senator Tom Cotton, of Arkansas, also called this week for a simultaneous 
effort to erase the healthcare law and rewrite it.

“I don’t think we can just repeal Obamacare and say we’re going to get an 
answer two years from now,” Cotton said Thursday on MSNBC.

He added: “We haven’t coalesced around a solution for six years, in part 
because it is so complicated. Kicking the can down the road for a year or two 
years isn’t going to make it any easier to solve.”
 