
The explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ranulph-fiennes> is set to take on blizzards, 
minus 30C temperatures and his own fear of heights as he ascends one of the 
world’s most perilous peaks.

At 72 and with ailing health, the seasoned adventurer is pursuing a unique 
record, aiming to become the first person to climb each continent’s highest 
mountain and cross both polar ice caps.

This week he will attempt to climb Aconcagua, South America’s highest 
mountain, at 22,838ft (6,961 metres).

The low oxygen levels at the peak will be particularly challenging as he 
suffers from a respiratory condition.

Ranulph Fiennes interview: 'I wouldn't have done this if I'd passed my 
A-levels'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/10/ranulph-fiennes-extreme-cold-adventurer-interview>
Fiennes’ hunger for physical challenges has not relented since he had two 
heart attacks and underwent double bypass surgery in 2003.

He is now more than halfway to completing the Global Reach Challenge in aid of 
Marie Curie, having already crossed both polar ice caps and climbedMount Everest
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/21/ranulph-fiennes-everest-climb-third-attempt-age-65>
 in Asia, Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa, Mount Elbrus in Europe and Mount Vinson 
in Antarctica.

To complete the feat he still needs to summit Aconcagua, Mount Carstensz in 
Australasia, and Denali, the highest peak in North America.

Fiennes said: “If life consisted of climbing one mountain and then waiting a 
bit before doing another, it would be quite simple, but with the seasons and 
weather dictating things, that’s not how it is.

“And of course, another obstacle I will face is that things aren’t as they 
were in the past – the body, with the same amount of training, can’t achieve 
the same things, so success in this challenge is by no means guaranteed.

“But the whole point of doing this is to raise money for Marie Curie nurses. 
If someone donates to my challenge, they are really doing something special 
which is helping people at what can be the most difficult time in life.”

Jane Collins, the charity’s chief executive, said: “Following the progress of 
Sir Ranulph’s challenge, it has become increasingly clear what a truly amazing 
undertaking this is. I cannot overstate my admiration for his determination as 
well as his unfailing commitment to raising money for Marie Curie.

“We hope that the success that he’s had so far in his challenge will encourage 
even more people to get behind him and donate via hisJustGiving page 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/ranulph>.”
 