
Raymond Briggs would have good grounds for feeling every bit as grouchy as he 
likes to appear. Late last year, his partner of 40 years died ofParkinson’s 
disease <https://www.theguardian.com/society/parkinsons-disease>; she had been 
ill for years, many more than he had realised. “You look back and think: ‘God, 
that was odd, the things Liz did.’ I came home one day years ago and saw this 
lovely carpet out on the grass. Extraordinary. Why throw it away? I couldn’t 
understand it. I mean, God almighty, it was very exasperating. But at the time, 
we didn’t know she was ill. It was this creeping, awful disease thing.” He 
inhales briskly. “Never mind. Bit of a bugger, but there we are, such is life. 
Never mind.”

This is the second time the illustrator has been widowed. In 1963 he married a 
painter he met at art school. “I wasn’t a madly keen marrying type or burning 
with love or anything. I mean, I loved her, but I don’t particularly approve of 
marriage as such. Or disapprove. It just seems pointless to tie up your 
emotional relationship with the law. Always seems awful to me.” But she had 
schizophrenia, “and we got married mainly because I thought it would help her 
mental state – give her a feeling of stability”. So although Briggs was “the 
normal sort of young arty type”, he saw little of the 1960s.

Ethel & Ernest review – moving adaptation of Raymond Briggs's graphic novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/ethel-ernest-review-moving-adaptation-of-raymond-briggss-graphic-novel>
“I had a house and a mortgage and all that, and didn’t feel part of the 60s 
movement thing at all. I remember saying to friends, ‘I’m sick to death of 
hearing about these fuckingBeatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles>. I’m not the least bit 
interested’.” His wife died in 1973, of “schizophrenia combined with 
leukaemia”. Under his breath, he mutters, “God, that was a jolly one-man-band.”

As Briggs talks, he shuffles around his cluttered cottage making coffee. 
Papers are stacked all over the place; he is currently making his will. 
“Terrible bloody business. They say: ‘Who is your next of kin?’ Well, I don’t 
have a next of kin. I asked [Liz’s daughter] Claire, ‘Would you mind being my 
next of kin?’ But she’s not my daughter, nor even a stepdaughter.” Now touching 
50, Claire and her brother were at primary school when Briggs and their mother 
became a couple, but he never felt paternal towards them.

“No, I kept out of the paternal role. I made it a rule not to buy them 
anything forChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> that 
cost more than a fiver, because I didn’t want to be saying, ‘Oh, look at me, 
I’m better-off than your father.’ I didn’t want to intrude in that way.” He 
pauses glumly. “Yes, it’s a funny old business, all this stuff. People idealise 
family life, don’t they? It’s not necessarily all that easy.” For that matter, 
“I’ve never been particularly interested in children at all, as such. Don’t 
particularly dislike them. But I’m not,” and his tone turns crisply disdainful, 
“a‘child lover’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed0622a2a0f2531b7ff90b8022f39b9352f153f%2F0_145_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raymond%20Briggs%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20could%20be%20another%20world%20war.%20Terrifying%2C%20isn%E2%80%99t%20it%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raymond%20Briggs%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20could%20be%20another%20world%20war.%20Terrifying%2C%20isn%E2%80%99t%20it%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed0622a2a0f2531b7ff90b8022f39b9352f153f%2F0_145_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 The 1982 film of Raymond Briggs’ story The Snowman. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
The bestselling children’s author was appalled to be considered a potential 
children’s laureate <https://www.theguardian.com/books/children-s-laureate> 
some years ago. “I didn’t see the point of that. It sounded awful. You go all 
over the country. Imagine it! The hotels and bed-and-breakfasts and taxis and 
trains, and really you just think: for God’s sake, what for? I suppose if you 
like that kind of public appearance, it’s alright, but I’d hate it.” He isn’t 
keen on lifetime achievement awards, either. “I’ve had one or two of those, and 
it’s a rather funny title, because come on, my lifetime hasn’t ended yet. But 
if you say you’ve got a lifetime achievement award, it’s like – well come on, 
get dead, man!” And he famously, of course, “hates Christmas”.

I’m not convinced Briggs is anything like the miserabilist he affects to be. 
For one thing, he follows every grumpy pronouncement with a light little laugh, 
as if in on his own joke. For another, he volunteers a touchingly tender memory 
of meeting me on holiday in Scotland more than 30 years ago. I was only a 
child, so I don’t think he can find kids an unmitigated bore. Tentatively 
solicitous, he offers up a plate of chocolate brownies with a gentle air of 
inexpert hospitality, and his bah-humbug misanthropy is difficult to square 
with his kitchen walls, which are plastered with handmade cards and children’s 
drawings. In a child’s handwriting, one card reads: “Raymond, you are really 
funny, lots of love, Matilda.” Another shows a child’s drawing of him. “Hideous 
caricature, you know. Doesn’t look anything like me at all.” But in spite of 
himself, he is grinning fondly, and points out a photo of a girl holding a copy 
of his bookThe Bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/28/the-bear-review-polka-theatre>, 
which features a character called Tilly.

“This little girl fell in love with Tilly and the bear, so she made her 
parents call her Tilly, and was so insistent that in the end they changed her 
name legally. Best compliment I ever had.” He allows a bashful chuckle, plainly 
delighted. All over the rest of the wall are Christmas cards from the year 
before last. “Couldn’t be bothered to take them down,” is the mumbled and 
rather unconvincing explanation.

On another wall are posters of his two classic Christmas works, Father 
Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/16/how-i-made-father-christmas-by-raymond-briggs>
 andThe Snowman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/22/how-the-snowman-melted-david-bowies-heart-raymond-briggs>
, making me wonder if he really does hate Christmas. “Oh, I do,” he insists, 
but the reason he offers is not one that would belong to an actual misanthrope. 
“It’s the anxiety. Have I spent enough, too much, how do I get it there, did I 
give her this before, has she already got this?” To me, he sounds like someone 
who cares very much about making others happy, but has never quite been sure 
how to get it right, and so learned long ago to disguise social awkwardness as 
gruff impatience. An anecdote he tells about receiving a second invitation to 
appear on Desert Island Discs only confirms my hunch that his big fear is not 
public acclaim, but making a public faux pas. “I was so relieved when towards 
the end ofthe second time <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00935yk> the 
presenter said: ‘We’ve had you on before. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p009mjkv>’ I thought: ‘Oh, thank God, I didn’t 
think you knew, yes you have.’”

What he cannot conceal is his delight at the reception his latest film has 
received. “I’ve been to three or four screenings, and the audience has 
applauded at the end every time. Amazing! Amazing.” Peering at me, he enquires 
casually: “They don’t applaud at the end of a film in the cinema very often 
these days, do they?” Happy to confirm they do not, I’m nonetheless not 
remotely surprised to hear that they did forEthel & Ernest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/ethel-ernest-review-moving-adaptation-of-raymond-briggss-graphic-novel>
.

The film is an adaptation of his 1998 book of the same name, and tells the 
simple story of his parents’ unremarkable lives. Briggs’ father was a milkman, 
who spotted a pretty housemaid shaking a duster from the window of a grand 
Belgravia house one day in 1928; he knocked at the back door, they courted 
briefly, got married, bought a house in Wimbledon, and doted on their only son, 
Raymond. Ernest was an irrepressibly happy-go-lucky working-class lad, Ethel a 
little less worldly but more aspirational. They remained happily married right 
up until their deaths in 1971, Ethel from dementia, and Ernest just months 
later from cancer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJXDlEw5u8u8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJXDlEw5u8u8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJXDlEw5u8u8&media=>
Ethel & Ernest trailer on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JXDlEw5u8u8> 
The film will be screened on Wednesday 28 December on BBC1 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0868yr9>, and on paper sounds so slight that 
I was quite unprepared for its impact – poignant and subtle, yet powerful 
enough to haunt me for weeks afterwards. Through Ethel and Ernest’s ordinary, 
uneducated, innocent eyes we see the 20th century unfold, from the Great 
Depression and the rise of Hitler to the second world war and the welfare 
state; new-fangled mysteries such as television and telephones to the marvel of 
a family motor car, and the unfathomable sensations of the 60s – all the 
short-skirted women and long-haired men. Voiced byJim Broadbent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent> and Brenda Blethyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/31/brenda-blethyn-ethel-and-ernest-raymond-briggs-film-animation>
, Mr and Mrs Briggs are evoked so perfectly that their son spent most of the 
recording sessions in tears. “It was as if my parents were right there in the 
room. Uncanny. I don’t know how they did it so well.”

I’m equally at a loss to explain why I was moved to tears by a 
historiographically mundane recap of events we all know inside out. I had been 
floored once before by a Briggs film, but anyone could see whyWhen the Wind 
Blows <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0090315/>, his film about nuclear war, would 
have traumatised a teenager in 1986. It’s been years since that chilling dread 
of global Armageddon left me, so I ask Briggs why he thinks Ethel & Ernest 
feels so ominously resonant now.

“Ah, because now that dread’s coming back.” He reels off a few current trigger 
points –China and Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/tsai-ing-wen-taiwan-president-us-visit-china-donald-trump>
, eastern Ukraine,Russian warships cruising the English channel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/21/russian-warships-pass-through-channel-watched-by-royal-navy>
 – “and you think, my God, it could all be seen as utterly trivial – or it 
could be seen as something immensely serious. You just don’t know what’s going 
to happen, with a lunatic like Trump. And when we left that Europe thing,that 
Brexit nonsense <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, I was 
just so horrified. Crazy. When Nato and the UN were created, we thought it 
meant there could never be another world war. Well, there bloody well could be. 
Terrifying, isn’t it? Can’t believe it.”

Had Briggs made a film about his own life (“Good God, no!”), I wonder which 
world events we would have seen through his eyes? “Oh, blimey. That’s a big 
question.” He pauses to think. “Well, the worst thing was theCuban missile 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/15/cuban-missile-crisis-russian-roulette>
, wasn’t it? I remember feeling actual physical fear while that was going on. I 
remember looking out of the window of my bedsit in Wimbledon, and thinking: my 
God, by Monday all this I’m looking at could be a smoking ruin.”

He isn’t sure that he would still call himself a pacifist – “I don’t know, 
quite. Depends on the circumstances” – but is definitely no longer “solidly 
Labour. I used to be solid all the way through. But now I wouldn’t know who to 
vote for. I certainly wouldn’t vote Labour any more.” He despairs of his 
once-loved party underJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. “The whole thing’s just 
rubbish, isn’t it? Falling apart.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdda1b7dd205a85f60074f9b8a2cf13d15af554d%2F0_0_2276_1517%2F2276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Raymond%20Briggs%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20could%20be%20another%20world%20war.%20Terrifying%2C%20isn%E2%80%99t%20it%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Raymond%20Briggs%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20could%20be%20another%20world%20war.%20Terrifying%2C%20isn%E2%80%99t%20it%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fraymond-briggs-interview-the-snowman-ethel-and-ernest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdda1b7dd205a85f60074f9b8a2cf13d15af554d%2F0_0_2276_1517%2F2276.jpg>
 When the Wind Blows, Briggs’s nuclear war film from 1986. Photograph: Ronald 
Grant Archive 
No matter how politically bleak the world’s prospects, I had assumed Briggs 
could always console himself with his wealth, but when I say so, he looks 
astounded. “No, no, oh no. I’m not rich.” But The Snowman alone has sold more 
than 8m copies! “Has it? Oh, I expect the publishers just say that.” I’m fairly 
sure book sales are rigorously audited. “Oh. Really?” He looks genuinely 
surprised, but still insists he isn’t rich. “I don’t take any interest in it,” 
he adds. “As long as there’s enough to pay the bills, I couldn’t tell you how 
much I earn.” He hasn’t bought a house since the 70s, drives a second-hand 
Honda Jazz, and likes to shop in charity stores, so unless he has the world’s 
worst literary agent, I would guess he’s a lot richer than he either needs or 
cares to know.

How The Snowman melted David Bowie’s heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/22/how-the-snowman-melted-david-bowies-heart-raymond-briggs>
I’m far from the first to notice Briggs’ temperamental resemblance to his 
crotchety fictional Father Christmas. But for all of his faux gloom, by the 
time I leave, only two of his grievances ring wholly true. He says he hates 
being old because “everything hurts”, he’s “TATT – tired all the time”, and 
random words keep eluding him. I believe him because they are written out in 
black marker pen as an aide memoire on his kitchen wall: probate, secular, 
prostate, migraine, narcissistic, sociopath, water chestnuts, merlot, 
post-script, Jim Broadbent, Brenda Blethyn, Katie Price – Jordan, ciabatta, 
diabetes, ragwort, Velcro and many more. The list would keep aThrough the 
Keyhole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/31/tvod-through-the-keyhole-keith-lemon>
 audience guessing for ever, but Briggs has had quite enough by now of TV 
camera crews “poking around and moving bits of furniture. You don’t know 
whether they’re pinching things at the same time!”

Nor do I doubt the sincerity of his indignation about the Guardian’s review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/ethel-ernest-review-moving-adaptation-of-raymond-briggss-graphic-novel>
 of Ethel & Ernest. “It said the film mentions my wife’s schizophrenia, but 
that it’s barely touched on. Well, what do you fucking expect? You can’t just 
embark upon schizophrenia when you’re writing about something else! It’s a huge 
subject. If you knew anything about it, you’d know you’d need half a dozen 
books to write about it.”

As for the rest of it, my guess is that however much Briggs, like his 
fictional Father Christmas, loves to grumble, he likes making us happy even 
more.

•Ethel & Ernest <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0868yr9> is on BBC1 at 
7.30pm on Wednesday 28 December
 