
Is melancholy a mood or an emotion? Is it involuntary or an indulgence? Are 
there any similarities between misery and melancholy? Scholars say that the 
lines between them are blurred. Very helpful.

Let’s instead turn to more creative souls who seem to catch on what the 
19th-centry poet James Thomson (BV) was all about when he said, spelling the 
word this way with all caps – “MELENCOLIA transcends all wit”. Gospel, soul, 
blues, folk … all show a complaint of souls overflowing with the bitterest 
anguish - “Like tears, they were a relief to aching hearts.”

The Portuguese have one word for all the pleasures of reflection and 
contemplation of things we love and long for, with hope adding a touch of 
sweetness that makes melancholy bearable. And more -fado. And who better to 
introduce us to the “joys of longing” thanAmália Rodrigues, the Queen of Fado 
herself. InLágrima, she tells her lover, “And if I knew that by dying/ You 
would have to cry for me/ Then just one tear from you/ Would bring a joy I 
would die for.” Incrível!

Rocked by the loss of a close friend, depression and addiction, James Taylor 
shows how much courage it takes to ride out his bad days publicly inFire and 
Rain, a reflection marked more by contemplation than recollection.

Or maybe the simple act of saying goodbye to friends could set us off as Sandy 
Denny and Fairport Convention remind us of all those on the road in Farewell, 
Farewell. 

Paul Simon contemplates a different sort of travel. “I live in fear that my 
love is so overpowering I’m afraid that I will disappear … The nearer the 
destination, the more the danger ofSlip Slidin’ Away.”

How would you describe the life of a man who spends his one weekly off in bed 
till ten o’clock?Mickey Buckins & The New Breed paint this picture of quiet 
desperation inReflections of Charles Brown and ask us “What a quiet life he’s 
had/ Don’t you think it’s very sad?”

John Prine takes us deeper into blues territory when he declares his dislike 
for all things – from broken toys to old love letters - that rob him of his 
childhoodSouvenirs. “Broken hearts and dirty windows/Make life difficult to 
see.”

Such contemplation of memory - of a person, place or event – can bring about 
the clouds, as the Queen of the Slide GuitarBonnie Raitt details in I Gave My 
Love a Candle. And now that she’s moving down that “same lonesome road” all she 
can say is “Goodbye, Goodbye, Goodbye.”

New Orleans bluesman Snooks Eaglin has a similar affliction. He met his love 
when it was raining and it rained when he lost her. Now he says, “I Get The 
Blues When It Rains,” sharing the penchant all such minds have for linking 
weather and mood-swings. He’d really be miserable inCherrapunji 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cherrapunji>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d88f356b553734cbd47246869b2227a32208de7%2F0_277_4085_2451%2F4085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%E2%80%93%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%E2%80%93%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d88f356b553734cbd47246869b2227a32208de7%2F0_277_4085_2451%2F4085.jpg>
 BB King (1925-2015). ‘Hard luck and trouble’ brought to a sublime level 
Photograph: Aviv Small/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blues> icon BB King doesn’t have any 
such particular point. He has no money, his woman is cold-hearted and the whole 
world is just wrong. “Hard luck and trouble is my middle name, and I can’t 
shake it loose, theseChains and Things.”

It’s not just about loss as the promise of a fresh start is part of 
melancholy. Bon Scott and his mates inAC/DC raise just such hope with an honest 
re-appraisal of their lives. The answer is toRide On. Scott’s demise soon after 
only adds to the poignancy.

But, a reader asked, can rap do melancholy? Hell Yeah! With a clip of George H 
W Bush providing a counterpoint rapperParis sets his song amidst urban warfare 
and crime. Back in the day being bad was cool …”But nowadays it seems life just 
ain’t the same … It ain’t the same as theDays of Old.” Brutal. 

From that iron blow to the velvet slash of Chitthi Aayi Hai. This tale of/from 
an expat starts suspiciously like a massive guilt trip. It says you haven’t 
written ... blah, blah. Then word by word, note by notePankaj Udhas turns the 
theme inside out in a masterclass of mellifluous melancholy.

A sort of a respite comes at the end of this playlist when Amira Willighagen 
enters RR’s lists as the youngest performer with her singing of Puccini’s ariaO 
Mio Babbino Caro. I’ll leave her introduction to André Rieu, who after the 
applause ends, just shakes his head in wonder and says: “Nine years old!” 
Quite. Or as we say at RR, super mega donds!


The playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv4_yhwJmYCU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv4_yhwJmYCU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv4_yhwJmYCU&media=>
 A-list for melancholy songs 
 Amália Rodrigues - Lágrima (subtitulado en español)  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4_yhwJmYCU&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=1>

James Taylor - Fire and Rain 
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qMD0XJ-0BAE&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=2>

Sandy Denny and Fairport Convention - Farewell Farewell 
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O8_eFRZP1uQ&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=3>

 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_H-LY4Jb2M&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=4>
 Paul Simon - Slip Slidin’ Away 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_H-LY4Jb2M&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=4>


 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKJmPyH264s&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=5>
 Micky Buckins and The New Breed - Reflections Of Charles Brown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKJmPyH264s&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=5>

Souvenirs -Steve Goodman and John Prine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQ1Na6Ho1fI&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=6>

 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9fbF52hb94&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=7>
Bonnie Raitt – I Gave My Love A Candle
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9fbF52hb94&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=7>

Snooks Eaglin - I Get the Blues When It Rains  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aUsfRZS3QqM&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=8>

BB King – Chains and Things 
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P38hd3BtnPg&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=9>

AC/DC - Ride On (with Bon Scott)  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XNdagpIgItw&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=10>

Paris - The Days Of Old [Official Video HD]  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ywoLzIYhCeA&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=11>

Chitthi Aayi Hai – Pankaj Udhas
 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m7Gy-chUNZM&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=12>

Amira Willighagen and André Rieu live - O Mio Babbino Caro  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yom-UzSDGmI&list=PLd311HlAmiPrgze2bdxrNJWdLUJtgRZ5g&index=13>
 