
A strong desire to do or achieve … from the Latin: ambire “go around, 
canvassing, for votes”. How timely thatAlice Cooper kicks us off with some 
grandiloquent glam rock from 1972:“I never lied to ya, I’ve always been cool …” 
Maybe if he’d run for mayor he’d have beenElected. 

But what about the rest of us? What do you want from life? “To dream and be 
happy while we do the nasty things we must?” Trapped in a capitalist 
wonderland, Fee Waybill ofthe Tubes lays out our choices in a fierce diatribe 
against the commercial aspirations of modern life.

By contrast, Animal Collective don’t want to bother with “material things like 
social status”, but they do want four walls forMy Girls. How having children 
focuses the mind! I’ve spoken to plenty of musicians who are a long way from 
even that modest ambition.

Slightly more mature than Eddie Cochran, whose ambitions are the usual classic 
young man wants: a girl and a car, both of which are –Somethin’ Else! But by 
the last verse, and a slight compromise on the car, he’s fulfilled his 
ambition. Now what?

“Is that all you get for your money?” asks Anthony after saving his pennies 
for “someday”. It seems such a waste of time. Sgt O’ Leary is doing two jobs, 
like most people in New York, trading his Chevy for a Cadillac.Movin’ Out: 
another pointed attack on the miserable shallow staircase of the rat race by
Billy Joel.

Glen Campbell hasn’t given up on his ambitions, but we feel that he’s unlikely 
to achieve them with only “a dollar tucked inside my shoe”. Rhinestone Cowboy 
is a deeply sad song, a dream of glamour from the point of view of a bum who 
knows “every crack in these dirty sidewalks of Broadway”.

“It’s a pity half of you won’t make it” acknowledges Jay-Z in his take on 
Alicia Keys’sEmpire State Of Mind, yet another hymn to the “concrete jungle 
where dreams are made” AKA New York, New York. Print the myth, or listen to
Billy Joel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/billy-joel>.

Ambition to be famous powers our entertainment culture, currently in the form 
of X-Factor; in 1980, the show peering into this world of striving and sweat was
Fame. Irene Cara sang the theme song: “I’m gonna make it to heaven, light up 
the sky like a flame”. Legwarmers and attitude wins.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-ambition-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430334971185%2Fef36066a-a813-4a46-b626-709c2566b6e8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20ambition%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-ambition-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20ambition%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-ambition-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430334971185%2Fef36066a-a813-4a46-b626-709c2566b6e8-1020x612.jpeg>
 Cute in a stupid-ass way? Scott Walker has no shortage of ambitions in his 
cover of the Jacques Brel classic. Photograph: Dezo Hoffmann/Rex Features 
Even camper than that is Scott Walker covering Jacques Brel’s classic Jackie 
which is hilarious and exciting all together. Imagining he has banks “in every 
country ruled by me”, he would still prefer to be in an opium den singing 
Jackie, his simple ambition to be “cute, in a stupid-ass way”. Not as easy as 
it sounds!

The Supremes and the Temptations joined forces in 1968, with Diana Ross and 
Eddie Kendricks trading vocals in the driven, forcefulI’m Gonna Make You Love Me
, perhaps the most ambitious thing any individual can aim for, love being 
capricious, whimsical and elusive.

And so failed ambition : the coulda, shoulda feeling as you look over your 
shoulder at the life you once knew, hopefully you’re not on a midnight train to 
Georgia and anyway, “rock’n’roll don’t mind”, so does it really matter?What A 
Waste – or not – says Ian Dury.

All this individual yearning for more is what powers our system, the 
commercials, the competition, the ambition to “succeed”. Selfish ambition 
doesn’t think much about other people.Marvin Gaye broke the mould with What’s 
Going On?” in 1971, raising his eyes from his navel and asking “who really 
cares?”. That’s ambition: Save the Children.

 The playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1i4EnjRKVQw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1i4EnjRKVQw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1i4EnjRKVQw&media=>
 Songs about ambition playlist 
1. Elected - Alice Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper>

2. What Do You Want From Life? - The Tubes

3. My Girls - Animal Collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/animalcollective>

4. Somethin’ Else - Eddie Cochran

5. Movin’ Out (Anthony’s Song) - Billy Joel

6. Rhinestone Cowboy - Glen Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glen-campbell>

7. Empire State Of Mind - Jay-Z ft. Alicia Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys>

8. Fame - Irene Cara

9. Jackie - Scott Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/music/scott-walker>

10. I’m Gonna Make You Love Me - The Supremes & The Temptations

11. What A Waste - Ian Dury <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ian-dury>

12. Save The Children - Marvin Gaye

The next topic will launch at 8pm UK time this evening for readers to nominate 
songs.


Would you like to choose and write up a list of songs like based on a Readers 
Recommend topic? We are currently seeking a volunteer for the topic launching 
next Thursday 7 May (election night - should be lively) to be published the 
following week. There will be further opportunities in June onwards. Email 
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com to arrange.
 