
The Lithuanian defence ministry has issued 30,000 copies of an instruction 
manual advising citizens on what to do in the event of a Russia-led invasion.

The release of the 75-page paperback, entitled Guide to Active Resistance, 
comes amid increased fears of Russian aggression following the election of 
Donald Trump, who stated during his campaign that he would review the US’s 
position on defendingNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> allies.

Such manuals have been published three times since 2014, when they were first 
issued as part of Lithuania’s response to theKremlin’s annexation of Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
.

The first edition, How to Act in Extreme Situations or Instances of War, 
included instructions on forms of civil disobedience in the event of 
occupation, describing strikes, blockades, disinformation and the organisation 
of cyber-attacks against the enemy.

It assured readers that gunshots outside “are not the end of the world”, and 
that another method of resistance could be to do one’s job “worse than normal”.

The second edition, Prepare to Survive Emergencies and War: a Cheerful Take on 
Serious Recommendations, was reissued and updated at the end of 2015, and 
featured illustrations of a family cat.

The latest is more clearly pointed at Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, after a series of military moves in 
the Baltic region by the Kremlin since Trump, a supporter of President Vladimir 
Putin, was elected in the US.

The manual outlines how the public can recognise Russian-made guns, tanks, 
mines and other military hardware, while urging citizens to spy and report on 
the enemy shouldLithuania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lithuania> once 
again fall under Russian occupation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fready-for-russia-lithuanians-taught-how-to-resist-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac08da9d47026574f46177c7d0ab5579fcf678f%2F0_147_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ready%20for%20Russia%3A%20Lithuanians%20taught%20how%20to%20resist%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fready-for-russia-lithuanians-taught-how-to-resist-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ready%20for%20Russia%3A%20Lithuanians%20taught%20how%20to%20resist%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fready-for-russia-lithuanians-taught-how-to-resist-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac08da9d47026574f46177c7d0ab5579fcf678f%2F0_147_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
 US soldiers occupy an enemy trench during Nato military exercises in November. 
Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
All three “how to” manuals are available on the Lithuanian defence ministry’s 
website 
<http://kam.lt/en/news_1098/current_issues/ministry_of_national_defence_issued_third_publication_on_civil_resistance.html?pbck=20>
, and were created in collaboration with the Lithuanian Riflemen’s Union. 
Copies have been distributed to schools, libraries and other public 
institutions across the country.

Povilas Poderskis, a 26-year-old volunteer in the Lithuanian military, praised 
the latest manual for informing the public about self-defence. “Military 
training is not for everyone,” he said. “It’s great to see a broad viewon 
different ways of non-violent resistance. It is a good, inclusive strategy that 
can bond people together.”

He said the manuals had also been useful in assuaging public fears about an 
invasion. “I think it does [calm people],” he said. “The media is constantly 
shooting out messages about the escalating conflict – they are exaggerated, but 
knowing how to deal with emergencies in case they happen can provide some sense 
of calmness.”

In October, the Russian military reportedly transported a nuclear-capable 
short-range ballistic missile system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/russia-confirms-deployment-of-nuclear-capable-missiles-to-kaliningrad>
 to the Kaliningrad region, a Russian enclave that borders Lithuania in the 
Baltic Sea region. In November, theKremlin deployed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/nato-and-kremlin-in-war-of-words-over-russian-missile-deployment>
 Bastion supersonic cruise missiles to Kaliningrad, which have a range of up to 
280 miles (450km) and can be used against ships and ground targets.

These moves, taken in the context of Trump’s victory and comments about Nato, 
have raised fears that the Nato alliance, seen as preventing Russian 
expansionism, could be under threat.

However senior government ministers have sought to play down the significance 
of the manuals, and have assured citizens they are not concerned about a change 
in US-Lithuania relations, despite Trump’s apparent support for Putin.

Lithuania’s foreign minister, Linas Linkevičius, called for calm. “There will 
be no changes with regard to the US foreign policy, and when Trump comes to 
office we expect business to continue as normal – that will be that the US will 
remain a key ally for us inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” he said.

The defence minister, Juozas Olekas, said the manuals were a response to 
increasing public demand for heightened national security. “Our citizens want 
the basic knowledge on how to survive, and how we can demonstrate that our 
people are ready to act against any aggression and fight for every centimetre 
of our land,” he added.
 