
Under the cover of darkness they came. Precious time was snatched to deliver. 
One reader endured terrible pain and went to hospital, another is set to move 
house, but this did not stop them. And another, more delightfully, saw the 
delivery of a beautiful baby (I dedicate this blog to you, prolific RR regular
BeltwayBandit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/12/readers-recommend-songs-about-smuggling-stealing#comment-29972014>
 - congratulations!), and despite all of this, during this crazy pre-Christmas 
period, you still brought riches. Thank you, me hearties, for your bountiful 
song booty! From rampant robbery to surreptitious smuggling your treasures 
cascaded through the cellar door of the Readers Recommend and I spent many 
hours admiring, examining, analysing and enjoying. I am a man poor in time, but 
rich in song.

And now my turn again to stand and deliver. And indeed, among all the thieves, 
brigands and rogues came out from your collections, highwaymen featured 
prominently. For this I tempted by some more traditional fayre such as Eliza 
Carthy's Turpin Hero or Highwayman by, well, the Highwaymen, but I was 
persuaded to start with a bit of a bang, a dandy flourish, a glamorous swish, 
some panache, pistols and pomp. And so I plumped for a man then in his prime, 
delivering original sounding, drum-heavy post-punk pop. So hands up for nothing 
butStand and Deliver by Adam & the Ants.

Theft often starts with small items and among history's most common petty 
criminals are the pickpockets, which what drew me to Sonny Boy Williamson II's 
street bluesy rebuke to all thieves -Take Your Hand Out of My Pocket 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uCq_1EfrYN0>. Sonny ain't messin' here - the 
police gonna take you down. But instead a number from a musical put its sticky 
fingers on my keyboard. It features other small ones - a bunch of Dickensian 
ragamuffins and their leader played byRon Moody in Oliver! - You've Got to Pick 
a Pocket Or Two. I'm not big on musicals, but this is an entertaining steal 
every time.

Stealing can quickly move on from small theft to bigger items - and that means 
cars. So I nearly hopped into Bruce Springsteen's big, Caddy-styleStolen Car 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UnHy_46DfiE>, and then thought about driving 
off instead with the sensitive, thoughtfulBeth Orton's same title 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uJ35dnfYKrQ>. But then, in a song that combines 
stealing with smuggling, cars and small things, the name had to beJohnny Cash. 
His song about Australian outlaw Ned Kelly was also grabbing for the A-list, 
but it had to be hilariously fast, and highly detailedOne Piece at a Time, in 
which Cash's General Motors factory worker smuggles out small parts in his 
lunchbox over several years to create his own weird but wonderful luxury 
automobile. Stick it to the man, Johnny!

Staying in an American setting, in fact moving from from Tuscon to Tucumcari, 
Tehachapi to Tonapah, the next song has been covered and duly nominated by 
several artists including Black Crowes, Linda Ronstadt and Steve Earle. It's 
about a smuggler of drugs and people in and out of Mexico who also thinks 
constantly about his lost Alice. It has a beautiful melody and a falling chord 
sequence: "I've been kicked by the wind, robbed by the sleet /Had my head 
stoved in, but I'm still on my feet and I'm still â€¦Willin' by who else but 
Little Feat.

Time for another beauty, but concerning another kind of stealing - a woman who 
wants to steal away in secret with her lover - but the difficult circumstances 
suggest that her man might also have to do some stealing so they can escape. 
It'sEtta James with Steal Away.

Next a couple who did indeed steal away, and then some! There is another 
version of the Serge Gainsbourg classic (zedded in 2006 under crime), this time 
by Luna. But for its swagger, lovely arrangements, and inspired by the famous 
film too, I preferred another song entirely byGeorgie Fame, which captures the 
jazz era superbly, and charts the glamorous rise, and inevitable hand-in-hand 
fall of those romantic robbers of many banks -The Ballad of Bonnie & Clyde. 

We've had cars, now it's time to hop onto a train, not going across the US 
plain, even though the song has an American feel, but one that went between 
Glasgow and London. And during a week in which Ronnie Biggs has died, it seems 
apt to choose the wonderfully twangy and throatyHave You Seen Bruce Richard 
Reynolds by the Alabama 3 about the mastermind of the 1963 Great Train Robbery, 
who also died earlier this year.

The 1963 robbery came after much planning, but a lot of stealing just happens 
impulsively. We see this in Joan Armatrading's Opportunity - one that goes 
wrong of course, and an interesting cover nomination also came in the form of 
Bobby McFerrin. Ian Dury's Razzle in My Pocket was already zedded, as was the 
Slits' superbShoplifting <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OTJmaid-3zk>. So with 
something punchy in mind, honourable mentions also go toBankrobber by The Clash 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ttJBdr6eBuo>, and Been Caught Stealing by 
Jane's Addiction <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrwjiO1MCVs>. But because it 
neatly follows the mail train robbery song before it, and for being fast, 
furious and stupidly brilliant, I'm delivered by theStealing People's Mail by 
the Dead Kennedys.

Institutionalised theft and smuggling came up in several different forms. A 
telling nomination came withAid Dealer by Coldcut 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F6c5nFbY_-s>, all about corruption from banks 
to governments over developing countries - in other words stealing on a massive 
scale. Another more localised and hip-hop contender came with a great 
performance by Del tha Funky Homosapien inThe Coup's The Repo Man Sings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dSFPMsfL_6w> - where the collector will take 
everything and doesn't care about the consequences. However, with an impossibly 
catchy, simple tune, this making it somehow more hard hitting , I couldn't 
ignoreStealing in the Name of the Lord by Max Romeo and the Upsetters, a 
timeless critique of organised religion.

Taking this political link further, I was going to choose a song that attempts 
to show, rather poignantly, how a deprived childhood can inevitably lead to a 
tragic criminal act of theft. Yes, that would have an unusual song byElvis 
Presley - In the Ghetto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2En0ZyjQgU4>, but it is 
zedded! Instead, a hip hop tune came to mind -Ghetto Bastard by Naughty by 
Nature <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nw_3AtPsYcQ> - but it wasn't nominated. 
So I went for another nomination which takes a different tack, but by 
coincidence, has Elvis on the cover. Morrissey is noted as saying this is his 
favouriteSmiths song. It is variously interpreted, but he once said 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kDxca9FuogA&feature=player_detailpage#t=232s>: 
"It's more or less spiritual shoplifting, cultural shoplifting, taking things 
and using them to your own advantage." A very common sort of theft indeed in
Shoplifters of the World Unite.

It's time to focus in a celebrity thief. There are many nominations of famous 
pirates and outlaws, from Captain Kidd (Waterson/Cathy) to Henry Martin (Joan 
Baez) and Henry Morgan.Pirate Jenny <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7awW5nrDHk>
 is a very potent song, particularly in Nina Simone's version, but her story is 
more about killing than stealing. A real contender wasJesse James by the Pogues 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O9RKP0pu9hY>, which manages to portray a 
notorious American outlaw in style that also captures the era of sea-faring 
criminals. But it was just shaded in the end bythe Byrds with their plucky 
version of Woody Guthrie's tale of Depression-era Robin HoodPretty Boy Floyd.

From telling the tale of the thief, to going inside their mind. So many songs 
on this. I enjoyed Arlo Guthrie's rather laid back expressions of smuggler's 
worry on the plane Coming Into Los Angeles (with a couple of 'kees'). An even 
more potent source of anxiety is mixed when the thief is feeling compromised by 
his relationship.Simon and Garfunkel's Somewhere They Can't Find Me 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-IY1g2LARs> (an upbeat version of Wednesday 
Morning 3am) includes the immortal lines - "I've committed a crime, I've broken 
the law.While you were here sleeping and just dreaming of me / I held up and 
robbed a liquor store," and he must flee. But this time, by using Google
translate 
<http://translate.google.com/#fr/en/Mon%20front%20est%20moite%0AJe%20tremble%20un%20peu%0AMa%20t%C3%AAte%20%C3%A9clate%0AJe%20suis%20nerveux%0AJ%27ai%20l%27impression%20qu%27on%20me%20regarde%0AEt%20dans%20la%20nuit%20o%C3%B9%20na%C3%AEt%20la%20peur%0AQue%20des%20doigts%20tendus%20me%20poignardent%0AAu%20Voleur!%0ARien%20n%27est%20trop%20sombre%0ARien%20n%27est%20trop%20s%C3%BBr%0AJe%20ne%20suis%20qu%27ombre%0AJe%20me%20fais%20mur%0AComme%20un%20f%C3%A9lin%20je%20me%20d%C3%A9place%0ARaflant%20les%20objets%20de%20valeur%0ALa%20gorge%20serr%C3%A9e%20par%20l%27angoisse%0AAu%20Voleur!%0AParce%20qu%27elle%20aime%20les%20fourrures%0ALa%20vie%20facile%20et%20les%20plaisirs%0ALes%20robes%20de%20haute%20couture%0AQue%20je%20ne%20pouvais%20lui%20offrir%0ADe%20peur%20qu%27un%20jour%20elle%20me%20quitte%0APour%20trouver%20tout%20cela%20ailleurs%0AJ%27ai%20choisi%20pour%20garder%20son%20coeur%0ADe%20tenter%20gros%2C%20de%20jouer%20vite%0AAu%20Voleur!%0AChaque%20seconde%0ASemble%20une%20ann%C3%A9e%0ALes%20bruits%20du%20monde%0ASont%20amplifi%C3%A9s%0AAu%20loin%20une%20horloge%20qui%20sonne%0AUn%20craquement%2C%20une%20lueur%0AFont%20que%20je%20me%20fige%20et%20frissonne%0AAu%20Voleur!%0AUn%20vide%20immense%0ASe%20fait%20en%20moi%0APuis%20le%20silence%0AReprend%20ses%20droits%0AJe%20fais%20les%20choses%20quatre%20%C3%A0%20quatre%0AMais%20%C3%A0%20chaque%20bruit%2C%20chaque%20heurt%0AJ%27ai%20le%20coeur%20qui%20cesse%20de%20battre%0AAu%20Voleur!%0AA%20bout%20de%20nerf%20lorsque%20je%20rentre%0AAux%20heures%20grises%20du%20matin%0ALes%20traits%20tir%C3%A9s%20la%20peur%20au%20ventre%0AElle%20contemple%20mon%20butin%0APuis%20en%20faisant%20son%20oeil%20de%20biche%0AElle%20murmure%20avec%20candeur%0AQu%27au%20fond%20l%27argent%20n%27a%20pas%20d%27odeur%0AEt%20qu%27apr%C3%A8s%20tout%20on%20prend%20qu%27aux%20riches%0ALa%20nuit%20tandis%20que%0ADe%20plus%20en%20plus%0AJe%20prends%20des%20risques%0AEt%20m%27%C3%A9vertue%0AA%20lui%20faire%20une%20vie%20de%20r%C3%AAve%0AJe%20vois%20soudain%20doubler%20ma%20peur%0AA%20l%27id%C3%A9e%20qu%27un%20autre%20m%27enl%C3%A8ve%0ACe%20bonheur%0AQui%20est%20plus%20que%20ma%20vie%0ANe%20me%20laissant%20qu%27un%20cri%0AAu%20Voleur%2C%20Au%20Voleur%2C%20Au%20Voleur!%0A%0A[%20These%20are%20Au%20Voleur%20Lyrics%20on%20http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lyricsmania.com%2F%20]>
, I was swayed by swirling delusional passion of the protagonist inCharles 
Aznavour's Au Voleur, who feels compelled to steal for the woman he loves (he 
moves like a cat â€¦ because she loves fur), but worries about being named as a 
thief while another man steals his lover. Potent stuff!

And so to the final twist. Sadly there's no room but honourable mentions for 
the wonderfulLincolnshire Poacher 
<http://open.spotify.com/track/5Vr9PR5lAfGHLyt78g0e3j> sung by Peter Pears, 
which captures another era entirely. Nor for a couple of Stones smuggling songs 
includingSweet Virginia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tIfQipkkOqs>, or 
Radiohead's 2 + 2 = 5 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waJWRYa7weo>. Here though 
I bring in, of all people, Rod Stewart, who inMaggie May 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7T5hYlUsQ0s>, repeatedly mentions how "you 
stole my heart and that's what really hurts". Poor old Rod, eh? Great song, but 
the old seducer is just B-list pawn in my game, as the final choice isLet No 
Man Steal Your Thyme. In this traditional song, "thyme" refers to virginity, 
but it can also be seen as one's whole life and "time" too. A quiet, simple, 
but potent song, of which there are other renditions, including a good one by 
Anne Briggs, but here it isPentangle. After lots of jollity about theft in 
other songs, this one reflects how people, particularly men, may take what they 
can find, but it can have consequences for others.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4B2a6l6wM2k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4B2a6l6wM2k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4B2a6l6wM2k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Stand and Deliver by Adam & the Ants  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B2a6l6wM2k>
You've Got To Pick A Pocket Or Two by Ron Moody in Oliver! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VogHwP0C5VY>
One Piece At A Time by Johnny Cash <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5GhnV-6lqH8>
Willin' by Little Feat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yze10kM1fyI> 
Steal Away by Etta James <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LXsAH-fFxqg> 
The Ballad of Bonnie & Clyde by Georgie Fame 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgjCHR3ikKQ>
Have You Seen Bruce Richard Reynolds by Alabama 3 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QbmRgKuWa8> 
Stealing People's Mail by Dead Kennedys 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3jHQqcky_Aw> 
Stealing in the Name of the Lord by Max Romeo and the Upsetters 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=meqVcrd7Nzg>
Shoplifters of the World Unite by the Smiths 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04_Cf9HBggw>
Pretty Boy Floyd by the Byrds <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gVY1RDxa-OI> 
Au Voleur by Charles Aznavour <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tz-1SjJlBMk>
Let No Man Steal Your Thyme by Pentangle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwT0COKXFMM>
 