
Nicole Hockley, who lost her son in the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting 
in 2012, faced a row of television cameras on Tuesday. She and other Sandy Hook 
families were filing an appeal in theirbattle against the gun companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/sandy-hook-newtown-victims-trial-gun-manufacturers-adam-lanza>
 who had made the military-style rifle used to kill their children.

What was her reaction to Donald Trump’s victory, reporters asked her. Was she 
scared?

Hockley, composed and forceful, offered a reality check: even if Hillary 
Clinton had been elected president, Congress would not have passed gun control 
legislation.

Can the US break its cycle of gun control failure?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/gun-control-orlando-attack-newtown-mass-shooting>
“We’ve had a very committed gun violence prevention president in place for the 
last eight years, and we’re not seeing significant federal change,” she said.

“This is about bottom-up change, not top-down,” she told the cameras. “This is 
more about a community groundswell that’s needed.”

Hockley’s fight for gun violence prevention has been focused on state and 
local action – and having Trump in the White House did not change that strategy.

Obama, a passionate advocate for gun violence prevention, has “tried 
everything. He can’t get it passed,” she said in an in-depth interview with 
Guardian US.

When it comes to guns, “I still don’t think our country is ready yet for 
federal change,” she said. “I think there are still too many people that are 
uninformed or misinformed on this issue, that believe it’s never going to 
happen to them, that believe it has nothing to do with access to weapons.”

“This is not the time to bow out,” she said. “This is where we have to double 
down our efforts. Regardless of who’s in office, people are still dying every 
day, and there’s an opportunity to save lives.”


Hockley’s son Dylan was six years old when a disturbed young man shot his way 
through Dylan’s elementary school in Newtown,Connecticut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/connecticut>. Twenty first-graders and six 
educators were murdered. Dylan died in the arms of his classroom aide, who was 
also killed. A photograph of Dylan in a Superman T-shirt has become an icon in 
the fight for stricter gun control laws.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsandy-hook-families-gun-control-state-and-local-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037d0bee436f4fa10944bd8b948b77f2d4e197a1%2F0_0_2324_2903%2F2324.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reality%20check%3A%20Even%20Hillary%20Clinton%20could%20not%20have%20passed%20gun%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsandy-hook-families-gun-control-state-and-local-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reality%20check%3A%20Even%20Hillary%20Clinton%20could%20not%20have%20passed%20gun%20control&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fsandy-hook-families-gun-control-state-and-local-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037d0bee436f4fa10944bd8b948b77f2d4e197a1%2F0_0_2324_2903%2F2324.jpg>
 Dylan Hockley. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Hockley was among the family members who went to Washington, only weeks after 
their children were killed, to press senators to vote in favor of a compromise 
bill to tighten background checks on gun sales. The high-profile effort, backed 
by the White House, failed to attract enough support to overcome a potential 
filibuster in the Senate. This rejection of moderate gun control left many 
Americans stunned that political change on guns was impossible even after 
first-graders had been massacred.

Clinton’s loss, after a campaign where she had made gun violence prevention a 
central issue, had hit advocates hard, Hockley said.

“There’s still that shock and numbness from really strong gun violence 
prevention advocates,” Hockley said. Some advocates and donors are worried that 
“Nothing’s going to happen now,” saying, “I don’t want to waste my effort.”

 “They’re grieving,” she said. “I know a bit about grief, and you do want to 
pull away.”

Without Clinton, the movement’s progress will be slower, she said. But Hockley 
said she had been heartened byvictories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/us-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control>
 on ballot measures in California, Nevada and Washington state last week, where 
majorities voted to impose stricter controls on guns and ammunition. And Sandy 
Hook Promise, a nonprofit advocacy group Hockley helped to found, has been 
seeing progress at the local level, in school districts across the country.

From the beginning, the group rejected the idea that real change in preventing 
gun violence and mass shootings could come from gun control policy victories 
alone. Unlike Clinton, the group decidednot to fight for a federal ban on 
assault weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/gun-control-orlando-attack-newtown-mass-shooting>
 like the one used at Sandy Hook. Unlike other leading gun control groups, the 
group does not endorse candidates for office.


Instead, Sandy Hook Promise has also been working with school districts across 
the country to spread a violence prevention program that teaches students to 
take action when they see signs of someone who might be about to harm 
themselves or others. The training programs have already reached more than one 
million people, Hockley said – and Sandy Hook Promise works closely with 
schools in both red and blue states, from Florida and Louisiana to Alaska and 
California.

Even parents and teachers who are strong gun rights advocates appreciate this 
kind of training, she said. In Louisiana, she met with a group of sheriffs who 
started out skeptical of a Sandy Hook parent – and ended up enthusiastic about 
having the program in local schools.

The need is obvious: when Hockley gives trainings at schools, students 
sometimes come up to her afterwards and tell her that they are thinking about 
self-harm, she said. She talks to them, she listens and she walks them over to 
a teacher or counselor who they trust to talk more.


“It kills you, you know?” she said. “You think: that’s just the tip of the 
iceberg, because those are the ones who come forward right then and there. 
There are so many others who need help.”

In Eau Claire, Michigan, she heard about a student seeing a Snapchat video of 
another student saying: “Don’t come to school on Monday, I’ve got a loaded 
gun.” A student told a parent, the parent informed law enforcement, and “the 
gun was found: potential tragedy averted,” she said.

“The only thing that keeps me going – I don’t care about anything else other 
than saving lives,” she said.

Sandy Hook Promise is about to hire its first political director in Ohio, 
where it will focus on drafting state legislation on gun violence prevention 
measures, including securing mental health funding and creating gun violence 
restraining orders. In Congress, Sandy Hook Promise advocates for mental health 
reform legislation.


“When I do think about the NRA, the opposition, it took them decades to build 
that base, and to get organized, and to have deep relationships with their team 
members,” she said. “They’re best-in-class in organizing. We haven’t been as 
organized on the other side.”

With the National Rifle Association’s candidate heading to the White House, 
Hockley said she is concerned about federal right-to-carry reciprocity 
legislation. This Trump-endorsed national law wouldeviscerate local gun 
carrying restrictions. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/gun-control-donald-trump-congress-concealed-carry-law>
 If passed, the legislation might mean that tourists from other states would be 
allowed tocarry their guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/gun-control-donald-trump-congress-concealed-carry-law>
 around New York City.


If Trump follows up on his campaign rhetoric about eliminating gun-free zones 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/05/23/politics/donald-trump-guns/> and pushing guns in 
schools, “That I’ll fight hard against,” she said. “Schools are no place for 
guns. If he comes out and tries to make that happen, there are a heck of a lot 
of people who will fight against that … I think that would be a very, very 
unpopular move.”

Trump’s second amendment platform does not mention guns and schools, though he 
haspledged 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/> to 
end gun-free zones on military bases.

Asked at the Tuesday press conference if she would agree to meet with Trump to 
talk about addressing gun violence, as she has met with Obama, Hockley paused. 
“I will never say no to having an open conversation with anybody regardless of 
their stated or unstated beliefs, because I believe without conversation we’re 
not going to see progress,” she said. “I can’t foresee a reason that the 
president elect would have any desire to meet with me, so I’m not anticipating 
that.”

Hockley was announcing her appeal of a lawsuit on behalf of several Sandy Hook 
victims’ families that argued gun companies were negligent to market an AR-15 
style rifle to the general public. Last month, a Connecticut judge struck down 
the lawsuit that nine victims’ families and one survivor had filed against the 
manufacturer, distributor and seller of the rifle used in the shooting.

Hockley is involved in the lawsuit privately, not as part of her work for 
Sandy Hook Promise.

‘I lost part of my soul’: the mothers who lost their children to gun violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/07/mothers-children-gun-violence-victims-ali-smith-photography>
Gun company lawyers had argued that the companies were protected by a 2005 
federal law designed precisely to shield gun companies from being held liable 
when a legally sold, non-defective gun is later used in a crime. Adam Lanza, 
the Sandy Hook shooter, had killed his mother and then taken her guns, which 
she had purchased legally.

On 14 October, Judge Barbara Bellis of the Connecticut superior court ruled 
that the companies were protected by the federal shield law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/sandy-hook-massacre-families-gun-company-lawsuit-ruling>
.

Interest in the case had clearly dwindled by the time lawyers announced their 
appeal on Tuesday. At an earlier press conference at Koskoff’s law office in 
February, local and national media outlets had packed the room to ask questions 
of a line of victims’ family members. On Tuesday, in the pouring rain, only a 
handful of media outlets showed up.

Hockley, who has been working full-time on gun violence prevention since March 
2013, just weeks after her son was killed, said she is trying to learn how to 
prepare better for the long fight. Kickboxing and seeing a therapist both help, 
she said.

“Self-care has not been a priority for me, which is a shame, because this is 
going to be the rest of my life,” she said. “So I need to start focusing on how 
I’m going to ensure that I maintain the stamina and the emotional wellbeing to 
do this.

“I do think it’s going to take two generations.” 
 