
Aga

Demand for Aga cookers has gone off the boil in the past few weeks, as the 
financial crisis deters people from buying a piece of the so-called Aga Saga 
lifestyle.

Aga Rangemaster <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aga-rangemaster> 
reported this morning that sales of its high-end cookers have fallen by 15% 
since August, compared with a year ago when the credit crunch was just 
beginning. Sales had already been slipping in the summer before the latest 
turmoil struck.

The housing slump is a key factor behind the sales decline - the 10% drop in 
mortgage lending in September 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2008/oct/20/mortgages-property> means less 
demand for its cast iron beauties.

"Consumer markets are clearly weak and the impact of the macroeconomic 
environment is being felt," said William McGrath, chief executive, who admitted 
that profits for the second half of 2008 would be "appreciatively below" the 
first six months.

This is a much gloomier picture than the company painted at the end of August, 
when it emphasised its resilience to the crisis.

Shares in the company promptly fell by more than 20%, and analysts at Panmure 
Gordon predicted that Aga's markets would continue to deteriorate.

Davenham

With a business model based on lending to small businesses and property 
developers, Manchester-based Davenham is being badly squeezed by the downturn. 
The company cut 20% of its workforce this morning, meaning 43 people are now 
out of a job, and admitted it would not be profitable this year.

It blamed the "rapidly deteriorating" economic climate for a rise in bad 
debts, a trend it expects to continue - especially on the property side as more 
developers are hit by falling house prices and a lack of buyers.

Davenham is now in talks with its banks to possibly revise and extend its loan 
facilities.

Shareholders received a double-whammy - the proposed dividend has been 
cancelled as a cash-saving measure, and Davenham's shares plummeted 76%.

Marks & Spencer

Having cut back on store refurbishments and new openings, is M&S about to axe 
jobs at head office? The Daily Telegraph reported this morning that it is 
consulting with staff in its property and store development arms about the 
implications of cutting capital expenditure from £900m to £700m. With less 
money to spend and fewer new outlets to launch, the implication is that M&S 
need fewer heads on the design and development side.

Employees affected may be redeployed rather than being laid off. But their 
mood may not be improved byM&S's recent attempt to cut its redundancy payments 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/aug/19/marksspencer.retail>.

Aldi-Travelodge

But while a recession will push some companies to the wall, others plan to 
thrive in the tougher climate.

Rather than cutting back on expansion plans, Aldi and Travelodge are 
partnering up to build a series of budget supermarket-hotel hybrids. The first 
site, in Torquay, will see a 74-room hotel build on top of a 14,000 square foot 
Aldi store. It's due to open next autumn, while a similar project in 
Middlesborough should be completed by November.

Travelodge's Paul Harvey says the credit crunch means that the hotel chain can 
snap up development sites that were previously out of reach.

"By developing sites together with Aldi we are sending out a clear signal that 
the budget sector in the UK is going to make the most of the opportunities 
presented by the economic downturn," Harvey said.

Housebuilders

Taylor Wimpey, Persimmon, Bellway et al already had enough problem before a 
damning analyst note from Collins Stewart hit our desks today. Reassuringly 
called "The Shadow of Death", it predicts that the builders will struggle to 
sell much until 2010. Nick Fletcher has all the facts over onMarket Forces Live 
<http://blogs.guardian.co.uk/markets/>.
 