
The regulator that monitors UK financial reporting is to investigate two of 
the big four accountancy firms over their role in the failures of the retailer
BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> and the banking group HBOS.

The Financial Reporting Council, responsible for overseeing UK accounting 
standards, began an investigation into PricewaterhouseCoopers over its audit of 
thecollapsed high street chain BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/15/guardian-view-on-bhs-tainted-love-of-business-and-politics-philip-green>
 when it was owned by Sir Philip Green.

It has begun a parallel investigation into whether KPMG should have signed off 
on the accounts of HBOS, which was bought by Lloyds as the banking crisis 
gathered pace in September 2008.

BHS fell into administration in April, with the loss of 11,000 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/bhs-rescue-bid-fails-putting-11000-jobs-at-risk>
, 13 months after Green’s Arcadia group sold it to the businessman Dominic 
Chappell for £1.

Dominic Chappell accused of treating BHS money as his own
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/dominic-chappell-accused-treating-bhs-money-as-own-allegations-mps-darren-topp>
The FRC said it had “launched an investigation under the accountancy scheme 
into the conduct ofPricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> in relation to 
the audit of the financial statements of BHS Ltd for the year ended 30 August 
2014”. KPMG is also being investigated under the scheme.

Such an investigation can be launched when “the matter raises or appears to 
raise important issues affecting the public interest in the United Kingdom”.

It also requires that “there are reasonable grounds to suspect that there may 
have been misconduct or it appears that the member or member firm has failed to 
comply with any of his or its obligations” under the scheme’s requirements.

The FRC said it would look at the extent to which KPMG considered whether HBOS 
should have deemed itself a going concern for the purposes of its accounts for 
the year ending December 2007. It will also ask whether there were “material 
uncertainties” about the bank’s finances that KPMG should have raised when it 
approved the bank’s accounts.

The chairman of the Commons Treasury committee, Andrew Tyrie, said: “The HBOS 
report exposed the staggeringly poor quality of HBOS’s loan book. The role of 
the auditors – for years left unexamined – is to be subject to thorough 
investigation. Not before time.”

HBOS was among the first British casualties of the UK banking crisis and was 
bought by Lloyds for £12bn in September 2008 to prevent it from collapse. The 
government eventually had to spend £12bn on bailing out Lloyds, partly because 
of toxic loans on the HBOS balance sheet that it acquired in the deal.

The FRC’s decision to investigate PwC intensifies scrutiny of the stewardship 
of BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> before Green sold it to 
Chappell, a former racing car driver with no previous retail experience who has 
been declared bankrupt three times.

PwC was questioned by MPs in a joint session of the business and work and 
pensions select committees over its description of BHS as a going concern days 
before it was sold. If the regulator determines that PwC failed to do its job 
properly, it has the power to impose sanctions and can force the accountancy 
firm to pay costs.
 