
The MPs who rightly denounced Sir Philip Green’s grubby sale of BHS to a 
thrice-bankrupt chancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 missed a trick: they never pinned down what the tycoon meant when he said he 
would “sort” the deficit in the pension schemes.

Their report was well researched, well argued and commendably concise – a fine 
advertisement for the power of select committees to cut through financial fog. 
A mistake, however, was made when Greengave his testimony 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/work-and-pensions-committee/pension-protection-fund-and-the-pensions-regulator/oral/34431.pdf>
 on 15 June and proclaimed: “I want to give an assurance to the 20,000 
pensioners – I am there to sort this in the correct way.”

That sounded definitive. But what did the “correct” way mean? To most 
observers, the answer should be easy: it means ensuring that everyBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pensioner receives the pension he or 
she was expecting.

But note Green’s response when Iain Wright, the chair of the business select 
committee, asked for clarification in those terms. Green replied: “Sir, they 
[Green’s advisers] are working up a plan. When they have got the plan together 
they are going to present it. I haven’t seen – I basically, this time, am going 
to get presented the plan, hopefully to find a way how we solve it.”

That was far from clear. Green’s answer did not commit him to any precise 
outcome. Disastrously, the exchanges then fizzled out inconclusively. Indeed, 
in later answers, Green suggested “sorting” involved reheating a pension 
restructuring plan from 2014, entitled Project Thor, that would have involved 
Green and his family finding an up-front payment of £80m.

But £80m no longer seems remotely enough. At the point of BHS’s collapse the 
combined deficit in the two schemes was £571m on one accounting measure. It may 
be even bigger today because long-term gilt yields have fallen, which has the 
effect of increasing the size of future liabilities in a defined-benefit 
scheme. More important, BHS has failed and thus can’t make future 
contributions. The bill, on some estimates, could be reduced to £400m by making 
cash offers to scheme members with small pots. But there is no indication Green 
is contemplating an offer of that size.

Indeed, the mood music suggests Green is still fixated by the idea that 
long-term gilt yields will rise one day, allowing the deficits to evaporate.

If Lesley Titcomb, chief executive of the Pension Regulator, has even half a 
mind to accept a settlement on these terms, she should think again. Green had 
many opportunities over many years to address BHS’s deficit. He failed to do 
so, even after paying himself dividends far in excess of BHS’s profits in the 
early years of ownership.

Yet another exercise in procrastination, or date-stamped IOUs backed by Green 
family vehicles, would be -disgraceful. This time, “sorting” should mean a 
structure that gives BHS -pensioners proper confidence. If Green won’t pay, the
Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator should chase 
him for the cash – that’s what its powers are there for.



BT Openreach: decision time

Over at the select committee for culture, media and sport, the MPs have also 
scored a result of sorts. A week after they complained thatBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> was “significantly 
underinvesting” in its broadband network, company chairman Sir Mike Rake is 
firing off promises. Openreach, the infrastructure division, can have an 
independent chairman and a majority of independent directors, says Rake, plus 
more control over how the cash is spent.

Will that be enough to silence the calls for Openreach to be liberated from BT 
via a formal breakup? We’ll find out on Tuesday when regulator Ofcom publishes 
its final thoughts on the matter. A breakup, we assume, is off the cards, but 
Ofcom also said in February it wanted Openreach to have more autonomy than BT 
had proposed.

Rake’s eleventh-hour offer was thus timed curiously. It was, perhaps, a case 
of volunteering concessions Ofcom would demand anyway. Alternatively, BT was 
drawing a line in the sand: this much, and no more.

One thing seems clear, however: the MPs’ report illustrated how little 
goodwill BT enjoys in Westminster. One prod from the MPs and BT is on the back 
foot.

Gambling problem

The gambling industry is obsessed by deals, or so it seems. But here’s an 
offer William Hill can surely afford to decline. Rank and 888 Holdings want the 
chain of bookies tojoin a three-way mashup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/william-hill-unsure-over-deal-with-rank-and-888>
 to pursue benefits of scale.

That, at least, is what it says on the invitation. In practice, it sounds like 
a plea for William Hill, the biggest of the trio, to fix the others’ lack of 
size. Just say “No”.William Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill>, without a permanent chief 
executive since last week’s ousting of James Henderson, has enough headaches of 
its own.
 