
There are few relationships so complex, tumultuous and unbreakable as that 
between a mother and daughter. But what about a mother who sweeps her child up 
in the world of showbiz, drags her on stage as a reluctant teenager and offers 
to oversee her losing her virginity, and give tips?

Bright Lights: trailer for Debbie Reynolds and Carrie Fisher documentary 
released
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/04/bright-lights-debbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-trailer>
Such was the strange, often tortured but ultimately loving dynamic between 
Debbie Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> and Carrie 
Fisher, the Hollywood mother-daughter duo who passed away within a day of each 
other in December. A new HBO documentary, Bright Lights, which airs this week, 
followed the pair in 2014 and 2015 and reveals how they moved from a 
decade-long period of estrangement to become best friends and next-door 
neighbours, entirely interdependent on one another.

The documentary, made by Alexis Bloom and Fisher Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/06/bright-lights-carrie-fisher-debbie-reynolds-documentary>
, was Fisher’s idea, as a way to preserve her mother’s legacy and the 
remarkable relationship the pair had. It was originally due to air in March, 
but was brought forward following their deaths, which shook Bloom and Stevens 
who had grown incredibly close to both Fisher and Reynolds over the two years.


 “Yes, Carrie smoked up a storm and drank a hell of a lot of Coca Cola – 
though it’s worth noting that she had stopped smoking in recent months – but 
she was really on good form,” said Bloom. “She lived a hard life, she was 
unconventional but she was not expecting this at all – she was coming with 
Christmas presents and looking forward to seeing friends of ours.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd0df8411e10cd00ffe5c25706e6cc02e575a290%2F0_291_862_517%2F862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remarkable%20tenderness%3A%20film%20reveals%20bond%20between%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remarkable%20tenderness%3A%20film%20reveals%20bond%20between%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd0df8411e10cd00ffe5c25706e6cc02e575a290%2F0_291_862_517%2F862.jpg>
 Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds. Photograph: Publicity image 
The closeness of Fisher and Reynolds in the final years of their lives form 
the focal point of the documentary. They lived next door to each other in an 
expansive Beverly Hills compound, formerly owned by Bette Davis, and Fisher was 
a daily visitor to her mother’s house, where they would chat, sing and eat 
together, accompanied by their dogs.


“I am my mother’s best friend, more than a daughter,” says Fisher in the film. 
“She wants me to be an extension of her wishes, an extension of her and to a 
great degree, sometimes more than I would ever want to, I know what my mother 
feels and wants.”

It was an affection that Bloom had not anticipated. “Their tenderness was most 
remarkable,” she said. “Even when they were making fun of each other or were 
incredibly frustrated with each other, there was always this underlying 
tenderness that no matter the circumstances of the day and how frustrating they 
were, that they would suffer anything for each other.

“I expected them both to be incredible individually but I didn’t expect them 
to be this lyrical duet.”

The hurdles of dysfunction the pair overcame are also central to their story. 
Fisher’s struggles with drugs and her mental health, and the volatile 
relationship with her mother, were partly portrayed in her 
semi-autobiographical book and screenplay, Postcards From the Edge, but the 
documentary goes further in revealing how alienated Fisher felt as a child and 
teenager.

“Family-wise we didn’t grow up with each other, we grew up around each other, 
like trees ... it was a prototype life,” she said. “We were always getting 
ready for a photoshoot.”

She desperately craved the attention of her father, singer Eddie Fisher, who 
left Reynolds for Elizabeth Taylor when his children were very young, and – as 
he admitted himself in later years – was more focused on drugs than parenting.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ecce30c27066a1b513f0706b0f9878fffb2ec64%2F0_83_997_598%2F997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remarkable%20tenderness%3A%20film%20reveals%20bond%20between%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remarkable%20tenderness%3A%20film%20reveals%20bond%20between%20Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fremarkable-tenderness-film-examines-bond-between-debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ecce30c27066a1b513f0706b0f9878fffb2ec64%2F0_83_997_598%2F997.jpg>
 Carrie Fisher (right) and Debbie Reynolds. Photograph: Publicity image 
There was also enormous pressure on Fisher from Reynolds to follow in her 
Hollywood footsteps, despite a reluctance on Fisher’s part. Footage shows an 
uncomfortable Fisher, aged just 15, being dragged onstage during one of her 
mother’s cabaret shows to sing Bridge Over Troubled Water, rolling her eyes as 
she finally walks off.

“The biggest thing I did that broke my mother’s heart was not do a nightclub 
act,” Fisher said in the documentary. “My mother would say: ‘Do drugs, do 
whatever you need to do, but why don’t you sing?’ That was my big rebellion.”

Yet her mother’s interference went even further, and Fisher reveals Reynolds 
even offered to help her daughter lose her virginity as a teenager. “I swear to 
God my mother offered for me and this guy Albert to have sex, and she would 
supervise Albert and I having sex. Actual having sex,” Fisher recalls to her 
childhood friend Griffin Dunne, the man who she chose to lose her virginity to 
after refusing her mother’s offer.


Nonetheless, Bloom said Fisher bore no lasting resentment towards her mother. 
“Carrie watched her mother her whole life,” she said. “And they always spoke. 
It’s been overstated in the press that there was a decade where they didn’t 
speak. But Carrie told me they did speak, they just spoke badly.”

Fisher’s struggles with mental health began at 13, when Reynolds said her 
“personality changed”. In the later years of her life, she was very open about 
her experiences with bipolar disorder and the documentary reveals Fisher had 
names for both sides of her personality: Rollicking Roy, when she felt ecstatic 
mania, and Sediment Pam “who stands on the shore and sobs”, when she felt low.

The film is also revealing about the extent that Reynolds struggled to come to 
terms with her own ageing, refusing to give up the stage and only performing 
her final stage show in 2012, aged 82. While Fisher was an open book, Reynolds 
was reticent to let down her guard in front of the camera, and so was a 
difficult subject to document. She refused to be filmed looking anything other 
than pristine and did not let the cameras in when she was ill.


“Debbie was difficult to document because you really want to get the private 
side of somebody and she wasn’t willing to share that with us,” said Bloom. 
“She was trained that when the camera is on, you are on.”

At all public appearances in her final years, Reynolds had appeared to be 
strong and lively, but the documentary reveals how much her health was 
suffering as she hit her 80s and how weak she had become.

“Age is horrible for all of us but she [Reynolds] falls from a greater 
height,” said Fisher. “It’s very frustrating for her because inside my mum is 
the same person and she does not want to retire.”

The pair saw the documentary before they died. Fisher had a “very emotional” 
reaction to it, said Bloom, but after a week came round to it, while Reynolds 
simply chose not to engage with the parts that bothered her. “In the end, they 
were both very supportive,” added Bloom. “The film mattered to them.”

Bright Lights airs in the US on HBO at 8pm on 7 January, and in the UK on Sky 
Atlantic at 9pm on 10 January.

 