
Christmas, unbelievably, is almost upon us, and with it an annual playlist of 
endlessly watched, endlessly renewable films – an entirely personal matter of 
curation, whether it coversIt’s a Wonderful Life, The Shop Around the Corner or 
The Muppet Christmas Carol. (I, meanwhile, am looking forward to my first year 
of being able to savour the yuletide melancholy of Todd Haynes’sCarol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/21/carol-steve-jobs-black-mass-hunger-games-mockingjay-good-dinosaur-dvd-review>
in my own living room: bring on the jingling bells and the mournfully yearning 
strings.)

Over at the BFI Player 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-remember-the-night-1939/>, however, I 
recently made the acquaintance of a film that deserves as much December 
ubiquity as any of the above, yet remains oddly neglected in the archives. 
Blessed with a characteristically brut champagne script byPreston Sturges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/preston-sturges-how-a-master-of-daft-conquered-hollywood>
, Mitchell Leisen’sRemember the Night is special even by the bright standards 
of the romantic comedies that Hollywood studios pulled off so breezily in 1940. 
It’s the cinematic equivalent of oven-warm gingerbread. Which is not to say 
there’s anything overly cosy or cloying about this story of an accused 
shoplifter (Barbara Stanwyck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/10/barbara-stanwyck>) and an 
assistant DA (Fred MacMurray <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/05/1>) 
sparring and falling inevitably in love over the course of a Christmas-time 
road trip from New York to Indiana.

An annual tradition: assessing just how far south of his former glory the new 
Woody Allen film falls

The premise may be fancifully contrived, but the human stakes here are 
entirely authentic, with a moral and romantic outlook that’s exquisitely 
perceptive and generous. Four years before their more celebrated pairing in
Double Indemnity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/29/my-favourite-film-double-indemnity>
, Stanwyck and MacMurray perfected a comfortable, crackling star chemistry, 
tossing Sturges’s wry, whetstone-whittled lines back and forth like a 
beachball, and palpably enjoying themselves in the process. And the seasonal 
setting is hardly incidental: this is a Christmas film powered by a loving, 
unsentimental spirit of goodwill to all men, and not at the expense of one 
scrap of wit. Seventy-six years on, it fully deserves a place in the holiday 
canon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0881d11565a8ce5cca8f738c9a11de1af9d0263%2F461_0_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0881d11565a8ce5cca8f738c9a11de1af9d0263%2F461_0_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
 Miles Teller, left, and Jonah Hill in the ‘brashly unpleasant’ War Dogs. 
Photograph: AP 
The DVD release schedule, meanwhile, has very much slowed down for Christmas, 
with a surfeit of less-than-festive titles waiting for Boxing Day. After all, 
not many will be in the mood next week for the efficiently grim criminal low 
jinks of Noel Clarke’sBrotherhood (Lionsgate, 15), nor the grimily dystopian 
violence ofThe Purge: Election Year (Universal, 15), though in the wake of 
Donald Trump’s presidential victory, it’s debatable when we’ll ever be in the 
mood for the latter, a slickly assembled, worst-case-scenario allegory for the 
evils of the “alt-right”. DittoWar Dogs (Warner, 15), a brashly unpleasant, 
fact-based comedy in which two callow young men become embroiled in 
international arms dealing. Glibly written and directed byThe Hangover’s Todd 
Phillips, it feigns moral complexity principally by making its two heroes as 
extravagantly unsympathetic as possible – but that doesn’t make them worthy of 
our time either.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff283c13a5ba25c783d7d6640f6fd59cb565357%2F0_260_4927_2956%2F4927.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff283c13a5ba25c783d7d6640f6fd59cb565357%2F0_260_4927_2956%2F4927.jpg>
 The ever-game Andy Samberg in Popstar: Never Stop Stopping. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Actively revelling in its protagonist’s vileness, to mostly sparky comic 
effect, isPopstar: Never Stop Never Stopping (Universal, 15), a welcome send-up 
of vapid fan-service pop documentaries, with Justin Bieber its principal 
satirical target. As walnut-brained singer-rapper Conner4Real, whose musical 
transition from bubblegum to wrong-headed social consciousness sends his career 
into freefall, the ever-game Andy Samberg and his Lonely Island troupe have 
created an inspired, absurd figure of fun. The film around him is less 
consistently on target, but when it lands, it’s delicious. I had a better time 
with its silliness than that ofSausage Party (Sony, 15), an adults-only 
animation in which a plucky frankfurter goes on a lewdly diversion-laden 
journey to escape his fast-food destiny. Some of the ensuing smut is clever, 
but its wink-wink jocularity is terminally, off-puttingly impressed with itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419cf9b32ec70128acd88c7802f6e938f5783d58%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remember%20the%20Night%3B%20Brotherhood%3B%20The%20Purge%3A%20Election%20Year%3B%20War%20Dogs%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fremember-the-night-brotherhood-the-purge-election-year-war-dogs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419cf9b32ec70128acd88c7802f6e938f5783d58%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kristen Stewart lights up Woody Allen’s Café Society. Photograph: Sabrina 
Lantos/Warner Bros 
Finally, an annual tradition: assessing just how far south of his former glory 
the newWoody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> film falls. 
Café Society (Warner, 12) lands about halfway along the scale. Shot in creamy 
gilded tones by the great Vittorio Storaro, this tidy fable of a young man 
(Jesse Eisenberg, an effective enough proxy for Allen’s own neurotic star 
persona) undergoing a bittersweet romantic education in 1930s Hollywood is just 
attractive enough to keep persistent fans hoping that its maker will completely 
regather his gifts at some point. As it is, his eye for relationship politics 
(and even his ear for dialogue) is off. Only the wonderful Kristen Stewart, 
wistful and weathered as the complicated object of Eisenberg’s affection, seems 
fully human here.
 