
The removal of Sir Philip Green’s knighthood after the BHS scandal is far from 
certain despite the tycoon’s censure by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, according to people with knowledge of the process.


Insiders say the path to rescinding Green’s honour remains unclear because the 
panel charged with the task – the honours forfeiture committee – meets only 
when there is a case to consider.MPs voted on Thursday to strip Green of his 
knighthood in a symbolic move that carries no official sanction. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>

According to the official honours guide, the criteria for removal by the 
committee is having damaged the honours system’s reputation. It gives examples 
such as being convicted of a criminal offence or struck off by a professional 
body – neither of which applies to Green following theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> collapse.

However, it also offers the vague statement that “other reasons for forfeiture 
can also be considered”. For instance, when the former chief executive of Royal 
Bank of Scotland,Fred Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sir-fred-goodwin>, lost his knighthood 
the committee said that the “scale and the severity of the impact of his 
actions as chief executive officer of RBS made this an exceptional case”.

The forfeiture committee is an ad hoc panel chaired by Sir Jonathan Stephens, 
a senior civil servant, who also heads up the main honours committee.

Once assembled, the discussions are confidential with the panel’s membership 
drawn from the chairs of the specialist honours committees, a pool that 
currently includes Sebastian Coe, medical professor Sir John Bell, retail 
executive Sir Ian Cheshire and charity boss Mary Marsh.

If the forfeiture committee decides an honour should be withdrawn, the Queen 
is informed by the prime minister. The Queen then has the final say, with her 
decision published in the London Gazette.

Paul Myners <https://www.theguardian.com/business/paul-myners>, a former City 
minister who was chair of Marks & Spencer when Green launched a failed takeover 
bid in 2004, said: “I’m not in favour of his knighthood being withdrawn. If 
there’s any issue with bringing the honours system into disrepute that lies 
with the people who gave it to him. The Philip Green I see today is the Philip 
Green I knew when it was given to him. It was very silly to give him a 
knighthood and that brought the system into disrepute – not what he has 
subsequently done.”

Green has been accused of leaving BHS with a £571m pension deficit, taking 
nearly £400m in dividends from the retailer and selling the business for £1 in 
March 2015 to serial bankrupt Dominic Chappell. Green has robustly defended his 
track record at BHS, saying he invested substantial sums in the business. He 
was knighted by the Blair government in 2006.

Several people close to the matter suggested Green’s knighthood would remain 
in the balance until the postmortem into the collapse of BHS is complete. 
Although MPs have completed their inquiry, the Pensions Regulator is 
investigating the funding of the BHS pension scheme, while simultaneously 
trying to thrash out a settlement with Green who has promised to “sort” the 
matter. The Insolvency Service is also investigating the retailer’s collapse.
 