
The top-grossing films of 2016 in the UK are The Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review> and 
Bridget Jones’s Baby <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-s-baby>. 
Shouting about its schedules during negotiations with the government for a new 
licence fee deal, the BBC sounded most proud ofPlanet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/12/planet-earth-iis-most-mindblowing-moments>
 andWar and Peace <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace>. 
Three of the biggest successes in London theatre have been Tom Stoppard’s
Travesties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/05/travesties-review-tom-hollander-tom-stoppard-patrick-marber>
, Harold Pinter’sNo Man’s Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/20/no-mans-land-review-ian-mckellen-and-patrick-stewart-capture-the-contrasts-of-pinters-masterwork>
 and Peter Shaffer’sAmadeus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/27/amadeus-review-national-michael-longhurst-lucian-msamati-salieri>
.

What unites these works is that they all represent deja vu. Mowgli appears in 
a remake of the 1967 Disney hit, and Ms Jones’s franchise started 15 years ago. 
The TV shows are a new adaptation of a Tolstoy novel filmed by the BBC in 1972, 
and a higher-tech second pass at a David Attenborough series from a decade ago. 
That trio of stage shows revives 1970s successes.

Repetition is usually seen as a negative by consumers of the main forms of 
entertainment. But, in an age of information overload and economic crisis, the 
already familiar will always have an advantage: this year’s US election was the 
first to feature two candidates, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, who were 
both global celebrities before they ran. Similarly, in showbiz, immediate name 
recognition makes repeats, revivals and remakes seem safe. Strikingly, the 
entire box office top 10 in the UK this year (including Batman v Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/25/review-batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice>
 andFinding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/14/finding-dory-review-nemo-sequel-disability-ellen-de-generes>
) was a continuation of a known story: evenSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/suicide-squad-review-dc-comics-will-smith-margot-robbie-jared-leto>
 andFantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>
 arose from established DC Comics and JK Rowling sequences.

BBC series Planet Earth II will be unparalleled, says Attenborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/29/planet-earth-ii-bbc-sir-david-attenborough-nature-series-wildlife-animals>
However, the introduction in the digital age of the “reboot” introduces to 
this debate the idea that a second attempt at the same thing might sometimes be 
an artistic upgrade. BothThe Jungle Book and Planet Earth II can be seen as 
superior versions of the originals, taking advantage of advances in animation 
and wildlife filming.Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/22/poldark-preview-brooding-do-gooder-returns-with-light-shade-and-shirtless-mining>
 andWar and Peace also improve visually on the originals through HD 
photography, while making attractive characters available to a new generation 
of actors.

Much of the other backward-looking programming on TV, though, seems to have 
been motivated by cultural nostalgia and editorial caution. It is alarming how 
familiar the BBC schedules of 2016 would feel to someone who had emerged from a 
long coma. This week, the peak-time BBC1 9pm slot on Tuesday was occupied by
Rillington Place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/30/rillingron-place-tim-roth-john-reginald-christie>
 – a real-life crime drama that duplicates the subject-matter and two-thirds of 
the title of10 Rillington Place, a 1970 film about the murderer, John Christie 
– and on Wednesday bySix Wives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/08/six-wives-with-lucy-worsley-review-a-history-and-drama-but-not-quite-wolf-hall>
, a drama-documentary about the marital massacres of Henry VIII, a tale that 
the BBC has twice recently presented as drama inWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/22/wolf-hall-review-slabs-of-guilt-lifted-triumphantly-from-the-bookshelf>
 (2015) andThe Tudors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/28/the-tudors-review> (2007-10).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d56a2ae5487b3eff99c460dd5239bb34e1943f%2F71_0_1957_1174%2F1957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64d56a2ae5487b3eff99c460dd5239bb34e1943f%2F71_0_1957_1174%2F1957.jpg>
 Bagheera and Mowgli in the 2016 remake ofThe Jungle Book. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney 
ITV’s biggest successes of the past 12 months revisit either familiar 
historical material (Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/itv-didnt-need-to-embellish-queen-victoria-life>
) or previous hit series (Cold Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/05/cold-feet-review>). 
Channel 4’s most publicised decision of the year was the poaching ofThe Great 
British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
 from BBC1, which, regardless of any other objections, meant that a network set 
up with a remit of originality was resorting to a policy of: here’s one that 
someone else made earlier. Meanwhile, much of television’s archive is becoming 
available either on DVD or online.

The case for revisiting material is stronger in theatre because, while the 
television archives preserve the originals intact, earlier stage productions 
usually exist only in memory or on scratchy videos. The reinterpretation of 
famous roles is also a test of actors. As a result, a rhythm has become 
established of reviving hit plays every 20 years or so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edf644de171c9693cffdd29e20bdc22d49212c6%2F0_194_4290_2574%2F4290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edf644de171c9693cffdd29e20bdc22d49212c6%2F0_194_4290_2574%2F4290.jpg>
 Tim Roth as John Christie in the BBC’sRillington Place (2016). Photograph: BBC 
A production of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/28/yasmina-reza-art-20-years-enduring-appeal>
, Christopher Hampton’s translation of Yasmina Reza’s play about reactions to a 
blank painting, opened recently at the Old Vic in London, two decades after its 
sensational debut.Dead Funny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/03/dead-funny-review-terry-johnson-vaudeville-london-katherine-parkinson-1994-drama>
, Terry Johnson’s 1994 farce about Englishmen who are more comfortable with 
sexist jokes than sex, has also been revived this winter.

If a second major UK production confirms a play’s durability, a third (as 
Travesties has just achieved) or a fourth (the current No Man’s Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/20/no-mans-land-review-ian-mckellen-and-patrick-stewart-capture-the-contrasts-of-pinters-masterwork>
) raises it to modern classic status. Sam Shepard’sBuried Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/01/buried-child-review-ed-harris-sam-shepard-trafalgar-studios-london>
, a contemporary take on Greek tragedy set in Illinois, had its London premiere 
in 1980, was staged at the National 12 years ago and is now given a 
blisteringly powerful staging at Trafalgar Studios, starring Ed Harris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbbfb92fd0c7d28a75e26df9a9cfc99010b1e44%2F0_141_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcbbfb92fd0c7d28a75e26df9a9cfc99010b1e44%2F0_141_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Six Wives … treading the same ground as the recent Wolf Hall and The Tudors. 
Photograph: Laurence Cendrowicz/BBC/Wall to Wall South 
A revival of a play differs significantly from a TV or film remake in that the 
same script will generally be used, although Stoppard has added some new 
business, including a comedy sex-act under a tablecloth, for the production of
Travesties, his word-twisting play about political and literary exiles in 1917 
Zurich, that will transfer to the West End next year after acclaim at the 
Menier Chocolate Factory.

For the new look at Art, Hampton has changed a 1994 reference to a painting 
costing 200,000 francs to 100,000 euros and shifted a past event from the 
“1970s” to the “1990s.”Art is the third of Hampton’s works to be revived within 
a year – afterLes Liaisons Dangereuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/18/les-liasons-dangereuses-review-dominic-west-janet-mcteer-donmar-warehouse>
 and the Lloyd-Webber musicalSunset Boulevard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/05/sunset-boulevard-review-imperious-glenn-close-gives-show-new-lease-of-life>
 – and he says: “In some ways, revivals are my favourite thing. It’s very – as 
Americans would say – ‘validating’ to have them done again. And the 
apprehension is less than with a new piece of work.”

But the fascinating aspect of a theatrical revival is that, even if the play 
remains largely the same, it may be changed by the new historical context. In
Buried Child, the xenophobic detestation of Shepard’s mid-west characters for 
urban outsiders and new ways seemed, in 1980, prophetic of the Reagan 
presidencies; now it seems to speak of an isolationism tapped by 
President-elect Trump. Conversations inTravesties about whether art exists to 
serve the cause of the state, the audience or the author also feel remarkably 
relevant, 42 years on, to the artistic identity crisis created by the digital 
marketplace. New casts may also bring fresh inflection to a text: Hampton found 
that the newLes Liaisons Dangereuses was changed by an actress having a 
previously unexplored perception of the relationship between two characters.

The strongest trend to emerge in the clutch of current re-productions is the 
medicalisation of characterisation.Travesties and Amadeus are both narrated by 
elderly, forgetful men (when the plays are seen closely together, Shaffer seems 
clearly to have been influenced by Stoppard), but, in the revivals, Tom 
Hollander andLucian Msamati  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/28/lucian-msamati-othello-game-of-thrones-interview>
are portraying a more clinically precise dementia than would have been 
attempted 40 years ago, when there was less recognition of Alzheimer’s as a 
condition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37f55be0b8cecb9e727d75a9ae1f2c3187de5e61%2F0_232_5353_3211%2F5353.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Replay%20for%20today%3A%20why%20the%20remake%20is%20making%20a%20comeback&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Freplay-remake-theatre-film-television-revivals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37f55be0b8cecb9e727d75a9ae1f2c3187de5e61%2F0_232_5353_3211%2F5353.jpg>
 Tom Hollander and Clare Foster in the revival ofTravesties by Tom Stoppard. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In the 2016 Amadeus, Adam Gillen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/30/amadeus-national-theatre-review-opulent-explosion>
 seems to be attempting to place his Mozart, whom the text makes simply an 
obscene brat, on the autism spectrum with a sub-diagnosis of Tourette’s, while 
a damaged character inBuried Child is now given detailed symptoms of 
post-traumatic stress disorder. Directors approach revivals these days not with 
the attitude of a play-doctor but a hospital doctor.

Events I am looking forward to next year include Daniel Radcliffe in the 50th 
anniversary revival of Stoppard’sRosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead 
<http://www.boxoffice.co.uk/arts-and-theatre-tickets/plays/rosencrantz-and-guildenstern-are-dead-tickets.aspx?referrer=BoxOffice&gclid=COfxjoCS8dACFeGd7QodbeQGyw>
, and the movieT2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/03/t2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video>
, a sequel toTrainspotting, while Civilisations – a new version of the 1969 BBC 
series, retitled to reflect the more plural nature of visual arts scholarship – 
may yet turn out to be a necessary reboot that restores the BBC to former 
glories. But let’s hope that there will also be more and more examples of 
plays, films and TV shows that we have never seen before. Creativity is at 
risk of being rebooted as re-creativity.

• Art is at the Old Vic, London SE1; Planet Earth II is available on DVD; 
Rillington Place is released on DVD on 16 January.

In some ways, revivals are my favourite thing. It’s very – as Americans would 
say – ‘validating’
 