
In more than a decade of being a news editor at the Guardian, I can’t remember 
another period quite like the summer of 2016.

There have been bigger atrocities before but nothing like the daily succession 
of attacks that we have reported, from theNice truck slaughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/nice-attack-leaves-84-dead-and-france-in-shock>
 and theMunich shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/munich-shopping-centre-evacuated-after-reported-shooting-germany>
 tomurder in Normandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/france-shock-second-isis-attack-12-days>
 andYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
, not forgettingOrlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/orlando-nightlcub-shooting-pulse-florida-attack-timeline>
,Dallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/08/how-the-dallas-protest-shootings-unfolded-police>
,Ansbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/bomb-attack-southern-germany> and
Sagamihara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/tokyo-knife-attack-stabbing-sagamihara>
.

It’s at times like these that we might just turn to each other in the Guardian 
newsroom and whisper (so the editor-in-chief can’t hear): “Can somebody please 
stop the news?”

How should the media cover terror attacks? Readers' views
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/jul/28/how-should-the-media-cover-terror-attacks-live-debate>
Over the years, and despite being a proper coward, I’ve covered the Balkans 
war and 7/7 as a reporter, and terrorist attacks from Bali to Beslan to the 
Bataclan as a news editor. But these sudden bursts of violence test the nerves, 
judgment, stamina, humanity, character and common sense of news editors and 
reporters to the limit. And when they come one after the other, like the 
staccato volley of attacks across Europe and the US in this dreadful summer, 
they throw up difficult decisions and questions that can threaten the 
reputation of an entire news organisation.

A shooting, it is said: some injured; no, some killed? Says who? How many 
fatalities – and does that govern how big the story runs? Grainy video – what 
does that prove? Who was he? (Because in case you haven’t noticed, it’s almost 
always a he.) A terrorist? What does that even mean any more? A Muslim. So what?
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>? How can we be sure? 
Someone who is ill? Is that mitigation? What are the sensitivities there? 
Bodies. Lots of them. Children. Do we describe what they look like? Is that 
necessary?

It’s easy to make mistakes. Even the foreign secretary can get it painfully 
wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/24/boris-johnson-foreign-secretary-criticised-munich-shooting-islamist-terrorists>
 by jumping to conclusions. And the terrifying thing is this, being a news 
editor is like being a goalkeeper: you can get it right 99 times, but people 
will always remember the one mistake you make.

My colleague Lizzy Davies has a better analogy. “It’s a bit like you’re the 
conductor of an orchestra,” she says, “and there’s a group of people with 
different skills and abilities. You have to make sure everyone’s playing to 
their strengths, whether that’s on-the-ground reporting, cool-headed analysis, 
or fantastic live-blogging.”
Become a Guardian supporter 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=support_the_Guardian>
How do we navigate these wretched events? The crucial factors are experience, 
judgment, instinct, caution, teamwork and resources. And, of course, energetic, 
curious reporters who will find out the facts and stick to them. Fortunately, 
we have no shortage of those.

The first decision is what makes an attack worthy of coverage, serious enough 
to send one of our team to the scene. It’s hard to give a reader the sense of 
the terrible mix of the awful and the banal if you’re not on the ground. But 
you can’t be everywhere all the time. You need to separate the remarkable from 
the prosaic, and fast.

There are many considerations. Scale, moment – and above all, what does it 
mean? It’s not just about death: in the last week we all but ignored the murder 
of a Berlin doctor by his patient (ghastly, but with few wider ramifications) 
andthe killing of two people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/25/shooting-nightclub-fort-myers-florida>
 outside a Florida nightclub (equally ghastly but by now wearily familiar). By 
contrast, themurder of a French priest in his church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/men-hostages-french-church-police-normandy-saint-etienne-du-rouvray>
 was the lead story of both the website and the newspaper. Motive and the 
novelty factor are crucial. There’s a clue in the word “news”. It has to be new.

Of course, readers query these decisions: we have been asked why we covered 
the Paris attacks in November 2015 in the greatest detail but gave less time to 
the preceding attacks in Beirut or subsequent atrocities in Baghdad, where the 
death toll was comparable. It’s a fair question. The first day a car bomb went 
off in Baghdad, following the US invasion in 2003, we spent days reporting the 
perpetrators, victims, tactics and implications, because the development was 
new. Alas, horror in the Iraqi capital is no longer so new. Horror in the 
French capital is.

The next decision is whether to fire up live coverage. We call these articles 
“live blogs”: a rolling screed of incoming news, filtered, distilled, curated, 
verified wherever possible. We’ve covered at least half a dozen violent attacks 
live in the past two weeks, sometimes rotating the anchor to our reporters in 
London, New York and Sydney through the timezones. These pieces are read by 
millions of people, and though they are clearly a fast and furious attempt to 
grapple with a moving target, we have to ensure they do not descend into an 
echo chamber of every rumour and conspiracy theory going.

So we are careful to avoid repeating second-hand information, such as 
unsourced comment reported by other news outlets. We are cautious about naming 
names until we are certain; that goes for victims as well as perpetrators. We 
are highly sensitive about pictures that intrude on grief or are demeaning, or 
just gruesome for the sake of gruesomeness.

“It’s forced us to think about making live judgment calls on everything,” says 
Matt Wells, our senior digital editor. “It’s quite an intense editing 
experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Freporting-on-atrocities-it-is-vital-that-we-measure-every-word-with-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1af6aba5fab8f2f6eb0eb61f1da1dc8abfd99f07%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reporting%20on%20atrocities%3A%20it%20is%20vital%20that%20we%20measure%20every%20word%20with%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Freporting-on-atrocities-it-is-vital-that-we-measure-every-word-with-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reporting%20on%20atrocities%3A%20it%20is%20vital%20that%20we%20measure%20every%20word%20with%20care&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Freporting-on-atrocities-it-is-vital-that-we-measure-every-word-with-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1af6aba5fab8f2f6eb0eb61f1da1dc8abfd99f07%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A woman places flowers near the church in Saint-Étienne-du-Rouvray where 
Father Jacques Hamel was killed. Photograph: Pascal Rossignol/Reuters 
The metabolic rate of news events such as these is ferocious. Twitter chatter, 
TV, wire services, local papers, rival live blogs, citizen journalists 
Periscoping in real time. We strive to resist the pressure of rivals making 
calls we can’t. Such as CNN, during the Boston bombings,asserting that arrests 
had been made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/17/fbi-media-exercise-caution-bombings>
, or Mail Online during the Paris attacksidentifying one of the attackers as 
Europe’s first female suicide bomber 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/11/24/europes-first-female-suicide-bomber-moroccan-woman-bath-selfie-mistaken-identity_n_8635894.html>
 (she wasn’t) and then publishing a picture of “the bomber in the bath” (it was 
the wrong woman).

At times such as these we find a useful device is “What we know – and what we 
don’t 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-shootings-what-we-know-so-far>
”. We recognise that our value lies sometimes not in what we publish but what 
we choose not to. This is particularly true of motive. It was noticeable how 
the alleged killer of Jo Cox was described as a “loner” with “mental health” 
issues; Muslim attackers are rarely described that way. We are also careful to 
reflect soberlyon the lives lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/who-were-the-nice-attack-victims-bastille-day-dead>
.

Experience tells us not always to trust the authorities. During the Nice 
attacks, everyone from the president down had reached for the words “terrorism” 
and Isis before much was known about the truck driver who killed 84 people. 
Throughout that day, we were extremely careful about using the T word (it has 
become rather meaningless) and deliberately avoided mentioning Isis. Of course, 
it was clear that a mass killing had taken place. But as to motive, nothing was 
apparent. One of our earliest decisions was to send a reporter to the Tunisian 
home of the perpetrator, wherean alternative to the Isis footsoldier narrative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/nice-attack-bewilders-mohamed-lahouaiej-bouhlel-relatives>
 emerged.


There are new discussions – still evolving – about the impact our reporting 
has on the world it reflects. Do we glorify the attackers too much, encouraging 
copycats? (Le Monde has decided it willno longer show pictures of killers such 
as 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2016/07/27/resister-a-la-strategie-de-la-haine_4975150_3232.html>
 Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel.) Are we too saccharine, too writerly, in rendering 
these tragedies? Do we really need to describe the gore and horror? Does that 
serve a purpose? Readers’ views on this are always welcome.

Suffice to say that it is vital to measure every word in our news stories 
carefully to navigate these precarious waters of meaning. In the era of instant 
news and information overload, not every publisher can afford that luxury.

Thanks to the support of our members, we can. And we do.

• Help fund our journalism by becoming a Guardian supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=edfooter>.


• This article was amended on 2 August 2016 to amend a reference to the person 
alleged to have killed Jo Cox.
 