
Over the last couple of years I have written several items on this blog about 
the worrying lack of plurality in the Irish media market.

I have pointed in particular to the fact that a billionaire businessman, Denis 
O’Brien, owns far too wide a range of media outlets. And I have argued that 
such a concentration of ownershipposes potential threats to Ireland’s democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/07/should-ireland-allow-denis-obriens-media-empire-larger>
.

Now comes a report by four lawyers at two UK-based legal firms which raises 
similar concerns and calls on the Irish government to intervene.

In the report, “on the concentration of media ownership in Ireland”, the 
authors state: “we consider there to be a perfect storm which poses grave risks 
to freedom of expression and media pluralism in the Irish market”.

That storm is composed of O’Brien’s reach through newspapers and radio 
holdings in company withhis penchant for issuing writs against rival media 
outfits. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/16/are-denis-obriens-legal-activities-some-kind-of-record>

To recap, O’Brien is the largest shareholder in Independent News & Media 
(INM), which publishes Ireland’s two best-selling newspapers, plus theSunday 
World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-world> and Dublin Herald.

It also owns the Belfast Telegraph, 50% of the Irish Daily Star and 13 
paid-for regional weeklies (with seven more soon to be acquired 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/media/inm-group-agrees-deal-to-buy-irishowned-regional-newspapers-35017815.html>
).


According to the INM website <http://www.inmplc.com/about-inm/profile/>, it 
manages gross assets of €187.6m and is the largest newspaper contract printer 
and wholesale newspaper distributor on the island of Ireland.

Then comes radio. O’Brien is chairman and principal shareholder of 
Communicorp, which owns Ireland’s two leading commercial radio talk stations, 
Newstalk and Today FM. In addition, it owns Dublin’s 98FM, SPIN 1038, TXFM 
(soon to close) and SPIN South West.

However, the state’s public service broadcaster, RTÉ, is dominant in radio 
(and TV). It has been calculated,in an October 2015 study 
<http://monitor.cmpf.eui.eu/mpm2015/results/ireland/>, that Communicorp has a 
20% share of the Irish radio market. The company, citing “industry standard 
methodology”, has challenged this,arguing that it is 16% 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1689511.ece>. 

Whatever the case, INM’s newspaper dominance in addition to Communicorp’s 
radio assets anchors O’Brien as the country’s major private media mogul.

But there is another aspect to O’Brien’s activities that exercises the new 
report’s authors: Caoilfhionn Gallagher and Jonathan Price of London’s Doughty 
Street Chambers, and Gavin Booth and Darragh Mackin of KRW Law in Belfast.

Arguing that Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has “one of 
the most concentrated media markets of any democracy”, they contend that this 
“alarming” feature has to be viewed alongside another “gravely concerning 
aspect of the Irish media landscape”.

This is the “sustained and regular threats of legal action by Mr O’Brien to 
media organisations and journalists who are engaged in newsgathering or 
reporting about his activities.”

And this has to be seen in the light of what the authors call the “chilling 
effect” of Ireland’s current defamation laws. They argue: “This is a toxic 
combination for freedom of expression and media plurality”.

They believe it “imperative that urgent action is taken” and dismiss 
“suggestions that this is a constitutional no-go area, or an European Court of 
Human Rights (ECHR) no-go area”.

But they concede that retroactive action to break up media holdings “is a 
difficult area... affecting property rights and impacting upon an existing 
market”.

So they call for a “detailed multi-disciplinary analysis” to consider “complex 
and nuanced issues... including how precisely to measure plurality”.

To that end, they conclude: “We recommend that the government establish a 
cross-disciplinary commission of inquiry” in order to examine the issues “and 
make concrete recommendations, within a tight time frame”.

The authors were commissioned to compile a legal opinion by the Sinn Féin MEP 
Lynn Boylan on behalf of the European parliament’s left-wing groupingGUE/NGL 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_United_Left%E2%80%93Nordic_Green_Left>.

Boylan presented the study to the European Centre for Press and Media Freedom 
in Leipzig on 6 October <https://ecpmf.eu/2016/sched.html>. She will launch it 
in Ireland next Monday (24 October), at the Cliff Town House on St Stephen’s 
Green, Dublin, 2.30-4pm.

NB: If you happened to be wondering who might be the third-largest media owner 
in Ireland (after O’Brien and RTÉ) it is Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp, with Sky 
plus the Irish editions of the Sun, Times and Sunday Times. It is currently 
acquiringthe Wireless Group <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless_Group> 
(formerly UTV Media) with holdings that include six Irish local radio stations 
(including FM104) and a Belfast outlet.
 