
A Republican-dominated Congress convenes on Tuesday with a carefully crafted 
plan to erase much of what the Obama administration considered to be its main 
domestic achievements, starting with healthcare and environmental regulations.

Barack Obama is seeking to rally Democrats 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/30/politics/obama-congressional-democrats-block-obamacare-repeal/>
 on Capitol Hill on Wednesday for a rearguard struggle to salvage at least some 
of his signature legislation in the face of looming attacks over the course of 
the incoming Trump administration. But the party’s ability to resist is 
hampered by Republican legislative tactics designed to minimize the power of 
the minority, and by the fact that 10 Democratic senators will face re-election 
two years from now in states won by Donald Trump, making them reluctant to defy 
him.

Obama treads on Trump's Twitter turf to reflect on presidential achievements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/barack-obama-donald-trump-twitter>
In light of such handicaps, Democrats are likely to focus their limited 
political resources on fighting the confirmation of Trump nominees for high 
office, particularly in the supreme court, and to join forces with Republican 
senators pushing for a thorough investigation of the Russian role in the 
presidential election.

Republican leaders in the House and Senate have  
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/obamacare-repeal-coming-soon-mitch-mcconnell-232268>
signalled that theirfirst target 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/obamacare-repeal-coming-soon-mitch-mcconnell-232268>
 in the 115th Congress will be the Affordable Care Act (ACA), widely known as 
Obamacare, and have made clear they will not wait for Trump’s inauguration to 
start dismantling it.

“Repeal and replace” legislation has been developed since the ACA came into 
place in 2010, awaiting the arrival of a sympathetic president. The Democrats’ 
last line of defense is in the Senate, where they control 48 of the 100 seats, 
including two independents who normally vote with them. That gives them the 
power to hold up major legislation through filibusters that would require 60 
votes to overcome. So the Republicans’ plan to start unraveling Obamacare from 
their first day back at work is based on the use of budget measures that 
require only a simple 51-vote majority, and new procedural rules that ease 
budget constraints on their actions.

The main obstacle to the destruction of the ACA is not the Democrats, but the 
sheer complexity of unpicking its provisions, which offer tax credits for 
purchasing private health insurance and allow states to expand coverage of 
Medicaid, a longstanding program for low-income Americans. It may be 
politically necessary to replace those provisions with other forms of 
healthcare coverage, but House and SenateRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> are divided on how to do 
that, and on the overall ambitions of their healthcare counter-revolution.

Many in the House want to use Republican dominance of government to rewrite 
the Medicare program for the elderly that dates back to Lyndon Johnson, but 
there is less enthusiasm for that in the Senate. The likely outcome of such 
complications is that the effective date for Obamacare repeal and replacement 
will be deferred for several years.

The other priority for the Republican majority in the first days of the new 
Congress will be a planned bonfire of Obama-era regulations imposed on business 
and industry for environmental or labor-related reasons.

Top of the list are an eleventh-hour measure putting restrictions on 
mountaintop-removal coal mining 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/interior-stream-rule-appears-headed-for-congresss-chopping-block-232825>
 due to take effect on 19 January, one day before Trump enters the White House, 
as well as rules obliging hydrocarbon industries to reduce methane emissions 
and reveal their payments to foreign governments for mining rights.

The Republicans are planning to employ an obscure tool to kill these 
directives off quickly. The Congressional Review Act allows them to block 
regulations within 60 legislative days after their issue with a simple majority 
in the Senate.

An additional target for repeal is the Dodd-Frank Financial Reform Act, which 
provides consumer protection viewed by Republicans as an undue burden on the 
financial sector.

Republican leaders have said that an overhaul of the tax code and a new 
infrastructure bill are also priorities, especially as they can claim some 
bipartisan support. Chuck Schumer, the new Democratic leader in the Senate, has 
expressed guarded backing for Trump’s stated ambitions for infrastructure 
renewal.

“We think it should be large. He’s mentioned a trillion dollars. I told him 
that sounded good to me,” Schumertold 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/schumer-trumps-trillion-dollar-infrastructure-plan-sounds-good/story?id=44311598>
 ABC News.

However, that backing is likely to melt away when it becomes clear how much of 
the program is based on tax breaks for corporations rather than government 
spending. Observers say that the promised restructuring of the tax code is also 
likely to be put on hold to make way for the GOP’s overwhelming priority, 
destroying Obamacare.

The one likely blossoming of bipartisanship in the early days of the new 
Congress will be the opening ofan inquiry 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/john-mccain-russia-cyber-hacking-hearing-233059>
 on Thursday by the Senate armed services committee into Russian hacking of the 
2016 election. Democrats on the committee will join its chairman, Senator John 
McCain, and other Republican foreign policy hawks in seeking to focus the 
investigation on Moscow’s role in getting Trump elected.
 