
House speaker Paul Ryan said on Thursday that Republicans would legislate to 
defund Planned Parenthood as part of their attempt torepeal the Affordable Care 
Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
.

Senators demand inquiry into whether Trump pick broke insider trading laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
The same day, the Planned Parenthood Action Fund announced 
<http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/312886-planned-parenthood-launches-national-campaign-to-take-on-trump-gop>
 a national effort against such attempts to defund it.

Ryan spoke a day after a special House panel issued a report criticizing 
Planned Parenthood <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, 
which provides women’s health services, for its practices regarding providing 
tissue from aborted fetuses to researchers.

Allegations regarding such practices were at the heart of a scandal involving 
videos filmed by an anti-abortion activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/planned-parenthood-sting-videos-charges-dismissed>
. Investigations in 13 states concluded without criminal charges, and Planned 
Parenthood officials have denied any wrongdoing.

Ryan’s comments, while expected, were the first official word that repeal 
legislation would also renew the congressional assault on the group.

“The Planned Parenthood legislation would be in our reconciliation bill,” Ryan 
said.

Last year’s Obamacare repeal measure also contained an effort to defund 
Planned Parenthood, which receives government reimbursements from the Medicaid 
program for non-abortion health services to low-income women. It receives 
reimbursements for contraception services from a different government account.

The defunding measure would take away roughly $400m in Medicaid money from the 
group in the year after enactment, according to the nonpartisan Congressional 
Budget Office, and would result in roughly 400,000 women losing access to care.

Being enrolled in Medicaid does not guarantee access to a doctor, so women 
denied Medicaid services from Planned Parenthood may not be able to find 
replacement care.

Attempts by states to remove Planned Parenthood from Medicaid programs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/31/planned-parenthood-sues-texas-medicaid>
 have been deemedincompatible with federal law 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/08/states-cant-end-medicaid-funding-of-planned-parenthood/452283/>
.

President-elect Donald Trump sent mixed signals during the campaign about the 
100-year-old organization. He said “millions of women are helped by Planned 
Parenthood”, but he also endorsed efforts to defund the group. Trump once 
described himself as “very pro-choice”, but now opposes abortion rights.

Cutting off Planned Parenthood from taxpayer money is a long-sought dream of 
social conservatives, but it’s a loser in the minds of some GOP strategists.

Planned Parenthood is loathed by anti-abortion activists who are the backbone 
of the GOP coalition. Polls, however, show the group is favorably viewed by a 
sizable majority of Americans: 59% in a Gallup survey last year, including more 
than one-third ofRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>.

The defunding effort could also complicate an Obamacare repeal push in the 
Senate, where at least one GOP member – Susan Collins of Maine – cited the 
defunding language in opposing the repeal effort in late 2015.

Last year’s elections thinned Republican ranks in the Senate to 52, so only a 
handful of defections are possible if a repeal measure is to pass.

Asked on Wednesday about party efforts to tie the effort to defund Planned 
Parenthood to Obamacare repeal, Collins said: “That’s of concern to me as well, 
but I don’t want to prejudge what’s in the … bill.”

'We've shown that we can': Obama's last letter to the American people – full 
text
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/barack-obama-letter-american-people>
Most Republican lawmakers have long opposed Planned Parenthood because many of 
its clinics provide abortions. Their antagonism intensified after anti-abortion 
activists releasedsecretly recorded videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/planned-parenthood-sting-videos-charges-dismissed>
 in 2015 that purported to show Planned Parenthood officials discussing how 
they sometimes provide fetal tissue to researchers, which is legal if no profit 
is made.

The House GOP report issued on Wednesday accused Planned Parenthood of 
violating federal laws by altering abortion procedures to obtain fetal tissue, 
disclosing patients’ private information to firms that procure the tissue and 
“a general disinterest in clinical integrity”.

Planned Parenthood has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing, and did so again on 
Wednesday. The group has strong support from Democrats on Capitol Hill.

“Today’s Republican staff report once again demonstrates that this exercise 
was nothing more than a partisan attack on Planned Parenthood and women’s 
access to safe and legal abortion,” said Dana Singiser, Planned Parenthood’s 
vice-president for Public Policy, in a statement.
 