
Republicans gut ethics body

In a surprise move late on Monday, congressional Republicans voted to 
significantly weaken the Office of Congressional Ethics (OCE). The motion was
reportedly backed 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/house-republicans-gut-their-own-oversight-233111>
 by several congressmen who were under investigation by the OCE and was opposed 
by the Republican legislative leadership. The bill turns the independent OCE 
into the Office of Congressional Complaint Review, which will now be a 
subsidiary to the House Ethics Committee, which is run by the Republican 
majority. The move to remove the independence of the body – which was 
established in 2008 to investigate lobbying scandals in Congress – was met with 
outrage by Democrats as well as ethics advisers. George Bush and Barack Obama’s 
ethic counselsreleased a statement 
<http://www.citizensforethics.org/press-release/norman-eisen-richard-painter-statement-house-gop-vote-gut-office-congressional-ethics/>
 condemning the move.

Outcry after Republicans vote to dismantle independent ethics body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/outcry-after-republicans-vote-to-dismantle-independent-ethics-body>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

North Korea nuclear attack ‘won’t happen’, says Trump

Donald Trump has said no North Korean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> nuclear bomb will reach the US 
mainland, a day after the regime in Pyongyang claimed it was close to
test-launching an intercontinental ballistic missile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/pentagon-condemns-north-korea-after-claim-it-will-test-missile-that-can-reach-us>
 (ICBM). “North Korea just stated that it is in the final stages of developing 
a nuclear weapon capable of reaching parts of the US,” Trump said on Twitter. 
“It won’t happen!” It was not clear whether the president-elect believedNorth 
Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> was incapable of 
developing a reliable ICBM, or that the US would prevent it doing so. Trump 
also added a criticism of China, which he said drained the US economy but 
refused to rein in its ally in Pyongyang. Kim announced his country was in the 
final stages of testing the ICBM, which in theory could travel 5,500 miles 
needed to reach the US, during a New Year’s address. North Korea has never 
successfully test-fired an ICBM.

Trump says US safe from North Korean nuclear strike – no thanks to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/trump-says-us-safe-from-north-korean-nuclear-strike-no-thanks-to-china>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnorth-korean-nuclear-attack-on-us-wont-happen-says-donald-trump-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=North%20Korean%20nuclear%20attack%20on%20US%20won't%20happen%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnorth-korean-nuclear-attack-on-us-wont-happen-says-donald-trump-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=North%20Korean%20nuclear%20attack%20on%20US%20won%27t%20happen%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnorth-korean-nuclear-attack-on-us-wont-happen-says-donald-trump-video-report&media=>
North Korean nuclear attack on US won’t happen, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/03/north-korean-nuclear-attack-on-us-wont-happen-says-donald-trump-video-report>
A look back at Obama’s legacy

After becoming the first African American president eight years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/the-obama-years-timeline-of-a-presidency>
, Barack Obama rallied the nation with a message of hope. The Guardian’s 
specialist writers look back at Obama’s presidency issue-by-issue to evaluate 
his accomplishments and examine how long they will last under a Trump 
administration.

Obama’s legacy: the promises, shortcomings and fights to come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/the-obama-years-timeline-of-a-presidency>

Ferguson wants to sing Strange Fruit at Trump inauguration

Singer Rebecca Ferguson has said she would perform at Trump’s inauguration if 
she could sing Billie Holiday’s Strange Fruit. The song, first recorded in 1939 
and covered by Nina Simone in 1965, graphically describes lynchings of African 
Americans. Strange Fruit is “a song that speaks to all the disregarded and down 
trodden black people in the United States”, Ferguson said in a Twitter 
statement. The British singer rose to fame as a contestant on 2010’s X Factor, 
where she sang Sam Cooke’s civil rights anthem A Change is Gonna Come. Amber 
Jamieson compiled a list of 10 more songs Trump might want to consider for his 
20 January inauguration.

Rebecca Ferguson says she will play Trump inauguration if she can sing Strange 
Fruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/rebecca-ferguson-says-she-will-play-trump-inauguration-if-she-can-sing-strange-fruit>


Labor department administrator worries over Trump pick

David Weil, the chief enforcer of the nation’s wage and hour laws, is worried 
that the fast food executive Donald Trump has nominated to be labor secretary 
will undermine efforts to crack down on widespread wage violations. “I 
obviously am concerned about things I hear,” Weil told the Guardian about Andy 
Puzder. “If they do things that are attempts to just undermine the department’s 
mission, I think that is something they should be called on.” Puzder, chief 
executive officer of CKE Restaurants – the company that runs the Hardee’s and 
Carl’s Jr fast-food chains – has on occasion been ordered to pay back wages 
because of labor violations.

Don’t bankrupt labor department’s mission, wages chief tells Trump nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/us-labor-department-andy-puzder-workers-right-wages>



Liberalism ‘under threat’

If liberalism is to survive the kind of challenges that Trump’s voters threw 
at it, it will have to come back, with energy, imagination and still greater 
investment, to its origin points, argues Daniel T Rodgers.

Liberals risk becoming a permanent minority in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/liberals-risk-becoming-permanent-minority-america>


USC win epic Rose Bowl

The highest-scoring Rose Bowl ever ended with a victory for the University of 
Southern California. The ninth-ranked team pipped the fifth-ranked Penn State 
after mounting a 14-point comeback. Junior Matt Boermeester kicked a 46-yard 
field goal for USC just as time expired to give them the game.


USC win Rose Bowl epic after last-gasp field goal breaks Penn State hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/usc-win-rose-bowl-penn-state-matt-boermeester>


Finland trials basic income for unemployed

Finland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland> has become the first 
country in Europe to pay its unemployed citizens a basic monthly income, 
amounting to €560 (£477/US$587), in a unique social experiment that is hoped to 
cut government red tape, reduce poverty and boost employment. Olli Kangas of 
the Finnish government agency KELA, which is responsible for the country’s 
social benefits, said the scheme’s idea was to abolish the “disincentive 
problem” among the unemployed. The trial aimed to discouraged people’s fears 
“of losing out something”, he said, adding that the selected persons would 
continue to receive the €560 even after obtaining a job.

Finland trials basic income for unemployed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/finland-trials-basic-income-for-unemployed>


In case you missed it…



Animal rights groups have hit out at Japan’s owl cafes, where the birds are 
petted and photographed by customers. The word owl means good luck or 
protection from hardship in Japanese. Bird-of-prey experts warn that owls make 
terrible pets and welfare groups consider cafe conditions questionable, if not 
abusive.

Conservationists get their talons out for Japan’s owl cafes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/03/conservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes>

 