
The Conservatives and Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> have provided 
Westminster with a masterclass in recent days on how not to run a coalition 
government.

That is the view of senior Whitehall sources over the handling of the report 
by the venture capitalist, Adrian Beecroft, into liberalising employment laws. 
Steve Hilton, David Cameron's policy guru who is a champion of deregulation, 
commissioned the report because he believes that overly restrictive employment 
laws are holding back Britain's economic growth.

The Liberal Democrats have taken fright at Beecroft's central proposal: giving 
employers the right to sack unproductive employees without explanation.I report 
in Wednesday's Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/nov/08/nick-clegg-vetoes-work-reform> 
(as doesRobert Winnett in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/journalists/robert-winnett/>) that Nick Clegg has 
intervened to block Beecroft's main idea on the grounds that it would have a 
"chilling effect" on the Labour market. The deputy prime minister believes that 
Beecroft's idea would actually stunt economic growth by making workers so 
insecure they would stop spending money.

Clegg is understood to have made clear that he would not allow the most 
controversial aspects of the Beecroft proposals to pass the "quad" – the 
coalition's key decision making body attended by Cameron, Clegg, George Osborne 
andDanny Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander>. 
Government sources say that while there has been a row in Whitehall there has 
been no bust up over Beecroft among the coalition's most senior ministers. They 
all enjoy friendly, if not exactly loving, relations. Osborne has also not gone 
out of his way to press for the adoption of the report because the proposals do 
not feature prominently on the CBI's list of priorities.

But the positioning over the Beecroft report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/beecroft-report> has given minsters pause 
for thought on how to run the coalition. This is what one Whitehall source says:


The problem with commissioning something like the Beecroft report in a 
coalition is that you are effectively inviting people to take up positions. 
They dig in and nothing happens.

Ministers are wondering whether the coalition now needs to enter a new – and 
third – phase. In the first phase, symbolised by the Nick and Dave press 
conference in the Downing Street garden in May last year, the two partners 
showed their determination to govern together in the national interest.

That came to an abrupt end, triggering the second phase, when the Liberal 
Democrats suffered a bruising defeat in the AV referendum in May this year. At 
that point the Liberal Democrats started to differentiate themselves from their 
coalition partners. Clegg gave the first taste of this approach back in January 
whenhe told me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/jan/11/nick-clegg-differences-coalition-government>
 that it was right, from"time to time" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/jan/11/nickclegg-davidcameron>
, to remind people that the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats are "separate 
independent parties with separate identities".

There is growing feeling among ministers that the differentiation strategy may 
need to be toned down a degree or two. This is what one senior Lib Dem said:

I think we need to be careful this does not go too far. Obviously after the 
referendum loss in May we needed to differentiate ourselves more than we had. 
But we do have to be careful. We must continue to look like a cohesive 
government. The quad works fine. But we have to be careful about the briefers. 
We cannot have people in Downing Street briefing against eachother. We are not 
going to be like Blair and Brown.

Hilton may be frustrated that some of the key ideas in Beecroft's report have 
been junked by the Lib Dems, as my good friendBenedict Brogan has blogged 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/benedictbrogan/100116340/nick-clegg-has-blocked-beecrofts-main-recommendation/>
 tonight. But the Beecroft report may end up strengthening the coalition. That 
will increase the chances of the friend he calls Dave making it through to the 
2015 election as prime minister.
 