
 Normally it makes sense, if you have a personal pension, to keep it invested 
as long as possible to maximise money available for converting into a tax-free 
lump sum and annuity. (It also means that your annuity will be payable for 
fewer years, and therefore higher.)

 But accountant Barry Kernon is advising his clients to ponder breaking this 
rule: if annuity rates are really going to head still lower, he asks, could it 
be better to take the pension now? You can normally take a personal pension 
from age 50, even if you have no intention of retiring from paid work. 'It's a 
question of when it's sensible to take the annuity. You could decide to 
crystallise what you've got.' In many cases, Kernon argues, deferring annuity 
purchase means a poorer result.

 Cashing in a personal pension doesn't preclude you from continuing to save 
until your actual retirement. A number of invest-ment alternatives (such as 
Isas) can be considered. As Kernon points out, it is also possible if you have 
continuing income from work to arrange a further personal pension. The eventual 
policy proceeds would be smaller, so the annuity conversion risk would be 
diminished.

 But there are difficulties. People with personal pensions (especially Section 
226 policies dating from before 1988) may be penalised if they do not hold the 
policies until the agreed retirement date. Some terminal bonuses may be in 
jeopardy, and some policies may offer guaranteed annuity rates at term, an 
increasingly valuable facility.

 Peter Quinton of the Annuity Bureau has a more substantive concern. With 
rates low, there is commercial pressure on insurers to come up with new 
innovative alternatives to traditional annuities. 'We're expecting some major 
developments in annuity funds soon.'
 