
Like two ageing heavyweights, Garry Kasparov, 46, and Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov>, 58, will face up to each 
other again this month. The 25th anniversary of the first of their five world 
title matches will be marked in Valencia, Spain, on 21-24 September by a 
12-game series (four rapid, eight blitz), and there are suggestions that if 
this is successful they may repeat the exercise in their other championship 
venues, which include London. Frankly, if Kasparov came here I would rather see 
him in a rematch with the rejuvenated Nigel Short.

Though Kasparov is officially retired and Karpov is not, the older 
grandmaster's disastrous last place recently in San Sebasti√°n and his relative 
weakness in speed play make him the underdog. Both took part last month in 
events to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the Zurich chess club. Eight world 
champions (some of them Fide knock-out winners) each took on 25 amateurs. 
Kasparov scored an unbeaten 23-2, Karpov 20.5-4.5, so this week's game is 
interesting as a rare indication of how far Kasparov's genius has survived 
years of relative chess rust while he sought unsuccessfully as a politician to 
unseat Vladimir Putin.

In fact, Kasparov's Swiss amateur opponent gives a very good account of 
himself for the first 24 moves, preparing and launching the thematic d6-d5 
counter to undermine White's c4/e4 pawn centre. But 25...Nf6 26 N4c3 Rd8 is 
superior to 25...Nb4, and next turn Black miscalculates and blunders a pawn. 
Kasparov then wraps up convincingly, though on the final move 35 Rg5! is a 
faster way to mate.

G Kasparov v Gahwiler

1 e4 c5 2 Nf3 d6 3 Bb5+ Bd7 4 Bxd7+ Qxd7 5 c4 Nf6 6 Nc3 Nc6 7 0-0 g6 8 d4 cxd4 
9 Nxd4 Bg7 10 Nde2 Qe6 11 Nd5 Rc8 12 f3 0-0 13 Rb1 Qd7 14 Ndc3 Rfd8 15 Kh1 e6 16
 Bg5 Ne717 Qd3 h6 18 Bh4 g5 19 Bf2 Nc6 20 Qd2 d5! 21 cxd5 exd5 22 Rfd1 dxe4 23 
Qxd7 Rxd724 Rxd7 Nxd7 25 Nxe4 Nb4?! 26 N2c3 Nd3? 27 Bxa7 Nxb2 28 Rxb2 Bxc3 29 
Rxb7 Ba530 Be3 Ne5 31 h4 gxh4 32 Rb5 Nc4 33 Bxh6 Rd8? 34 Nf6+ Kh8 35 Rh5 1-0

Nigel Short is officially England No1 with a world rating of 2706 in the just 
published Fide rankings, while Michael Adams has dropped to 2682. Short has 
continued his fine form this week at India's Kolkata Open where he is joint 
leader with 3.5/4 in an event which became news when French GM Vladislav 
Tkachiev was forfeited for being drunk at the board.

3103 1 Rxf7! Rxf7 2 b6+! Resigns. If Kxb6 3 Qxe6+ and 4 Qxf7. If Kb8 3 Qd6+ 
Nc7 4 Qd8 mate.
 