
An aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by temp recruitment agencies is 
depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” of pounds a year, a Guardian 
investigation has found.

A number of agencies have been making large windfalls by using “contrived” 
financial arrangements to slash their employer’s national insurance bills.


More than 7m Britons now in precarious employment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
The schemes also generate millions more pounds for participants by exploiting 
VAT rules that were originally designed to benefit very small businesses.

Last year, HMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> advised anybody 
using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the costs of litigation and minimise 
any interest and penalties due on underpaid national insurance”.

However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands there has been a spike 
in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the 
government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the 
employment agency sector.

Guardian undercover footage shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider 
of the schemes, outlining how:

• Workers’ contracts are being transferred from a single employment agency 
into a web of thousands of tiny companies that benefit from the tax breaks.

• Each of the tiny employment companies are ostensibly run by overseas 
directors, who are based in locations such as the Philippines and Pakistan.

• Some agencies are keeping these schemes secret from the organisations they 
are supplying the workers to.

Asked about the ethics of profiting at the expense of the taxpayer, the 
Guardian footage shows Griffin saying: “All I can do is explain to you what our 
product does. It’s right for some businesses and it’s wrong for other 
businesses. I’ve sat where you’re sat and you make your own judgments and 
decisions on that. All I can do is present to you the case that what we’re 
doing is effective, it works and it complies with all of the laws as they’re 
currently written.”

He added: “I never like to comment on morals because everyone’s moral compass 
is different, isn’t it?”
How temporary recruitment agencies use an aggressive tax avoidance scheme 
which deprives taxpayers of 'hundreds of millions' of pounds each year 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/tax_dodge-zip/giv-15726bo1beZnFx1G4/>
The discovery of these new schemes comes as part of a series of articles 
published by the Guardian about modern employment practices and a newly 
precarious workforce. They will add to the pressure on the already embattled 
employment agency sector, which has been reeling from separate scandals about 
the exploitation of low-paid workers at companies such as Sports Direct.

Griffin said his firm has a QC’s opinion stating the Premier Payco scheme 
legally helps clients avoid taxes, because it is based on “genuine” commercial 
relationships between the interacting companies and had not been created 
specifically to avoid tax.

However, not all tax lawyers agree.

Having been shown Premier Payco marketing documents and viewing sections of 
the Guardian’s undercover footage, Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at 
Devereux Chambers, said: “It’s a not particularly sophisticated piece of failed 
tax avoidance because having read through the document I have no real doubt 
that the scheme doesn’t work. So what it does, it piles up tax liabilities in a 
[tiny] shell company and it does so in a way that the organisers of the scheme 
know that those tax liabilities will never be met. So that shell company will 
fold if HMRC ever catches up with it and HMRC – and indeed by extension the 
rest of us – will be kept out of the tax that we need to fund schools and 
hospitals and pensions and social care.”

Maugham added that the salesman was “doing a soft-shoe shuffle on what is the 
critical question of law, which is whether one of the main purposes of these 
arrangements is to obtain a tax saving. As I listen to [Griffin’s] answer and 
as I read the documents you’ve been provided with, it’s abundantly clear to me 
that this is one of the main purposes.

“It is perfectly reasonable to think the loss to the exchequer of this sort of 
abuse runs into the hundreds of millions if not billions of NICs [national 
insurance contributions], and prospectively VAT.”

The sale of these schemes is being ramped up despite concern about their 
efficacy, the Guardian understands.

Last year, HMRC issued a notice specifically about such schemes, following a 
BBC report on similararrangements being marketed by a supplier called Anderson 
Group <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-32914372>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc963ad201421786cb5ecef33388d3adf67b5f%2F0_97_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20temp%20agencies'%20avoidance%20scheme%20costs%20taxpayers%20'hundreds%20of%20millions'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20temp%20agencies%27%20avoidance%20scheme%20costs%20taxpayers%20%27hundreds%20of%20millions%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc963ad201421786cb5ecef33388d3adf67b5f%2F0_97_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 HMRC issued a notice last year specifically about tax avoidance schemes 
involving the use of artificial and contrived arrangements to slash national 
insurance bills. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
In its notice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules>
, HMRC said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules/spotlight-24-employment-allowance-avoidance-scheme-contrived-arrangements-caught-by-existing-rules>
: “Attempted avoidance schemes like this, which seek to use artificial and 
contrived arrangements to get an unintended advantage, do not work. HMRC’s firm 
view is that such schemes are notifiable under thedisclosure of tax avoidance 
schemes (Dotas) rules 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/disclosure-of-tax-avoidance-schemes-overview>. 
Anyone who comes within the meaning of a promoter for such a scheme who has not 
notified it under the Dotas rules could be liable for a fine of up to £1m”.

However, Maugham added that his knowledge of the market suggested HMRC was 
“just letting it slide”.

Meanwhile, the Guardian’s undercover footage shows Griffin questioning HMRC’s 
ability to prevent the schemes: “That [HMRC notice is] from June 2015 and the 
company they investigated doubled their size since then. I know that’s not very 
scientific. I know that’s not a piece of paper from HMRC but it’s relatively 
good anecdotal evidence that while they don’t like it, the way things are at 
the moment, there’s not a lot they can do about it.

“Other ways they could attack it? You’ve already got Dotas but [ours is] not a 
tax avoidance scheme so you don’t have to declare it to Dotas. You’ve already 
gotGAAR 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tax-avoidance-general-anti-abuse-rules>
 [general anti-abuse rule] … We’ve got a series of commercial transactions all 
of which have signed, legally binding contracts binding the parties to do what 
it is they’re supposed to do, so the advice that I’ve got is that at the 
moment, nothing that we’re doing falls under GAAR.”

The employment agencies identified by the Guardian as using these schemes 
supply temporary labour to some of the UK’s best known brands, as well as the 
public sector.

Premier Payco, which claims to have 6,000 workers enrolled on its system, 
cites recruitment group Mtrec as one of its clients. Mtrec supplies workers to 
the NHS as well as to a series of industrial clients.

HRGo, an agency that uses a similar product, has a major contract with support 
services group G4S and says it supplies workers to the NHS as well as the 
prison service.

Another employment agency called Jark, which also places its workers with the 
NHS as well as FTSE 100 companies such as Shell and Burberry, is understood to 
be using an employment allowance product supplied by the financial services 
group Contrella.

Because each mini employment company created in these schemes employs only two 
or three workers, the taxes it has to pay on its wage bill are small.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd931a44109c004fe5ea361a25797ec9afdcf82e8%2F0_11_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20temp%20agencies'%20avoidance%20scheme%20costs%20taxpayers%20'hundreds%20of%20millions'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20temp%20agencies%27%20avoidance%20scheme%20costs%20taxpayers%20%27hundreds%20of%20millions%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd931a44109c004fe5ea361a25797ec9afdcf82e8%2F0_11_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Premier Payco cites recruitment group Mtrec, which supplies workers to the 
NHS, as one of its clients. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
That small tax bill can be effectively eradicated by each mini company 
claiming a £3,000 government subsidy called the employment allowance, which can 
only be claimed once by a company and was designed to help very small 
businesses create more jobs or increase wages.

The mini employment companies can also generate an additional windfall by 
charging VAT at 20% but paying it back to the government at about 12%, 
exploiting arrangements designed to free very small businesses with revenues of 
less than £150,000 a year from red tape.

Marketing materials produced by Premier Payco, and seen by the Guardian, claim 
the company has 6,000 temporary workers enrolled in its scheme. Along with 
similar products supplied by providers such as Contrella and Anderson Group, 
one employment agency insider calculates the exchequer is losing about £100m a 
year from the schemes alone.

A spokesman for Premier Payco said: “We are confident that we operate within 
all relevant guidance and legislation and we constantly review the regulatory 
landscape to ensure our ongoing compliance by reference to leading counsel, tax 
advisers and employment specialists.”

Anderson Group said it had taken QCs’ advice on the services to ensure the 
arrangements were legal and compliant with any relevant legislation and that it 
had offered schemes on behalf of a client. Contrella did not respond to 
invitations to comment.

Among the agencies using this type of arrangement, HRGo and Jark said they 
took compliance seriously and that they had taken legal advice before signing 
up with any suppliers of this type of scheme. Mtrec did not respond to 
invitations to comment.

Burberry and G4S said they had not benefited from any of the tax arrangements 
of their employment agencies. Shell declined to comment.
 