
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01nwfxs>

"STATISTICS!" parps the cover of the first ever issue of Pop Scene, 
"published" in 1981. Because, of course, when you're an 11-year-old boy writing 
your own pop magazine on paper taken from your parents' chip shop, there are 
few more exciting things in the world than STATISTICS!

As a dedicated 11-year-old chart watcher, I knew from the outset that Pop 
Scene wouldn't be short of STATISTICS! And in 1981 there were no more exciting 
STATISTICS! than those that made up the weekly singles chart. Pop Scene was 
born of a gap in the market. Having studied the existing music magazines – NME, 
Melody Maker, Smash Hits, Record Mirror – brought into the house by my 
15-year-old brother, I noticed that none of them featured reviews of every 
single record in the top 75. I surely can't have heard every record in the top 
75, but looking at Pop Scene 31 years later, it's pretty clear to me that I'd 
heard a lot of them. So I duly set about the process of reviewing them. I can 
tell from the records in the chart –Take It on the Run 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J010sooBvp4> by REO Speedwagon; Body Talk 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ednOJ5ejjg> by Imagination; Ghost Town 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WhhSBgd3KI> by the Specials – that we're into 
July. So I suspect that Pop Scene was also born of summer holiday boredom. 
Nevertheless, it's nothing if not thorough. I really do appear to have written 
something about every single record in that week's chart.

In my 11-year-old mind, the charts were a battleground between real and 
manufactured pop, between the authenticity of guitars and the fakeness of 
synths and drum machines, and it's pretty clear which side I was on. Writing 
about Depeche Mode's maiden hitNew Life 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZFnEhwmpjXI>, I grudgingly conceded: "It's a 
good sound but imagine seeing them in concert. It's just as lively as 
Crossroads. All the noises are made by a synthesiser." Note the disapproval. 
Dropping to No 61 that week, Adam and the Ants had not long ridden into the 
hearts of a million teenage girls with an audaciously bonkers concept album 
about pirates and Native Americans.Stand & Deliver 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B2a6l6wM2k> was no less brilliant, but in a 
Birmingham suburb, one critic remained unimpressed. Adam Ant was, I decided, "a 
prat who thinks he's Tonto and the next minute Dick Turpin". My searing 
evisceration of his oeuvre continued at some length, but in a little box to the 
side, the 11-year-old within could no longer be contained. "He's bent!" it said.

Mainly though, I called it like I saw it – usually in the sniffy, supercilious 
tones I deemed essential to all rock discourse. Pondering Eddy Grant's descent 
to No 40 withI Love You, Yes I Love You 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XW99QdLDyl0>, I sounded an ominous note of 
warning: "Same ole Eddy and people are getting bored." After an impressive run 
of hits such as Cool for Cats, Up the Junction and Another Nail in My Heart, 
Squeeze – exponents of the sort of unshowy songcraft I held in high regard – 
were struggling to penetrate the top 40 withTempted 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7PmtS_qMdXg>. "Squeeze have got two things 
other groups haven't got – Difford and Tilbrook," I lamented, before 
concluding: "Squeeze deserve more than they're getting." I could perceive 
comparable depths to Bob Marley and the Wailers' posthumously released No Woman 
No Cry, but this merely left me conflicted: "Brought [sic] in honour of the 
reggae king's death. It's got feeling, a meaning. But I don't like it."

With their monophonic synth-prodding, I might have disdained Depeche Mode, but 
in his own way, the all-conquering Shakin' Stevens seemed no less lazy to me. 
As Shaky gazed imperiously down from his perch, at the apex of that week's top 
75, one lone, prepubescent voice of dissent, somewhere in the West Midlands, 
could be heard: "I like it, it's good, but it's just not right how he can pick 
one old song, sing it and sell it. How about some new stuff, Mr Stevens?" The 
same puritanism extended to pre-eminent medley-makers Star Sound, who had the 
temerity to tackle Abba withStars on 45 Vol II 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hizHRgMU3-4>: "This Abba medley is very good 
but I, being an Abba fan, hate it. If you like people making money out of other 
people's songs, buy it." Meanwhile, five places beneath it, at 14, sat the real 
Abba, with their 12in-only club hitLay All Your Love On Me 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K1D9NMadiGo>: "The best group the world has 
ever seen. The only group that can get in the top 10 on 12in singles at £1.99 
each. Another outstanding Abba song."

I didn't know anyone else who was quite as obsessed with the weekly hit parade 
as I was in 1981. But if this Friday's BBC4 documentary Pop Chart Britannia is 
anything to go by, there were quite a few of us. Chart fan Steve Carr recreates 
the weekly ritual of unwrapping an audio cassette and preparing to tape his 
favourite songs from that week's chart countdown, finger hovering over the 
pause button in order to eliminate the sound of the DJ at the end of the track.

But do people still view the top 40 in the same way? I'm not sure if it's 
quite the pop share index it once used to be. That only really works if you 
have a weekly high-profile TV show predicated on the ups and downs of that 
chart. Without Top of the Pops, the top 40 on its own is a little too much like 
any other trade chart – akin to say, the latest rundown on chiller cabinet 
lines found in the Grocer or a list of the most purchased paperbacks in 
motorway services. It's hard to imagine any freakish 11-year-olds in 2012 
sharing Pop Scene's excitement about STATISTICS!

In the continued absence of Top of the Pops, my 11-year old daughter has found 
herself drawn to BBC4's Thursday night TOTP reruns from 35 years ago. We sit in 
the front room discussing whether Summer Nights will continue its run in the 
top spot. I can't remember if it will and she never knew in the first place. 
Meanwhile, in the current chart, neither of us have any idea what's No 1. If 
only there was a magazine you could go to for that sort of information.

Pop Charts Britannia: 60 Years of the Top 10 is on BBC4 on Friday at 9.25pm
 