
Richard Linklater: ‘Someone’s living back there, and he’s murdered somebody’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/30/richard-linklater-film-director-murderer-lodger-simon-hattenstone>
If you could enter into the mindset of one of the great established American 
film-makers of our age – into the movies they make, and the personal creative 
vortex they emerge from – who would you chose? Would it be mechanical David 
Fincher, the Kubrickian 80-takes man, once accused of using actors like mere 
“hues” in his palette? Would it be the inscrutable Paul Thomas Anderson, daring 
you to love his increasingly fractured movies? Or the mind of on-set screamer 
David O Russell, whose work exhibits, movie by movie, an extreme waxing and 
waning of directorial surehandedness?

I’d choose the quiet life, and the organic and artisanal work of Richard 
Linklater <https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater>, who’s well 
profiled by fellow Austin scene-maker Louis Black inRichard Linklater: Dream Is 
Destiny. The film weaves a neat cat’s cradle of narrative back and forth across 
Linklater’s career, starting on the set of his newest film Everybody Wants 
Some!! (sequel of sorts to his third feature Dazed & Confused), then cutting 
back to the hardscrabble economics and sense of collaboration that got his 
$23,000 indie pacesetter Slacker made. Threaded throughout the movie are the 
12-year filming process of Boyhood, and the three romantic stepping stones that 
form the trilogy Before Sunrise/Sunset/Midnight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhmpBJu7_xfs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhmpBJu7_xfs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhmpBJu7_xfs&media=>
Richard Linklater: Dream is Destiny review – from Slacker to Boyhood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/27/richard-linklater-dream-is-destiny-sundance-2016-first-look-review>
I’d almost forgotten that Linklater was deemed back then to have invented “the 
slacker generation”, and was lumbered for a while with that career-millstone 
role of being deemed its spokesman. Our understanding of him as an artist took 
a while to ripen – as his repertoire widened to show his range – in much the 
way the movies themselves grow with repeated viewings.

As he developed, you began to notice how French he was, or at least how much 
warmth he shared with humanists such as Renoir or Truffaut; then how homemade 
and hand-crafted his movies felt (literally, in the case of the post-animated 
Waking Life and A Scanner Darkly); how he’s always had his own John Wayne 
(Matthew McConaughey) and Henry Fonda (Ethan Hawke); and how he strives for the 
unforced small dramatic moment – think of the wordless listening-booth scene in 
Before Sunrise – that somehow discloses everything.

All this without film school, only what he learned from making it up with his 
friends as he went along. Linklater, the happy autodidact, is the least 
referential director of his generation; happy to be himself and no one else. 
He, more than anyone his age, is making movies not about other movies, but 
about life itself; two words that could be the title of almost any one of his 
works.

Richard Linklater: Dream Is Destiny is in cinemas from Friday 
 