
My brother, Richard McKane, who has died aged 68 of pneumonia, was a poet, 
interpreter and translator. While he was a second-year undergraduate at Oxford 
University, his translations from Russian of the poetry of Anna Akhmatova were 
published by Penguin and Oxford University Press. The book was instrumental in 
popularising her in Europe and was the standard English translation for many 
years.

In spite of spates of ill health, he continued to translate Russian and 
Turkish poetry, publishing Osip Mandelstam, Olga Sedakova, and many Turkish 
writers, including Oktay Rifat and Nazim Hikmet. This was combined with writing 
his own poetry and interpreting at counselling sessions at the Medical 
Foundation for the Victims of Torture, work that made great demands on his own 
equilibrium. The charity’s founder, Helen Bamber, became a close personal 
friend, and onDesert Island Discs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00942b4> 
she chose a book of his own poetry,Out of the Cold Blue 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Out-Cold-Blue-Poems-1999-1967/dp/1905082452/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1481716019&sr=8-1-fkmr0&keywords=Into+the+Cold+Blue+mcKane>
, for her desert island.

Richard was born in Melbourne, son of Leonard (Mac) McKane, who worked around 
the world for GCHQ, and his wife, Kate (nee Harris), a languages teacher who 
had worked in intelligence at Bletchley Park during the war. Richard and his 
three siblings were sent to boarding schools in England. After Marlborough 
College, where he excelled as a linguist and a squash player, he travelled for 
six months in the Middle East, learning fluent Turkish. He was already 
translating Russian and Turkish poetry before beginning his Russian degree at 
University College, Oxford.

It was at university that he was first troubled with mental illness, but he 
recovered and after graduation worked for several summers as a travel rep based 
in Antalya,Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, for Wings Tours. 
Snorkelling was a particular passion, and he was a skilled spearfisher. He 
often wintered in old Istanbul, working on translations and enjoying the 
Turkish literary scene.

In 1978 he was awarded a Hodder fellowship in creative writing at Princeton 
University, the first non-US citizen to be so honoured. There he met and 
married Elizabeth Pohland, and a year later their daughter, Juliet, was born. 
The marriage did not last, and Richard returned to England in 1980, and worked 
for some years at the Turkish consulate in London.

He and Elizabeth remained friends and collaborated on translations; their 
best-known work was Mandelstam’s Moscow and Voronezh Notebooks, published in 
1991. Other collections of Russian and Turkish translations followed, as well 
as several books of his own poems, includingAmphoras for Metaphors 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Amphora-Metaphors-Richard-McKane/dp/0948684097/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8>
 (1993) andPoet for Poet 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Poet-Anthology-Poems-Selected-Translations/dp/1870841573/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8>
 (1998).

Throughout his life Richard was a passionate defender of human rights and free 
speech, campaigning for writers facing persecution in other countries. He was 
vice-chair of English PEN’s writers in prison committee. A leading member of 
the committee described him as “a stalwart you could rely on to say and do the 
right thing, however awkward that might have been”. AndMoris Farhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/moris-farhi>, chair of International PEN, 
described Richard as “a champion of the oppressed. He lines up alongside the 
victims, the ‘others’, the unloved strangers in our midst and amplifies their 
voices.”

He is survived by his daughter, Juliet, by our sister, Caroline, and me. 
Another brother, Andrew, predeceased him.
 