
It seems to be an article of faith among most writers that the making of The 
Book is the pinnacle of creative endeavour. Only through these long crusades 
against entropy can real seriousness of purpose be demonstrated. Book writing 
is like a military campaign, demanding ideological certainty, labyrinthine 
strategy, and the smug self-purification of abandoned weekends. Ask any 
author’s partner in the three months before delivery.

The essay is my natural form, the equivalent of a satisfying round walk

I’ve written 40 assorted nonfiction books, so I’m in the masochist majority. 
But I don’t subscribe to the view that this is where the most rewarding 
pleasure lies. Give me journalism for that any day – at least journalism that 
approximates to the writing of a journal. The joy of working at the existential 
coalface, capturing a moment when and where it happens: this has a special, 
honest urgency beside which the long game can seem unnaturally contrived.

This preference seems embedded in the way I think. I can work up big ideas, 
but preferably in short measure. The essay is my natural form, the equivalent 
of a satisfying round walk. The hatching of a good paragraph is even better, 
but nobody publishes those as standalone titles. Sweetest of all is a single 
sentence that snaps into place as compellingly as a musical catchphrase.

Richard Mabey – how plants think
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/how-plants-think-the-cabaret-of-plants-richard-mabey>
I think this is the reason why only about half a dozen of my books were 
entirely my idea. Most began as suggestions from other parties which cut across 
my usual thinking ruts and opened up new side routes.The Common Ground 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=aCucnrYeCsIC&pg=RA1-PR14&lpg=RA1-PR14&dq=%22The+Common+Ground%22+richard+mabey&source=bl&ots=ld4NBxRVBJ&sig=Uj_S599XzRY5MGp0KoeOCUdb4i8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjjoIOB8fXPAhWHjCwKHWi3ArY4ChDoAQgbMAA#v=onepage&q=%22The%20Common%20Ground%22%20richard%20mabey&f=false>
 was a commission from a government council for a personal and uncensored book 
about nature conservation in Britain. For me, it turned into amaster’s course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/masters-degrees> in land-use politics 
and basic ecology. The Frampton Flora came about when publisher Anthony 
Cheetham (then at Century) asked for my opinion on a stash of Victorian flower 
paintings that had been discovered in the attic of a Gloucestershire manor 
house. The pictures were remarkable, and so was their origin, painted 
communally by the female members of a single family. The book that followed, 
part album, part cultural history, is the only one to have reached the top of 
the nonfiction bestseller lists. Weeds began with an invitation from Profile to 
do a cultural history of outlaw plants. I was beginning another contracted book 
at the time, but put it on ice because I had an immodest conviction that I was 
the writer who knew most about this subject, and wasn’t about to let anyone 
else do a botched job.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0854521b65208ebc6bc900acc608b5174894e5c%2F0_0_3500_2138%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Mabey%3A%20'Suggestions%20from%20outside%20act%20on%20my%20imagination%20like%20a%20magnet%20on%20iron%20filings'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Mabey%3A%20%27Suggestions%20from%20outside%20act%20on%20my%20imagination%20like%20a%20magnet%20on%20iron%20filings%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0854521b65208ebc6bc900acc608b5174894e5c%2F0_0_3500_2138%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘I could envisage being mired in the economic history of cotton and corn.’ 
Photograph: Vincent Kessler/Reuters 
My latest, The Cabaret of Plants: Botany and the Imagination, began in a 
similar way. About the time Neil MacGregor’sHistory of the World in 100 Objects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/sep/13/radio-4-a-history-of-the-world-in-100-objects>
 was riding high, my agent suggested that I should try a history of the world 
in a hundred plants. I wasn’t drawn. There were already umpteen books along 
those lines, and even with a new twist I could envisage being mired 
interminably in the economic history of cotton and corn. But the idea burrowed 
into my mind, sending out tendrils to all manner of unexplored memories and 
unresolved questions. After a while I had conceived the idea of a collection of 
quirky biographies of plants that had changed the way we think, a perspective 
on the vegetal world that has always seemed to me the most respectful and 
fascinating.

I think suggestions from outside act on my imagination like a magnet on iron 
filings, reorientating scattered material so that it all points in the same 
direction, and setting an internal compass for future attentiveness. So I 
revisited the times I’d spent withWordsworth’s “dancing” daffodils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/mar/06/andrewmotion.featuresreviews> in 
the Lake District, only this time with the focus on how and why this particular 
flower had affected him so. I took my enthralment with prehistoric portrayals 
of animals into new areas, asking what cave artists had made – or not made – of 
the vegetation of their world. And gradually an underlying theme began to 
emerge, of plants as organisms that were autonomous and intelligent and the 
creative tension that had long existed between this revelatory idea and the 
tradition of plants as inanimate goods. I realised I had been nibbling the 
edges of this notion for most of my working life – it just needed a nudge from 
outside to make the pieces fall into place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28835cb06c4f7292b2d41764b41c8a909d826f3a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Mabey%3A%20'Suggestions%20from%20outside%20act%20on%20my%20imagination%20like%20a%20magnet%20on%20iron%20filings'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Mabey%3A%20%27Suggestions%20from%20outside%20act%20on%20my%20imagination%20like%20a%20magnet%20on%20iron%20filings%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Frichard-mabey-the-cabaret-of-plants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28835cb06c4f7292b2d41764b41c8a909d826f3a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A field of daffodils originally planted by Wordsworth in Cumbria. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Extract

In the 1850s Europeans had their first news of the welwitschia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/may/02/rachel-sussman-oldest-plants>
, a Namibian desert plant whose single pair of leaves can live for 2,000 years, 
grow to immense size but remain in the permanently infantilised state of a 
seedling. Ten years later Charles Darwin had revealed the barely credible 
devices orchids used to conscript insect pollinators, including the launching 
of pollen-laden missiles. In a world of such remarkable organisms why shouldn’t 
there be a fly orchid dangling real flies likeBluebottlia buzztilentia in 
Edward Lear’s surreal Nonsense Botany? Lear’s bionic vegetables were botany’s 
reductio ad absurdum, the last tarantellas of a century in which plants had 
been just about the most interesting things on the planet. It wasn’t a 
fascination confined to the scientific elite. The general public had been agog, 
astounded by one botanical revelation after another. In America the discovery 
of theancient sequoias of California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/05/tc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness>
 in the 1850s drew tens of thousands of pilgrims, who saw in these giant 
veterans proof of their country’s manifest destiny as an unsullied Eden. (There 
were throngs of rubberneckers and partygoers too: 19th-century botany was far 
from sober-sided.) Similar numbers flocked to Kew Gardens in west London, where 
one of the star attractions was an Amazonian water lily whoseleaves were so 
brilliantly engineered that their design became the model for the greatest 
glass building 
<http://www.lookandlearn.com/blog/25162/a-giant-water-lily-inspired-the-structure-of-paxtons-crystal-palace/>
 of the 19th century. What these moments of excited attention shared was not so 
much a simple pleasure in floral beauty or the promise of new sources of 
imperial revenue (though these were there too) but a sense of real wonder that 
units of non-conscious green tissue could have such strange existences and 
unquantifiable powers. Plants, defined by their immobility, had evolved 
extraordinary life-ways by way of compensation: the power to regenerate after 
most of their body had been eaten; the ability to have sex by proxy; the 
possession of more than twenty senses whose delicacy far exceeded any of our 
own. They made you think.

More about the book

The Cabaret of Plants: Botany and the Imagination by Richard Mabey review – a 
hymn to flower power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/01/the-cabaret-of-plants-richard-mabey-review-tim-dee>
… his amateurishness, as written, has always revealed the roots of the word: 
to be an amateur is to be a lover, and this is the book of a man in love with 
both the known facts of plants and the dreams they sponsor, a man who has a 
microscope at home and is eager to penetrate the mysteries of vegetal life, but 
who is just as likely to marvel or swoon at what he finds, and wish for such 
softer responses to be admitted as legitimate, so to keep (in Coleridge’s 
phrase) the heart alive in the head.

That is flower power, and that is this book’s concern. Mabey has little to say 
here about our national green-fingered obsession, our capture and fixing of the 
wild in our lawns, flower beds and allotments. Instead, he gardens with his 
imagination and by eavesdropping on others’ thoughts and fantasies of plants 
across thousands of years. His flowers are energetic, unpredictable, 
resourceful and transgressive. –Tim Dee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/01/the-cabaret-of-plants-richard-mabey-review-tim-dee>

Buy the book

The Cabaret of Plants: Botany and the Imagination is published by Profile at 
£9.99, andis available from the Guardian Bookshop for £8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cabaret-of-plants.html>. 
 