
Ridley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> is now planning 
up to four Prometheus films, with the final instalment linking up to the events 
of his classic 1979 space horror Alien, the veteran film-maker has said.

Interviewed for German site FilmFutter 
<http://www.filmfutter.com/news/prometheus-3/>, Scott confirmed that plans to 
eventually connect the two space sagas and explain the origins of the hideous 
xenomorph extraterrestrials remained intact, but suggested his upcoming sequel 
to 2012’s Prometheus would expand rather than contract the narrative.

“It won’t be in the next one,” said the British film-maker. “It will be in the 
one after this one or maybe even a fourth film before we get back into theAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> franchise.”

Alien is go: Neill Blomkamp confirms stalled project is officially greenlit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
Prometheus was originally billed as a film “sharing strands of Alien’s DNA” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/17/alien-prequel-ridley-scott-prometheus>
, but only a prototype version of the xenomorph ultimately appeared on screen. 
The space thriller instead focused its attention on the Engineers, a race of 
human-like beings who may have created life on Earth, but ultimately failed to 
explain very much about them.

Scott said “the whole point” of Prometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/prometheus> was “to explain the how and why 
of the creation of the Alien itself”. He added: “I always thought of the Alien 
as kind of a piece of bacterial warfare. I always thought that that original 
ship, which I call the Croissant, was a battleship, holding these biomechanoid 
creatures that were all about destruction.”

The Guardian film show extra podcast: Ocean's 11 gender swap, Alien 5 lost in 
space and top Halloween films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2015/oct/30/film-show-extra-halloween-episode-5>
To complicate matters a fifth Alien film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
, from District 9 director Neill Blomkamp, is also moving forward, though it is 
thought Prometheus 2 will arrive first on our screens. The sequel is set to 
debut in 2017, so if the final two movies arrive in 2019 and 2021 (based on a 
reasonable gap of two years between films), Scott would be at least 83 by the 
time the saga is finally complete.

The Gladiator director’s next movie in cinemas also takes place beyond Earth’s 
borders. The space drama The Martian, starring Matt Damon as an astronaut left 
stranded and alone on the red planet, debuted at the Toronto film festival 
earlier this month to positive reviews. Also featuring Jessica Chastain, 
Kristen Wiig, Jeff Daniels, Michael Peña and Chiwetel Ejiofor, it hits UK 
cinemas on 30 September and arrives in the US on 2 October.
 