
He has never won an Oscar, but is routinely described as one of the greatest 
film directors working today – and his credits attest to his monumental 
contribution to cinema over five decades. Alien, Blade Runner, Thelma and 
Louise, Gladiator and Prometheus are just the highlights of Ridley Scott’s 
directorial career, which stretches back 37 years to The Duellists, released in 
1977, and which is about to enter a new chapter with the biblical epicExodus: 
Gods and Kings <https://www.theguardian.com/film/exodus>.

Remarkably, Scott has managed to stay relevant, producing at least one major, 
influential film a decade, and responding to periodic downturns with commercial 
hits that have kept his hat permanently in the ring. Now 76, Scott can be 
bracketed in the same league as Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg as a 
veteran director in as complete control of his powers as he ever was.

How has he done it? For Leslie Felperin, film critic at the Hollywood 
Reporter, “the thing about directors with longevity is that they never sit 
still; they keep diversifying, trying different things”. That’s true of Scott, 
who has turned his hand to horror, sci-fi, war films and road movies with equal 
proficiency. “As a director, it’s hard to get a read on him,” Felperin says. 
“In one way, he seems like a very capable journeyman: he clearly has always had 
a perfectionist streak, but it’s hard to say the dramatic material he picks is 
particularly distinctive, compared to Scorsese, Spielberg, or even James 
Cameron. His ability has always been to deliver what’s best for the material.”

Scott’s pre-eminence in the British film industry was underlined when in 2003 
he was knighted for “services to the British film industry” 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/3054254.stm>; another indication, you 
may have supposed, that he was in his twilight years. But instead of retiring 
to the committee room, he has kept working: in the decade since his knighthood 
he has had some of his biggest hits – American Gangster, in 2007which grossed 
$265m worldwide <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=americangangster.htm>; 
Prometheus in 2012,took over $403m 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=prometheus.htm> – as well as some of 
his most underwhelming mis-steps: his Peter Mayle adaptation A Good Year from 
2006, wasvocally criticised by Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/16/news.russellcrowe>, owner of the 
studio that produced it.

Most recently the much-anticipated The Counselor – based on an original script 
by novelist Cormac McCarthy, and with a cast including Michael Fassbender, 
Javier Bardem and Penelope Cruz – received some of theworst reviews of Scott’s 
career 
<http://www.thewrap.com/counselor-reviews-ridley-scotts-legal-drama-thrilling/>
and a dismal box office performance in 2013.

But bouncing back from The Counselor, Scott’s new film, Exodus: Gods and 
Kings, demonstrates that he still has clout: a $200m budget production for 20th 
Century Fox, part of the Hollywood studios’ current dash for the faith market 
which earlier in 2014 saw Paramount release the $125m Noah, with a cast led by 
the notoriously truculent Christian Bale.

This is no grace-and-favour project. Exodus has not been without controversy, 
either, with vocal complaints over itsethnically questionable casting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/12/five-ethnically-insensitive-casting-decisions>
. Scott recently addressed the issue inan interview with Variety magazine 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/ridley-scott-exodus-gods-and-kings-christian-bale-1201363668/>
, asserting: “I can’t mount a film of this budget … and say that my lead actor 
is Mohammad so-and-so from such-and-such. I’m just not going to get it 
financed. So the question doesn’t even come up.” This hard-headed attitude is a 
constant in Scott’s career, when he has found himself working with tricky 
material. On Black Hawk Down, his account of the US military’s misadventure in 
Somalia, he insisted to the Observer’s Lynn Barber, “I just wanted to stick as 
closely as I possibly could to the facts.”

It’s fair to theorise that Scott’s early grounding in advertising has coloured 
his approach to his material as much as the visual style with which it is 
rendered. As Felperin suggests: “Maybe the need to service the client, in an 
eye-catching way, has stayed with him.”

After growing up in an army family in South Shields, and following stints at 
West Hartlepool art college, the Royal College of Art and the BBC, Scott spent 
the late 60s and early 70s running a successful commercials company with his 
brother Tony (with the famous1973 Hovis advert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTS7-9RVApE> arguably the best remembered of 
their work). The British film industry was in catastrophic decline in the 
mid-70s, so Scott – and other ad men such as Alan Parker, Hugh Hudson and 
Adrian Lynem – was forced to look to the US to make the step up to features. 
Scott’s first film, The Duellists, was a studied, Kubrickesque adaptation of a 
Joseph Conrad short story, and won him the best first film prize at the 1977 
Cannes film festival.

However, he saw which way the wind was blowing and after the success of George 
Lucas’s Star Wars in the same year, he quickly signed up for his own 
effects-driven sci-fi thriller. The resulting film, Alien, spawned five 
follow-ups (the most recent of which, Prometheus, Scott took charge of 
himself), won an Oscar for visual effects, and is still the most commercially 
successful of the series. Scott then went on to establish his reputation as one 
of Anglo-American cinema’s premier visual stylists with his next film, Blade 
Runner, which, despite its disappointing box office results, suggested Scott 
might be an auteur in the making. Partly, as hetold Barber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/jan/06/features.awardsandprizes>, 
because it was his “most complete and personal film”; but also because rumbling 
dissatisfaction over producer-imposed elements – a heavyhanded voiceover, a 
“happy” ending – led to the then-novel release of a “director’s cut” in 1992. 
(Scott later released a third official version, the so-called “final cut”, in 
2007.) Despite – or perhaps because of – his fondness for the film, Scott has 
recently backed away from directing aa mooted sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/26/ridley-scott-blade-runner-sequel-wont-direct>
.

Over time, however, the film world caught up with Scott’s floridly conceived 
baroque visuals, and it’s fair to say it has become the industry norm, in this 
era of superhero fantasies and effects-driven thrillers. Other than the 
relatively small-scale Thelma and Louise, Scott spent the 1990s struggling to 
reinvent himself. It wasn’t until Gladiator, in 2000, which fused glistening 
CGI (computer generated imagery) with old-fashioned Hollywood spectacle, that 
he found a successful path out of the woods. Gladiator’s success triggered a 
latter-day predilection for classical and medieval-era epics – Robin Hood and 
crusades drama Kingdom of Heaven, as well asGladiator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gladiator> – and Scott now has some claim to 
being the Cecil B DeMille of the digital era.

In parallel to his own directing work, Scott is also developing a quiet 
reputation as an influential producer of other people’s films: recent credits 
include the Nicole Kidman thriller Before I Go to Sleep, the Christian Bale 
drama Out of the Furnace, and the forthcoming comedy Get Santa – all made with 
involvement from Scott Free. Felperin suggests that “proximity to younger 
film-makers and new ideas” may also be a factor in Scott’s film-making 
longevity. “There’s a generosity of spirit there, which I think is laudable, 
and the British film industry ought to be very grateful.”

Scott also has had to grapple recently with the shock of sudden personal 
tragedy. His brother Tony killed himself in 2012, and Scott chose to speak 
publicly about it for thefirst time to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/ridley-scott-exodus-gods-and-kings-christian-bale-1201363668/>
. Although thecoroner’s report discounted rumours of illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/23/tony-scott-antidepressants-no-cancer>
, Scott confirmed that his brother had been undergoing cancer treatment prior 
to his death. “Tony had been very unwell, actually … I’d go to him even when he 
was doing his recovery, and I’d say, ‘F— the chemo, have a vodka martini.’”

One has the sense that, despite everything, Scott will work for as long as 
possible, seemingly unwilling or unable to quietly fade away. He’s already well 
into production of his next film, The Martian, a drama starring Matt Damon 
about an astronaut stranded on Mars. And his listing on the Internet Movie 
Database says he has 54 titles in development.

Potted profile

Born 30 November 1937, South Shields, Tyne and Wear

Career Made his first short film, Boy and Bicycle, starring his brother Tony, 
while a student at the Royal College of Art. Trainee designer at the BBC; 
foundedRidley Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> Associates 
in 1968 and made more than 2,500 commercials before moving into features in the 
late 1970s. Bought an interest in Shepperton film studios in 1995, and was 
knighted in 2003.

High point The stratospheric hype around his Alien prequel, Prometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/prometheus>. The trailer got 3m internet 
views in three days.

Low point Being passed over for the best director Oscar for Gladiator, even 
though the film won best picture. You could see the irritation on his face.

 * This article was amended on 2 December 2014 to reflect the fact that the 
armed forces involved in the action filmed as Black Hawk Down were largely not 
US marines.  