
 He is virulently anti-immigrant, has called for Roma camps to be razed and 
once referred to the euro as a “crime against humanity”. Matteo Salvini, the 
bombastic rightwing leader of Italy’s xenophobic Northern League, has even 
accused Pope Francis of doing a disservice to Catholics by promoting dialogue 
with Muslims.

None of this appears to be doing him any harm at the ballot box. On the 
contrary, in the divided and economically battered Italy of 2015, it seems to 
be a winning formula. The 42-year-old is riding high after his party made 
significant electoral gains in central and left-leaning parts ofItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, results that reflect growing 
opposition to the EU and concern over the thousands of migrants landing on 
Italy’s shores each week.

In what can only be viewed as a personal affront to Matteo Renzi, the 
charismatic left-of-centre prime minister who used to be mayor of Florence, 
Salvini’sLega Nord, as it is known in Italy, even managed to win 20% of the 
vote in Tuscany – unheard of in the leftwing bastion of the country that counts 
Renzi as its favourite son. Salvini called the Tuscan result “sensational”.

Although Renzi’s Democratic party (PD) emerged from Sunday’s regional 
elections as the overall victor, it lost a bellwether race in Liguria, in 
northern Italy, to the League-backed candidate from Silvio Berlusconi’s 
centre-right Forza Italia, and was trounced by the League in Veneto, the region 
around Venice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnorthern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15402cd6c909666cceca4036f5efbef4228c3c8%2F0_0_690_914%2F690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rightwing%20Northern%20League%20makes%20gains%20in%20Italian%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnorthern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rightwing%20Northern%20League%20makes%20gains%20in%20Italian%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Fnorthern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15402cd6c909666cceca4036f5efbef4228c3c8%2F0_0_690_914%2F690.jpg>
 Matteo Salvini on the cover of Oggi 
Apart from the rightwing resurgence, the results also reflect dissatisfaction 
with Renzi on the left wing of his party, where his support is waning.

“I have been listening to chatter on the television for an hour: I am happy 
that we are a bogeyman for lots of mummies, it must mean we are right,” a 
gleeful Salvini said on Italian radio. “Three months ago it was unthinkable 
that the League would be fundamental in Liguria or able to win again in Veneto. 
Our work begins tomorrow; for many parties it ends tonight.”


Salvini, who often appears at events wearing T-shirts and hooded sweatshirts – 
he once posed for the cover of Oggi magazine innothing but a green tie 
<http://www.oggi.it/attualita/gallery/matteo-salvini-nudo-le-foto-esclusive-di-oggi/>
 – could not be more different to the other Matteo. Renzi, a former boy scout 
with Machiavellian political instincts, came to power after an intra-party coup 
last year and promised to reform Italy. He is seen by many, particularly those 
outside of Italy, as the only viable option to lead the country among a host of 
politicians who are either too rightwing, too anti-establishment or, on the 
left, relics of the past.


But Sunday’s election results show that ongoing economic pessimism – despite 
the economy showing meagre growth for the first time after years of stagnation 
– is fuelling opposition to the prime minister and could challenge his ambition 
to rebuild a lasting centrist majority in Italy.


“We are the real alternative to Renzi,” Salvini said in a Facebook post. On 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/matteosalvinimi>, he thanked supporters and warned 
Renzi “we’re coming”, using his usual signoff #Salvini.
Matteo Salvini (@matteosalvinimi) 
GRAZIEEEEE! Felice e orgoglioso, al Lavoro per mantenere gli impegni, crescere 
e vincere!#Renzi <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Renzi?src=hash>, stiamo arrivando.
#Salvini <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Salvini?src=hash> #Lega 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Lega?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/matteosalvinimi/status/605311421178621952> June 1, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/matteosalvinimi/status/605311421178621952> 
Salvini is nipping at Renzi’s heels in large part because he has managed to 
turn what was a regional force in Italy into a national party. The Northern 
League started as a secessionist party that argued for a separation of rich 
northern Italy from the poor south, but Salvini has – with mixed success – 
changed the party’s focus.

He likes to compare the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean to an invasion and 
is a frequent critic of Italy’s Roma population. He has claimed that Muslims in 
Italy are “trying to impose a way of life that is incompatible with ours”. He 
has even called on Italians to renounce their nationality and ask for asylum so 
that they can get benefits.

The question now, according to Wolfango Piccoli, an analyst at Teneo 
Intelligence who follows Italian politics, is whether Salvini will emerge as 
the new leader of Italy’s centre-right bloc, therefore replacing Berlusconi, 
the former premier who was forced to step down from high office following a 
slew of sex and corruption scandals.


Salvini had an answer to that question on Monday: “I am the leader of the 
centre-right,” he said. “Berlusconi knows how to read the numbers.”

There was only one real bright spot for Renzi on Sunday, and even that was 
somewhat dulled. The PD won the race in Campania, in southern Italy, but did so 
with a slate of candidates who have been criticised by anti-mafia authorities 
for their links to corruption and organised crime.

 