
Has David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> finally 
weathered the Panama Papers’ storm? Tuesday’s national press coverage of his 
Commons performance suggests that, for the moment, he may well have drawn a 
line under the affair.

The rightwing newspapers were generally supportive of the fact that he has 
published his tax returns, that he defended wealth creation and that he thinks 
it fine for one generation to pass on its riches to the next.

So the Daily Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> 
headlined the prime minister’s statement: “Cameron: wealth is not a dirty word” 
and the Daily Express was delighted to report “PM backs your right to pass on 
wealth”.

The Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> chose a more 
personal angle: “Don’t smear my father, says angry Cameron”. Even the Guardian 
conceded that the PM had “come out fighting”.

Three other papers preferred to headline the decision of chancellor George 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> to publish his tax 
returns. He had bowed to pressure to reveal his earnings” said the i, while the 
Times reported that Osborne had enjoyed £45,000 from his family’s firm “even 
though it has not paid corporation tax in seven years”.

The Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>, which has 
lately been echoing its former Tory-bashing history, ran a front page 
headlined: “Chancer of the Exchequer... how dodgy Osborne made £2,500 from his 
own tax cuts”.

Oddly, the non-political Metro <https://www.theguardian.com/media/metro> 
thought the major story concerned Jeremy Corbyn’s fine for failing, by a couple 
of days, to file his tax return on time, calling him “Corbyn the tax bodger”.

Some leading articles reflected a concern about where the publishing of tax 
returns by politicians might lead. It would,said the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/04/12/the-moral-case-for-low-taxes/>, 
“deter able people who have made money from embarking on a career in a 
parliament overpopulated with political activists who have achieved nothing.”

The row has enabled Labour to “reprise its ‘one law for the rich, another for 
the poor’ accusation to which a government headed by several wealthy 
individuals is especially vulnerable.”

But the Telegraph noted that the publication of tax returns had revealed that 
Cameron and Osborne had “each paid nearly four times more than the Labour 
leader towards the upkeep of the nation.”

It was critical of the “pernicious narrative” that accumulating wealth is a 
bad thing and concluded:

“Tax cuts create incentives to wealth creation, fuel aspiration and stimulate 
people to work harder, thereby generating income and extra revenues. Mr Cameron 
was right to emphasise these virtues in the Commons yesterday, and not before 
time.”

The Mail agreed: 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3535057/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Mr-Cameron-defends-aspiration.html>
 “It was high time he took this soundly conservative stand.” Cameron “has to 
demonstrate, on every possible occasion, that the government is on the side of 
the many millions of people who for the sake of their own families are 
determined to work hard and create wealth”.

The Guardian, conceding that “Cameron carried the day among MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/11/the-guardian-view-on-david-cameron-and-tax-havens-a-dodgy-day-at-the-office>
”, argued that “the long-term residue” of the row “will be both toxic and 
defining for the prime minister, his party and his government.” It continued:

“The two burning issues exposed by the Panama Papers are the enormity of the 
world’s lightly taxed or untaxed offshore financial holdings and the stark 
inequality between a system in which the richest pay so little tax when 
compared with the strictly enforced rules that govern the honest ordinary 
majority.

To allow the surge of righteous anger about the offshore world and culture to 
be hijacked by another campaign directed against the political class would be a 
distraction at a point when the much bigger issues about unfairness are on 
fire.”

Cameron will find it hard “to shake off the sense that he embodies a 
privileged class who benefit most from offshore tax regimes.Dennis Skinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dennis-skinner> may have been suspended 
for saying them, but the words that may linger longest from Monday are his 
taunt of ‘dodgy Dave.’”


The Mirror also thought Skinner “was bang on the money 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/dennis-skinner-right-money-calling-7736081>
 by calling Cameron ‘Dodgy Dave’. Yet this most honest of MPs was kicked out of 
the Commons for telling the truth.”

The Sun preferred to concentrate its fire on Labour 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6500866/Sun-Says.html>. 
With polls showing most voters hate the “death tax” and the government 
struggling to make its case Labour “let the PM off the hook.”

Sketch writers welcome the Beast’s intervention

For parliamentary sketch writers, Skinner’s jibe at Cameron and the 
intervention by Tory MPAlan Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan> offered unrivalled material.

“It is some achievement to be kicked out of class by Sir on the first day back 
after the hols,”wrote the Times’s Patrick Kidd 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/member-for-bolsover-hits-a-nerve-with-beastly-word-blq9qh37z>
 of Skinner’s ejection from the Commons by the Speaker, John Bercow. He 
continued:

“The silly thing is that Mr Skinner had been asking a valid question. He 
wanted to know about the windfalls that the prime minister had received on his 
taxpayer-subsidised homes. As a result of his puerile strop, the question was 
left unanswered.”

Kidd argued that Duncan “wound up the Labour benches by accusing them of 
‘synthetic indignation’ for wanting to know every footnote of the PM’s 
financial affairs... He told Mr Cameron to fend off the forces of envy, lest 
the Commons be ‘stuffed full of low achievers.’”

The Telegraph’s Michael Deacon echoed Kidd in contending that Skinner’s 
refusal to “withdraw his pointless insult” meant thatCameron could avoid 
answering his pertinent question about the prime minister’s mortgage payments. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/11/if-you-thought-david-cameron-made-a-fool-of-himself-over-tax-the/>


But “silliest of all” was Duncan’s low achievers’ remark. “Hmm,” wrote Deacon, 
“I think you’re supposed to call them ‘hard-working people’, Sir Alan.”

Quentin Letts, in the Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3535002/Withdraw-Not-chance-snarled-Skinner-Manic-times-mes-braves-QUENTIN-LETTS-day-drama-Commons.html>
, thought Duncan’s low achievers remark “shot up the Labour lot’s backsides 
like a vindaloo steam jet.”

The Guardian’s John Crace wrote of Duncan being “a man possessed of a large 
fortune but little intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/clean-dave-wages-war-class-a-tax-avoidance>
” and wondered whether Cameron would be happy about his colleague “calling the 
proles a bunch of useless, workshy failures” when the Tory party is trying to 
lose its nasty tag.

As for Skinner, when ordered from the chamber, he “wandered off happily, 
muttering ‘Dodgy Dave’ over and over again to himself. Mission accomplished.”
 