
The 2016 Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games-2016> have 
prompted widespread violations of children’s rights and other civil liberties, 
according to a new dossier of alleged abuses compiled by academics and 
nongovernmental organisations.


Evictions, police violence and poor labour conditions top a long list of 
problems linked to next year’s Games inRio de Janeiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>, claim the coalition of 
activists led by the Comité Popular who are calling on the International 
Olympic Committee to pay greater heed to human rights.


Brazil officials evict families from homes ahead of 2016 Olympic Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/brazil-officials-evicting-families-2016-olympic-games>
Their report – Exclusion Games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fywvd6mmDhs> – 
claims that at least 4,120 families have lost their homes and another 2,486 are 
threatened with removal as a result of infrastructure projects associated with 
last year’s World Cup and the upcoming Olympics. As a result, they say, 
thousands of children have been displaced and left – at least temporarily – 
unable to access education, healthcare and other social services.


The dossier claims other youths have been the victims of an uptick in police 
and army violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/police-killed-1500-rio-de-janeiro-past-five-years-amnesty>
 as a result of a struggling favela pacification program that is part of the 
city’s efforts to prepare for mega-events. Some have beenshot and killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/05/protest-rio-de-janeiro-police-killing-eduardo-ferreira>
, many wounded and countless others psychologically scarred by gunfights and 
tension.


Terre des Hommes, the NGO that contributed the chapter on children, has 
producedvideo testimonies from some of those affected 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzDZ-Op58is&feature=youtu.be>, including 
Naomy, a 12-year-old girl who sees swaths of her communityVila Autódromo 
demolished to make way for the Olympic Park, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/2016-olympics-rio-de-janeiro-brazil-destruction>
 and Gabriel, a 13-year-old boy who washit by a bullet while playing marbles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iKYN6_DVI74&feature=youtu.be> after the army 
moved in to the Complexo da Maré favela complex ahead of the World Cup.


The report cites earlier studies by Brunel University 
<http://assets.sportanddev.org/downloads/child_protection_and_the_fifa_world_cup__revised_at_24_7_13_.pdf>
, which found that risks of child exploitation – particularly with regard to 
labour and eviction – increased during previous mega sporting events such as 
the South Africa World Cup in 2010.


It also includes more recent research 
<http://www.dundee.ac.uk/media/dundeewebsite/geography/documents/research/15337SoELetsWinThisGameTogetherReport%20A4.pdf>
 by Dundee University and the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro 
into the impact of the World Cup on local children. Among many concerns, it 
noted the disappearances of several street children who were removed from the 
streets in “social cleansing” operations ahead of major events.


The Rio city government disputes the allegations. It says that most of the 
displacements, with the exception of Vila Autódromo, are unrelated to theWorld 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> and the Olympics.

Instead, it says 72% of relocated families have been moved away from areas 
prone to floods and landslides, and 9.6% for transportation and other 
infrastructure projects that benefit the city as a whole. A spokesman said the 
city’s children are now better off than before thanks toincreased spending on 
healthcare and education 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B1x0_cNhKxbDb094M1hraGVNekU/view>.


The Rio property developer hoping for a $1bn Olympic legacy of his own
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/04/rio-olympic-games-2016-property-developer-carlos-carvalho-barra>
The Comité Popular – a group that was active in the mass protests ahead of the 
World Cup – counters that the social costs of mega-events outweigh the 
benefits, which areskewed towards the wealthier parts of the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/04/rio-olympic-games-2016-property-developer-carlos-carvalho-barra>
.

Ahead of next year’s Games, the Comité Popular and its partners call on the 
government to halt evictions, harassment of street vendors, and “cleansing” of 
homeless children and adolescents. It also urges the IOC to issue a human 
rights commitment and introduce monitoring systems for all stages of the Games.

“The IOC should ensure that the 2016 Summer Olympics do not cause or 
exacerbate human and child rights abuses in Rio. It is time that the IOC lives 
up to the values declared in the Olympic Charter,” said Ignacio Parker, 
secretary general of Terre des Hommes.

The dossier – the fourth and most comprehensive to date – was launched as the 
IOC meets in Lausanne to discuss Agenda 2020, the strategic roadmap for the 
future of the Olympic Movement. The governing body will discuss the fundamental 
principles of sport at a time when football is mired in a Fifa corruption 
scandal, athletics is plagued by doping revelations and the Olympics is dogged 
by claims of human rights violations in host countries.


“With the IOC on its back foot, perhaps we’re actually witnessing a propitious 
moment for human rights groups to press for meaningful change,” said Jules 
Boykoff, a professor of political science at Pacific University.

“The Olympics have long provided local developers and politicians with an 
alibi to steamroll already marginalized communities … The IOC absolutely needs 
to start taking human rights more seriously. This is a no-brainer. The IOC 
tendency to foist plausible deniability on us has become undeniably 
implausible.”
 