
It’s become a familiar experience to the 21st-century cinemagoer: that nagging 
feeling of deja vu in the multiplex, the sense that one is seeing the same 
movie over and over again, ad infinitum. This is hardly surprising given seven 
of last year’s 10 highest-grossing films were either remakes, sequels or set in 
a pre-existing “cinematic universe”. Hollywood has become – perhaps always has 
been – a culturalMöbius strip <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%B6bius_strip>
, doomed to eternally travel the same path, only ever shifting its trajectory 
slightly; an old scratched, warped record that never plays quite the same way 
twice.

But while cinephiles have long become used to shelling out their hard-earned 
wonga to watch the same movie several times over,a new interview with the 
editors <http://www.slashfilm.com/rogue-one-alternate-cut/> of Rogue One: A 
Star Wars Story hints that Hollywood’s habit of regurgitation goes further than 
we imagined. It reveals the film’s initial “cut”, designed to map out the movie 
before any shooting took place, was cobbled together by editor Colin Goudie 
using footage from hundreds of other existing films.


Related: Lost in space: the Rogue One Disney didn't want us to see 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/19/rogue-one-star-wars-reshoots-trailers>

For protagonist Jyn Erso’s early encounter with Mon Mothma and her comrades on 
the Rebel council, Goudie substituted in theinterrogation scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m92yvNscIAo> from the beginning of Aliens; for 
the bit where Erso and her pals break into the Imperial data vault, the editor 
inserted a similar scene from 1983’s WarGames. Old Star Wars movies were also 
pilfered from. Using this celluloid patchwork quilt, director Gareth Edwards 
was able to devise a working template for Rogue One (albeit one that would 
later be ripped apart and stitched back togetherfollowing extensive reshoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/19/rogue-one-star-wars-reshoots-trailers>
). How long does an Imperial shuttle take to land, a Death Star to blow up, a 
Mon Calamari commander to question whether the Rebel fleet might be heading 
into a trap? Hollywood, it seems, already had all the answers hidden in the 
studio vaults.

 Ghost in the Shell: Jason Bourne meets RoboCop, or something more? 
Photograph: Paramount Pictures 
Given, then, that Edwards’ film began life as a hotchpotch of old movies, the 
eventual parachuting in of Peter Cushing’s Grand Moff Tarkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/rogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing>
 makes even more sense. For what exactly were those sublime yet utterly bizarre 
sequences of digital resurrection if not a CGI-assisted alternative to chopping 
in the best bits from Hollywood history? Who needs WarGames when Tarkin can be 
lifted from the original Star Wars and reanimated, pixel by pixel, using the 
green-screen ghost ofsome bloke off Holby City 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-12-23/how-a-holby-city-actor-brought-one-of-star-wars-most-iconic-characters-back-to-life>
?


But Edwards is not alone in turning to the archives in search of inspiration. 
Matt Reeves, the director of forthcoming sci-fi sequel War For the Planet of 
the Apes, revealed recently that he and screenwriter Mark Bomback sat down and 
watched dozens of movies before even beginning to put pen to paper.

“We watched every Planet of the Apes movie, war movies, westerns, The Empire 
Strikes Back,”Reeves told About Movies 
<http://movies.about.com/od/upcomingmovies/fl/Interview-lsquoWar-for-the-Planet-of-the-Apesrsquo-Matt-Reeves-amp-Dylan-Clark.htm>
. “We just thought, ‘We have to pretend we have all the time in the world,’ 
even though we had limited time. We got really inspired.”


Therein lies the rub, of course. Modern Hollywood requires such a 
blitzkrieg-paced turnover of product that studios inevitably look for shortcuts 
in an effort to keep the creative juices flowing. Even when they are not 
explicitly remaking a classic product, or putting together a sequel, a 
director’s first instinct is therefore to duplicate, to copy, to half-inch from 
the past.

Such insights into the strange gestation period of the 21st-century 
blockbuster paint a picture, both fascinating and terrifying, of film-makers as 
modern-day Victor Frankensteins, constantly splicing together old parts to 
create new forms. Is it any wonder that, rather than bothering to come up with 
original ideas, JJ Abrams and his team simplyrecycled countless elements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/31/george-lucas-attacks-retro-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
 of the original 1977 Star Wars when putting together The Force Awakens? Does 
this also explain why the new Ghost in the Shell movie looks nothing like the 
original anime, butdoes seem suspiciously reminiscent of Robocop with a bit of 
Jason Bourne thrown in for good measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/14/whitewash-ghost-in-the-shell-hollywoodised-mamoru-oshii-rupert-sanders-scarlett-johansson>
 (at least if an early trailer is to be trusted)? Even the highest-grossing 
film of all time,Avatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/17/avatar-james-cameron-film-review>
, can be broken down rather cruelly (at least on a thematic level) to Ferngully 
crossed with Dances with Wolves in space.
 True original? Domhnall Gleeson and Oscar Isaac in Ex Machina. 
The fact that many of the above movies are derivative does not make them bad 
films. Plagiarism, in many ways, is the oil that greases the cogs of the studio 
machine. Each film-maker takes something from the last, and hopefully passes 
something on to their successor. It has been ever so since the early days of 
silent film, and indeed eventhe era of Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/23/comment.stephenmoss>. 

Related: Worse than a whitewash: has Ghost in the Shell been Hollywoodised? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/14/whitewash-ghost-in-the-shell-hollywoodised-mamoru-oshii-rupert-sanders-scarlett-johansson>

The only problem here is that if you spend all your time watching other movies 
before making your own, it’s inevitable that a process of assimilation will 
take place – a sort of cultural osmosis. Rogue One is a fine movie, a splendid 
rewind to the classic 1970s space operas injected with just enough Trump-era 
bleakness to make it a more than worthwhile trip to the multiplex. But its 
greatest achievement will always be to remind viewers of the brilliance of 
George Lucas’ game-changing original, rather than to break new ground.

This sense that Hollywood is slowly but surely eating itself should make us 
more grateful for the truly original genre movies –Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/22/ex-machina-review>, for instance, 
orArrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
 – when they push their heads above the celluloid parapet. Because if these 
rare sparks of inspiration were to fizzle out altogether, those of us who love 
the movies could be facing a cultural desert of Tatooine-like dreariness. Apart 
from anything else, there would then be no material for Hollywood’s next 
generation of directors to pilfer from.
 