
“Throughout my life, I’ve been that annoying kid on every stage at school, in 
every talent contest,” says Florence Pugh, mock grimacing into her skinny 
cappuccino. “That’s really sad, isn’t it?”

Pugh may be a gifted actor, but she can’t sell that last line. Entering a 
south London cafe with a guitar case slung purposefully over one shoulder – 
“This isn’t just for show, I swear,” she explains hurriedly – the 18-year-old 
blonde from Oxfordshire radiates unapologetic ambition. As well she might: few 
teens are handed a film debut as beguiling as her role inThe Falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/10/the-falling-review-london-film-festival-carol-morley>
, the acclaimed new narrative feature byDreams of a Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/18/dreams-life-joyce-vincent-review> 
director Carol Morley, in which Pugh’s character serves as the charismatic 
catalyst to a surge in adolescent psychosexual exploration at an all-girls’ 
public school in the 1960s.

Recalling such works as Peter Weir’s Picnic at Hanging Rock and Peter Jackson’s
Heavenly Creatures, Morley’s film – which arrives in British cinemas in April – 
is impressively led by flintyGame of Thrones star Maisie Williams, but it’s 
Pugh, as the sexually precocious Abbie, who holds focus in her more restricted 
screen time. The performance has already netted her a best British newcomer 
nomination at the London film festival.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ddy8HmivqcC4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ddy8HmivqcC4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ddy8HmivqcC4&media=>
For Pugh, however, it hardly feels an early arrival. “I’ve been waiting for 
this my entire life,” she says, sheepishly acknowledging that may not seem very 
long to most of us: coming from a family of performers, Pugh has been acting, 
singing and playing guitar since the age of seven.

Pugh initially hung back when Morley arrived at her boarding school for open 
auditions. “Girls have that wonderful thing where they try to throw each other 
off, not wanting to appear too eager,” she laughs, explaining that she knew 
little about the film, or Morley’s previous work, going in. “I just happened 
upon the best possible start for my career. It’s a bit of a fluke.”

Pugh encountered a more constructive sense of solidarity on set, thanks to 
Morley’s principally female cast and crew: “The film is so heavily orientated 
around women, which is refreshing,” she says. “It may be a period piece, but 
you take a girl in 2014 and she’s not significantly different to the girls in 
the film. We still have to discover sex, periods, pregnancy, abortion. We’re 
still not comfortable talking about many of the things that were taboo then.”

Not that Pugh is opposed to doing slightly less cerebral films in the future. 
“I do like a bit of danger,” she admits. “Guns, cars, running, bullets. I’m up 
for it.”




THREE MORE TO WATCH







• Writer/director Joanna Coates’s debut feature, Hide and Seek 
<http://vimeo.com/94749055>, won the Michael Powell award in Edinburgh. Word is 
she could be the next Joanna Hogg.

• Actor Fisayo Akinade will be one of the stars of Channel 4’s new 
interconnecting TV showsCucumber, Banana and Tofu 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/programme-information/cucumber-banana-and-tofu>
, exploring 21st-century gay life.




• Paisley-born actor Ross Anderson plays a Scottish PoW in Angelina Jolie’s 
Unbroken <http://www.unbrokenmovie.co.uk/> and will star in Macbeth with 
Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard. He’s also the standout inThe Silent 
Storm <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2923780/>, a three-hander with Andrea 
Riseborough and Damian Lewis, out next year.
 