
Towards the end of his relentlessly inventive life, Robert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/01/robert-rauschenberg-quiet-minimalism-style-hero>
 confided an anxiety. He was worried that his mission to introduce the world to 
itself by way of the spectacular mirror of his art could fail, not because he 
lacked energy or talent, but because he might “run out of world”.

No one had bolder ambitions than Rauschenberg, and no one did more to breach 
the walls between art and life, hauling the grubby, gleaming world into the 
hallowed chamber of the gallery and dragging art out to the furthest corners of 
the planet. A lanky Texan with a penchant forJack Daniel’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/jul/18/american-whiskey-uk-favourite-jack-daniels-famous-grouse>
, he was still finding ways to innovate in his ninth decade, despite being 
semi-paralysed by a stroke.

If his work can be summed up in a single word, it is combination: a prodigal 
wedding of disparate and unlikely objects and techniques. Best known for making 
the hybrid painting-sculptures he called “combines” out of litter gleaned from 
New York’s streets – lightbulbs, chairs, tires, umbrellas, street signs and 
cardboard boxes were recurring motifs – Rauschenberg was a technical pioneer in 
multiple disciplines, moving restlessly on as soon as he mastered a new form.

“The artist of American democracy,” Robert Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-hughes> called him, “yearningly 
faithful to its clamour, its contradictions, its hope and its enormous demotic 
freedom.” Over the decades, he expanded the limits of painting, sculpture, 
printmaking, photography and dance. As a dizzying retrospective at Tate Modern 
makes clear, this self-described “loosest, weirdest artist” was a prolific 
visionary, whose gorgeous, sprawling work has lost not a single watt of its 
greedy incandescence.

Milton Ernest Rauschenberg (Robert was a name he cooked up after musing all 
night in a coffee shop) was born on 22 October 1925 in Port Arthur, a run-down 
oil refinery town on the Texas coast. His parents were fundamentalist 
Christians, and as a boy, Rauschenberg fantasised about becoming a preacher, an 
ambition he dismissed once he realised it would prevent him from dancing, an 
ecstatic lifeline for a tongue-tied, dyslexic kid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be1650eeace1aea5b87a876b52ef57df2358e20%2F0_149_4314_2590%2F4314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be1650eeace1aea5b87a876b52ef57df2358e20%2F0_149_4314_2590%2F4314.jpg>
 Detail from Rauschenberg’s Mirthday Man (1997). Photograph: Robert 
Rauschenberg Foundation and Faurschou Foundation 
His sensitive disposition brought him into repeated conflict with authority, 
starting with his father, a keen duck hunter disgusted by a son who refused to 
handle a gun (years later, on his deathbed, Rauschenberg senior confided 
balefully: “I never liked you, you son of a bitch”). After dropping out of 
pharmacy school for declining to dissect a frog, Rauschenberg was drafted into 
the navy in 1944, where he was made a neuropsychiatric technician in the 
Hospital Corps after once again asserting his refusal to kill.

Throughout those years he drew perpetually, covering his bedroom furniture in 
scarlet fleurs-de-lis and colouring portraits of fellow cadets with his own 
blood for lack of paint. But the notion that this might exceed a hobby didn’t 
strike him until he was on furlough in California. He wandered into the 
Huntington Library and came upon two paintings he recognised from the backs of 
playing cards: Gainsborough’sBlue Boy 
<http://www.britsattheirbest.com/cr_gainsborough_blue_boy.jpg> and Thomas 
Lawrence’sPinkie 
<http://artpaintingartist.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Pinkie-by-Sir-Thomas-Lawrence.jpg>
. Confronted by the swoony, enduring originals, he realised for the first time 
that artists existed, and that furthermore he could become one.

After the war ended he went to art school on the GI Bill, sampling the 
Académie Julian in Paris, where he met his future wife Susan Weil. In 1949 they 
settled together at Black Mountain, the experimental, anti-hierarchical arts 
college in North Carolina. The head of painting was Josef Albers, a refugee 
from the Nazi closure of theBauhaus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bauhaus>. His rigorous approach to 
colour and composition made him the most significant teacher in Rauschenberg’s 
life, though their native styles were anything but complementary. “Albers’s 
rule is to make order,” Rauschenberg observed. “As for me, I consider myself 
successful when I do something that resembles the lack of order I sense.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd45d9de4291d3a3d98e94c3713dc52c0c03d41%2F0_0_3444_2628%2F3444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd45d9de4291d3a3d98e94c3713dc52c0c03d41%2F0_0_3444_2628%2F3444.jpg>
 Untitled by Robert Rauschenberg. Photograph: Courtesy of the artist/Tate 
Together with Weil, Rauschenberg began experimenting with photograms, where 
objects are placed directly on photosensitive blueprint paper, initiating a 
habit of collaborating with lovers that would persist to the end of his life. 
The couple married in 1950 and separated a year later, shortly after the birth 
of their son, Christopher. Back at Black Mountain he began a passionate affair 
with a fellow student,Cy Twombly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cy-twombly>, as well as developing a 
productive, sustaining friendship with another queer couple: the avant garde 
composerJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/13/john-cage-contemporary-music-guide>
 and the dancerMerce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham>.

Rauschenberg described the encrusted Black Paintings and flat, shining White 
Paintings that arose from this tumultuous period to the gallerist Betty Parson 
as “almost an emergency”. It was hardly an overstatement. With the five panels 
of the White Paintings, he opened the door to minimalism, breaking away from 
the ruling cult of abstract expressionism and its macho insistence on emotional 
authenticity.

By applying white house paint with a roller, Rauschenberg deliberately avoided 
incident or gesture. The works were pure surface: the first and most extreme 
manifestation of Rauschenberg’s conception of art as a mirror for capturing the 
outside world. Look long enough, and you’d start to see shadows and 
reflections; an absence-that-wasn’t that inspired Cage to make4’33’’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/26/diplomat-silent-433-johannesburg-john-cage>
, his famous composition that deploys silence to expose a symphony of random 
ambient sounds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8906720ffb0366a7d07982875bb4a6df083675bc%2F0_0_940_2164%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8906720ffb0366a7d07982875bb4a6df083675bc%2F0_0_940_2164%2F940.jpg>
 Robert Rauschenberg’s Bed (1955). Photograph: Courtesy of the artist/Tate 
Of all the groundbreaking years in Rauschenberg’s life, 1953 was a doozy. That 
spring he settled in New York after returning from a European tour with 
Twombly. In his cold-water loft on Fulton Street he set about a series of 
paintings made of exalted and impoverished materials: dirt, grass seed that 
sprouted and died, mould, clay, lead and gold. He spent a painstaking month 
unmaking his notoriousErased de Kooning Drawing 
<http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2012/03/12/rauschenberg_erased-de-kooning-drawing_custom-b7d8d3d5667ee188a64ab02ae951d21e8d783cd5-s900-c85.jpg>
, a work of conceptual art before conceptual art had been conceived. He also 
began his voluptuously messy Red Paintings, chaotic collages assailed with a 
glorious repertoire of drips, splashes and smears. And on a street corner that 
autumn he met a young southern painter calledJasper Johns 
<http://www.jasper-johns.org/>.

Nicknamed “the Southern Renaissance” by Cage, Johns and Rauschenberg were 
lovers, collaborators and co-conspirators, a factory of two, egging each other 
on to ever more daring exploits. Dirt poor, they worked as window dressers, 
veiling this shamefully commercial activity with the pseudonym Matson Jones 
Custom Display. Speaking to Rauschenberg’s biographer Calvin Tomkins decades 
later, Johns said: “We were very close and considerate of one another, and for 
a number of years we were each other’s main audience. I was allowed to question 
what he did, and he could question what I did.”

Neither had yet achieved much purchase on the outside world. Reviews and sales 
for the exhibition of Red Paintings in 1954 were as dismal as they’d been for 
Rauschenberg’s previous shows. The only rave came from the poet and curator 
Frank O’Hara, who wrote presciently inArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> News: “He provides a means by 
which you, as well as he, can get ‘in’ the painting … For all the baroque 
exuberance of the show, quieter pieces evince a serious lyrical talent.”

What does it mean to get in a painting, and what might you do once you get 
there? Would it be domestic or dangerous, erotic or dreamy? All these 
possibilities smear and slide in 1955’s sublimeBed, the best known of 
Rauschenberg’s combines. In lieu of canvas, he requisitioned his own 
bedclothes, assaulting pillows, sheet and quilt with gory, libidinal gouts of 
paint and stripy toothpaste. A crime scene, one critic sneered, though the 
ecstatic nocturnal residue is also wickedly subversive: a closeted gay man 
airing filthy laundry in public pre-Stonewall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stonewall>.

Making the combines, Rauschenberg felt he was cracking “the secret language of 
junk”. They could be composed of anything: a goat corseted by a tire; a stuffed 
bald eagle. One of the very first,Untitled (Man with White Shoes), contained – 
deep breath – fabric, newspaper, a photograph of Jasper Johns, a handwritten 
letter from Rauschenberg’s son, a drawing by Twombly, glass, mirror, tin, cork, 
a pair of the artist’s socks and painted leather shoes, dried grass and a 
taxidermied Plymouth Rock hen.

All the same, there’s a limit to how much world you can cram into a sculpture, 
and as Rauschenberg’s success grew he became increasingly fascinated by 
replication. Back in 1952, he’d experimented with transfer drawing, and in 1958 
he embarked on a grand project of illustrating Dante’sInferno 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/sites/default/files/styles/zoom/public/images_artwork/60.D001_0.jpg?itok=El4f75Qn&slideshow=true&slideshowAuto=false&slideshowSpeed=4000&speed=350&transition=fade>
 using lighter fluid to transfer images on to paper. In 1962,Andy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> introduced him to a far 
more sophisticated technique: the wizardry of using photographic images on 
silkscreen canvases.

Now he could reuse and resize his own photos and those he snipped from 
newspapers and magazines, giving him an unprecedented power of composition. 
Anything could be incorporated:John F Kennedy; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-f-kennedy> a water tower; Bonnie and 
Clyde <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde>. As he gleefully 
observed of the silkscreen paintings: “It’s as much like Christmas to me as 
using objects I pick up on the street.” He was giddy for them, until in 1964 he 
was awarded the Golden Lion at theVenice Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale>. Terrified of 
stasis, the next day he called his New York studio and asked his assistant to 
burn all the screens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6297741c150b62d621b4916460b14441ce9ae4%2F0_1141_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6297741c150b62d621b4916460b14441ce9ae4%2F0_1141_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Rauschenberg’s Monogram (1955-59). Combine featuring rubber tyre on Angora 
goat. Photograph: Courtesy of the artist/Tate 
Focusing on any one aspect of Rauschenberg’s life risks distorting the 
kaleidoscopic whole. Throughout the 1950s, he was as deeply involved in dance 
as art, designing sets, scores, lighting and costumes – headdresses like 
“inhabited seashells”; a two-man horse suit – for Paul Taylor and theMerce 
Cunningham Dance Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham>. 
An “awkward, but beautiful addition to my work”, he called it: a collaborative 
antidote to “the privateness and loneliness of painting”.

The possibilities of bodies mingling on a stage excited him. His own forays 
into the form were characteristically surreal: roller-skating in his 1963 piece
Pelican with a kind of huge umbrella made of parachute silk lashed to his back; 
abseiling from a skylight into a drum of water for 1964’sElgin Tie.

He was always pushing forward, willingly lowering himself into new elements. 
In 1966, he co-founded the astonishingly forward-thinking Experiments in Art 
and Technology, an organisation that sought to promote the non-industrial use 
of technology by arranging collaborations between artists and engineers.

The 1970s, by contrast, were less frenetic. Rauschenberg moved to the luscious 
Captiva Island in Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/apr/05/sanibel-florida-seashell-haven-tranquillity>
, slowly establishing a substantial compound of studios and houses in the 
jungle. Inspired by a trip to India, the most beautiful work from those years 
involved a newly subtle use of fabric. In the enigmatic, haunting Hoarfrost 
series he used the old solvent technique to transfer ghost images from 
newspapers on to shrouds of chiffon and cotton. The Jammers were even more 
simple: bright lengths of silk, slung from rattan poles, like washing lines or 
prayer flags.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8f3786efad7f5a3b5d25b672d78a2315ee86a39%2F124_0_2887_3606%2F2887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%20and%20the%20subversive%20language%20of%20junk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Frobert-rauschenberg-and-the-subversive-language-of-junk-tate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8f3786efad7f5a3b5d25b672d78a2315ee86a39%2F124_0_2887_3606%2F2887.jpg>
 Robert Rauschenberg in 1966. Photograph: Jack Mitchell/Getty Images 
The world gnawed at him. He wanted to get out into it; to scoop it up. In 
1982, a project at a paper mill in China kick-started his most ambitious work. 
TheRauschenberg Overseas Cultural Interchange 
<http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/exhibitions/1991/rauschenberg.html> (ROCI) 
was an attempt to engage artistically with countries he felt were culturally 
isolated. Announcing its launch at the United Nations in December 1984, he 
said: “I feel strong in my beliefs … that a one-to-one contact through art 
contains potent peaceful powers and is the most non-elitist way to share exotic 
and common information, seducing us into creative mutual understandings for the 
benefit of all.”

Rauschenberg had initially hoped for public or corporate funding, but in the 
end he footed nearly all the $10m bill for ROCI himself, selling a Warhol and 
some of his own early work to fund an immense tour of 11 countries, including 
the US. Between 1985 and 1991, he visited Mexico, Chile, Venezuela, China, 
Tibet, Japan, Cuba, the USSR, Malaysia and Germany, working with local artists 
for weeks before hosting a substantial exhibition in each country.

“At once altruistic and self-aggrandising, modest and overbearing,” the critic 
Roberta Smith wrote of this unprecedented project, while the Soviet poet 
Yevgeny Yevtushenko described it as “one of the symbols of a spiritual 
perestroika of our society”. No other artist could have done it; no one else 
came close to Rauschenberg’s stamina or appetite, his outsized faith.

There was no question of running short of inspiration. For many artists the 
avalanching awards and wealth of later life come with an unwelcome diminishing 
of ideas, but Rauschenberg was still avid for discoveries in his 80s. Digital 
printing thrilled him, and he was making and exhibiting new work with the help 
of studio assistants even after 2002’s stroke (with his right hand paralysed, 
he simply learned to paint with his left).

His 1997 retrospective was the largest ever American one-man show. It far 
exceeded the capacity of the Guggenheim, spilling out into two other museums. A 
glut, you might call it, lifting the title of a late series; a lavish 
extravagance. He was equally generous with what had become a substantial 
fortune, donating heavily to Aids research, education and environmental causes. 
When he died on 12 May 2008 of heart failure, the New York Times described him 
as an artist “who time and again reshaped art in the 20th century”.

In a wheelchair, he’d still dreamed of photographing the entire world, inch by 
inch, asking friends to snap the most boring details they could find. Nothing 
was beneath his regard, and no one exceeded his vision for art as a kind of 
alternative planet, equally vast in scope and scale. “I’m for yes,” he said 
firmly. “No excludes. I’m for inclusion.”

• Robert Rauschenberg is at Tate Modern <>, London SE1 from 1 December. Olivia 
Laing is the author ofThe Lonely City 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/> (Canongate). 
tate.org.uk
 