
Rogue One <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> 
director Gareth Edwards has a nice story about Ben Mendelsohn – who is playing 
Orson Krennic, chief bad guy in the forthcoming offshoot of the Star Wars 
franchise. On the day that Darth Vader walked on to the set, says Edwards: “We 
were just getting ready to shoot the scene, and Ben asked to confer. It 
probably looked like we were huddling over actor stuff – motivation, tone, 
whatever. We weren’t. In fact, Ben was like a 10-year-old kid, clenching his 
fists in total delight and saying [he puts on an Aussie accent]: ‘Mate, look! 
It’sDarth fucking Vader!’”

Mendelsohn says: “It was like the seven-year-old me’s dream come true, 1977, 
Star Wars. From the ages of six to about 12, you’ll find that’s the peak age 
range where these movies go straight in – zoom!” He mimes a rocket flying into 
his face and blowing his kiddie-consciousness into a million pieces. “It hit me 
at an elemental level, and, for that kid I was then, I’m very glad. I often 
quip that there were many times in my life when I wish I’d been able to tell 
myself: ‘Don’t worry about it, one day you’ll be in aStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movie.’ Alas, you can’t do it. And 
yet …” he chuckles, “here we are.”

Mendelsohn’s face is his fortune. As we talk at the Lucasfilm production 
offices in Presidio Park overlooking San Francisco Bay, I marvel at its languid 
expressiveness, one moment lordly, unexpectedly noble in profile, the next 
slovenly, lizardly rangy, a sneer rolling along his lips. Few actors have his 
degree of iron control over their faces; no one says more facially by doing 
less. His vocal dexterity is also remarkable. His talk is effervescent and 
brutally blunt by turns, punctuated by sharp barks of laughter and a goodly 
sprinkling of “fucks”, as he ranges widely – here in a tone appropriate to a 
biker bar at closing time, here in one more suited to bone-dry academia – on 
esoteric themes that appeal to him in the moment. Talking with him is a journey 
and a joy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4936bb667cd2bc2b1034ac0139ee2517c096e148%2F0_220_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4936bb667cd2bc2b1034ac0139ee2517c096e148%2F0_220_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Mendelsohn as Orson Krennic in Rogue One: A Star Wars Story. Photograph: 
Allstar/LucasFilm 
A dapper fellow, he shows up in a surprisingly elegant knee-length brown 
greatcoat, easily the liveliest person in this tightly controlled junket 
environment. He has the demeanour of some savage, untamed indie actor, more 
accustomed to eating at petrol stations and crapping in buckets on some 
austerely frigid location-shoot, suddenly let loose amid the spoils, swag and 
heaving craft-service tables of a mega-budget A-list crowdpleaser: the very 
definition of a loose cannon.

Mendelsohn, now 47, has been a professional actor for nearly 30 years. But 
most people won’t have come across him until his blistering turn as the 
psychopathic elder brother in David Michôd’s Melbourne crime sagaAnimal Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/24/animal-kingdom-review> in 2010. 
Since then, he has given us a gallery of (mostly malevolent, usually funny, 
always complex) antiheroes and flat-out bad guys in movies as interesting and 
varied asKilling Them Softly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ujqiIK-jAo>, 
Starred Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starred-up>, The Place Beyond the 
Pines <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBZics1Zrw4>, Black Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/dec/03/michael-smiley-black-sea-space-video-interview>
 andSlow West 
<http://cdn3-www.comingsoon.net/assets/uploads/2015/05/benmendelsohnslowwest1b1.jpg>
. On a parallel track, he has been slowly establishing himself in A-picture 
material, such as Ridley Scott’sExodus: Gods and Kings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/29/exodus-gods-and-kings-review-christian-bale-ridley-scott>
,The Dark Knight Rises <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c1Z35jZ1LEo> and Rogue 
One, and next year we’ll see him in his first Spielberg movie, Ready Player 
One, again as the main antagonist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&media=>
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – video trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
By the time he struck it big – or medium-big – in the US, Mendelsohn had 
almost given up on succeeding outside Australia. He had seen actors his own 
age, then younger, then much younger, bypass him on the way to Los Angeles and 
stardom. His career had started out with the hit nostalgia dramaThe Year My 
Voice Broke <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q48hLGtazdw>, in 1987, when he was 
17; a film that came at the tail-end of the original Australian new wave of the 
late 70s (directed by one of the original new-wave heavy hitters, John Duigan). 
Mendelsohn played the charismatic, irresponsible, rugby-playing bad boy who 
stole cars and got girls pregnant, in a swaggeringly confident performance that 
earned him work in Australia for years after, but nowhere else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d622aa4fbc840f7fe3e7a796176399640dbb79a%2F0_0_2391_1600%2F2391.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d622aa4fbc840f7fe3e7a796176399640dbb79a%2F0_0_2391_1600%2F2391.jpg>
 Mendelsohn as the psychopathic elder brother in the 2010 film Animal Kingdom. 
Photograph: Allstar/Maximum Films 
In the decades that followed, he worked prolifically across the archipelago of 
diverse Australian film scenes that had sprung up separately in Melbourne, 
South Australia and Sydney, and kept busy. He is thus one of the youngest 
actors of the mature new wave, and one of the oldest of the seemingly 
never-ending new wave of Australians passing through the Neighbours set (like 
every Australian actor from Russell Crowe and Guy Pearce to Margot Robbie a 
generation later) and on to greater glory in Hollywood. He was on Neighbours  
<https://s.yimg.com/ea/img/-/161202/5840dca52c3c4_postimage_ben.jpg>before 
anyone else, and they all beat him to Los Angeles.

“I held the highest age-to-films ratio in Australia for a good few years. I 
really did do a lot of films, by Australian standards. Most of which didn’t 
travel. But I was also there for the start of Neighbours, with Kylie Minogue 
and Jason Donovan. I just predated it in my career by a couple of years. Kylie 
and I had doneThe Henderson Kids <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdbjH7Zf_6k> 
before that. I knew her from the time she was 15, and I heard her the first 
time she sang on stage, in a hall in Birregurra, doing a cover of The Rose by 
Bette Midler at the Hendersons wrap-party – it was actually a magical time.”

But the siren call of Hollywood never dimmed. “Now it’s much more possible for 
people to do one thing or two things in Australia and then go straight over – 
the path to LA has become a lot quicker, but was harder 20 years ago. It was 
pretty easy to start feeling one had been passed over and forgotten about, and 
I wasn’t gonna take that on the chin. And I did do it, kept going back but, for 
a long time, nothing came of it. I found myself having to think: ‘Well, that’s 
that.’”

He does pop up in odd places, if you are not aware of his past career. The 
night before I interviewed him, I caught him in a small but eye-catching role 
in the mountaineering thriller Vertical Limit, sobbing his eyes out in one 
scene, then being blown to bits 10 minutes later. And, if you watch carefully, 
you can spot him somewhere in Terrence Malick’s The New World. Patience, 
however, was his virtue.

Mendelsohn had a peripatetic upbringing, living in many places, mostly in 
Europe and in the US. He believes that rootlessness helped him as an actor, 
giving him a certain latitude to decide which Ben he would be in this “next 
life”, whenever he moved house, school or country, and how to write his own 
“character”.

“In this acting game,” he says, “there are a lot of army brats and people with 
moving-about childhoods. Moving around a lot and having to learn how to read 
what was coming up next, that thing of being able to read things and adjust 
accordingly, to find a way to make yourself fit in or feel a bit special, or 
different, is a lot like joining a new cast, really good practice.”

Most of this was outside Australia, which inevitably made him start feeling 
differently about the meaning of the word “home”, with Australia soon becoming 
another foreign place.

“I got back there for the first time when I was six, from living in Germany, 
and I had a thick German accent, and my mother had dressed us in these, almost 
semi-lederhosen, garish German, early-70s clothes. And it was a real shock. 
Australia was the real shock, it was where I learned to act, no doubt about it. 
And I returned to Australia twice at different crucial points in my schooling, 
and each time it was another kind of transformation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408af58f649308a85776c86bf14b7294e61b3113%2F0_0_1984_3030%2F1984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%E2%80%99s%20Ben%20Mendelsohn%3A%20%E2%80%98Star%20Wars%20is%20a%20childhood%20dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Frogue-ones-ben-mendelsohn-star-wars-is-a-childhood-dream-come-true%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408af58f649308a85776c86bf14b7294e61b3113%2F0_0_1984_3030%2F1984.jpg>
 Mendelsohn, aged 17, in the 1987 film that started his career, The Year My 
Voice Broke. Photograph: Avenue/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Mendelsohn arrived “home” just in time to witness the forcible removal from 
office in 1975 of modernising progressive prime minister Gough Whitlam by the 
governor general of Australia Sir John Kerr, the most scandalous usurpation of 
democracy in the nation’s history 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1975_Australian_constitutional_crisis>.

“When I got back there were lots of “WE WANT GOUGH!” badges everywhere. I 
remember that badge on the fridge at home, and understanding that it was our 
sworn duty to hate Malcolm Fraser! [Whitlam’s unelected replacement] If it 
wasn’t for Gough, you just wouldn’t have an Australia as you recognise it now. 
It gets its lifeblood from that government and what it achieved. And the 
reaction to Blue Poles [the Jackson Pollock painting purchased by the Whitlam 
government at enormous cost, solely to spur a national cultural conversation], 
and I do remember the reaction to it, even though I was very young, was … I 
mean, they were absolutely derisive about it! Australia was very elemental in 
the 70s, very raw, still kind of philistine. The Australian way, it is brutal, 
absolutely brutal at the merest whiff of, I mean, any airs and graces, you are 
for it. It’s a kind of ferocious egalitarianism. That’s very big in your 
culture and in ours, but not in the US at all. And it didn’t really start to 
shed that until the 1990s.” (Mendelsohn obviously loves his home country, but I 
note that he lives in Los Angeles with his wife of four years, British writer 
Emma Forrest.)

Funny thing: as good as he is, Mendelsohn doesn’t watch his own work. You 
should start, I tell him. Turns out you’re pretty good at this.

“I think I might start again. It began when I was doing some TV thing 
somewhere, and I didn’t want to watch it. Afterwards, I thought: ‘Oh, I got 
away with that!’ And I really think it helped make me better as an actor. There 
is a certain sense to that. There’s always some tinkering that you could have 
done, you feel. You watch things and think about how you could have got louder 
or thought differently, but worrying about that just gets to be a huge pain in 
the arse. No, maybe I won’t start watching myself again!”

When he was a kid, his acting heroes were John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, Al 
Pacino, Jeff Bridges (“the best, the most charismatic and beautiful, just a 
fantastic actor!”) and Jack Thompson. Since Animal Kingdom,Ben Mendelsohn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-mendelsohn> has been proving over and 
over that he might well ascend into their company one day.

• Rogue One: A Star Wars Story is released on 15 December
 