
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
 soared to the top of the weekend box office as expected, scoring the 
second-best December opening ever with $155m in estimated ticket sales.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story review – a sleek addition to the fleet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
After the biggest Thursday night debut of the year, the intergalactic 
adventure blasted past industry expectations for a $130m weekend, according 
Sunday’s studio estimates. Rogue One opened at No 1 in all markets globally, 
though it has yet to bow in China and Korea.

“We’re in uncharted territory for December,” said Paul Dergarabedian, senior 
media analyst for the box office tracker comScore. “It’s going to be really 
hard for any movie to catch up to this movie … This is only the second time a 
movie has opened this big in December.”

The record-setter was Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, the space saga’s 
seventh installment, which debuted to $247.9m in the US and Canada last 
December.

Like The Force Awakens in 2015, Rogue One could top the box office for the 
rest of the year, Dergarabedian said.

Set before the events of the original 1977 Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, it stars Felicity Jones and Diego 
Luna as leaders of a rebel faction that steals plans for its imperial enemy’s 
master weapon, the Death Star.

Rogue One knocked the No 1 movie for the past three weeks, Disney’s Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana>, to a distant second with $11.6m, 
followed by Office Christmas Party with $8.4m.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story in-depth fan review: 'This is a movie made for 
fans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-in-depth-fan-review>
The weekend’s other new release, the critically panned Will Smith drama 
Collateral Beauty, opened in fourth place with $7m.

“This is one of the most intense marketplaces for movies I’ve ever seen,” 
Dergarabedian said. “You have a Star Wars movie out there looming like the 
Death Star over everything, and a really great crop of Oscar contenders that 
keeps expanding.”

Denzel Washington’s Fences opened in limited release this weekend and expands 
on Christmas Day. Manchester by the Sea, La La Land and Arrival, which all 
earned awards nominations recently, remain in the box office top 10.

Moviegoers who see Rogue One will also get a peek at next year’s anticipated 
blockbusters: trailers for the new Guardians of the Galaxy, Spider-Man and Fast 
& Furious films play before the feature.

Rogue One is the “perfect lead-in for 2017, which looks absolutely massive”, 
Dergarabedian said.
 