
The North American movie box office took in $11.4bn in 2016, making it the 
highest-earning year in history, according to the box office tracker comScore. 
The total eclipsed the previous record of $11.14bn in 2015.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story review – back to the retro future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/rogue-one-star-wars-story-review> 
The crop of blockbuster movies in 2016 was topped by Finding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-dory>, which took $486.3m in the US 
and Canada, comScore said.

 The latest Star Wars movie, Rogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/rogue-one-star-wars-story-review>
, finished the year in second place, but it was only released on 16 December in 
the US and continues to enjoy strong sales.

Rogue One and Sing led the way over the New Year’s holiday. The Star Wars 
spin-off topped the box office for the third consecutive weekend, earning just 
under $50m for the three-day period and a projected $64m for the four-day 
holiday.

The movie business is tacking Monday on to New Year’s weekend, because many 
companies and schools observe it as a holiday.

The weekend gross made Rogue One the year’s second-highest-grossing domestic 
release, with $425m, and concluded a record-annihilating year for Disney. The 
studio became the first totop $7bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/20/walt-disney-sets-7bn-box-office-record-2016-star-wars-rogue-one>
 in one year, fielded four of the five top-grossing domestic releases, and 
should see four of its movies top $1bn at the global box office.

Sing, the latest collaboration between Illumination and Universal, racked up 
$41.4m during its second weekend in theaters. It is projected to earn $53.7m 
for the four-day holiday weekend and has made $177.3m stateside. The company 
also scored with last summer’s The Secret Life of Pets.

In third place, Passengers, a critically derided science fiction romance with 
Chris Pratt and Jennifer Lawrence, earned $16.1m over the three-day weekend and 
was projected to take $20.7m over the four-day. As of Sunday, its domestic haul 
stands at $61.4m. With a $110m budget and millions more spent on promotion, 
Passengers will need a lift from foreign audiences.

The same is true for Fox’s Assassin’s Creed, which took in $8m for the weekend 
and a projected $10m for the holiday. The video game adaptation has earned $41m 
– a dispiriting result given its $125m budget.

Fox is having more luck with Why Him? The R-rated comedy earned $10m over the 
three-day period and an estimated $13m for the four-day holiday. The film about 
the rivalry between a father (Bryan Cranston) and his daughter’s fiance (James 
Franco) has earned $37.6m and cost an economical $38m to produce.

Paramount’s Fences expanded nicely. Denzel Washington directs and stars in the 
August Wilson adaptation, with Viola Davis playing a key supporting role. The 
drama earned an estimated $13m for the holiday. It has made $32.7m since 
debuting three weeks ago in limited release.

Lionsgate’s La La Land continued to capitalize on awards buzz. The musical is 
projected to make $12.3m over the four-day holiday, which would bring its gross 
to an estimated $37m. On Friday, La La Land passed Hell or High Water to become 
the highest-grossing movie in limited release for the year.

Sing review – pitch-perfect porcupines have the X factor in jukebox musical
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/sing-review-scarlett-johansson-toronto-film-festival-matthew-mcconaughey>
Fox’s Hidden Figures also looks strong. The drama about the African American 
scientists and mathematicians who played a pivotal role in the early days of 
America’s space program, earned $815,000 for the three days and $1.1m for the 
four days from just 25 theaters. It goes into wide release next weekend.

20th Century Women and Paterson were released just under the wire in order to 
qualify for Oscars. 20th Century Women, a comedy-drama that has earned some of 
the best reviews of Annette Bening’s career, earned $112,705 for the weekend. 
A24 is handling the rollout. Paterson, a drama about a poetic bus driver, made 
$70,760. It is being released by Amazon Studios and Bleecker Street.

Overall in 2016, Disney had six of North America’s top 10 grossing movies and 
all of the top three, including Captain America: Civil War, which took in $408m.

 “Forgetful fish, superheroes, household pets and space travellers led the 
charge,” comScore’s senior media analyst, Paul Dergarabedian, said in a news 
release on Sunday.

The year, he said, “was marked by an incredibly diverse selection of films 
from every genre and of every size and scope from all the studios”.
 