
Rogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
 might be the perfect Christmas present for the Star Wars fan who has 
everything, or thought they did. Where George Lucas’s prequels tried 
desperately to twist the long-running space saga into exotic new forms,Gareth 
Edwards <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gareth-edwards>’ bleak, electrifying 
entry takes everything we love about 1977’s Star Wars and imagines what might 
have been going on in the movie’s peripheral vision, an inch or two either side 
of the main action. It’s a gap-filler of a film, a plot hole-plugger, an 
examination of a famous event from the opposite side of the mirror.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&media=>
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – video trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story review – a sleek addition to the fleet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
That this event is the destruction of the first Death Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-five-reasons-were-still-slightly-worried>
 is probably the only reason the film works, because Star Wars is so deeply 
embedded in the cultural consciousness that we’re more than willing to 
luxuriate in an unexpected additional episode that relies almost entirely on 
its predecessor for meaning. In many ways, Rogue One does not even feel like a 
movie, but more like TV. I was reminded of the Lost episode The Other 48 Days, 
in which the mystery show rewound to the beginning to present the story of 
another group of survivors ofOceanic Airlines Flight 815 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/27/jj-abrams-ship-of-theseus> – 
even though the show’s previous 20 hours or so has been spent in the company of 
the established characters.

All this makes Edwards’ movie a strangely discombobulating experience, despite 
all those luxurious Easter eggs and electrifying visits to gorgeously imagined 
planets. And yet the critical consensus is that Rogue One has succeeded where 
Lucas’s prequel trilogy failed. The new movie, the first Star Wars spin-off,
currently boasts a rating of 85% “fresh” on the review aggregator Rotten 
Tomatoes <https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/rogue_one_a_star_wars_story/>, only 
just down onThe Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
’ 92% and higher than all other episodes bar Star Wars andThe Empire Strikes 
Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/12/secret-cinema-the-empire-strikes-back-review-the-force-is-weak-with-this-one>
. Where would you rate it in the canon? And how does the new film bode for the 
future of the looming Star Wars cinematic universe? Here’s your chance to give 
your verdict on the movie’s key talking points.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4936bb667cd2bc2b1034ac0139ee2517c096e148%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4936bb667cd2bc2b1034ac0139ee2517c096e148%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Ben Mendelsohn at Krennic. Photograph: Allstar/Lucasfilm 
The dark and sombre tone

From the opening scene in which Jyn Erso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/daisy-ridley-rey-mum-jyn-erso-star-wars-rogue-one>
’s mother found herself mown down by Deathtrooper bullets, Rogue One set out 
its stall as a Star Wars movie for mature audiences, the grimmest entry since 
1980’s The Empire Strikes Back. The original trilogy always balanced the 
horrors of the dark side with a sense of hope surrounding Luke Skywalker’s 
endeavours. But Edwards’ film never balks at showing the desperation of the 
Rebel Alliance and their allies, the misery of the downtrodden peoples of the 
galaxy and the bloody fate likely to be faced by anyone who gets on the wrong 
side of the Empire. By the time the credits roll, every member of the Rogue One 
crew has met a horrible death, just to give Luke Skywalker the chance to blow 
up the Death Star. Warn your friends with young children now, this is not one 
for the kids!

The plot hole-filling

Has there ever before been a movie created almost entirely to paper over the 
cracks of one of its predecessors? The preposterous convenience of the exhaust 
port on the original Death Star that can be used to blow the entire space 
station to smithereens has been a talking point for decades. Now we know that 
Galen Erso built it that way deliberately to take revenge on Krennic and his 
Imperial buddies for making him build the giant planet-killing superweapon in 
the first place.

Might Disney be on to something here? Expect a future Star Wars spin-off to 
explain why baby Luke was sent to live on his dad’s home planet and never 
warned to keep his famous surname a secret, despite the obvious dangers of 
Vader discovering his identity. And perhaps we can get another instalment that 
explainsObi-Wan Kenobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/17/ewan-mcgregor-obi-wan-kenobi-star-wars-spin-off>
’s inability to recognise R2-D2 and C-3PO in the original Star Wars, despite 
having known both for decades.

The fan theories now torpedoed 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0d01ac327667c7dd8327be0b03261c2af6b3e4f%2F335_0_2443_1467%2F2443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0d01ac327667c7dd8327be0b03261c2af6b3e4f%2F335_0_2443_1467%2F2443.jpg>
 Forest Whitaker in Rogue One. Photograph: Allstar/Lucasfilm 
Here are a few theories about Rogue One that can now be filed away for ever in 
a box marked nonsense. Supreme Leader Snoke’s true identity is not explained 
(he’s not even in it), Rey is not Jyn Erso’s daughter (as far as we know) and 
the Rogue One crew will not end up as theKnights of Ren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/21/where-should-star-wars-spin-off-to-next-yoda-obi-wan-leia>
 (they all die). In fact, Edwards’ movie seems to leave very few threads 
hanging that were not picked up in 1977’s Star Wars, so we’ll all just have to 
wait another 12 months forEpisode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/18/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson>
 to arrive and (hopefully) plug all the gaping logic chasms in The Force 
Awakens.

The completely misleading trailers

What is the point of releasing trailers for Rogue One when very little of the 
footage in them appears to have made the final cut? Whatever happened toSaw 
Gerrera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/24/rogue-one-star-wars-story-entertainment-weekly-spoilers>
 hinting that Jyn might end up turning to the dark sidein the debut teaser 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wji-BZ0oCwg>, or Mon Mothma discussing the 
junior Erso’s shady past in the same trailer? Felicity Jones’s awful “I rebel” 
line is absent.

It’s well known that early trailers are often made with footage that ends up 
discarded, butOctober’s final trailer for Rogue One 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c1J8ZA8_plw> featured completely different 
takes of Jyn rousing the rebels from those seen in the final movie. In the 
trailer, Jones is upbeat and optimistic; in the final cut, these scenes are 
doom-laden. The overall picture presented was of a much cheerier film than the 
gloomy, darkling entry that ended up in cinemas.

Peter Cushing’s CGI-assisted return from the dead (and other Easter eggs)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8428fe7c153ecc75cb35272fd337361f2e83d2e3%2F0_65_1838_1103%2F1838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20Death%20Stars%2C%20plot%20holes%20and%20a%20darker%20side%20of%20Star%20Wars%20%E2%80%93%20discuss%20with%20spoilers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Frogue-one-darth-vader-digital-tinkerings-dark-side-star-wars-gareth-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8428fe7c153ecc75cb35272fd337361f2e83d2e3%2F0_65_1838_1103%2F1838.jpg>
 Peter Cushing, left, in the original Star Wars (1977). Photograph: Cine 
Text/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
This was a far greater feat of digital wizardry than Captain America: Civil War
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war>’s depiction of a 
teenage Robert Downey Jr, or those scenes in Westworld featuring a “young”
Anthony Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/08/anthony-hopkins-quitting-the-dresser-california-ian-mckellen>
. Cushing seems to have at least as much screen time in Rogue One as he did in 
the original Star Wars. The sceneswere apparently shot with Holby City actor 
Guy Henry stepping in for the Hammer horror icon 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-12-15/how-a-holby-city-actor-brought-one-of-star-wars-most-iconic-characters-back-to-life>
, with the images altered in post-production. On the giant Imax screen at the 
Empire in Leicester Square, London, there were moments when you could just 
about see the strings holding up this digital puppet, but the differences 
between fake Cushing and the real thing were so microscopic as to be virtually 
negligible.

Did you also enjoy the brief glimpse of Mos Eisley gangster Cornelius Evazan? 
How about Luke Skywalker’s future X-wing pilot comrades, or the superbly 
rendered Mon Calamari commander Admiral Raddus, who appears to be a distant 
relative of Admiral Ackbar? Perhaps the piece de resistance here was the 
miraculous final shot featuring a young Carrie Fisher, even if it must have 
made a seriously incomprehensible ending for anyone who has not seenStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story in-depth fan review: 'This is a movie made for 
fans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-in-depth-fan-review>
Then there was Darth Vader’s swashbuckling revival. The scene in which the 
charred remains of Anakin Skywalker are seen in an Imperial take on Luke 
Skywalker’s bacta tank from Empire Strikes Back was an unexpected sideswipe 
into body horror territory that summed up Rogue One’s obsession with the 
grimmer corners of the Star Wars galaxy. And the Sith Lord’s arrival on Leia’s 
ship gave us thelightsaber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/dec/11/how-to-build-a-real-lightsaber>
 battle that no Star Wars movie should be without, even if it was pretty 
one-sided.

The future of Star Wars

Where does Rogue One leave Disney’s mooted cinematic universe? If Edwards’ 
movie hits the magic $1bn mark –signs look positive 
<http://deadline.com/2016/12/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-box-office-opening-disney-felicity-jones-1201867465/>
 – it will have proved that Star Wars can flourish without Skywalkers, Jedi 
Knights and miraculous feats of telekinesis, as well as putting the lie to the 
suggestion that the long-running space opera is just for kids. Rogue One’s 
thrillingly raw and downbeat veneer might even allow room for the upcoming 
young Han Solo movie, not to mention Episode VIII, to dip into duskier 
territory than we might have imagined. More than anything, the film’s success 
will have proved that passion for further Star Wars adventures has remains 
undimmed, almost four decades after the original episode ushered in the 
blockbuster era, and that the Mouse House was right to suggest that the saga’s 
potential for future spin-offs is almost infinite.A new Star Wars film every 
year? <http://www.ew.com/article/2013/04/17/star-wars-movies-2015> At this 
rate, Rogue One makes that task look easier than bullseyeing a womp rat.
 