
Rogue One: A Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> Story’s 
visual effects supervisor John Knoll has hit back at critics of the decision to 
digitally resurrect Peter Cushing as the Grand Moff Tarkin, a character who 
previously appeared in 1977’s Star Wars: A New Hope.

Speaking to Yahoo Movies 
<https://www.yahoo.com/movies/rogue-one-creator-defends-cgi-tarkin-says-carrie-fisher-loved-her-digital-self-203453637.html>
, Knoll – who shares a story credit on Rogue One, as well as being chief 
creative officer for FX house Industrial Light & Magic – responded both to 
criticism of the look of the work, and the ethics of doing it in the first 
place.

Related: Disney deny negotiating with Carrie Fisher's estate for rights to her 
digital image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/carrie-fisher-disney-negotiating-for-digital-rights-star-wars>

On the first point, Knoll said: “There are people that have said quite 
vehemently that it looks terrible and looks like a video game, and I will 
assert that that is not the case.” The film-makers used actor Guy Henry as a 
digital stand-in for Cushing, and employed motion-capture and a 
facial-expression tracker to animate footage and photographs of Cushing. Knoll 
said: “Essentially, we’re using the computer graphics as a tool to alter his 
appearance.”

As for the ethics of working with images of an actor who died in 1994, Knoll 
said: “We weren’t doing anything that I think Peter Cushing would’ve objected 
to. I think this work was done with a great deal of affection and care. We know 
that Peter Cushing was very proud of his involvement in Star Wars and had said 
as much, and that he regretted that he never got a chance to be in another Star 
Wars film because George [Lucas] had killed off his character.”

Knoll added: “This was done in consultation and cooperation with his estate. 
So we wouldn’t do this if the estate had objected or didn’t feel comfortable 
with this idea.”

Related: Rogue One: the CGI resurrection of Peter Cushing is thrilling – but 
is it right? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/rogue-one-star-wars-cgi-resurrection-peter-cushing>

Knoll also touched on the digital recreation of Carrie Fisher’s young Princess 
Leia, as seen in A New Hope, which was accomplished with a similar mix of 
stand-in, motion capture and archive material. Knoll said he didn’t have direct 
contact with the actor – who died on 27 December, a fortnight after Rogue One 
was released – but heard via Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy that Fisher 
approved of the result. “Kathy [Kennedy] called me right after she showed it to 
[Fisher] and said how fantastic she thought it was. So she was very much in 
favour of it.”

Disney and Lucasfilm recently denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/13/carrie-fisher-disney-negotiating-for-digital-rights-star-wars>
 they were negotiating with Fisher’s estate over further use of the actor’s 
digital image.
 