
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> has opened to 
$29m in its first night on release in the US.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story in-depth fan review: 'This is a movie made for 
fans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-in-depth-fan-review>
The spin-off, which is set before the events of Star Wars: A New Hope, has 
beaten Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice and Captain America: Civil War to 
score the year’s biggest preview number. But it falls behind the 
record-breaking $57m achieved by Star Wars: The Force Awakens which opened last 
year.

Rogue One is expected to score the second biggest December opening of all time 
with tracking around $135-$150m. The Force Awakens opened to $247.9m. Back in 
September,Disney CEO Bob Iger said 
<https://variety.com/2016/film/news/star-wars-rogue-one-vs-force-awakens-bob-iger-1201866852/>
 that the company wasn’t expecting it to perform as well as JJ Abrams’ sequel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-unveils-darth-vader-return-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%3A%20trailer%20unveils%20Darth%20Vader%20return%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-unveils-darth-vader-return-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%3A%20trailer%20unveils%20Darth%20Vader%20return%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-unveils-darth-vader-return-video&media=>
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story: trailer unveils Darth Vader return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/12/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-unveils-darth-vader-return-video>
Reviews for the film have been largely positive, with the Guardian’s Peter 
Bradshaw calling it an“exhilarating, good-natured and enjoyable adventure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
. The Rotten Tomatoes score is 85% compared with 92% for The Force Awakens.

The film, directed by Godzilla’s Gareth Edwards, focuses on a mission to 
obtain the blueprint for the Death Star and is led by Oscar nominee Felicity 
Jones. After a year of ongoing discussions about equal pay within the industry,
the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/rogue-one-whos-getting-paid-956874>
 claimed on Friday that Jones was the highest-paid member of the cast.

As a standalone story, it’s already been confirmed that the film won’t be 
receiving a sequel. Next year sees the release of Star Wars: Episode VIII ahead 
of a Han Solo origins tale soon after.
 