
The defamation trial against Rolling Stone drew to a close on Tuesday, as 
attorneys clashed over whether the author of the magazine’sdiscredited story of 
a gang rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/29/rolling-stone-uva-rape-jann-wenner>
 was an agenda-driven reporter or a dupe.

Before they adjourned, attorneys for the plaintiff excoriated Rolling Stone 
for willfully ignoring any facts that might have contradicted its preconceived 
notions of the story.

“Once they decided what the article was going to be about, it didn’t matter 
what the facts were,” said Tom Clare, an attorney for a former University of 
Virginia dean who issuing the magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/12/uva-rolling-stone-defamation-campus-rape-article>
 for nearly $8m.

Attorneys for Rolling Stone countered that Sabrina Rubin Erdely, the author of 
the piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/20/rolling-stone-reporter-admits-mistakes-in-jackie-article>
, and her editors had no reason to doubt theaccuser at the center of the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/24/rolling-stone-defamation-trial-uva-jackie-testifies>
 before publication.

“Everyone who encountered this young woman believed her,” Scott Sexton, an 
attorney for Rolling Stone, said. “Yet we are the ones, in a sense, being tried 
for having believed her.”

UVA rape story trial highlights struggle to report on sexual assault in Trump 
era
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/trump-sexual-misconduct-accusers-uva-rape-story-rolling-stone>
The closing arguments bring to an end two weeks of testimony and the first of 
several lawsuits the magazine faces over its discredited November 2014 story A 
Rape on Campus.

The 9,000-word feature told the story of a University of Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia> student, identified only as 
“Jackie”, who claimed that seven members of Phi Kappa Psi gang-raped her in a 
gruesome fraternity initiation. For several weeks, the UVA campus reeled from 
the revelations – until the story quickly fell apart under scrutiny from other 
news outlets. A Charlottesville police investigation, concluded soon after the 
article was published, found no evidence to substantiate Jackie’s story, but 
stopped short of declaring that she had fabricated her assault.

The trial didn’t center on questions of whether Jackie’s claims were false, 
but on the nature of Rolling Stone’s attempts to verify her story and the 
callous picture it painted of University of Virginia administrator Nicole 
Eramo, then the associate dean of students.

Still, the trial probed some of the key elements of Jackie’s story. Jackie was 
never called to testify. Instead, attorneys for Eramo played clips for the jury 
from her video deposition. “I never felt like she [Eramo] suppressed my sexual 
assault,” Jackie said in her deposition. “I personally thought that she did 
everything right.”

In legal filings, attorneys for Jackie maintain that she is a survivor of 
sexual assault. The court treated her as such and prevented either side from 
revealing her name. Eramo, who does not believe she was gang-raped in the 
manner she describes, believes Jackie underwent something traumatic.

The story portrayed Eramo as taking no action after Jackie disclosed that she 
was, allegedly, gang-raped. Eramo says she was the story’s “chief villain”.

There are only three statements about Eramo in the article in question, 
including one in which she is quoted – through Jackie – as saying that the 
university doesn’t publish all of its statistics about sexual assault because 
“nobody wants to send their daughter to the rape school”. Eramo also claims 
that Erdely defamed her in statements she made on a radio program and podcast 
after the article was published.


The judge has dismissed Eramo’s claim that the story, when taken as a whole, 
implied that Eramo was a “false friend” to Jackie – a claim that Rolling Stone 
called a “critical element” of her case.

Eramo still works at the university in another position, and is paid a higher 
salary than she was as a dean. But the article, Eramo said, took a heavy toll 
on her reputation and her psyche. A deluge of emails she received after the 
article ran called her, among other things, a “wretched rape apologist” and 
“disgusting, worthless piece of trash”.

The abuse was the consequence of Rolling Stone’s efforts to paint her as its 
“chief villain”, Eramo argues. As a key piece of evidence, her attorneys 
highlighted a meeting Eramo arranged between Jackie and the Charlottesville 
police – a meeting that Erdely knew about. Erdely made a reference to the 
meeting in an early draft of her article, but it was later cut.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Frolling-stone-uva-defamation-trial-jackie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce561534881166ca09c62a5c2c3e72af6864d9e%2F629_14_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rolling%20Stone%20defamation%20trial%20nears%20end%20as%20lawyers%20say%20facts%20of%20UVA%20case%20ignored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Frolling-stone-uva-defamation-trial-jackie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rolling%20Stone%20defamation%20trial%20nears%20end%20as%20lawyers%20say%20facts%20of%20UVA%20case%20ignored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Frolling-stone-uva-defamation-trial-jackie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce561534881166ca09c62a5c2c3e72af6864d9e%2F629_14_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
 University of Virginia administrator Nicole Eramo, center, leaves federal 
court with her attorney, Tom Clare. Photograph: Steve Helber/AP 
In its defense, attorneys for the magazine attempted to reinforce the central 
argument of its retracted story: that the university, and Eramo, did next to 
nothing after learning of Jackie’s story.

The meeting, for example, did not appear to concern Jackie’s purported gang 
rape but another incident that Jackie was reporting, Erdely testified. In that 
incident, Jackie claims that a member of Phi Kappa Psi threw a bottle at her 
and struck her in the face. “This article was not about how the university 
handles bottle incidents,” Erdelysaid 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tylerkingkade/rolling-stone-writer-admits-mistakes-in-reporting-of-rape-st?utm_term=.qpKj4AEMG#.jvYXAr054>
. “It was about how it handles sexual assault.”

Rolling Stone’s attorneys also attempted to show that Eramo did not take 
Jackie’s claims seriously as a crime until news reached her that Erdely was 
preparing a story. As proof, the legal team held upa pair of text messages 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tylerkingkade/rolling-stone-writer-testifies-in-trial-arising-from-uva-rap?utm_term=.yeEWdy4Rl#.hfGjR5V70>
 Eramo sent to victims’ advocates before the article published. “[A]fter a 
convo last night seems the fraternity is planning to throw me under the bus. 
Awesome,” read one message. In a subsequent text, Eramo wrote, “I should have 
conducted an investigation due to the public safety risk despite the wishes of 
the survivor.”

Eramo’s bid to prove the magazine defamed her is a challenging one. In 
September, a judge ruled that Eramo was a public figure, meaning she must prove 
that Rolling Stone’s reporting was not only false but also malicious.

As a result, attorneys for Eramo strove to prove that Erdely arrived to the 
story with a preconceived narrative. They cross-examined Erdely over her 
failure to contact friends of Jackie who contradicted Jackie’s story when 
contacted by the Washington Post. Theygrilled 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tylerkingkade/rolling-stone-writer-testifies-in-trial-arising-from-uva-rap?utm_term=.yeEWdy4Rl#.hfGjR5V70>
 Erdely for writing in her notes that she was investigating “institutional 
indifference” and for comparing her potential story, in the early stages of 
reporting, to her investigation of the Catholic church for mishandling claims 
of sexual misconduct.

On Tuesday, Clare, Eramo’s lawyer, assailed Erdely for being “blind to the 
facts” that might have caused her to rethink the article.

Witnesses for Rolling Stone’s defense admitted that the magazine erred when it 
failed to confirm the existence of Jackie’s alleged rapists. But they walked 
the line, throughout the two-week trial, between contrition and defensiveness.

In a video deposition played for the court, for example, Jann S Wenner, the 
magazine’s founder and owner,apologized 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/29/business/media/founder-says-rolling-stone-erred-in-retracting-rape-article.html?_r=0>
 to Eramo. “I’m very, very sorry,” he said. “Believe me, I’ve suffered as much 
as you have.” But he was defiant over the April 2015 decision to withdraw the 
article from Rolling Stone’s website, saying that “personally, professionally 
and on behalf of the magazine”, hestood by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/29/rolling-stone-uva-rape-jann-wenner>
 the parts of the article that weren’t related to Jackie.

“We do not retract the whole story,” he said.

Wenner’s words fueled a skirmish over when Rolling Stone officially retracted 
the article. The timing could make a difference in the damages awarded to Eramo 
if the jury finds in her favor. Attorneys for Rolling Stone have asserted that 
a December 2014 editor’s note disavowing Jackie’s allegations counts as its 
official retraction.

Eramo’s legal team have argued that the article wasn’t retracted until April 
2015, when Rolling Stone made the article unavailable on its website. In its 
place, the magazine released an excoriating review of the article completed by 
experts at the Columbia University School of Journalism.


Eramo’s lawsuit is one of several lobbed at Rolling Stone after the article’s 
retraction. One case, brought by three fraternity members, was dismissed 
earlier this year on the basis that none of the men are named in the lawsuit. 
The UVA chapter ofPhi Kappa Psi has filed a $25m lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/09/university-of-virginia-fraternity-sues-rolling-stone-rape-article>
 that is set for trial in 2017.

Rolling Stone has agreed to pay for Erdely’s legal defense and any fines she 
must face.
 