
Any new wave in cinema is duty-bound to make surprise its mission, cocking a 
snook at tradition and shuffling conventions. The one that broke in 2005 got 
off to a good start: hailing from Romania, a filmic backwater compared to 
Russia and Poland. Kicking off with Cristi Puiu'sThe Death of Mr Lazarescu 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/113257/death.of.mr.lazarescu> – the 
whispered hit of Cannes that year – this revolution had ready-made class: it 
was aesthetically rigorous; serious-minded yet buoyed by a mordant sense of 
humour; it scraped its truths from the dingy fabric of everyday life, often 
covered in the residue of 42 years of communism.

Corneliu Porumboiu, Cristian Mungiu and Radu Muntean all followed up in this 
vein in the second half of the noughties, with pure festival-bait that was 
still clocking up awards this year when the dramaChild's Pose 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/17/berlin-film-festival-eastern-european-movie-makers>
 took the top prize at Berlin.

And yet it was a movement almost totally disconnected from its Romanian 
audience. Even given its purist arthouse allegiances, the box office figures 
were appalling. Aurora, Puiu's last film, grossed just $6,942 in Romania, the 
country's 96th most popular film in 2011. Only Mungiu's Palme d'Or winner4 
Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/120862> has 
breached the top 10 – making $274,611, as 2007's seventh most successful; with 
Florian Serban's prison drama,If I Want to Whistle, I Whistle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/136938/if-i-want-to-whistle-i-whistle)> 
struggling into the top 50 in 2010. Compared to other east European audiences, 
Romanians were definitely not interested in getting high on their own supply: 
domestic films had a paltry 2.5% share of the market in 2010.
 Beyond the Hills, directed by Cristian Mungiu 
Does a new wave exist if there's no one around to hear it crashing to shore? 
Festival audiences and international arthouse buffs certainly marvelled at the 
high quality of the Romanian new wave – AO Scott called it "the most exciting 
development in a European national cinema since Spain in the 1980s" in his
exhaustive piece 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/19/arts/19iht-fromanian.1.9340722.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 for the New York Times in 2008.

But it's easy to think that the lack of interest on the part of those whose 
lives were in closeup made the pressing questions posed by the films peter out 
in a vacuum. Shouldn't there be more sparks of recognition over The Death of Mr 
Lazarescu's sly digs at the healthcare system, or Porumboiu's droll debate in 
his fantastic12:08 East of Bucharest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/115663/12> (about whether the 1989 
revolution actually happened, or the provocative sadism of the clergy in 
Mungiu's biting convent drama,Beyond the Hills 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146661/beyond-the-hills> (out in the UK 
this week)?

Perhaps these are questions more for the directors than for audiences, 
touching on their motivation for carrying on. The Romanian new wave has 
noticeably slowed down since its mid-noughties eruption, the lack of local 
acknowledgement might be one reason why; every artistic movement needs 
nourishment from the grassroots (Mungiu, in his recentinterview 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/mar/07/beyond-the-hills-cristian-mungiu> 
with Xan Brooks, pinpoints the lack of film theatres in the country as a 
crucial problem area).

Now it looks as if Romanian film-goers could be moving off in another 
direction. There was a small resurgence at the box office for local films last 
year – for more conventional commercial fare, such asMinte-mă Frumos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_45sc1LY0SE> (Sweet Little Lies), which 
followed on the heels of 2011'sBună! Ce Faci? 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RE6iBY4SFQ> (Hello! How Are You?), the first 
Romanian romcom for many years.

But no one cares about these films abroad. Romania's commercial industry might 
help put the much-needed infrastructure in place, but only the arthouse can 
bring it respect. The rift between the Romanian new wave and its home audience 
could end up hurting the global profile of the industry, if the movement runs 
to seed. Unfortunately, the government's priorities lie elsewhere: last year, it
killed off funding 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/commentary-romanian-cinema-is-in-grave-danger-and-heres-why-indie-film-fans-should-care?page=1#articleHeaderPanel>
 for the body responsible for promoting Romanian films abroad (which had to 
resort toKickstarter 
<http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/romanianfilm/making-waves-2012-romanian-film-festival-at-lincol>
 to help fund last year's Romanian film festival in New York).

In some ways, the Romanian new wave is fighting the same battle undergone by 
the other localised culture surges of the noughties, such as Japanese J-horror, 
the Latin Americanbuena onda 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/may/22/cannesfilmfestival.brazil>, the 
South Koreanhallyu <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Korean_wave>; the battle for 
survival outside the initial warming spotlight of the global media. But they 
weren't short on commercial appeal – compared to them, Romanian cinema is the 
grumpy, grimy puppy of the bunch. It would be a shame if audiences – home and 
abroad – didn't discover how much character it has. And what bite.

• Next week's After Hollywood will focus on how London's global-city status is 
being recognised on film. What global cinematic stories would you like to see 
covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 