
94 hours, 404km

I had planned to post regular updates on my progress through the Ultra Trail 
of the Gobi Desert. This was hampered, in part due to poor signal in the 
mountainous section but mostly by the fact that I got a little bit carried away 
with the actual racing.

The first half of the route was mostly flat, making both running and 
navigating easier and most of us quickly settled into a routine: run a bit, 
walk a bit, check the GPS, discover you’ve only moved a few hundred metres, 
calculate the distance to the next check point, promise yourself a reward when 
you get there, repeat.

The initial freshness of the first day soon wore off and those who had set off 
too fast began to pay for it. After 130km I was surprised to discover myself 
catching up with the lead pair, Harvey Lewis of the USA and Chor Kin Law from 
Hong Kong, both of whom had been seen as frontrunners to win.

To perform well in a race like this many things need to go right. For these 
two that unfortunately didn’t happen: Harvey suffered from serious stomach 
issues and Chor Kin got badly lost several time. Both persevered with the 
rugged determination of experienced runners for whom winning is an added bonus 
rather than a primary motivation.

At 200km mark I found myself in the wholly unfamiliar position of being in the 
lead, much to the excitement of various friends, family and colleagues who were 
tracking on the race website.

Competing over a distance like this is unlike a normal race. While speed is 
important it is more a matter of attrition and strategy. Much as racing drivers 
make pit stops we would periodically pull over into a rest station where an 
army of volunteers was on hand to help (the ratio of volunteers to runners was 
9:1). In my case this would mean downing a Coca-Cola, scoffing some noodles and 
a Mars bar and having my growing number of blisters drained and dressed by the 
expertExile Medics <http://exile-medics.com/>. 

As we approached the final part of the race (just 100km to go) I was being 
chased down by the famous Chinese runner Bai Bin who had come second in last 
year’s race and was back to win it. The terrain at this point was mountainous 
and extremely tough. Scrambling up hills and out of canyons is hard enough in 
the day, but doing it in pitch darkness with little sleep and a delirious mind 
adds a whole new challenge. Twice I slipped and saw a water bottle fall from my 
pack and disappear down a slope.

Sadly by this point my right ankle had swelled to the point where fitting a 
sock over it was a real struggle; it was simply a case of strapping it up and 
plodding on. With 40km to go Bai Bin sauntered past looking very fresh. It was 
reassuring to see that even in my best physical condition I would have 
struggled to keep up. His stamina and endurance towards the end of the race 
were truly impressive and deserving of the victory.

The last 34km were particularly tough as I braced myself for the pain for each 
step (of which there were roughly half a million over the course of the race). 
Eventually, at 4am on Sunday morning, after 94 hours - including about five of 
sleep - I hobbled across the finish line, a spectacular set-up in a park in 
Guazou complete with fireworks, drummers and a very patient media crew.

I had just about enough energy to receive the second half of my ‘tiger talley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fu_(tally)>’, drink a beer and give a blood test 
for a research project (I did have to lie down at this point but that was more 
because of the needle) before being transported to the nearby hotel and to a 
very welcome shower and bed.

The Ultra Trail of the Gobi – the hardest race in the world?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2016/sep/27/the-gobi-desert-ultramarathon-the-hardest-race-in-the-world>
22 hours, 131km
Today I learned that one thing you can’t afford to have on a race like this is 
a sense of perspective. Right now I’ve been on the move for 22 hours with maybe 
two hours of cumulative breaks. I’ve eaten two hot meals, countless energy bars 
and trail mixes and enough sweets to make Augustus Gloop look reserved. And yet 
I’m not quite a third of the way through, with most of the climbing still to 
come.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Frunning-the-ultra-trail-of-the-gobi-desert-a-daily-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f821a842f253c400b609c9758d41cef4f19d4f0%2F0_471_1344_806%2F1344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Running%20the%20Ultra%20Trail%20of%20the%20Gobi%20desert%3A%20a%20diary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Frunning-the-ultra-trail-of-the-gobi-desert-a-daily-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Running%20the%20Ultra%20Trail%20of%20the%20Gobi%20desert%3A%20a%20diary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Frunning-the-ultra-trail-of-the-gobi-desert-a-daily-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f821a842f253c400b609c9758d41cef4f19d4f0%2F0_471_1344_806%2F1344.jpg>
 Lunch in the Gobi desert. Photograph: Alfie Pearce-Higgins 
If I thought for more than a few minutes about the distance remaining I would 
probably find the nearest rock and have a cry. Instead I have to break the race 
down into manageable bite size chunks.
For the past few hours I have been fantasising about the power nap I promised 
myself at rest stop four. So now I am off to bed (of sorts).

 