
“You’re running the Two Oceans? That’s 35 miles isn’t it? Lekker. What are you 
training for? Comrades?”


I forget how many times I had that conversation in the run-up to the Old 
Mutual Two Oceans Marathon <http://www.twooceansmarathon.org.za/> in Cape Town 
last month – but it happened a lot more than you’d imagine if, like me, you 
come from a country where completing a regular marathon is seen by most as an 
end in itself.

This is South Africa, though, a sport-obsessed country, where ultra marathons 
such as the Two Oceans andComrades <http://www.comrades.com/> – 56 miles 
between the cities of Pietermaritzburg and Durban – attract huge crowds of 
spectators and the kind of mass participation usually reserved for big-city 
marathons.

In fact, the Two Oceans was originally conceived in 1970 as a 35-mile training 
run for the Comrades by founder Dave Venter – but, with a route around the Cape 
peninsula taking in both the Indian* and Atlantic oceans (hence the name), as 
well as two big climbs up Chapman’s Peak and Constantia Nek, it’s a worthy 
event in its own right.

I love an arbitrary target as much as the next runner, but I hadn’t even known 
sub-5 was a thing until the day before

Before the race, I spoke to Louis Massyn. as he prepared for his 44th 
consecutive Two Oceans (and his 41st attempt at finishing both the Two Oceans 
and the Comrades in the same year – a record). The 65-year-old medical rep says 
the massive growth in the scale of the race has been the main change he has 
witnessed. In the first year, only 26 runners took part – and only 15 finished, 
but all of them in under four hours, which is speedy for a 35-mile course with 
1,560 feet of ascent. This year, 11,000 people took part in the ultra, with 
16,000 in the half marathon and a further 3,000 in the trail run, friendship 
run or fun runs – what the organisers bill as an Easter weekend “festival of 
running”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fd82276fd511b3e5008e23e8cf26a46a6c1563%2F0_108_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Running%20the%2035-mile%20Two%20Oceans%3A%20distance%20running%20South%20African-style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Running%20the%2035-mile%20Two%20Oceans%3A%20distance%20running%20South%20African-style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87fd82276fd511b3e5008e23e8cf26a46a6c1563%2F0_108_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Runners packed in at the 6.30am start of the Two Oceans Marathon 2016. 
Photograph: ImageSA 
It was still dark as I squeezed into the pen ahead of the 6.30am start, just 
as the thousands of other runners packed shoulder to shoulder launched into a 
powerful rendition of the South African national anthem. I may have even heard 
the odd vuvuzela – bringing back unwelcome memories of England’s ignominious 
departure in the first knock-out round of the 2010 World Cup.

Massyn’s first piece of advice was to be careful on the first flat 19 miles to 
Noordhoek and the start of the first climb. But as soon as the gun went, that 
advice was forgotten, as I got swept along on the surge.

Before the race I had had no real target time in mind. The Two Oceans is like 
a regular marathon – but with nine miles of hills tagged on the end – so I 
didn’t have any similar events to judge it against. It was only when I went to 
the expo to pick up my number that I realised finishers were awardeddifferent 
medals for different times 
<http://www.twooceansmarathon.org.za/information/medals-56km>: gold for the 
first 10 men and women; silver for sub-4 hours; a colourful Sainsbury medal 
(named afterMr Two Oceans Chet Sainsbury 
<http://www.citizen.co.za/1004912/mr-two-oceans-chet-sainsbury-dies/>, who died 
earlier this year) for sub-5; bronze for sub-6 and blue for sub-7. There’s a 
strict cut-off after seven hours, and if you’re not on schedule at certain 
points in the run, then it’s race over.

By the halfway point I found myself travelling in the sub-5 “bus” and decided 
to sacrifice peace and quiet for the simplicity of following in the footsteps 
of a pacer and a big group of runners. I stuck with them for the next few miles 
and up Chapman’s Peak, which must be among the most spectacular stretches of 
tarmac in the world. Once we reached the top, though, I decided to take Louis’s 
second piece of advice and hop off to soak up the sheer cliffs and the Atlantic 
sparkling far below. I love an arbitrary target as much as the next runner, but 
I hadn’t even known sub-5 was a thing until a day before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ddb8cdd2e782ed6c01e8ed88f93c58d048023b%2F0_0_1862_654%2F1862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Running%20the%2035-mile%20Two%20Oceans%3A%20distance%20running%20South%20African-style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Running%20the%2035-mile%20Two%20Oceans%3A%20distance%20running%20South%20African-style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Frunning-35-mile-two-oceans-south-african-marathon-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38ddb8cdd2e782ed6c01e8ed88f93c58d048023b%2F0_0_1862_654%2F1862.jpg>
 The Two Oceans ultra marathon route. Photograph: Mapmyrun 
Maybe I was just making excuses, but taking those extra few moments at key 
points to drink in the views and chat to runners around me really made the rest 
of the race more memorable. Support along the route was fantastic and the big 
turnout of spectators and musicians gave Two Oceans that big-city marathon feel.

I finished in five hours, three minutes, so just a plain old bronze medal, but 
it’s destined for the spare-room drawer with all the other finisher medals 
anyway. The memories of supporters and stunning views were much more special.


*Technically, the Indian Ocean begins somewhere between Cape Point and Cape 
Agulhas 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/where-do-the-indian-and-atlantic-oceans-meet-disagreement-in-south-africa-1441152307>
, 60 miles to the south east but we’ll gloss over that …
 