
Russia have unveiled their mascot for the 2018 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> – Zabivaka the wolf.

Zabivaka, whose name means “the one who scores” in Russian is described as 
“charming, confident and social” and has “always dreamt of becoming a football 
star”, received 53% of the one million votes in a Fifa poll, beating 
competition from a tiger who got 27% and cat which collected 20%. He was 
developed by student designer Ekaterina Bocharova.

José Mourinho on Roman Abramovich: ‘We were never friends’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/jose-mourinho-roman-abramovich-chelsea-friends>
“I am sure Zabivaka will be a massive hit among fans at the Confederations Cup 
in 2017 and 2018 World Cup,” said Russian sports minister Vitaly Mutko.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Frussia-2018-zabivaka-world-cup-mascot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a24633f18bf8446cc3baacc8e37c4ae95e39cc%2F2_0_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%202018%3A%20World%20Cup%20mascot%20Zabivaka%20the%20wolf%20unveiled%20in%20Moscow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Frussia-2018-zabivaka-world-cup-mascot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%202018%3A%20World%20Cup%20mascot%20Zabivaka%20the%20wolf%20unveiled%20in%20Moscow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Frussia-2018-zabivaka-world-cup-mascot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a24633f18bf8446cc3baacc8e37c4ae95e39cc%2F2_0_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 Russia have named Zabivaka the wolf as their mascot for the 2018 World Cup. 
Photograph: FIFA 
Fifa secretary general Fatma Samoura added: “To get to the stage of seeing the 
wolf chosen today, we first collected the preferences of Russian kids through 
an online poll. Based on those ideas, university students submitted their 
designs and now the public have chosen their favourite character from among the 
final three. Eighteen months after kicking-off this project, we are extremely 
happy that the 2018 mascot is the result of a team effort where the Russian 
people demonstrated their creative flair and their strong commitment to putting 
on a successful Fifa World Cup.”

Former Brazil striker Ronaldo was in attendance at the ceremony in Moscow and 
he was suitably impressed.

“Mascots are great ambassadors for promoting the event and bring so much joy 
to the stadiums,” he said. “I can see it happening already in Russia with 
Zabivaka just by seeing him on stage tonight. He will surely be remembered for 
a very long time by football fans all over the world.”

Zabivaka’s biography on Fifa.com 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/news/y=2016/m=10/news=wolf-chosen-2018-fifa-world-cup-official-mascot-and-named-zabivaka-2845435.html>
:

He is charming, confident and social and has always dreamt of becoming a 
football star.

His favourite sporting pastime is playing football. He is a fair player, 
values his team members and respects his opponents, and he plays with skill and 
purpose.

He is always fun to be around - as the joker in the pack, he knows how to make 
others laugh.

He has taken to wearing cool sports glasses when he’s in action; he believes 
they give him special targeting powers on the pitch. And he loves to pose for 
photos.
 