
After art shows in Moscow have been doused in urine 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2016/sep/26/moscow-gallery-jock-sturges-protest-urine>
, covered in red paint and picketed by conservative activists, one curator has 
set up a new exhibition in a remote observatory 900 miles from the Russian 
capital.


The show, featuring work from seven Russian and three Austrian artists, is “a 
classic contemporary art experience,” explains curator Simon Mraz. So 
contemporary that a cleaner almost threw away one of the paintings after 
mistaking it for rubbish.

The 10 artists visited the 1960s observatory in Nizhny Arkhyz, perched in the 
mountains of the Karachay-Cherkess republic this summer to learn about 
astronomy.

The observatory founded in 1966 as the space race was hotting up between the 
Soviet Union and the US and its six-metre diameter telescope was the largest in 
the world until 1993 when the US built a bigger one in Hawaii.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F229aa3163de13f6f55ee28d069d89808da2a373f%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia's%20remote%20observatory%20hosts%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%27s%20remote%20observatory%20hosts%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F229aa3163de13f6f55ee28d069d89808da2a373f%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 The star-themed stained glass roof inside the observatory. Photograph: Kevin 
O'Flynn 
As part of the show Irina Korina, a Moscow based-artist, created three 
installations in the nearby village, whose name translates as “Science Village” 
to show that for the local residents science is religion.

The rest of the exhibit, which opened last week, is a broad mix of art rarely 
shown in the remote region. From Eva Engelbert’s space emblems, created in 
honour of Galina Balashova the only female architect in the Soviet space 
programme.

To a neon installation above the observatory reading “they are brighter than 
us”created by provocative graffiti artist Timofei Radya from Yekaterinburg and 
only visible to night time visitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26710e60f5a0a38e3f79c962771600fa70b408f%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia's%20remote%20observatory%20hosts%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%27s%20remote%20observatory%20hosts%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Frussias-remote-observatory-hosts-art-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd26710e60f5a0a38e3f79c962771600fa70b408f%2F0_267_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The offering from provocative artist Radya. Photograph: Timofei Radya 
“When they first proposed [the exhibit] we were wary,” said Yury Balega who 
ran the observatory for more than 20 years, but it turns out “artists and 
astronomers have a lot in common”.


But some were left questioning whether the artists truly understood the 
complicated work of the observatory and what it had managed to achieve.

Yevgeny Chentsov, who has worked at the observatory since 1968, described the 
art as “naive and childlike,” which he meant as a compliment adding that 
astronomers have a similar approach to their work.

And it was Austrian artist Michail Michailov’s drawing of dust – which was 
meant to represent the particles the astronomers look at through the telescope 
– that was nearly thrown away after being mistaken for dust. An incident 
brushed off by Mraz as “the risk of contemporary art.”.


Mraz would not say exactly how much it cost to put on the show, but he did say 
that hosting something similar inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> would cost around €100,000.

A sizeable sum for an exhibition was only seen by a very small audience, 800 
residents of the village and the handful of press that attended the opening, 
but Mraz believes that it still had an impact.

Not only can art help people working in different professions understand each 
other better, but it can help us “understand what our country is about.... 
[especially] in times when politicians are getting crazy,” he says.

The curator who has also hosted an art exhibition on an icebreaker in Murmansk 
, north westRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, says that in a 
way remote locations are easier than Moscow: at least “nobody was touching it 
[and] nobody was destroying it.”
 