
Ryanair has ended its long-running feud with Aer Lingus by agreeing to sell a 
stake in its rival Irish airline to the parent ofBritish Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways>.

Ryanair said its board had voted unanimously to accept International Airlines 
Group’s offer for Ryanair’s 29.8% share of Aer Lingus. Ryanair first bought a 
stake inAer Lingus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aer-lingus> nine years 
ago and has tried to buy the company several times.

IAG’s €1.4bn (£1bn) offer looked set to succeed in May when the Irish 
government agreed to sell its 25% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/26/iag-given-clearance-by-irish-government-for-aer-lingus-takeover>
 in Aer Lingus but Ryanair, whose attempts to buy the carrier were blocked on 
competition grounds, remained a potential obstacle.

IAG given clearance by Irish government for Aer Lingus takeover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/26/iag-given-clearance-by-irish-government-for-aer-lingus-takeover>
Michael O’Leary, Ryanair’s chief executive, said: “We believe the IAG offer 
for Aer Lingus is a reasonable one in the current market and we plan to accept 
it, in the best interests of Ryanair shareholders. The price means thatRyanair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> will make a small profit on its 
investment in Aer Lingus.”

In an apparent putdown of IAG’s deal, O’Leary said Ryanair now had no need to 
buy Aer Lingus because since 2013 his company had established itself at primary 
European airports. Ryanair had originally wanted to use Aer Lingus’s presence 
at primary airports to compete for mid-price flights against flag-carrier 
airlines, he said.

O’Leary said: “We wish IAG well with their takeover of Aer Lingus. When 
Ryanair first bid for Aer Lingus in late 2006, Ryanair [36 million passengers] 
carried four times Aer Lingus’s traffic [9 million]. Today Ryanair [over 100 
million] carries more than 10 times Aer Lingus’s traffic [10 million], and we 
will continue to deliver the vast majority of Ireland’s traffic and tourism 
growth in the coming months and years.”


The European Union will approve IAG’s takeover of Aer Lingus after IAG made 
further concessions on competition grounds 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/07/10/uk-aerlingus-m-a-iag-eu-exclusive-idUKKCN0PK0RV20150710>
, Reuters reported. IAG has offered to give up some London airport slots as 
well as so-called prorate agreements that let airlines carry rivals’ passengers 
on connecting flights.

Willie Walsh, the chairman of IAG, said in May he expected Ryanair to behave 
rationally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/27/aer-lingus-takeover-iag-boss-expects-ryanair-not-to-stand-in-way-of-deal>
 and to accept the offer. Ryanair was incensed bythe UK competition watchdog’s 
ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2013/aug/28/ryanair-aer-lingus-competition-commission>
 that it should sell most of its stake in Aer Lingus to leave its rival free to 
forge alliances.
 