
Ladbrokes will be shut out of sponsoring at next month’s Cheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> after 10 years as 
backers of the World Hurdle, it was announced on Thursday. The news amounts to 
a hardening of positions in the continuing row about what share of their 
profits bookmakers should be paying to racing, as it is Ladbrokes’ failure to 
agree a funding deal with the sport’s ruling body that has led to their being 
ousted from Cheltenham.

Racing and bookmakers sponsorship spat just start of a long fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/24/racing-bookmakers-sponsorship-spat-start-of-long-fight>
Under the Authorised Betting Partner scheme, introduced by racing in November, 
only those bookmakers who have come to terms with the sport will be allowed to 
ink new sponsorship deals with many of the main tracks, including Cheltenham. 
It had been thought that Ladbrokes’ desire to continue their prestigious and 
high-profile association with the Festival might be the catalyst for an 
agreement of some kind. Now that that chance has gone, it is hard to imagine 
circumstances in which that firm can become an ABP; if their senior executives 
were at all minded to sign up, they would have done so in time to save their 
position at Cheltenham.

As a consequence, Cheltenham now needs a new firm to supply two large betting 
shops on its premises in time for the Festival, now less than four weeks away.
Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> were offered the 
chance to continue running those shops, one in the enormous Centaur building 
and one in the Sovereign Bar in the main grandstand, but declined.

World Hurdle still without sponsor as Ladbrokes remains outside ABP tent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/world-hurdle-ladbrokes-cheltenham-festival-abp>
“It struck us as at least peculiar that our money and expertise were welcome 
in one part of the racecourse and not in another,” said Ladbrokes’ spokesman, 
David Williams, last night. “We didn’t feel comfortable in continuing to run 
the shops.

“We are very disappointed about this. We wanted to sponsor and be there and 
we’ve now got to work out where we’re welcome. When you’ve invested in 
something for over a decade and then you take it away, that money may not come 
back quickly. That’s not a threat, we are just not the kind of firm that tends 
to do short-term deals.”

A Cheltenham spokeswoman confirmed on Thursday that the shops will have to be 
run by a firm which is an ABP. That dramatically reduces the options, since 
Bet365, Betfair and 32Red are the only major firms to have gained ABP status 
and of those only the first-named have any retail experience. Resolving this 
issue in short order must now be a high priority for the track, since a 
shortage of betting facilities on the site during the Festival would be a PR 
disaster.

Bookies and racing representatives meet for key ABP funding talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/08/bookies-racing-authorised-betting-partner-funding-talks>
The World Hurdle will now be sponsored by Ryanair, who were already backers of 
the other Grade One race on the Festival’s third day, the Ryanair Chase. The
British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority> issued a 
statement to say that “an expansion of the support of a global brand for the 
Cheltenham Festival’s key races is good news and a testament to the value of 
British racing’s assets to major sponsors”. A BHA spokesman did not want to 
expand on the ABP debate beyond insisting that talks were continuing with 
various firms.

Top Notch remains a 25-1 shot for the Champion Hurdle after an easy success 
against three inferior rivals in Kelso’s Morebattle Hurdle. Daryl Jacob, the 
winning jockey, said: “It’s very hard work out there, it’s very gluey. He 
generally loves it, but in some parts even he was getting stuck in it.

“Nicky [Henderson, trainer] has freshened him up and he felt really good all 
the way around. He’s very fluent and the faster they go the better he is. His 
jumping’s a great asset to him.”
 