
My kitchen is … mostly borrowed. I travel five months of the year for work, so 
a lot of my cooking happens in random Airbnbs around the world. At home, I have 
a simple, pared-back kitchen, but it’s still the focal point of my apartment. 
It’s one long bench with everything happening underneath: a bar fridge and 
freezer, and an induction stove. I live in the city, so my kitchen is also my 
garden: I regrow my green onions, celery and coriander in pots of soil, lined 
up on the bench. The whole thing has a relaxed, lo-fi vibe – I’ve been known to 
sit on the floor to cook …

My kitchen gallery: Tom Hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2015/sep/08/my-kitchen-gallery-tom-hunt>
My favourite kitchen tool is … my slow cooker. It uses less electricity than a 
light bulb and is perfect for cooking secondary cuts of meat and “daggy” 
(unfashionable) vegetables, such as swede and carrots. Dump in your 
ingredients, press play and dinner is ready eight hours later.

My storecupboard staple is … turmeric powder. I have an autoimmune disease (
hashimoto’s 
<http://www.webmd.com/women/hashimotos-thyroiditis-symptoms-causes-treatments#1>
) and when it flares up, a teaspoon of this stuff is wonderfully healing. I 
make golden milk a lot – hot milk (normal or coconut) with 1 tsp each of 
turmeric and cinnamon, and a little salt. I also add turmeric to coffee, stews 
and soups.

When I’m starving I … eat a proper meal – meat, veg and a good dollop of fat 
(olive oil or butter). Snacking mucks with our appetites. I always have 
leftover meals in the freezer: soups or stews, which I keep in zip-lock bags 
(that I always wash and reuse), which I defrost and heat in a saucepan, adding 
some flour or chia seeds to thicken if need be. Often, I’ll pour in an egg or 
two, as well.

My culinary inspiration is … US journalist and food writer Michael Pollan 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Michael+Pollan&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. We share a similar philosophy – if you want to be well, learn to cook. His 
book Cooked is a multi-dimensional delight. It advocates things such as 
fermenting and sourdoughs and pulled pork, which are trendy now, but he 
explains their benefits from an ethical, nutritional and sustainable point of 
view.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … to become friends with your freezer. The 
things it can do for preventing food waste and saving time! Par-cook your 
veggies as soon as you buy them, in bulk, to about 60% done, then freeze and 
use as required in stews or simply steamed. Keep several resealable “stock 
bags” into which you can dump carrot ends, celery leaves, broccoli stalks, 
onion bits and chicken or beef bones. Once full, add to a big pot and cover 
with water to make stock, throwing in a few bay leaves. Simmer for a day or so. 
Freeze nuts and nut flours to stop them going rancid.

When I’m invited to dinner I always take … the ingredients to make my 
chocolate raspberry ripe 
<http://www.sarahwilson.com/2012/04/my-sugar-free-raspberry-ripe-2/>: (3) 
coconut oil, cacao, berries, coconut and a little rice malt syrup. I combine it 
all then pour it on to a wax-paper lined plate and pop it in the freezer. It 
sets in 15 minutes and guests snap off shards at will.

Everything tastes better with … frozen peas. They add instant sweetness and a 
lovely sprinkle of colour to a lot of meals. I cook in “layers”, adding bits 
where I see a gap. If a meal needs more bulk or visual excitement, a handful of 
peas at the end can save it.

 * Sarah Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sarah-wilson> is an 
author, blogger and food waste campaigner, and the founder of I Quit Sugar.  
<https://iquitsugar.com/>Instagram: @_sarahwilson_  
<https://www.instagram.com/_sarahwilson_/?hl=en>She will be taking over 
@guardian_cook <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> this weekend.  