
Three episodes into the new season of Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live>, and the show, 
like many media outlets, is learning to navigate this most unusual political 
season. Historically, what made SNL’s campaign coverage so necessary was its 
ability to highlight the subtle absurdities of the election and exaggerate the 
ridiculous. Needless to say, the 2016 presidential election could never be 
accused of subtlety, forcing SNL to take a page from some of its fellow 
late-night shows and move into more blatant commentary.

In its obligatory debate cold open, a weary Anderson Cooper (Alex Moffat) and 
Martha Raddatz (Cecily Strong) did shots as they introduced the “the worst ever 
presidential debate”. Alec Baldwin returned asDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, and Kate McKinnon was 
introduced by the moderators as: “Can we say this yet?” “Probably fine.” 
“President Hillary Clinton.”

No groping for laughs as Baldwin nails Donald Trump on Saturday Night Live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/09/no-groping-for-laughs-as-alec-baldwin-nails-trump-on-saturday-night-live>
Baldwin’s Trump is still mostly facial expressions and excruciating pauses – 
more mimicry then genuine impression – while McKinnon’s Clinton feels lived-in 
and comfortable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPf_BGqEfMs0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPf_BGqEfMs0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPf_BGqEfMs0&media=>
The sketch included some classic SNL elements, imitating the candidates’ 
awkward staging during the town hall debate, and brilliantly turning their 
decision not to shake hands into an awkward dance. But when McKinnon’s Clinton 
mocked the idea she would be intimidated by women like Paula Jones in the 
audience, the joke felt more like a Samantha Bee quip than an SNL line. It was 
a little jarring, but ultimately this shift could be a good thing; SNL has many 
funny people at its disposal with many varied strengths, and it will help them 
immensely to shake up even something as traditional as a debate satire.

Emily Blunt was a strong host, an immensely talented actor who was down for 
anything and flitted easily between melodramatic, goofy, sexy, and sweet. 
Unfortunately, her monologue was another musical number, this time a take on 
“Get Happy!” to cheer things up in the face of a grim news cycle. There were 
puppies and cookies, and while it was cute and chipper, it was immediately 
forgettable.

The first post-monologue sketch was, dispiritingly, about two hookers; the 
joke (helpfully summarized at the end of the sketch) was the duo’s long list of 
rules and requirements. Blunt’s goofy, mid-Atlantic-accented prostitute had a 
few good lines, while Leslie Jones got to be very funny with her quirks – “I 
can only role play as Stewie from the Family Guy” – but it didn’t have much to 
build to and ended blandly.
Saturday Night Live (@nbcsnl) 
Hillary! Behind you! #SNL <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SNL?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/LIkLXvzQY4 <https://t.co/LIkLXvzQY4>
 <https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/787507223542976512> October 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nbcsnl/status/787507223542976512> 
Pre-taped segments have been SNL’s strongest areas in the past decade, but 
this week’s R&B music video featuring five women in the Trump circle – Melania 
Trump, Ivanka Trump, Kellyanne Conway, Omarosa, and Tiffany Trump – began as a 
female empowerment video, with each saying “boy, bye” to The Donald, but didn’t 
commit to any strong idea and sold itself out at the end. Entertaining, but it 
was noTwin Bed <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6-QG-rFf4po>.

Next, Vanessa Bayer ended up the lone audience member at a short film festival 
forced to ask questions to the dozens of cast and crewmembers on stage. Bayer’s 
deer-in-the-headlights performance was spot-on and made this weird, silly 
sketch work.

Weekend Update led with all things Trump, and co-host Colin Jost seemed, 
understandably, exhausted by the entire thing. Michael Che has found his 
footing as an update host, even if this audience seemed eager to find him 
shocking, groaning at some relatively harmless jokes. The most biting moment 
came from Bayer as a little girl doing the news in a sing-songy musical voice, 
who was outraged at Today co-host Billy Bush’s $10m payment “from this 
network!”, earning a well-deserved applause break.

Keen viewers – and many Twitterers – also caught onto the show’s new product 
placement 
<http://mashable.com/2016/04/26/snl-less-commercials-more-branded-content/#QiKD6nR11uqb>
 in a few later, lesser sketches – a bizarre stream of characters pulling 
through a Burger King drive-thru, then a robot sketch that prominently featured 
the Hondo logo. Whether it’s meta-sketches or branded content, the 40-year-old 
institution is changing with the times.
 