
King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> 
has repeatedly urged the United States to attack Iran to destroy its nuclear 
programme, according to leaked US diplomatic cables that describe how other 
Arab allies have secretly agitated for military action against Tehran.

The revelations, in secret memos from US embassies across the Middle East, 
expose behind-the-scenes pressures in the scramble to contain the Islamic 
Republic, which the US, Arab states andIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> suspect is close to acquiring 
nuclear weapons. Bombing Iranian nuclear facilities has hitherto been viewed as 
a desperate last resort that could ignite a far wider war.

The Saudi king was recorded as having "frequently exhorted the US to attack 
Iran to put an end to its nuclear weapons programme", one cable stated. "He 
told you [Americans] tocut off the head of the snake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/150519>," the 
Saudi ambassador to Washington, Adel al-Jubeir said, according to a report on 
Abdullah's meeting with the US general David Petraeus in April 2008.

The cables also highlight Israel's anxiety to preserve its regional nuclear 
monopoly, its readiness to go it alone against Iran – and its unstinting 
attempts to influence American policy. The defence minister, Ehud Barak, 
estimated in June 2009 that there was a window of "between six and 18 months 
from now in whichstopping Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/209599> might 
still be viable". After that, Barak said, "any military solution would result 
in unacceptable collateral damage."

The leaked US cables also reveal that:

• Officials in Jordan and Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> 
have openly called for Iran's nuclear programme to be stopped by any means, 
including military.

• Leaders in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates> and Egypt referred to 
Iran as "evil", an "existential threat" and a power that "is going to take us 
to war".

• Robert Gates, the US defence secretary, warned in February that if 
diplomatic efforts failed, "we risk nuclear proliferation in the Middle East, 
war prompted by an Israeli strike, or both".

• Major General Amos Yadlin, Israeli's military intelligence chief, warned 
last year: "Israel is not in a position to underestimate Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/206775> and be 
surprised like the US was on 11 September 2001."

Asked for a response to the statements, state department spokesman PJ Crowley 
said today it was US policy not to comment on materials, including classified 
documents, which may have been leaked.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> maintains that its atomic 
programme is designed to supply power stations, not nuclear warheads. After 
more than a year of deadlock and stalling, a fresh round of talks with the five 
permanent members of the UN security council plus Germany is due to begin on 5 
December.

But in a meeting with Italy's foreign minister earlier this year, Gates said 
time was running out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/248624>. If Iran 
were allowed to develop a nuclear weapon, the US and its allies would face a 
different world in four to five years, with a nuclear arms race in the Middle 
East. King Abdullah had warned the Americans that if Iran developed nuclear 
weapons "everyone in the region would do the same, including Saudi Arabia".

America is not short of allies in its quest to thwart Iran, though some are 
clearly more enthusiastic than the Obama administration for a definitive 
solution to Iran's nuclear designs. In one cable, a US diplomat noted how Saudi 
foreign affairs bureaucrats were moderate in their views on Iran, "but diverge 
significantly from the more bellicose advice we have gotten from senior Saudi 
royals".

In a conversation with a US diplomat, King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa of Bahrain 
"argued forcefully for taking action toterminate their [Iran's] nuclear 
programme <https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/232927>
, by whatever means necessary. That programme must be stopped. The danger of 
letting it go on is greater than the danger of stopping it." Zeid Rifai, then 
president of the Jordanian senate, told a senior US official: "Bomb Iran, or 
live with an Iranian bomb. Sanctions, carrots, incentives won't matter."

In talks with US officials, Abu Dhabi crown prince Sheikh Mohammad bin Zayed 
favoured action against Iran, sooner rather than later. "I believe this guy is 
going to take us to war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/59984> ... It's 
a matter of time. Personally, I cannot risk it with a guy like [President 
Mahmoud] Ahmadinejad. He is young and aggressive."

In another exchange , a senior Saudi official warned that Gulf states may 
develop nuclear weapons of their own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/189229>, or 
permit them to be based in their countries to deter the perceived Iranian 
threat.

No US ally is keener on military action than Israel, and officials there have 
repeatedly warned that time is running out. "If the Iranians continue to 
protect and harden their nuclear sites, it will be more difficult to target and 
damage them," theUS embassy reported Israeli defence officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/235359> as 
saying in November 2009.

There are differing views within Israel. But the US embassy reported: "The IDF 
[Israeli Defence Force], however, strikes us as more inclined than ever tolook 
toward a military strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/91784>, whether 
launched by Israel or by us, as the only way to destroy or even delay Iran's 
plans." Preparations for a strike would likely go undetected by Israel's allies 
or its enemies.

The Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, told US officials in May last 
yearthat he and the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, agreed that a nuclear 
Iran would lead others in the region to develop nuclear weapons, resulting in "
the biggest threat to non-proliferation efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/209599> since 
the Cuban missile crisis".

The cables also expose frank, even rude, remarks about Iranian leaders, their 
trustworthiness and tactics at international meetings. Abdullah told another US 
diplomat: "The bottom line is that they cannot be trusted." Mubarak told a US 
congressman: "Iran is always stirring trouble." Others are learning from what 
they describe as Iranian deception. "They lie to us, and we lie to them," said 
Qatar's prime minister, Hamad bin Jassim Jaber al-Thani.
 