
It’s not hard to imagine how Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg came up with the 
premise for their new animated comedySausage Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sausage-party>. I see them stoned at the 
supermarket at 2am, slouching along behind matching shopping carts, when one of 
them suddenly twigs: “Dude, the whole universe is here in this supermarket!”

Sausage Party review – Seth Rogen's surprisingly tasty supermarket sweep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-review-seth-rogen> 
Sausage Party’s premise is so simple it just gives and gives, finding new 
ideas and potent metaphors in every aisle. The products in the market have 
names, feelings, hopes and fears, ideas and big plans. The hotdogs are all 
stoney dude-bros hanging out fractiously in their plastic packaging, flirting 
with the buns on the same shelf. Over in the bread aisle, the bagel and the 
lavash play out never-ending feuds in a baked-goods version of the Gaza Strip. 
And the villain of the piece is the super-grouchy vaginal douche (played by 
Nick Kroll,Parks & Rec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/27/parks-and-recreation-another-acclaimed-us-show-without-the-uk-audience-it-deserves>
’s offensive drive-time DJ “The Douche”).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&media=>
They yearn for the day when they’ll be purchased and taken into the Great 
Beyond, the world outside the sliding doors. The big 4 July sale is coming up, 
and that usually clears the shelves, especially when it comes to hotdogs such 
as Frank (Rogen) and his main bun-gal Brenda (Kristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/15/kristen-wiig-five-best-moments>). 
But one day a pot of honey mustard is returned (dented) with a horrifying tale 
of friends being skinned, minced, boiled and eaten. Here’s where we get all 
R-rated: these scenes – carrots being brutally ground up in the human maw, etc 
– may strongly remind you of Italian cannibal movies, or that time you boozily 
figured out that The Texas Chain Saw Massacre can be read as a militant 
vegetarian tract. And then the products finally declare war on… us, the 
monstrous human race.

Can Pete's Dragon and Sausage Party save a summer of blockbuster failure?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/pete-dragon-sausage-party-summer-movie-flops>
As a satire of Pixar’s upbeat worldview, this is pretty dark stuff, and the 
movie’s all the better for it. And it’s pretty raunchy from the get-go, with 
the C-word – which in the US is still on the long arc from unsayable taboo to 
cautious usage among consenting, still slightly shame-faced adults – making its 
debut in, ooh, line five of the dialogue, and from the mouth of Rogen, 
naturally. It’s the first CGI animated movie I know of to feature someone 
shooting up, or to climax – literally – with a gigantic sex-orgy of the 
groceries, involving every last eye-popping vegi-sex perversion your mind can 
conjure up.

And yet, behind the blizzard of obscenities there is that same core of 
sweetness and kindness that’s characteristic of Rogen and Goldberg’s work, 
while its willingness to visit dark and disturbing places suggests a new 
maturity and philosophical depth. Still, best to leave the kids at home for 
this one.
 