
Savings rates are collapsing and alternatives such as peer-to-peer lending 
will be regarded by many as too risky. So is it time for small investors to 
start buying shares in big-name companies, which in many cases are now paying 
dividends in excess of 6%?

Shares in the FTSE 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/ftse-100-now-higher-than-before-brexit-vote-eu-referendum>
 are currently forecast to pay out dividends equivalent to a “yield” of around 
3.5% this year. However, if you choose your firm carefully you can almost 
double that rate of return, albeit with the usual risk warnings.

Companies typically pay a dividend once or twice a year to shareholders. The 
recent share price falls in certain sectors – most notably among finance and 
house building firms – means the returns on investing in some shares look very 
attractive compared to savings accounts. Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at 
investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown, says the stock market is “pretty much the 
only game in town” when it comes to producing an income these days, and it’s 
hard to disagree when you look at the figures. The only question is what to 
buy, given that share prices can go down just as fast as they go up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsavers-stock-market-brexit-interest-rate-cut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8155704a939f9e0c78b5cf75a4c2f4b8f8687a45%2F9_7_756_1055%2F756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savers%2C%20it%20could%20be%20time%20to%20take%20a%20punt%20on%20the%20stock%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsavers-stock-market-brexit-interest-rate-cut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savers%2C%20it%20could%20be%20time%20to%20take%20a%20punt%20on%20the%20stock%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fsavers-stock-market-brexit-interest-rate-cut%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8155704a939f9e0c78b5cf75a4c2f4b8f8687a45%2F9_7_756_1055%2F756.jpg>
 Photograph: The Guardian 
Khalaf says insurance company Legal & General 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jun/28/legal-general-brexit-john-kingman>
 is currently trading on a prospective yield of around 7%, yet its UK focus has 
meant the share price was marked down post-Brexit. Despite this he says it is 
well-placed to “benefit from pensions auto-enrolment, the rise of passive 
investment, and the move from defined benefit schemes to defined contribution 
pensions”.

He adds: “It’s hard to see demand for National Grid’s services going away 
anytime before the next dark age, yet the stock is on a forward yield of 4.1%, 
with the dividend policy to pay increases of at least in line with RPI in the 
future.”

Stellar investor Neil Woodford is also on the record as a fan of L&G. He has 
also said he likes the look ofBAE Systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/bae-systems-posts-healthy-annual-results-despite-delay-in-saudi-orders>
, predicted to yield around 4% this year, assuming you are happy to invest in a 
firm that makes weapons.

Berkeley reports 20% fall in reservations for new homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/berkeley-homes-20-per-cent-drop-reservations-new-homes>
Charlie Musson at investment firm AJ Bell says prospective big-yield hunters 
should also be looking at the banks and building firms. “Four of the top 10 
highest yielders are now expected to be housebuilders –Persimmon and Berkeley 
have laid out very clear special dividend programmes and they have such strong 
balance sheets they could make the payments even in the event of a recession, 
especially if they stop buying land … as this could lay the foundations for 
profits growth during the next upcycle,” he says.

But there is a reason why the shares of housebuilders have fallen steeply 
since Brexit, with many people warning that they could be hammered by house 
price falls.

Elsewhere, HSBC currently has a predicted yield of 7%, while Lloyds is sitting 
at 5.9%. The insurerDirect Line has a predicted yield of 6.6%, while BP and 
Shell are offering in excess of 7%.

It should be noted that dividends are in no way guaranteed, and a change in a 
business’s fortunes will swiftly lead to a cut. However, chief executives are 
usually paid big bonuses if they can get the share price up – and nothing does 
that like a higher than expected dividend.
 