
About 160,000 people have had to pay fees to access their pensions since new 
freedoms were introduced, with some seeing more than 10% of their retirement 
pot swallowed up by charges, according to a report.

The study by Citizens Advice <https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk> said that 
those with smaller pots were the group hit the hardest.


Last month, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) announced that exit charges 
for people cashing in their personal and stakeholder pensionsare likely to be 
capped at 1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/pension-exit-charges-capped-1-percent-fca-proposals-retirement>
 of the value of a member’s pot.


These early exit fees are imposed on someone when they transfer or take their 
benefits over the age of 55 but before retirement age. Evidence emerged that 
some companies were imposing punitive charges on over-55s trying to take 
advantage of thefreedoms that took effect in April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/28/savers-withdraw-6bn-retirement-funds-pension-reforms>
, and which abolished the requirement to convert a pension pot into an annuity, 
leaving people free to do whatever they like with their retirement cash.


Citizens Advice said it believed a 1% cap was too high, and added there should 
be a standard £50 exit charge across all types of pensions to cover providers’ 
administration costs.


The charity said its research had shown that, while most consumers had been 
able to access their pension pots for free, 41% of those who wanted to do so 
had been charged a fee. Those who have faced fees since April 2015 reported 
paying an average of £1,577 in total.

Pension exit charges to be capped at 1% under FCA proposals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/pension-exit-charges-capped-1-percent-fca-proposals-retirement>
Citizens Advice said those with the smallest pots were paying the highest 
fees, both in absolute terms and proportionally. Those with pots of £20,000 or 
less who had paid a fee had handed over an average of £1,966, which was more 
than those with medium or large pots, and £389 more than the overall average.


“At best, those who have paid fees on their sub-£20,000 pots have lost an 
average of 10% of their pots to charges,” said the report. This assumed they 
all had £20,000 in their pots, but it is likely that many would have had less 
than this, and so would have lost more than 10% as a result.


Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “The threat of 
excessive charges can put people off making the right pension choices for them. 
A standard £50 exit fee across all types of pensions would mean consumers can 
make the most of the pension freedoms.”

 