
Scammers are bombarding people aged 55 and over with phone calls and messages 
offering them bogus investment opportunities in a bid to get hold of their 
pensions savings, the charity Citizens Advice has warned.

Since April, people have had more choice about what to do with retirement 
savings and can withdraw much more of their funds than before. But the charity 
said opportunistic criminals were increasingly trying to persuade savers to 
move their cash into schemes that did not exist.

Two in five Citizens Advice pensions staff said they had seen people targeted 
repeatedly by fraudsters, and one in 10 had seen people who had either 
responded or fallen victim to a con. Half said they thought pension scams were 
evolving into investment scams, with criminals targeting the cash lump sums 
people can release from their pots.

Investment scams can destroy people’s entire pension pot, leaving them with 
little or no savings for retirement
Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice 
Another third thought that scams targeting the over-55s had increased. 
Previously, pensions scams tended to be targeted at younger people who were 
cold-called andoffered the chance to access their money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/feb/09/pensions-predators-crackdown> 
before retirement age, at a cost of up to 50% of their fund.


The charity, which runs the face-to-face element of the government’s Pension 
Wise service that was brought in to help new retirees decide what to do with 
their savings, said it had seen new scams emerging since the pensions changes.

Fraudsters were offering investments in financial products with a high rate of 
return on savers’ behalf without explaining what the investments were, offering 
free pension reviews to get hold of savers’ details and offering scam 
investment opportunities.

Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “Pension scams threaten 
people’s financial security. People are being targeted again and again with 
bogus investment offers or fraudulent pension opportunities.

“Pension and investment scams are particularly dangerous as they can destroy 
people’s entire pension pot, leaving them with little or no savings for 
retirement. We will be monitoring pension scams closely in order to track how 
they are evolving, and warn consumers what to look out for.”

The economic secretary to the Treasury, Harriett Baldwin, said the government 
was “working tirelessly to shut down illegal scams and bring scammers to 
justice”. She said: “We’ve already made it illegal to imitate Pension Wise, are 
running scams awareness campaigns and have set up the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA), which has the power to prosecute scammers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fover-55s-targeted-scammers-exploit-pension-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653cc39aee5c230323029c9ff34627fba0fee091%2F690_332_4494_2697%2F4494.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scammers%20targeting%20over-55s%20to%20exploit%20new%20pension%20freedoms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fover-55s-targeted-scammers-exploit-pension-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scammers%20targeting%20over-55s%20to%20exploit%20new%20pension%20freedoms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fover-55s-targeted-scammers-exploit-pension-freedoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653cc39aee5c230323029c9ff34627fba0fee091%2F690_332_4494_2697%2F4494.jpg>
 Fraudsters try to get people to move pensions into non-existent schemes, which 
can destroy pension savings. Photograph: Garo/Phanie/REX 
Earlier this month, figures from Action Fraud showed that losses to pension 
liberation scams - where savers are persuaded to transfer their money to 
non-existent schemes - rose from £1.5m in April to £4.7m in May following the 
introduction of the rules. However, the organisation said it was difficult to 
say what impact the reforms would have, “because it can sometimes be months or 
even years after the crime, that the victim realises that they have been 
defrauded”.

Mick McAteer, head of the Financial Inclusion Centre and a member of the FCA 
board said the new pensions freedoms had been rushed through. “Pensions 
liberation has created huge new opportunities for scammers,” he said.

“The blunt truth is that it is very difficult to protect against scammers who 
don’t worry about breaking the law. Formal regulations don’t really deter 
illegal scammers and they are very difficult to track down and enforce against.”

McAteer added that tougher barriers to prompt consumers to think twice before 
withdrawing money were possible, but may attract criticism for preventing 
people exercising freedom and choice.

In the first two months under the new rules, announced with great fanfare in 
2014’s budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/19/budget-2014-george-osborne-savings-pensions>
, £1.8bn worth of pensions were cashed in, with savers taking an average of 
£15,500 each.

On Tuesday, pensions provider Fidelity said paying off debt was the biggest 
reason for its customers to access tax-free cash from its funds. It said 29% of 
savers had given that as a reason to withdraw money, followed by reinvesting, 
which was the motivation for 21% of people. Divorce settlements, helping 
children and a fear that the rules on withdrawals might change were each given 
as reasons by 2% of savers.•

• This article was amended on 7 August 2015. An earlier version said that 
earlier this month “figures from Action Fraud showed that losses to pension 
liberation scams - where savers over 55 are persuaded to transfer their money 
to non-existent schemes...”. This has been corrected.

 