
As scheduled movie channels have ceded ground to streaming platforms in the 
war for home-entertainment eyeballs, what have we lost and what have we gained? 
Choice has undoubtedly improved, as has our ability to watch a half-decent film 
without paying through the teeth in exorbitant satellite fees. But as Netflix 
and Amazon have taken their place at the centre of the bedroom-viewing 
experience, we’ve sacrificed the personal touch of scheduled programming – and 
the giddy feeling of spontaneity that comes with flicking on the TV at 3am and 
catching the bottle scene from Pan’s Labyrinth. Not the scariest film ever 
made, but out of context: boy howdy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSICJJq86ic&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSICJJq86ic>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOSICJJq86ic&media=>
Hoping to bring both qualities into the realm of streaming is Shudder, a new 
horror-only platform from US network AMC, launched in the UK earlier this 
month. With a sharply defined remit that excludes more or less any movie 
without the word “blood” in the title, Shudder has already built a strong 
following in the US by guaranteeing users a streaming experience entirely 
devoid of Adam Sandler movies. With around 200 titles, the UK service is only 
half the size of its American cousin, but still provides a stimulating 
alternative to the hodge-podge catalogues of the major streaming outlets.

The platform’s most curious innovation is Shudder.TV, a (free!) live stream 
showcasing titles from its catalogue 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This 
deceptively simple idea makes for a radically different user experience, 
bringing to streaming the forgotten pleasure of decontextualised viewing, 
perhaps the most potent mechanism horror cinema has ever had for burrowing into 
your subconscious. Just as so many children of the 20th century had their minds 
corrupted by unknown terrors glimpsed on late-night TV, maybe a few of today’s 
youngsters can have their childhoods ruined by the elliptical window Shudder.TV 
offers into the horrors of its catalogue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlygJ9VfhVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlygJ9VfhVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlygJ9VfhVo&media=>
I myself tuned in to Shudder.TV to find a small girl standing by the side of a 
canal, inviting a badly mutilated man to join her for tea and cakes through the 
conduit of a ventriloquist’s dummy with a smashed head. There are few words to 
describe how unnerving this scenario seemed, stripped of its surrounding 
narrative and, crucially, the ability to pause. Fifteen minutes later, once 
curiosity got the better of me, I discovered the film to be the 1955 adaptation 
of The Quatermass Xperiment. Not the scariest film ever made, but out of 
context: boy howdy.
 