
It's been a long time since I faced the terror of a school report myself, but 
it all came back after Ilanded upon this Slate article 
<http://www.slate.com/content/slate/blogs/the_vault/2014/07/22/history_of_the_bront_family_school_report_assessing_their_progress_at_cowan.html>
, pointing towards Charlotte Brontë's. Madeavailable online by the British 
Library <http://www.bl.uk/collection-items/school-report-on-the-bront-sisters> 
as part of its fabulous new digital English literature resource, the write up 
is hardly glowing. Apparently, the girl who would go on to pen Jane Eyre 
"writes indifferently" and "knows nothing of grammar, geography, history, or 
accomplishments". The eight-year-old is, however, "altogether clever of her 
age", but "knows nothing systematically".

The report is taken from the school register of the Clergy Daughters' School, 
at Cowan Bridge, and published in the Journal of Education. It also mentions
Emily Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte>, then aged 5 ¾, 
who "reads very prettily, and works a little", and, poignantly, Elizabeth and 
Marie Brontë, then aged nine and 10, both of whom left "in ill-health", and 
died later in 1825.

"Typhoid fever hit Cowan Bridge, leading to a number of deaths among its 
pupils, thought to have been exacerbated by the school's poor food and harsh 
regime," writes the British Library. "Maria and Elizabeth fell ill; after being 
sent home, they both died of tuberculosis in May and June, respectively. 
Shortly before Elizabeth's death in June, Charlotte and Emily were also removed 
from the school. The school's routine and conditions, combined with Charlotte 
Brontë's memory of her sisters' deaths, provided inspiration for Lowood School 
in Jane Eyre."

Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> is not 
the only author to have failed to receive a good send-off from school. Robert 
Graves writes in Goodbye to All That that, leaving Charterhouse, his 
headmaster's "parting shot" was "Well, goodbye, Graves, and remember that your 
best friend is the waste-paper basket". (Graves adds: "This has proved good 
advice, though not perhaps in the sense he intended: few writers seem to send 
their work through as many drafts as I do.")

Catherine Hurley has even compiled a whole book of school reports of the 
famous, Could Do Better <http://www.tes.co.uk/article.aspx?storycode=371528> – 
which is weirdly compelling. PG Wodehouse, at Dulwich College in 1899, was told 
"he has the most distorted ideas about wit and humour; he draws over his books 
and examination papers in the most distressing way and writes foolish rhymes in 
other people's books", and Helen Fielding, at Wakefield Girls' High School, 
that she "must learn not to use such flowery language".

The Wall Street Journal gives us report cards from the likes of Ernest 
Hemingway and Norman Mailer 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424053111904716604576546402741280870>
 here, but I think I like Hurley's look at Beryl Bainbridge's report best. From 
Merchant Taylors School in Crosby, in around 1943, Bainbridge's English report 
at least admits that "her written work is the product of an obviously lively 
imagination", although "it is a pity that her spelling derives from the same 
source". As for geography: "Her knowledge of the subject is so poor as to make 
one wonder if she is simple-minded."

If that's what can be said of someone as fantastic as Bainbridge, then there's 
hope for us all.
 