
M John Harrison has won the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction with 
Nova Swing, his space-noir novel filled with gangsters, prostitutes and a large 
space-time hole.

The winning tale is a companion novel to Harrison's acclaimed space opera, 
Light, which focused on a disturbance in the space-time continuum called the 
Tefahuchi Tract. Nova Swing is set in a galaxy light years away in the 
"ordinary" city of Saudade, filled with deadbeat characters living dead-end 
lives. But at the centre of Saudade, and the novel, is the "event zone", a 
space-time membrane created when a piece of the Tract fell to the ground in the 
city. The site draws tourists from Saudade, led by a hardened gumboot guide, 
Vic Serotonin, but it also allows "artefacts" to emerge.

According to the chair of judges, Paul Billinger, Nova Swing is "a vividly and 
richly described world, full of Harrison's unique interpretations, and is his 
most lyrical and affecting book to date."

It is the first time that Harrison has won the prestigious prize although he 
has been immersed in the sci-fi world since the late 60s when he was literary 
editor of the magazine New Worlds, and a key writer in the "new wave" 
experimental science fiction movement. His landmark fantasy series, Viriconium, 
was shortlisted for the Guardian fiction prize in the 1980s while Light was 
lauded as a triumphant return to genre SF. He has also written a 
semi-autobiographical book about rock climbing, Climbers, and a number of 
volumes of short stories.

Harrison was awarded the prize of Â£2007 and received a commemorative engraved 
bookend at a ceremony in London last night, held as part of the opening of the 
Sci-Fi-London Film Festival. Also shortlisted for the prize were Jon Courtenay 
Grimwood with End of the World Blues, Oh Pure and Radient Heart by Lydia 
Millet, Hav by Jan Morris, Gradisil by Adam Roberts and Streaking by Brian 
Stableford.
 