
Does pop culture science fiction merely reflect humanity’s hopes and fears for 
the future, or can it act as an early warning signal designed to help us avoid 
the impending techno-apocalypse? It’s hard to imagine anyone ever handing over 
the nuclear codes to a super-intelligent machine after watching James Cameron’s 
Terminator films, while movies such asEx Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/22/ex-machina-review> and Blade 
Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/blade-runner-the-final-cut-review>
 – and TV shows such asHumans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/humans-tv-review-channel-four>
 andWestworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/04/westworld-review-seamless-marriage-cowboys-dystopians>
 – might just make us think twice about the ethics of developing artificial 
lifeforms merely to satisfy cruel sexual appetites.

If there is a cultural hive mind in place doing its best to help humanity 
avoid self-destruction in 2017, it appears to be rapidly shifting towards 
Defcon 1. For this year’s crop of movies is dominated by darkling, sombre and 
often downright sinister entries: stories in which humans find themselves 
threatened by otherworldly forces, whether extraterrestrial monstrosities or 
techno-doppelgangers who can do everything we can do, only better. There is 
fear everywhere – a sign of the times, perhaps. Even Pixar’s big movie of 2017 
is about dead people.

There are cheerier entries, of course. Marvel looks likely to continue its box 
office reign with fantastical tales of interstellar talking rodents, Norse gods 
and a certain gravity-defying teenage crimefighter. Space opera will continue 
its comeback with a new Star Wars movie proper andLuc Besson’s first foray into 
the genre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/first-trailer-luc-besson-valerian-released-cara-delevinge-dane-dehaan>
 since The Fifth Element (1997). But, in general, the outlook for Hollywood in 
2017 is distinctly gloomy. Without further ado, here are my top tips – and a 
few to avoid.

Dark visions of the future

Rupert Sanders’ Ghost in the Shell already feels terribly compromised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/14/whitewash-ghost-in-the-shell-hollywoodised-mamoru-oshii-rupert-sanders-scarlett-johansson>
: a whitewashed cast, a middling director best known for insipid fantasy misfire
Snow White and the Huntsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/31/snow-white-and-huntsman-review> 
and hints in the trailer that the unsettling visions of humanity’s impending 
fusion with machines, offered by Mamoru Oshii’s seminal 1995 anime, have been 
swapped out for a load of tired Hollywood tropes about hidden, forgotten 
identities. It arrives in March. For a more thoughtful examination of the 
perils of future technology, James Ponsoldt’sThe Circle 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4287320/?ref_=nv_sr_1> (based on Dave Eggers’ novel
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/09/circle-dave-eggers-review> 
about a company that uses technology to oversee all aspects of human existence) 
might be worth a look the following month.

Worse than a whitewash: has Ghost in the Shell been Hollywoodised?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/14/whitewash-ghost-in-the-shell-hollywoodised-mamoru-oshii-rupert-sanders-scarlett-johansson>
Ridley Scott’s Alien: Covenant <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2316204/> will 
hope to rediscover the sense of infernal dread that cut through the original 
slasher-in-space like a knife, while tying up some of the loose ends that made 
predecessorPrometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review> such an 
ultimately frustrating affair. What happened to Noomi Rapace’s Elizabeth Shaw? 
Why isMichael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender>
’s devious David the android now living alone on his planet-wide bachelor pad 
of evil, and why do the race of Engineers so hate humanity that they keep 
cooking up new forms of acid-spewing creatures from the seventh layer of Hades 
to violate us in increasingly awful fashion? Get ready to scream into the 
cosmos in May.

Is the Planet of the Apes reboot really into its third movie? War for the 
Planet of the Apes <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3450958/> will see Andy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis>’s meticulously rendered mo-cap 
primate Caesar taking onWoody Harrelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woody-harrelson>’s Colonel for control of the 
post-apocalyptic Earth, and there’s surely no finer actor than the latter for 
essaying psychopathic intensity. Matt Reeves’ second stint in the director’s 
chair debuts in July.

It should come as no surprise that Denis Villeneuve’s Blade Runner 2049 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/blade-runner-2049-trailer-harrison-ford-ryan-gosling>
 looks set to be an even grimmer tale than Scott’s original 1982 dystopian 
masterpiece. The debut teaser does at least suggest that Harrison Ford’s Rick 
Deckard lived rather longer than his replicant brothers and sisters – a 
development that will need to be explained – but future Los Angeles’ jaded 
cityscapes remain clouded in an eternal dusk, and even the once glorious Tyrell 
pyramid appears to have been swallowed by the desert. New blade runnerRyan 
Gosling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-gosling> begins his mission to 
save a world that already looks pretty screwed in October.

It’s also worth mentioning a pair of thrillers set in space. God Particle, 
from newcomer Julius Onah, isthe third instalment 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2548396/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_1> in the 
very-loosely-connected-indeed Cloverfield saga, following on from last year’s 
sinister10 Cloverfield Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/10-cloverfield-lane-review-taut-hitchcockian-thriller>
. This time the aftermath of the monster attack on New York finds us in a space 
station floating above Earth, as an international crew of astronauts tries to 
work out why the planet beneath them appears to have suddenly vanished. The 
film debuts in October.

On a similar tip, Daniel Espinosa’s Life 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5442430/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_1> will see International 
Space Station astronautsJake Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal>, Rebecca Ferguson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebecca_Ferguson> and Ryan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds> grapple with the discovery of 
a mysterious sample taken from the surface of Mars that might hold the key to 
proving the existence of extraterrestrial life. That one arrives in March.

Galaxy-straddling space opera

The remarkable success of Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-review-felicity-jones-gareth-edwards>
 suggests audiences continue to be inspired by movies straddling the divide 
between science fiction and fantasy. Throw in the quick-fire inter-superhero 
badinage of Marvel’s Avengers films and you have James Gunn’sGuardians of the 
Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
, which is due a second outing in May. The comedy highlight this time around is 
expected to be Vin Diesel’s Baby Groot, who has regressed to infancy after the 
events of the first film and now boasts a toddler-esque penchant for mischief.

Who knows if Star Wars’ resurgence inspired Besson to return to the genre that 
ushered in perhaps his greatest triumph more than two decades after The Fifth 
Element debuted in cinemas, in the supremely ambitious-lookingValerian and the 
City of a Thousand Planets <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2239822/>. What is 
certain is that the French fantasy maestro is taking a galaxy-sized risk 
punting €180m (£153m, the biggest ever budget for a French film) onCara 
Delevingne <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne> delivering a 
better performance than she did in the execrableSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/suicide-squad-review-dc-comics-will-smith-margot-robbie-jared-leto>
.

Delevingne plays Laureline, partner to Dane DeHaan’s time-and space-travelling 
super agent: in the long-running graphic novels, she emerges as the series’ 
real star. Fingers crossed the film succeeds by injecting some Gallic whimsy 
into the genre and doesn’t go the same way as that other well-intentioned but 
ultimately failed attempt to expand the template, the Wachowskis’Jupiter 
Ascending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/04/jupiter-ascending-review-wachowskis-mila-kunis-channing-tatum>
. Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets debuts in July.

Finally, the big one: Rian Johnson’s still-untitled Star Wars: Episode VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/18/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson>
. Will we finally discover the truth about Rey’s mysterious past? Can Mark 
Hamill’s Luke Skywalker – this will be our first chance to see the galaxy’s 
last living Jedi knight in action since 1983 – still cut it with a lightsaber? 
And how will Disney go about givingCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>’s Princess Leia a suitable 
– preferably non-CGI-assisted – send-off? We’ll find out in mid-December.

Superheroes

Is The Lego Batman Movie the Deadpool your kids are allowed to see?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-lego-batman-movie-trailer> 
With comic book movies having shifted into grown-up territory, The Lego Batman 
Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/04/lego-batman-movie-new-trailer-winter-2017-release>
 is probably the only superhero film suitable for small children out this year. 
Fortunately, Chris McKay’s film looks set to have the beating of most of its 
contemporaries, thanks largely to Will Arnett’s wonderfully tongue-in-cheek 
turn as the tiny, plastic,lobster thermidore-munching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-lego-batman-movie-trailer> 
caped crusader. It’s a follow-up to 2014 smash hitThe Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/13/the-lego-movie-review>, and it’s 
out next month. What a pity Power Rangers, to be released in March, appears to 
have eschewed a similar meta-infused approach for agloomy, furrow-browed 
adaptation of the brilliantly super-kitsch TV show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/11/power-rangers-first-trailer>
.

There’s no X-Men movie out this year, but James Mangold’s Logan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/logan-trailer-hugh-jackman-final-wolverine-film>
, featuringHugh Jackman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman> in his 
(supposedly) final turn as an older, weakened Wolverine, should fill the gap 
nicely. Quite how influenced the movie will be by Mark Millar’s classic graphic 
novel Old Man Logan remains to be seen. There are hints it may be closely 
influenced by more recent Marvel comics in which a female clone of Wolverine, 
X-23, takes over the adamantium-clawed mutant’s role. Logan arrives in March.

The new, Warner Bros-funded DC Expanded Universe has two episodes out in 2017. 
Patty Jenkins’Wonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/25/wonder-woman-film-trailer-comic-con-dc-superhero-video>
 arrives first, in March, and will hope to give the film series an Amazonian 
kick up the backside after the disastrous double whammy of Suicide Squad and 
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. The latter’s director, Zack Snyder,promises 
he’s learned from his mistakes 
<http://nerdist.com/everything-we-learned-on-the-justice-league-set-visit/> and 
will give us a more sympathetic Batfleck in November’sJustice League 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0974015/>. If neither film achieves critical 
traction, it’s hard to see how future efforts such asThe Flash 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0439572/> and Aquaman 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1477834/> can be expected to drive all before them.

Why so serious? Power Rangers' first trailer ditches the kitsch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/11/power-rangers-first-trailer>
Rival studio Marvel is also doubling up this year. Spider-Man: Homecoming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/09/spiderman-homecoming-tom-holland-robert-downey-jr-star-in-full-trailer-video>
, out in July, will see Tom Holland’s callow wall-crawler earning his superhero 
stripes asRobert Downey Jr <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdowneyjr>’s 
Iron Man looks on proudly in between dodgy cracks aboutthe continuing 
attractiveness of Marisa Tomei’s evergreen Aunt May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/marisa-tomei-spider-man-aunt-too-hot-twitter-backlash>
. Then in November we get the return ofChris Hemsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-hemsworth>’s Norse hunk Thor for a 
Planet Hulk-inspired road trip through the cosmos in the rumoured company of
Mark Ruffalo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo>’s not-so-jolly 
green giant andTom Hiddleston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston>
’s Loki.There are also reports 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/doctor-strange-thor-ragnarok/> that Benedict 
Cumberbatch’sDoctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>
 could be along for the ride.

Best of the rest

Due in June, The Mummy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/05/the-mummy-trailer-watch-tom-cruise-die-in-monster-reboot-video>
 is a strange beast. It looks like a typicalTom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> action movie of the past decade, 
as he is joined once again by an attractive younger female companion (this time 
Annabelle Wallis) who will no doubtget plenty of screen time and no small 
portion of the action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/28/tom-cruise-equal-opportunity-action-movie-women-mission-impossible-rogue-nation>
. But it’s also intended to be the starting point for a Marvel-style “cinematic 
universe” built around Universal’s monster movies, withRussell Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> as a Nick Fury-like Dr Henry 
Jekyll investigating the emergence of various strange creatures in the modern 
day. Quite whether The Invisible Man and Frankenstein’s Monster can team up 
without recalling awful memories of Abbott and Costello’s silly 1950s capers in 
the company of various past-their-best beasties remains to be seen.

All hail Tom Cruise and the era of the equal opportunity action movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/28/tom-cruise-equal-opportunity-action-movie-women-mission-impossible-rogue-nation>
We’ve seen every type of King Arthur tale from whimsical Disney animated 
musical (The Sword in the Stone) to doom-drenched, mud-caked mediaeval fantasy 
(Excalibur) on the big screen. NowGuy Ritchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guy-ritchie> brings us a version in which 
cheeky cockney tyke Arthur biffs his way through the entire cast of Game of 
Thrones in a suspiciously mega-populated version of dark ages Britain.King 
Arthur: Legend of the Sword 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/25/king-arthur-legend-guy-ritchie-video>
 arrives in May, and looks as if it might be fun.

Those longing to see Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> in a genuinely beefy lead role 
only need wait until July, when the Hackney-born Englishman stars as gunslinger 
Roland Deschain in Nikolaj Arcel’s adaptation of/sequel toStephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>’s venerable series of sprawling 
fantasy novels, The Dark Tower. This one’s been a long time coming, and a $60m 
budget suggests an element of compromise. But Arcel has a credible back 
catalogue (2012’sA Royal Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/06/reel-history-royal-affair> won 
two Silver Bears at Berlin), even if he’s not quite got the industry stature of
JJ Abrams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams> or Ron Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ron-howard>, both of whom had been attached 
to direct.

Pixar has two movies out in 2017. Cars 3 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3606752/>
 looks like exactly the kind of insipid sequel the pioneering studio promised 
it would never make, but studio chiefJohn Lasseter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnlasseter> is a renowned petrolhead and 
these films generate billions in merchandise profits. By contrast, Lee Unkrich’s
Coco <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2380307/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_1> probably has the 
bravest, most daring setup for a kids’ movie since Up. It’s all about the 
Mexican Day of the Dead ceremony, and will see a 12-year-old boy set off on an 
adventure that culminates in a remarkable family reunion – no doubt involving 
gazillions of colourful skeletons and a trip to the fiery depths of Hades. I 
told you 2017 was going to be dark.
 