
I have always said that, first and foremost, the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> should be about 
celebration. As we reveal our 30th anniversary shortlist, I find we have a few 
good reasons of our own to be celebrating.

In three decades, the award has established itself as the UK’s premier juried 
prize for science fiction, and one of the big genre awards to watch across the 
world. Our prize has been won by authors spanning the SF field and beyond, 
including Margaret Atwood, Jeff Noon, Lauren Beukes, Amitav Ghosh and China 
Miéville (three times!).

An award shortlist is always going to create debate and discussion – it’s a 
big part of why we do it, after all – and it’s all part of our mission to 
encourage the positive promotion of science fiction. Personally, I’m thrilled 
by the positive reaction tothis year’s shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/27/iain-pears-app-novel-arcadia-shortlisted-arthur-c-clarke-award>
. As someone who has had longer to sit and reflect on it than most, I find it 
is the kind of shortlist that definitely rewards repeated viewing. So far, it 
seems that a lot of other people are equally passionate about the choices our 
judges made this year – I’m hugely grateful for that and their hard work.

I’m also doubly thrilled to be working for the prize on its 30th anniversary, 
knowing that only a few years ago there was a very real chance the prize 
wouldn’t make it past 25. With the death of Sir Arthur, our benefactor, and a 
subsequent lack of funds to support the award’s administration and prize money, 
we began serious discussions about whether it might make more sense to end on 
both a big round number of years and a real high note –the win of Lauren 
Beukes’s fantastic Zoo City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/28/lauren-beukes-arthur-c-clarke-award>
 – rather than slowly fade away.

Instead, we’ve spent the last five years doubling our efforts, getting 
creative and even a little entrepreneurial. We’ve staged conferences and author 
events, more than doubled our yearly submissions, launched a serious commercial 
research project into the current and growing cultural influence of our 
audiences (codename: the Geek Pound <http://www.geekpound.com/about>) and now 
as we look beyond our third decade we’re also reflecting on the ways we might 
change the award in years to come.

Where to start? Well, where other science fiction and fantasy awards often 
offer multiple categories and cover many different media, the Clarke award has 
always thrived on the simplicity of its proposition: one category, one 
shortlist, one best science fiction novel of the year. We now receive more 
submissions than ever before, from something like 40 books a year when I first 
joined, to more than 100 today.

It’s a formula that continues to work, but we’re not unaware of the changes 
afoot across the publishing industry and the science fiction community. The big 
question for us is how do we best play our part?

 As an award established 30 years ago, our rules were set before things like 
ebooks came to prominence. Should we open ourselves up to ebook-only 
submissions? Probably yes. But, then, what about self-published titles? This 
year’s nomination ofThe Long Way to a Small Angry Planet by Becky Chambers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/31/science-fiction-roundup>, 
published by Hodder but originally released as a crowdfunded ebook, is one of 
those watershed moments we’ve been waiting for to inform that decision.

There have also been many calls for us to introduce an annual longlist, in 
addition to our shortlist. There are good arguments for and against this, but 
it’s definitely worth the conversation if it will help highlight the increasing 
diversity of our genre. If a longlist proves impractical, we’re also discussing 
the idea of increasing the number of titles on our shortlists as a route to 
highlighting more titles.

As an award director, I can’t help but look to what is happening with other 
awards in our field, especiallythe current issues haunting the Hugo Award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/26/hugo-awards-shortlist-rightwing-campaign-sad-rabid-puppies>
. I have a huge amount of sympathy for the fans, writers and publishers caught 
up in that struggle. But this only strengthens our ambition to be open about 
our own ideas for change to and to continue looking at new ways to support both 
new and established writers in creating and promoting their work across the 
year. If we can get that right, I think the decade to come has the potential to 
be the Clarke award’s most exciting yet.
 