
The intensely tribal nature of Scotland’s football scene means neutral 
analysis of Scott Brown is about as forthcoming as peace marches before an Old 
Firm fixture. The combination ofCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> captain and a confrontational 
playing style that is viewed as being favourably looked upon by referees means 
Brown is adored by one club’s supporters whereas rivals view the midfielder as 
an individual they love to hate. This is not a novel concept, as Barry 
Ferguson, Graeme Souness and Neil Lennon will confirm.

On Friday Brown is expected to step back into the Scotland team after a brief 
absence that only intensified debate around him. In August Brownannounced his 
retirement from the international scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/19/celtic-captain-scott-brown-retires-international-football-scotland>
 while citing concerns over fitness. “I simply felt that I could not keep up 
both commitments [for club and country] without either my performances or 
recovery time suffering,” he said. Fair enough, nodded the Tartan Army.

Gordon Strachan's last stand with Scotland? – Football Weekly Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/nov/10/gordon-strachans-last-stand-with-scotland-football-weekly-extra>
Brown missed the unappealing matches against Malta, Lithuania and Slovakia 
before suddenly declaring his availability for the meeting with England at 
Wembley.Gordon Strachan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gordon-strachan>, 
who was gushing towards the 31‑year‑old three months ago, again offered lavish 
praise.

In touching the realms of the ludicrous, Strachan suggested friendships with 
people such as Brown matter more to him than medals. The sentiment of 
Scotland’s manager contrasted markedly with that offered in public with regards 
toAlan Hutton’s Scotland retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/alan-hutton-retires-scotland-thanks-gordon-strachan>
.

“Scott is in a better place now than when he left,” Strachan said last week. 
“The game is now not so hard for him. It is never easy but it is now not so 
hard. Any injury doubts have been dispelled, as have any self-doubts that came 
from that. He is in a different place to where he was when he retired.”

It is worth reflecting on the timeframe here: from August to November. During 
that period, Brown has excelled against meagre opposition in Scotland’s top 
flight and formed part of asuperb Celtic performance against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
. If the soundings of Brendan Rodgers within a dressing room are even half 
representative of public comments, Celtic’s manager has probably convinced 
Brown he is close to being one of the world’s great midfield players.

Brown also, however, laboured badly as Borussia Mönchengladbach swatted aside 
the Scottish champions in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/celtic-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
.

Earlier, in September last year in the key match of Scotland’s failed Euro 
2016 qualifying campaign, Brown was abjectwhen captain of the defeated team in 
Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/04/georgia-scotland-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
.

Brown’s situation partly illustrates precisely where Scotland are. The glaring 
shortage of personnel available to Strachan means the manager will feel 
obligated to select a player who remains so prominent. Still, Brown is not a 
tartan-clad version of Diego Maradona; he is not a player to whomScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> should be eternally grateful 
for service on account of international exploits past.

The subliminal messages from both sides are poor. For all Strachan and Brown 
clearly have a close relationship, this contrasts markedly with Scottish 
players who privately bemoan the manager’s lack of communication when they are 
not selected for teams or squads. Those hoping to make inroads into 
international football have been forced backwards in the queue by a player who 
apparently wants to pick and choose when to represent his country. Brown has 
not even been willing to commit to any matches beyond Wembley, in itself highly 
discouraging.

Gordon Strachan says Scotland’s pride is on the line in ‘huge’ England match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/gordon-strachan-scotland-england>
“I’ll know in my head how I feel,” said Brown. “I’ll know personally after the 
game. There’s not another Scotland game until March and that lets me figure out 
a lot about myself and how my body is going to take the battering with the no 
rest. I don’t know how many games it’s going to be for, whether it’s just this 
one-off game or we’ll just take it from there but I’m coming back for this game 
and we’ll see how my legs are and see how everything is.”

Brown’s motivation for reappearing, according to the man himself, seems to 
relate entirely to an obligation towards Strachan rather than wanting to 
kickstart a revival after a poor Scotland run. “The stuff that Gordon has done 
for me over the last 10 years of my career from when he first signed me and 
brought me to Celtic, turned me into the player I am now,” Brown said. “I’ve 
got a lot of respect for him. I admire him as a manager and he has led me a lot 
on the field as well as off it. He’s a mate.”

The notion of this playing out tremendously well, with Brown being influential 
in a famous Scotland win at Wembley, is a serious long shot. Otherwise, it is 
hard for player and manager to win. The negatives are abundantly clear: Brown 
being the focus of heavy attention before potentially walking from the 
international scene for a second time. If Scotland lose, Strachan will almost 
certainly leave the building first. When all pieced together, this is the 
latest unsatisfactory chapter of a stuttering campaign.
 