
‘Terror! Vice! Violence!” howls the poster for Claire Bloom’s 1953 film The 
Man Between, co-starring James Mason as Ivo Kern, shadowy smuggler of secrets 
and people in postwar Berlin. In the poster, he is putting the moves on Bloom, 
whom the artist has depicted reclining in rumpled sheets, hair down, thighs 
bared.

“It is fairly misleading!” says Bloom when I show her the poster she’s never 
seen before during lunch at Blakes hotel in Kensington. She’s right. Carol 
Reed’s follow-up toThe Third Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-third-man> is an existential meditation 
on human corruption. One that is being revived for a new audience.

Bloom was 22 at the time, and near the start of a remarkable career during 
which she would star with, among others, Chaplin, Gielgud, Burton, Olivier, 
Steiger, Brynner, Hopkins. “And some great women, too,” she adds, such as 
Kathryn Hunter and Eileen Atkins. She was also on the brink of a romantic 
odyssey anatomised in her 1996 memoirLeaving a Doll’s House. During it, she 
would marry three times (Rod Steiger, producer Howard Elkins and novelist 
Philip Roth), and have other affairs and dalliances, sometimes with her leading 
men, including Olivier, Burton and Brynner, not to mention a night of folly 
with Anthony Quinn.

Today, she is elegantly dressed and proves witty, friendly company; she is, 
generally, prepared to put up with the odd impertinent question. Only 
occasionally – say when asked about whether she and Burton were an item on the 
set ofAlexander the Great – does she snap incontrovertibly: “Let’s not talk 
about that.” But moments later gives me the gossip anyway.

“I am,” she tells me several times, “of a certain age” (she is 85), and that 
serves both as a get-out for her garrulousness and a justification for 
forgetting some of the details of her career. For instance, she can remember 
many things about the 63-year-oldThe Man Between, but not the name of the 
character she played.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf1a0986cca6731612025b22d4054855d29a3b4%2F0_264_2564_1538%2F2564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Screen%20gods%2C%20guilt%20and%20glamour%3A%20actor%20Claire%20Bloom%20on%20her%20life%20in%20the%20limelight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Screen%20gods%2C%20guilt%20and%20glamour%3A%20actor%20Claire%20Bloom%20on%20her%20life%20in%20the%20limelight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedf1a0986cca6731612025b22d4054855d29a3b4%2F0_264_2564_1538%2F2564.jpg>
 Bloom, Richard Burton and Gary Raymond in Look Back in Anger (1958). 
Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
She was Susanne Mallison, a naive young Englishwoman who poses as a prostitute 
to avoid capture by Soviet thugs. “I loved that scene,” she laughs. “It was a 
great relief from being the nice, nice girl.”

When Bloom arrived in Berlin for filming, the producer and director Alexander 
Korda had just put her under contract. After training at the Guildhall and the 
Central School of Speech and Drama, she had played Ophelia in Stratford and 
Juliet at the Old Vic. The most celebrated critic of the day, Kenneth Tynan, 
wrote that hers was “the best Juliet I’ve ever seen”.

Bloom made her screen debut with a small role in Gainsborough Pictures’ 1948 
filmThe Blind Goddess. Soon after, she enrolled – like Dirk Bogarde, Petula 
Clark and Diana Dors – in J Arthur Rank’s “charm school”, set up to manufacture 
British movie stars along Hollywood lines.

In 1952, she got her cinematic break. Chaplin had been searching for someone 
with “beauty, talent and a great emotional range” to play a suicidal ballerina 
suffering from hysterical paralysis who is rescued from the brink by, you’ve 
guessed it, his once-famous stage clown. He found those qualities in Bloom and 
the resulting film,Limelight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/24/limelight-chaplin-keaton-classic-dvd>
, gave her an international profile.

The following year, with The Man Between, she was being groomed for stardom by 
Korda. Later, she wrote: “I believe that if he [Korda] had lived, I might have 
had films built around me that were suited to my qualities.” But initially he 
gave her a role she didn’t think suited her. “I didn’t want to play the young 
English innocent, but that’s what I did and it worked.” It was only in her 
second film with Korda, his 1955 adaptation ofRichard III in which she played 
Lady Anne opposite Olivier, that she got “everything I could have wanted”. She 
thinks the film still holds up. “In that second scene ofRichard there’s an 
extraordinary kind of magnetism between us and it comes over to this day.”

Look Back in Anger: how John Osborne liberated theatrical language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/30/how-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne>
After Berlin, she returned to the Old Vic in London, where, between 
rehearsals, she fell in love with the marriedRichard Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-burton>. At the time, if her memoirs 
are anything to go by, she remained the young English innocent. She wrote of 
her and Burton’s first night together: “I was almost ignorant about sexual 
matters, and found this first experience perplexing … Richard left me in the 
early morning to go back home and I went to sleep childishly thrilled that I 
was a ‘woman’ at last.”

Though their romance soon ended, their careers were long after intertwined. In 
the 1956 sword-and-sandals epic,Alexander the Great, Bloom played beautiful 
mistress Barsine to his all-conquering Macedonian. InLook Back in Anger, Tony 
Richardson’s 1959 adaptation of John Osborne’s play, Burton played Jimmy 
Porter, and Bloom was Helena, who becomes the angry young man’s mistress.

She loves the role. “She was a woman of today.” Bloom was given a freedom on 
set by Richardson she’d never experienced before. “I’d say: What do you think I 
should do?’ He’d say: ‘What do you think you should do? Do what you like.’”

In 1964, Burton and Bloom appeared together in the film adaptation of John le 
Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre>’s The Spy Who Came in 
from the Cold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/24/carre-spy-came-cold-boyd>. By 
then, Burton was married to Elizabeth Taylor and Bloom to Steiger, with whom 
she would have a daughter, Anna, now a renowned opera singer. Bloom relates how 
Burton told her that to wake and find Taylor on his pillow was like having 
Christmas every morning, “a sentiment”, wrote Bloom hilariously, “that raised 
in me urges akin to murder”.

“It didn’t make me feel too good,” she laughs.

She has starred in more than 60 films, not to mention plays and TV dramas 
includingDoc Martin, Midsomer Murders and Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>. Among her most famous 
roles were the girls – Juliet, Ophelia, Susanne fromThe Man Between. Then the 
women, starting withLook Back in Anger’s sexually confident Helena and then her 
performance as Nora inA Doll’s House, a role that allowed Bloom to “fuse two 
conflicting sides of my nature – spoiled-child wife and the determinedly 
independent woman”. She, like Nora, had to slam the door on a husband – but in 
her case, it happened three times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe3d6d2712827e1f0d75183cc0eb16707ef3669%2F0_119_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Screen%20gods%2C%20guilt%20and%20glamour%3A%20actor%20Claire%20Bloom%20on%20her%20life%20in%20the%20limelight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Screen%20gods%2C%20guilt%20and%20glamour%3A%20actor%20Claire%20Bloom%20on%20her%20life%20in%20the%20limelight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fscreen-gods-guilt-and-glamour-actor-claire-bloom-on-her-life-in-the-limelight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe3d6d2712827e1f0d75183cc0eb16707ef3669%2F0_119_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Philip Roth with Bloom. Photograph: Ian Cook/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
The year after her Broadway triumph as Nora in the early 70s, she starred as 
the sexually troubled, fading southern belle Blanche DuBois in Tennessee 
Williams’sA Streetcar Named Desire. Bloom argues that she would never have 
understood the character properly but for her relationship with her second 
husband, Elkins, whose “entire being appeared to be centred on sexual 
gratification”.

Another significant performance has been her narration of Leonard Bernstein’s 
“Kaddish”Symphony No 3, in a performance conducted by his protégée Marin Alsop 
in 2013. It’s intriguing both as an exploration of Bloom’s Jewish heritage and 
as a near-sacrilegious work in which Bernstein writes verse raging against the 
Almighty for His feebleness at ending human suffering. “I was told by a 
composer friend that the kaddish is ‘Bernstein fights with God. Bernstein 
wins,” laughs Bloom.

Throughout lunch, I’ve been checking to see if she is still wearing the snake 
ring Roth gave her in the late 1980s. The couple had been living together for 
more than a decade when he presented her with the manuscript for his novel
Deception. He then left it with her in their New York apartment.

She read it in mounting fury because it depicted an actor called Claire from a 
self-hating Jewish family whose writer husband cheats on her with a series of 
women Bloom describes as “east European seductresses”. When he returned, Bloom 
says she was shaking with rage, while Roth presented her with a gold snake ring 
with an emerald head he’d just bought from Bulgari on Fifth Avenue.Deception 
was published in 1990, the same year they were married (they divorced in 1995). 
It was only when Roth agreed to remove her name from the novel that she 
accepted the ring as “his guilt offering”.

In Bloom, Chaplin found an actor with beauty, talent and great emotional range

Does she still read Roth’s books? “I don’t find it easy. I have gone back to 
readAmerican Pastoral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/11/philip-roth-american-pastoral-sabbaths-theater>
, which I had not read at the time. It’s a lovely, wonderful book. I find it 
hard.” How aboutI Married a Communist? “I certainly didn’t read that, if that’s 
what you’re asking.” In that 1998 novel, Eve Frame exposes her ex-husband as a 
communist during the McCarthy years. And then the outed commie takes his 
revenge. “Did she imagine,” snarls Roth’s narrator, “this openly aggressive hot 
head was going to do nothing in response?” Linda Grant in her Guardian review 
of the novel (under the heading “The wrath of Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1998/oct/03/fiction.philiproth>”) wrote that 
behind that question was another: “And did you, Roth is asking Claire Bloom, 
not expect me to retaliate?”

“I’ve nothing to say about Roth,” says Bloom, who has lived for the past 20 
years in London. Though she goes on to tell me about a time, a few years ago, 
when she was at a loose end in Montreal, having arrived early for a movie she 
was to film, and spent the week at the cinema. She saw an adaptation of one of 
Roth’s novels – “The one with Nicole Kidman in it.” She means the 2003 
adaptation ofThe Human Stain, in which Nathan Zuckerman, Roth’s fictional 
self-projection, is holed up in a New England cabin after suffering divorce and 
prostate cancer. “And the person who was supposed to be playing Philip was no 
more like him than you and I!” Zuckerman was played by Gary Sinise, who at the 
time was in his late 40s, while Roth would have been 70.

Writing in 1996, Bloom said she wore Roth’s ring “to this day”. But I notice 
she is not wearing it today. “A friend of mine said: ‘As long as you wear that 
ring you’ll never be free,’ so I sold it – immediately,” she says, before 
adding with a smile: “For very little.”

• A newly restored edition of The Man Between is available on Blu-ray, DVD and 
VOD from 2 January.
 