
Rob Daviau thought Cluedo was flawed. It was around the end of 2008, while 
Daviau was working as a designer at Hasbro, and he was brainstorming ideas 
which could breathe new life into the murder mystery classic. “At one point I 
made the comment: ‘I don’t know why they keep inviting these people over for 
dinner, they’re all mass murderers. Why would you keep inviting them back game 
after game?’”

Daviau was joking, but his boss thought there was something in his critique. 
What if there was a way for games to change every time they were played? They 
discussed ways in which decisions made in one gaming session might carry over 
into the next. An attempt at Cluedo: The Usual Suspects was swiftly abandoned 
but Daviau soon found another classic with potential: Risk – the somewhat 
interminable game of word conquest.


Risk Legacy was published in 2011. For the first time, decisions made during 
gameplay had permanent consequences. Players ripped up cards, defaced the 
board, and at key moments were instructed to open packets containing new rules. 
Long-held grudges became woven into the fabric of the game. Daviau explained: 
“You could point to the board and say: ‘Right here! You did this!’”


In 2012, Daviau left Hasbro after 14 years. The following year he was 
approached by Pandemic designer Matt Leacock about collaborating on a legacy 
version of the hugely popular co-operative title in which you try to cure 
diseases threatening humanity.Pandemic Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/25/pandemic-legacy-review-emotional-highs-agonising-lows>
 launched in October last year, won a string of awards and leapt to the top of 
theall-time rankings <https://boardgamegeek.com/browse/boardgame> at the Board 
Game Geek website. It has remained there ever since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1699b645553d5d65cbbb957cf2ffc779e345d8ed%2F0_1441_10349_6211%2F10349.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SeaFall%3A%20is%20the%20legacy%20format%20heralding%20a%20new%20era%20of%20board%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SeaFall%3A%20is%20the%20legacy%20format%20heralding%20a%20new%20era%20of%20board%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1699b645553d5d65cbbb957cf2ffc779e345d8ed%2F0_1441_10349_6211%2F10349.jpg>
 In Seafall, players will become seafarers as they set out to conquer a 
previously unexplored world. Photograph: SeaFall box art 
SeaFall is Daviau’s latest project <http://www.plaidhatgames.com/games/seafall>
. While Pandemic Legacy attracted widespread acclaim, SeaFall will be seen by 
many as the true test of the legacy format – the first title based on an 
original concept. Set in the age of sail, players will become seafarers as they 
set out to conquer a previously unexplored world. Daviau knows his format can 
revive an existing franchise. Can it take gaming in an entirely new direction?

Legacy was never expected to go mainstream. At Hasbro, Daviau was left to his 
own devices when developing the concept. Even he suspected it would be a niche 
pursuit. “When I was working on it I would think: ‘This is really different and 
I think it’s pretty good,’” he said. “But it’s weird, it’s unexpected and it 
breaks a lot of taboos. I expected it to be very successful with a handful of 
people. I thought I would be known as the guy who did this weird project.”

As Daviau anticipated, not everyone was convinced. Legacy games play out over 
the course of a fixed number of sessions. In Pandemic Legacy, each game 
represents one month and the story unfolds over the course of a fictional year. 
Some players took to forums after the game’s release to bemoan the fact that 
changes to the board were permanent and games had a fixed end point.

Nevertheless, most gamers loved the concept. Russell Chapman is events 
supervisor at Draughts,a board game café in east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/16/london-first-board-game-cafe-to-open-in-hackney>
. He sees the legacy format as one of the biggest advances in game design for 
several years. “It’s this new level of commitment, intensity, excitement,” he 
said. “There’s nothing more exciting for a board gamer than to learn a new game 
or way to do something and you’re getting that constantly with legacy games.”

Enthusiasm among gamers was reflected in sales. Ben Hogg, marketing manager at 
UK games distributor Esdevium, declined to give exact figures but said: “We 
launch some games with 90-120 copies, see what the reaction is from the hobby 
games market and it will maybe just get one print run. Then we’ve got triple A 
releases like a new Star Wars game that will do multiple thousands. Pandemic 
Legacy was in the second category.”

According to Hogg, the appeal of an unfolding adventure trumped any concerns 
about longevity. “There was that initial apprehension about making changes and 
basically wrecking your board as you went through,” he said. “Those have been 
put to bed by Pandemic Legacy. Most people don’t go to the cinema to watch the 
same film twice, do they? You’re buying into an experience. It’s introducing 
that aspect of narrative that you get from video games.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e98005807dbfc2587d7cf41d3b92bcb2779282b%2F0_33_3505_2103%2F3505.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SeaFall%3A%20is%20the%20legacy%20format%20heralding%20a%20new%20era%20of%20board%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SeaFall%3A%20is%20the%20legacy%20format%20heralding%20a%20new%20era%20of%20board%20games%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fseafall-legacy-format-pandemic-legacy-designer-rob-daviau-board-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e98005807dbfc2587d7cf41d3b92bcb2779282b%2F0_33_3505_2103%2F3505.png>
 SeaFall game setup … legacy designers must consider all possible player 
choices to ensure the narrative doesn’t fall apart. Photograph: SeaFall game 
setup 
The legacy format draws not only on video games but role-playing adventures 
and Netflix-fuelled demand for episodic entertainment. While at college, Daviau 
saw his future as a television writer. After interning with David Letterman, he 
moved into advertising, then game design. But the appeal of telling stories 
stuck with him. Pandemic creator Matt Leacock likens the legacy design process 
to writing a novel. “You need to have an idea of how you want it to end and a 
pretty good idea of where you want it to begin,” he said. “But also it’s not 
enough just to have an overall outline.”

Legacy designers must consider all possible player choices to ensure the 
narrative doesn’t fall apart. To do this, designers recruit testers so they can 
observe how games will unfold. Jaime Barriga was a play-tester on SeaFall and 
is now designinghis own legacy card game <http://www.quickfightgame.com/>. “It 
takes an insane amount of time,” he said. “You’ll have a situation where it’s 
playing great, the first few games are perfect, then four or five games in it 
starts to get shaky, then game six it’s broken. Then you have to go back and 
redo everything.”

All of this makes designing any legacy title hugely complex. In the case of 
SeaFall, Daviau had to create the entire concept from scratch. One awed Reddit 
user described Daviau as a “mad genius” for attempting the project. Asked if 
the design process for SeaFall would be more challenging than adapting an 
existing game, Leacock said: “That’s a bit of an understatement.”

Perhaps this complexity is why Daviau has been involved in every legacy 
project released to date. A second season of Pandemic Legacy to be released in 
2017. He is currently working onChronicles 
<http://www.artana.com/chronicles-origins>, a series in which players can chart 
the course of Western civilisation over the course of several linked games. 
Daviau, it’s fair to say, is a man with big ideas.

If SeaFall is a success, it’s almost inevitable that legacy titles from other 
designers will follow. While Daviau feels a sense of ownership, he is keen to 
see where others take the idea. But he also seeks to play down the significance 
of his innovation. “It’s got a lot of attention right now and probably will for 
another year to three,” he said. After that, he suspects gamers will be asking: 
“Enough of that, what’s new?”

Colby Dauch is less sure. For the studio manager at Plaid Hat Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>, the publisher of SeaFall, the 
legacy format has been a revelation. “For a company that publishes 
story-centric games, it is impossible to ignore,” he said. “It’s the kind of 
idea that changes the way you think about what a board game can be.”

In the coming weeks, gamers will open up boxes and carefully lay out the 
components contained inside, ready to embark on their own SeaFall adventures. 
On one side of the game board they will find marked a landmass from which they 
will launch their bids to conquer the world. Awaiting them on the other side? 
Uncharted territory.
 