


Monday

The chancellor appeared before the Treasury select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 to explain the details of his autumn statement and was visibly peeved when it 
was pointed out that the extra distributional analysis he had provided showed 
that the bottom three deciles of the population were going to be made much 
worse off.

“I expect you to deal with this information in a mature matter,” Philip Hammond
 <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/philip-hammond> said. In other words, 
the government had been elected on a manifesto of making the poor poorer so he 
shouldn’t be pilloried for keeping that promise.

Conservative Jacob Rees-Mogg was more keen to point out that he hadn’t 
personally benefited from one of the chancellor’s budgetary measures. Though 
Rees-Mogg was absolutely delighted Hammond had decided to give £7.6m for the 
repair of the stately pile,Wentworth Woodhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/inside-wentworth-woodhouse-a-key-piece-of-northern-heritage>
, he wanted it on record that the chancellor’s decision had nothing to do with 
the fact that it was the home in which his mother-in-law had grown up. Duly 
noted.



Tuesday

As someone who doesn’t drink, not only do I increasingly seem to find myself 
in bad company – Ben Wright’s excellent book, Order! Order! The Rise and Fall 
of Political Drinking reveals that Donald “I don’t even have the excuse of 
being pissed” Trump is teetotal – I also find the Christmas period tends to 
drag. I’ll go a long way to avoid going to parties. Preferably home. But there 
are exceptions. A close friend who has just discovered he has terminal brain 
cancer has decided that the best way to cope with the situation is to throw an 
impromptu party this weekend. He’s also insisted that dancing will be 
obligatory and promised one or two surprises. I’m fairly confident I would not 
have reacted to such terrible news with such style, but wild horses wouldn’t 
keep me away. I’m just not sure whether I’ll be laughing or crying. Both 
probably.

Wednesday

Christmas is the time of peace, goodwill and a chance to give your colleagues 
a good kicking. You’d have thought that Michael Gove might have had enough of 
Boris bashing for one year, but he couldn’t resist one last dig at one of 
Westminster’s many festive parties by laughing aboutBoris’s undiplomatic 
relations with the Saudis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/boris-johnson-refuses-to-apologise-for-saudi-arabia-comments>
. Maybe Gove was just following orders, for Theresa May also seems to have 
declared war on the foreign secretary.

When asked if FO had originally been intended as an instruction rather than 
destination for Boris,she replied that Boris was FFS 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/global/2016/dec/14/pmqs-verdict-corbyn-gets-better-of-may-over-social-care>
. “That’s fine foreign secretary,” she claimed unconvincingly. For fine sake. 
Still, at least Boris got his own back by describing her trousers as 
“lederhosen”. The Labour party has a more fraternal way of dealing with the 
festivities: they just avoid each other. Dozens of tickets for the normally 
rammed annual dinner of the parliamentary Labour party were still on sale 
minutes before it was due to start.

Thursday

You’d have thought that some stories, such as child abuse, go well beyond 
party politics. Not for Labour’s Dennis Skinner. At culture, media and sport 
questions he said: “When the government are digging into this, they should 
remember that there is a class argument about it. It is about people making 
money, and the Tories know a lot about that.” Wrong on so many counts. Turning 
paedophilia into class warfare could be just one of the reasons a struggling 
Tory party is still 15 points ahead ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in the opinion polls.

Friday

It may have been the perfect metaphor for Britain’s isolation in the EU, but I 
couldn’t help feeling a bit sorry for the PMas she was blanked by her opposite 
numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/lonely-theresa-may-video-at-eu-summit-is-brexit-in-a-nutshell>
 at the EU council meeting in Brussels. I’ve been that boy who was deliberately 
ignored and left anxiously fiddling with my cuffs in the school playground and 
it really isn’t that much fun. You’re never lonelier than when you’re in a 
crowd. Still, Theresa might take comfort that some MPs were having an even 
worse night out than her.

UK naive to expect EU trade deal in two years, Germany says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/uk-naive-to-expect-eu-trade-deal-in-two-years-germany-says>
The parliamentary Labour party did finally get together for a Christmas 
bonding session of sorts at a drinks party in a club on the Embankment. The 
party was meant to start at seven but as most Labour MPs were busy voting on 
their own opposition day motions until past eight, the place was like a morgue 
for the first hour or so.

Late on things degenerated still further when the evening turned into a 
karaoke night. Katy Clark, of Jeremy Corbyn’s office, fumed as Mike Gapes sang 
Back in the USSR and then flounced out when a group led by Ian Murray sang the 
Tony Blair anthem Things Can Only Get Better. As one MP said: “We’re nothing if 
not absolutely, fucking pathetic.”

Digested week, digested: Jeremy Corbyn plans to relaunch himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
 as Jeremy Corbyn.
 