
Workers in the burgeoning gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
 face poverty in retirement unless the government acts to change its flagship 
pension policy and makes it easier for them to save, experts have warned.

The pensions minister, Richard Harrington, has indicated that he is 
considering ways to include self-employed workers into the flagship 
auto-enrolment scheme, but he has not confirmed whether this will be part of a 
review planned for next year.

Recent changes to the pension system have boosted the number of employees who 
save into one and benefit from contributions made by their employer. Anyone 
earning more than £10,000 from their firm is automatically enrolled into a 
pension, and their employer makes contributions, currently worth 1% of earnings.

However, those in self-employment or doing a patchwork of low-paid jobs are 
not able to save through the scheme.

Related: The Guardian view on golden oldies: time to move over | Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/the-guardian-view-on-golden-oldies-time-to-move-over>

Steven Cameron, pensions director at insurer Aegon, said the changing nature 
of self-employment meant that the government needed to act. “It is not 
sustainable government policy to exclude the self-employed, who are no longer 
made up solely of the traditional small business owner but now include a 
fast-growing contractor population,” he said. “The differentiation between 
employed and self-employed has been further blurred by the gig economy and the 
recent ruling thatUber workers should be treated as employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
.”

Figures show the number of self-employed workers contributing to a personal 
pension have plummeted since the start of the century. About 1.1 million 
individuals were paying into a retirement fund in 2001-02, but by 2014-15 the 
figure had fallen to just 380,000.

Meanwhile, the government’s Family Resource Survey found that while 60% of 
working-age adults employed as staff had pensions, among the self-employed the 
figure was just 16%. Women were much less likely to be making payments into a 
scheme, with participation at just 12% against 17% for men.
 See the full visual 
Former pensions minister Steve Webb said there was “not a moment to wait” to 
address the issue of falling contributions by self-employed workers. “Pension 
membership among the self-employed – and self-employed women in particular – is 
chronically low and falling.”


Ros Altmann, who was pensions minister until the summer, said while 
self-employed workers had in the past been well-paid, “things are different for 
those young startup, gig economy type roles”. She said: “With auto-enrolment 
the lowest opt-out rates have been amongst the young, so if we have got a lot 
of young people starting their own businesses there will be a potential divide 
in the future between the haves and have-nots in pensions”.

Experts said they were most concerned about those in their 40s, who comprise 
about two-thirds of the self-employed workforce. They will be locked out of the 
new lifetime Isa (Lisa), launched by George Osborne to encourage savings for 
property and retirement.

Webb said his biggest concern was older workers who had started their own 
businesses only recently, perhaps after redundancy. “If you’re 53 and you’ve 
been in work previously and not built up a big pension, you are going to 
struggle – this is the group of people who won’t be able to stop working,” he 
said.


Research by pensions provider Old Mutual found that while 84% of 30- to 
45-year-old employees were contributing to a pension scheme, among the 
self-employed just half were paying towards their retirement. Those who were 
saving were putting in an average of £290 a month, while their employed 
counterparts were saving £400. The main reason for not saving was not having 
enough money left to put by.

Jon Greer, pensions expert at Old Mutual Wealth, said: “The rapidly growing 
self-employed population aren’t saving enough for retirement and are 
sleepwalking towards poverty in later life.

“The government needs to step in and help. Ahead of the conservative party 
conference in October, Theresa May ordered a review of employment regulation 
and practices, but action is also needed.”

He called on the government to increase the age limit on the Lisa to 55 and 
consider allowing self-employed people to make withdrawals so they were not 
worried about locking up their cash.

Even those in employment may be missing out, the TUC warned. It estimates that 
4.6 million workers do not qualify for auto-enrolment because they earn less 
than £10,000 a year. Because the limit applies to a job rather than total 
earnings, if you do more than one low-paid job, you will not automatically 
qualify for a pension.

Related: The Guardian view on employment law: an overhaul is needed | Editorial
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/the-guardian-view-on-employment-law-an-overhaul-is-needed>

The Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Policy Institute has 
estimated that about 80,000 people would be due a pension if they could add 
together earnings from their first and second jobs. Again, women are most 
likely to lose out, making up 60,000 of that number.

Tim Sharpe, policy officer at the TUC, said: “Automatic enrolment has been a 
great success, giving 6 million more people access to a workplace pension.

“But it mustn’t be allowed to become a policy that works well for men in 
traditional full-time work but excludes others. Millions of low-paid workers, 
most of them women, are still missing out. We need to remove the barrier of the 
earnings trigger so that the millions of workers in part-time work, including 
those holding down multiple jobs, are automatically enrolled into workplace 
pensions too.”

Self-employed workers have been helped by changes to the state pension, which 
brought the amount they can claim in line with that of workers, at just over 
£8,000 a year.

But Webb said the government should consider increasing the national insurance 
contributions paid by the self-employed and diverting the extra money into 
pension schemes for them. “We have the 2017 review of auto-enrolment coming up 
and we absolutely have to address this problem,” said Webb.

The government said that it had not confirmed which groups would be included 
in the review of auto-enrolment, but inan interview with the Financial Times 
Harrington said 
<https://www.ft.com/content/77f24f6a-ad91-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122> looking at 
how to extend auto-enrolment to the self-employed “should be the kind of thing 
that we are talking about”.

He added: “Many self-employed people could now be earning the minimum wage, 
maybe a bit more, but it is complicated. In the end we have to look at them 
being included in an envelope like the automatic enrolment system – and the 
same with people who have multiple jobs.”
 