
Investors face a “cataclysmic year” where stock markets could fall by up to 
20% and oil could slump to $16 a barrel, economists at theRoyal Bank of Scotland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> have warned.

In a note to its clients 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1452594796380/European-Rates-Weekly-08011.pdf> the 
bank said: “Sell everything except high quality bonds. This is about return of 
capital, not return on capital. In a crowded hall, exit doors are small.” It 
said the current situation was reminiscent of 2008, when the collapse of the 
Lehman Brothers investment bank led to the global financial crisis. This time 
China could be the crisis point.

Oil slides towards $30 per barrel - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/12/oil-30-dollers-per-barrel-opec-mark-carney-business-live>
Stock markets have already come under severe pressure in 2016, with the FTSE 
100 down more than 5% in its worst start since 2000. In the US,the Dow Jones 
industrial average has made its poorest ever start to a year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/08/us-stocks-suffer-worst-first-week-since-records-began>

Oil prices have also fallen sharply on fears of lower demand and a supply 
glut, especially with Iran due to start exporting once more when sanctions are 
lifted.Tensions between Iran and Saudia Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/11/iran-foreign-minister-mohammad-javad-zarif-saudi-arabia>
 make it less likely that Opec can agree to cut production to halt the slide in 
prices. Brent crude is down another 1% at $31.18, its lowest level since April 
2004.

Investors have been spooked by fears of a severe slowdown in the Chinese 
economy and a fall in the value of the yuan, not helped by a crash in the 
country’s stock market despite attempts by the country’s authorities to curtail 
selling.

 Andrew Roberts, RBS’s credit chief, said: “China has set off a major 
correction and it is going to snowball. Equities and credit have become very 
dangerous, and we have hardly even begun to retrace the ‘Goldilocks love-in’ of 
the last two years.”

Markets have been supported for some time by low interest rates, stimulus 
measures from central banks including quantitative easing, and hopes of 
economic recovery. But with the Federal Reserve raising rates and the Bank of 
England expected to follow suit, that prop is being removed.

Roberts said European and US markets could fall by 10% to 20%, with the FTSE 
100 particularly at risk due to the predominance of commodity companies in the 
UK index. “London is vulnerable to a negative shock. All these people who are 
long [buyers of] oil and mining companies thinking that the dividends are safe 
are going to discover that they’re not at all safe.

“We suspect 2016 will be characterised by more focus on how the exiting occurs 
of positions in the three main asset classes that benefited from quantitative 
easing: 1) emerging markets, 2) credit, 3) equities … Risks are high.”

RBS is not the only negative voice at the moment. Analysts at JP Morgan have 
advised clients to sell stocks on any bounce.

Morgan Stanley has said oil could fall to $20 a barrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/oil-price-forecast-fall-20-dollars-barrel-morgan-stanley>
, while Standard Chartered has predicted an even bigger slide, to as low as 
$10. Standard said: “Given that no fundamental relationship is currently 
driving the oil market towards any equilibrium, prices are being moved almost 
entirely by financial flows caused by fluctuations in other asset prices, 
including the US dollar and equity markets.

“We think prices could fall as low as $10 a barrel before most of the money 
managers in the market conceded that matters had gone too far.”
 