
This summer, the picturesque Birchcliffe Centre, a converted baptist church in 
the West Yorkshire village of Hebden Bridge, hosted an unusual festival. Guests 
danced across the sunlit floor to the music of Johann Sebastian Bach; they 
drank mugs of tea and watched talks. Outside, there was an “art walk” where 
attendees trudged up and down the muddy slopes, breathing in the scent of early 
summer flowers. There were nice places to eat, the village was welcoming. 
Everyone felt safe and included. Passers-by would perhaps not have guessed what 
people had come here to see and share. Video games.

The event, named Feral Vector <http://feral-vector.com/>, was a conscious 
attempt by organiser David Hayward to fight both the “gravitational pull of 
London” as he puts it, and the popular image of what a gaming event is. From 
the cavernous E3 show in Los Angeles to the annual EGX, this year held at 
Birmingham’s NEC, the usual set-up involves a vast convention centre, near 
total darkness and a constant cacophony of competing sound systems. But not 
everyone feels comfortable in these aggressively noisy environments. As 
independent game designer Rob Fearonrecently noted on his website 
<http://www.merseyremakes.co.uk/gibber/egx/>: “We all deserve better.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445414016551%2F4fa8f1ad-2c57-4fd9-be3e-fa165eea2f2e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20art%20and%20picnics%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20alternative%20video%20game%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C%20art%20and%20picnics%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20alternative%20video%20game%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445414016551%2F4fa8f1ad-2c57-4fd9-be3e-fa165eea2f2e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Feral Vector took place in a converted baptist chapel, rather than the usual 
vast convention centre Photograph: David Hayward/Feral Vector 
The good news is, Feral Vector is far from alone. The previous weekend, 60 
game makers and other members of the gaming community gathered on the tiny 
Inishbofin island off the coast of Ireland for the second,Inis Spraoi 
<http://inisspraoi.org/>, an event designed allow participants to think about 
games in an entirely different way.

“You’re on this island in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean – you have to get a 
ferry there,” says co-organiser Llaura Réalta. “It’s like Jurassic Park or 
something”. She says the event was so popular they overflowed the hostel, so 
some braved the rain and camped in the grounds. For two days, they explored an 
ancient fort, played folk games in the dark (a natural darkness quite unlike 
the forced gloom of EGX and E3) and sang around a campfire.

“Probably a retreat is the most apt term for it,” said Owen Harris, who also 
helped organise the event. “There’s a real sickness within the games community 
to do with work. We’ve kind of fetishised this idea of the starving artist 
destroying themselves. I think it makes logical and even financial and economic 
sense to highly respect this kind of timeout – the time that we have away from 
our computers and the time we have in rest so that we can do good work when we 
are working.”

Elsewhere this year, we’ve seen the Boston Festival of Indie Games 
<http://bostonfig.com/>, Bitsummit <http://bitsummit.org/2015/> in Kyoto and 
most intriguingly,Lyst <http://lyst-summit.dk/>, billed as a summit about love, 
romance and sex in games, which this year took place on Vartiosaari, an island 
district of Helsinki. The event featured a day of talks and a game jam. “We 
have quite a mix of speakers, from well-established names in the games scene 
such as [Uncharted lead designer] Richard Lemarchand, to students and 
independent game developers,” explains co-organiser Andrea Hasselager. “But we 
also really believe that different arts disciplines can benefit from each 
other, so we’re very encouraging of artists from other disciplines to join.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130558058&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130558058>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F130558058&media=>
All of these events challenge the negative reputation that still haunts video 
games as a creative sector. The BBC’s recent drama The Game Changers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/16/the-gamechangers-review-daniel-radcliffes-gta-drama-was-on-autopilot>
 painted a typically disingenuous image of the industry as a crass cesspit of 
greedy nerds, while psychologist Philip Zimbardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/11/the-cliche-of-lone-male-gamer-needs-to-be-destroyed>
 and business leaderJohn Cridland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/13/games-industry-nerds-john-cridland-cbi>
 have both tried to paint gamers as damaged geeks who just need to get out 
more. The problem is, the industry has a tendency to focus on money to assert 
its validity (“We’re bigger than Hollywood!”), and the sense of games as a 
joyful creative medium is often soured, not only by endless sequels, but by the 
mega-events designed to celebrate them.

But as the industry matures and opens to new voices, the influx of fresh, 
alternative gaming festivals continues. “The focus of Inis Spraoi is on the 
culture of games,” said Réalta. “It is not being run by marketing or PR people, 
and is not for their benefit. It’s about celebrating games and the creativity 
and everything around them, and the people most of all.”

Even large international events can maintain this focus on culture. “I like to 
promote that games are not only a product, that games are a medium of 
expression,” says Thorsten Wiedemann, director of theA MAZE festival 
<http://www.a-maze.net/>, which takes place in Berlin and Johannesburg. His aim 
is to reach a wider audience, catching passersby who would normally attend 
music events. “I have the feeling that A MAZE can be the Berlinale Film 
Festival of games,” he says – though he adds that we might have to wait a few 
decades to see that happen.

That desire to attract a more diverse audience is reflected across these 
alternative events. Nia Wearn, a lecturer in games design, recognised the need 
for more inclusive events on a personal level when she became pregnant. “[I 
was] wondering about what kind of game events in the next year that I’d 
actually be able to take my little baby to,” she said, “And realised there 
wasn’t anything. So we decided to host a picnic.”

The result was LudoLunch, a picnic in Oxford this June for game developers and 
their friends and family, at which I shared homemade baked goods, helped to 
feed Wearn’s baby, and sunbathed. Despite taking place outdoors, and hosting 
adults and children alike, LudoLunch featured many of the same parts that make 
up other gaming events: board games, a game jam, and talks from people like 
acclaimed interactive fiction designer Emily Short. All of the speakers were 
women, which is extraordinarily rare in this industry, even at events 
specifically about gender in games.

Meanwhile, mainstream events like EGX could and should be friendlier to those 
outside of what we’re still in the habit of perceiving as the “core” of the 
gaming community – and not only because it’s the considerate thing to do. In 
failing to cater for a more diverse range of people, the games industry is 
damaging itself by limiting its prospects. It’s something the company behind 
EGX, Gamer Network, seems to have acknowledged via its indie-focusedRezzed 
<https://www.egx.net/rezzed> event, which takes place at Tobacco Dock in 
London, and is much brighter and less frenzied.

“If you don’t have family-friendly events or family-friendly elements in 
events then all of these people can’t attend,” Wearn points out, “So you end up 
losing the voices of both the parent and maybe their spouse, and in fact maybe 
the children, which are going to be consumers of the future, and you end up 
with a very narrow slice of who is in the games industry and what they do.”

Harris agrees. “I’m sick of the homogeny of the games industry,” he says. 
“Events like A MAZE and GameCity and Inis Spraoi are hopefully giving us a 
glimpse into the future, where there are people of all sorts of different 
backgrounds and interests and persuasions making stuff together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445414585519%2Fb9048d33-a264-419f-ac57-38a9745addf9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20art%20and%20picnics%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20alternative%20video%20game%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C%20art%20and%20picnics%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20alternative%20video%20game%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fsex-art-camping-alternative-video-game-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F21%2F1445414585519%2Fb9048d33-a264-419f-ac57-38a9745addf9-1020x612.jpeg>
 GameCity in Nottingham: not your standard video game exhibition crowd 
One event that keeps coming up as an example of something inclusive and 
interesting that still caters to that “core” crowd is GameCity, an annual 
festival taking place in Nottingham every October. Celebrating its tenth 
anniversary this year, the event now has a permanent home in the form of the 
National Videogame Arcade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/28/national-videogame-arcade-nottingham-opens>
, which opened back in March. Like EGX, GameCity is growing, but it’s sticking 
to its principles, keeping that focus on culture and ensuring that attendees 
feel safe and welcome. The lineup <http://gamecity.org/festival/> revealed so 
far includes indie developer Mike Bithell talking about his latest hit, Volume, 
a daily redesign of football, performances of Mario the Musical and a visit 
from the author of the Minecraft Blockopedia. The Guardian games editor, Keith 
Stuart, has hosted discussion events at GameCity since it began, and this year 
he and I will be co-hosting a daily breakfast show.

The GameCity website describes the event as “a videogame festival for 
everyone”, and that’s exactly what it is. During the day there are craft tables 
and coding workshops for children, while the night sees more mature content, 
like club nights based around video game music and midnight trips to the 
haunted Courts of Justice to play horror games. At GameCity, game culture 
becomes a part of the fabric of the town – it’s not something hidden away in a 
vast warehouse of noise and marketing. If only for some of the time, this feels 
right; it feels like the way it should be.
 