
A prominent Chilean business leader presented the country’s economy minister 
with an inflatable doll on stage at an event late on Tuesday, sparking a social 
media storm and criticism by PresidentMichelle Bachelet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/michelle-bachelet>.

 Exporters’ association Asexma traditionally gives humorous gifts to VIPs 
attending its annual dinner, but the inflated sex toy – which was handed to the 
economy minister, Luis Céspedes, with the comment that it could be used to 
“stimulate the economy” – backfired.

 Photos of the event in local media showed a grinning Céspedes holding the 
life-sized blow-up doll on stage, alongside other ministers – all male – 
clutching their gifts, which included a blond wig meant to represent the US 
president-elect, Donald Trump.

 “The fight for respect for women has been an essential principle in my two 
governments,” said Bachelet, Chile’s first female leader, on her Twitter 
account. “What occurred at the Asexma dinner cannot be tolerated.”

Her comment was retweeted more than 1,200 times, and echoed by others.

 “I am an entrepreneur and union member,” tweeted small business owner 
Jacqueline Gálvez. “This kind of situation is unacceptable.”

 Centre-left Bachelet ran the country between 2006 and 2010 and began her 
second term in 2014, with her first administration in particular notable for 
the number of women appointed to cabinet posts. In between the two terms, she 
led UN Women.

Latin American authors bewildered by Donald Trump: 'I just can't believe it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/08/latin-american-writers-donald-trump-oaxaca-book-festival>
 However, glaring inequalities persist in many areas of Chile’s traditionally 
machista society. Access to abortion is illegal, skimpily dressed female 
“promoters” are a common sight at business and sporting events, and women’s 
participation in the labour market remains relatively low.

 “The event with the Asexma doll proves right those who say that our business 
world is ignorant and isolationist,” tweeted political scientist Cristóbal 
Bellolio.

 Céspedes said the gift was unexpected, but apologised, as did Asexma’s head, 
Roberto Fantuzzi.

“Ministro de Economía”, “Ministro Céspedes” and “Roberto Fantuzzi” were all 
trending on Twitter inChile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> on 
Wednesday, as was the hashtag #munecainflable, the Spanish for inflatable doll.

 