
The creator of Wallace and Gromit and Shaun the Sheep 
<http://www.aardman.com/the-studio/history/> is to make its first international 
expansion by taking a majority stake in New York-based animation studio Nathan 
Love.

Through the deal, Aardman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> will set 
up its first permanent production facility outside the UK.

The 40-year old Bristol-based firm <http://www.aardman.com/the-studio/history/>
 has taken a majority stake in Nathan Love, which has created animated TV ads 
for clients including Kellogg’s, Kraft, Pepsi, NBC Universal and Nickelodeon.

While Aardman is best known for its film and TV programmes, it has also 
branched out into TV advertising, making a string of campaigns in the UK for 
clientsincluding Npower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/25/wallace-gromit-npower-ad> and 
the government’sChange4Life anti-obesity drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/11/advertising-marketingandpr>.


However, despite creating work for US clients that include Chevron, the 
company has found it much harder to crack the North American TV advertising 
market.

“Teaming up with an existing [US] company gives us the opportunity to hit the 
ground running and build a solid base from which to grow,” said David Sproxton, 
co-founder and executive chairman of Aardman. “It’s about building a new 
business in New York for American [ad] agencies and we feel we can do this more 
effectively by being there.”

Following completion of the deal, which the two companies position as a merger 
despite Aardman taking a controlling stake, the eight-year old New York company 
will be rebranded Aardman Nathan Love.

“The partnership feels very natural, our values are philosophically closely 
aligned,” said Joe Burrascano, founder of Nathan Love. “The potential for what 
we can do together is incredibly inspiring. We hope agencies and clients will 
feel the same way.”

Aardman made a pre-tax profit of £2m in 2013, according to the most recent 
publicly available financial filing, a move back into the black which allowed 
it to rescind a four-year staff pay freeze.

However, since then the company has notched up successes including Shaun the 
Sheep: The Movie, made in conjunction with French film company StudioCanal, 
which has made more than $100m (£65m) at the box office. It was made on a 
budget of less than $25m.

The two companies are working on another Shaun the Sheep film as well as Early 
Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/06/aardman-studios-shaun-the-sheep-with-caveman-adventure>
, a caveman comedy due to be released in 2018.

Aardman is also creating a one-off 30-minute special, Shaun the Sheep: The 
Farmer’s Llamas, which will air on BBC1 this Christmas.
 