
One of Baroness Williams’s earliest memories is the clacking of her mother’s 
typewriter. Her mother, Vera Brittain, would retreat to her study in the 
family’s Chelsea home at 10 each morning, having already dealt with the day’s 
correspondence and bills. She would then spend the next seven hours writing the 
book that would make her famous.

“I was firmly told not to interrupt her between 10 and five, unless there was 
an extreme reason why,” says Williams as she sits at one end of a conference 
table in her Westminster offices, with a copy of that day’sGuardian and a cup 
of instant coffee in front of her. “Even as quite a young child, I’d say I sort 
of understood it.”

Brittain was an avowed pacifist and feminist whose fiancé, brother and two 
closest male friends had been killed during the first world war. In 1933, when 
Williams was three, Brittain’s memoirTestament of Youth was published. It 
became an instant hit and went on to sell 120,000 copies over the next six 
years. It was then republished in the late 1970s and adapted into a popular 
television series, attracting a whole new audience.

This week, the first film adaptation is set to hit our cinema screens and 
bring Brittain’s book once more to the fore of public consciousness. It stars 
Swedish actress Alicia Vikander as Brittain andGame of Thrones star Kit 
Harington <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kit-harington> as her fiancé, 
Roland Leighton, who was killed in the trenches. The film has been called 
“stunningly good” and “heartfelt and stirring” by critics.

Williams, 84, has already seen it five times and was closely consulted during 
filming.

“It’s an exceedingly rich film,” she says. “Most films are two-dimensional. 
This one, I’d say, has four dimensions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420829864884%2Fe412dfd7-46ff-4292-b4be-eb75c5669ef8-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shirley%20Williams%3A%20testament%20to%20my%20extraordinary%20mother%20Vera%20Brittain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shirley%20Williams%3A%20testament%20to%20my%20extraordinary%20mother%20Vera%20Brittain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420829864884%2Fe412dfd7-46ff-4292-b4be-eb75c5669ef8-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Vera Brittain as a nurse in the first world war. Photograph: Hulton 
Archive/Getty Images 
She says Vikander is superb as her mother, “in terms of catching those 
dimensions of personality, drive and ambition. We talked to each other quite a 
bit … Luckily, with her, what mattered was that her personality rather chimed 
with my mother’s. She does capture her: her candour and her blazing honesty.”

Brittain’s life was permanently scarred by the first world war. At the 
outbreak, she was 20 and had just started a degree at Oxford. When Leighton, 
her younger brother Edward and their friends Victor Richardson and Geoffrey 
Thurlow signed up to fight on the front after leaving school, she abandoned her 
degree and volunteered as an auxiliary nurse. She witnessed the traumas of 
battle first hand while tending to wounded soldiers in France.

Leighton was killed in 1915, shortly before he was due to return home at 
Christmas. When a telephone call came through, Brittain assumed it was to tell 
her he had arrived safely. Instead, she was informed of his death at the age of 
20, killed by a German sniper while repairing barbed wire on a moonlit night in 
a stretch of no man’s land. It is a scene recounted hauntingly in her memoir 
and faithfully adapted in the film.

Williams says that, although her mother had always been a “serious-minded” 
person, it felt as though the war extinguished any ability she might once have 
had to see the lightness in life. She later poured her energies into pacifist 
campaigning and was a vociferous opponent of the bombing of Germany during the 
second world war.

“She didn’t have that capacity to either laugh at oneself or at the world when 
something very serious was happening in it,” says Williams. At the same time: 
“She was perfectly capable of being frivolous. She loved things like red 
leather gloves or a new hairdo or going shopping, which I can’t stand.”

Brittain would not talk about the cataclysmic losses she had suffered during 
the first world war when her children were little because she did not want to 
burden them with the weight of her own reminiscence. She chose instead to 
write. “Not just to chronicle the war,” Williams explains, “but as a serious 
attempt to recreate the character of the lives she’d lost.”

Occasionally, Brittain could be anxious and over-protective of her children, 
ever-worried that something dreadful would happen to those she loved. It was 
only as Williams and her brother John grew older that their mother started to 
speak of what she had gone through.

Did Williams feel, at times, as if she were surrounded by living ghosts?

“I came to think that as I got to know my mother better. I had the feeling 
that the white crosses were so deeply embedded in her mind. She could never 
move out of that sense of them being in the background. They were always there 
as a kind of stage set and the stage set would never change.”

Williams says that it was particularly hard for her father, the philosopher 
and political scientist George Catlin. Leighton emerges from the pages of
Testament of Youth as a glamorous, heroic figure – an idealistic public 
schoolboy who was captain of the officers’ training corps at Uppingham School. 
In truth, Leighton and Brittain had met for a total of only 17 days, often in 
the presence of a chaperone, and much of their courtship was conducted by 
letter.

“My father was a lovely man and he adored my mother,” says Williams. “He once 
said to me: ‘The hardest rival you can have is a ‘ghost’ because your 
inclination is to idealise someone who died a long time ago.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420829985879%2F6cc4cb09-f7df-4ce4-9788-e837e19f3c0c-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shirley%20Williams%3A%20testament%20to%20my%20extraordinary%20mother%20Vera%20Brittain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shirley%20Williams%3A%20testament%20to%20my%20extraordinary%20mother%20Vera%20Brittain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F11%2Fshirley-williams-vera-brittain-testament-of-youth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420829985879%2F6cc4cb09-f7df-4ce4-9788-e837e19f3c0c-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Shirley Williams. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer 
The film adaptation brings it home to the viewer how young these men and women 
were. Williams took her own grandchildren to see it and said they were all 
moved by the story it told. She says she gets letters from hundreds of people 
each year who have read her mother’s memoir and the book still seems to strike 
a chord with modern readers who are living through a renewed era of conflict in 
Iraq and Afghanistan.

Was Williams moved the first time she saw Vikander playing her mother on 
screen? “Oh, I think so, yes. But I’m a politician so I’m used to being put in 
situations where something deeply dramatic is happening and you can’t show that 
in your face,” she says, a touch apologetically.

So what would Brittain have made of the film version of her own life?

“I think she would have been very pleased.” Williams smiles. “She’d have 
probably gone there [at first] thinking: ‘Oh my God, not a film.’ She called me 
Poppy and she would have said to me ‘Poppy, I can’t stand this. I don’t want 
the film to be just about the relationship with Roland built up into a 
romance.’ But I think [once she’d seen it] she would have liked it a lot. I 
think she would have liked Vikander for her seriousness –she’d see her as a 
full human being.”

Brittain died in 1970 at the age of 76 after a long physical decline into 
motor neurone disease. It would be another eight years beforeTestament of Youth 
was republished, so she never lived to see the extraordinary resurgence of her 
most notable work or the fact that it is still being introduced to new 
generations.

Williams believes that her mother now belongs to “the writing world of 
immortality”. And it is true that Brittain’s memories, and the lives of those 
she loved and lost, live on through her words. That, perhaps, is the most 
fitting tribute of all.
 