
Scaremongering about statins by doctors could have caused 2,000 deaths, said a 
report last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/statins-controversy-uk-people-stop-taking-pills-heart-attack-stroke>
. These would be the lives lost through people listening to the debate on the 
drugs and deciding to ditch them and risk a heart attack or stroke. The health 
watchdog Nice recommends statins to prevent cardiovascular disease in those 
with high risk (greater than or equal to 20% at 10 years) and intermediate 
(greater than or equal to 10% at 10 years) risk.

I should declare my conflict of interest. I work for the BMJ, purveyor of 
statin scepticism. The medical journal has raised the blood pressure of 
Professor Peter Weissberg, medical director of the British Heart Foundation, 
who said at a press conference this week that the BMJ was opposed to 
medicalisation of the “normal population”. The BMJ entered the statin debate in 
2013,publishing an article that said (I paraphrase) 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f6123?ijkey=e17dff8c69629e01e35a8e192f35b4759d46ffed&keytype2=tf_ipsecsha>
 that the benefits of statins were overstated, while their side-effects were 
undercooked.

The rate of side-effects such as muscle pains quoted in the article (18-20%) 
was hotly disputed by some cardiologists and epidemiologists.It was later 
revised to up to 9%. <http:> The “lives lost” figure is taken from another BMJ 
paper published this week, extrapolated from GP data showing 200,000 peoplemay 
have stopped taking statins <http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i3283> because 
of the media furore. However this, like the initial BMJ paper, is based on 
observational data – so doesn’t prove cause and effect. It also, most 
importantly, ignores that people of sound mind might actually decide to stop 
taking statins for other reasons.

The solution

The answer isn’t a quick yes or no, but a conversation to have with your 
doctor. If you had that conversation with Dr Malcolm Kendrick 
<https://drmalcolmkendrick.org>, a GP from Macclesfield who has researched and 
written about statins, it would go like this: “If I was taking a tablet every 
day for the rest of my life, I would want to know how long I would have extra 
to live. If you take statins for five years and you are at higher risk, then 
you reduce the risk of a heart attack by 36%. But if you rephrase the data, 
this means on average you will have an extra 4.1 days of life.” He warns that 
the risks are based on old data when heart attacks were more common –one study 
found that risk calculators overestimated 
<https://www.dor.kaiser.org/external/news/press_releases/Kaiser_Permanente_Study_Finds_Cardiovascular_Risk_Tool_Overestimates_Actual_Chance_of_Cardiovascular_Events/>
 the risk by four or five times.

Even the Nice decision support tool  
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg181/resources/cg181-lipid-modification-update-patient-decision-aid2>
for patients says that if 100 people at intermediate risk (greater than or 
equal to 10%) took statins for 10 years, then four people would be saved from 
having a cardiac event or a stroke. This may be enough for you. But it should 
be your decision and not a given from anyone.
 