
From re-educating Coruscanti drug dealers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G1EkOsY8p_8> via Jedi mind control in Attack 
of the Clones toavenging Qui-Gon Jinn in The Phantom Menace 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yHqdESArkqU> and that final, anguished cri de 
coeur towards a half-dead Anakin Skywalker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QiZNSzWIaLo> at the denouement of Revenge of 
the Sith, it’s easy to forget that Ewan McGregor’s Obi-Wan Kenobi had some 
fabulous moments in the Star Wars prequel trilogy. McGregor’s performances, 
which are especially impressive in the final two films given the horrors he 
faced acting against a green screenand opposite the horribly wooden Hayden 
Christensen, are never quite enough to save the movies they take place in. 
Nevertheless, such masterful efforts in the face of adversity continue to 
encourage Star Wars fans to prick up their ears whenever the actor talks about 
his desire to reprise the role in a forthcoming spin-off.


Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – five reasons we're still slightly worried
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-five-reasons-were-still-slightly-worried>
“It would be fun to film that story now I’m older,” McGregor tells the new 
issue of Empire. “I’d be the right age. I’m 45, Alec Guinness was what, 60? I 
could do two of them.”

McGregor gave us a slightly more cavalier take on Kenobi than the version 
essayed by the venerable Guinness, a vision of the Jedi knight before he became 
chastened and humbled by the experience of seeing his best friend turn to the 
dark side. We know that Disney and Lucasfilm are keen on rolling out spin-off 
standalone “Star Wars Story” movies in between the main instalments – with
rumours the studios are already planning a trilogy of Han Solo films 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/gossip/confidential/han-solo-return-part-bigger-plan-article-1.2722170>
 starring Alden Ehrenreich – so why not a return for Luke Skywalker’s one-time 
mentor?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1EkOsY8p_8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1EkOsY8p_8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG1EkOsY8p_8&media=>
Some might caution against bringing back an actor known for his role in the 
hated prequels. But Lucasfilm has already shown that it is not entirely 
allergic to George Lucas’s later movies, even though the Star Wars creator’s 
ideas for future instalments were left firmly on the shelf when he sold his 
beloved space opera saga to Disney in October 2012. Upcoming spin-offRogue One: 
A Star Wars Story <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story>
 will feature Genevieve O’Reilly, last seen in Revenge of the Sith, as Mon 
Mothma, and there are even rumours that Jimmy Smits is coming back as galactic 
senator Bail Organa.


So how would Disney pitch an Obi-Wan Kenobi movie? The logical path, at least 
for a film with McGregor in the hot seat, would be to set the new movies 
between the end of 2005’s Revenge of the Sith and 1977’sStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, a period in which Kenobi is 
ostensibly in exile on Tatooine, waiting to see if Luke Skywalker exhibits Jedi 
tendencies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer&media=>
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – video trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-video-trailer>
The problem here is that the 19-year gap between the two trilogies – as Rogue 
One has been discovering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-five-reasons-were-still-slightly-worried>
 – is a tough period within which to set a Star Wars film. The Jedi are pretty 
much extinct, having been killed off by Darth Vader and others in an extended 
purge, and the Galactic Empire is at the height of its strength. Since it 
remains all-powerful by the time the events of Star Wars take place, any 
stories surrounding Kenobi would almost certainly need to spin-off into far 
corners of the galaxy where the actions of the exiled Jedi knight are in no 
danger of knocking the main narrative off its course.

The new movies might reimagine our hero as a Kung Fu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kung_Fu_(TV_series)>-style wandering exile, 
travelling through the outer-rim planets and occasionally using his powers to 
help the local populace, though always with an awareness of the need to avoid 
attracting any unwanted Imperial attention. There are numerous examples in pop 
culture of iconic protagonists who have been successfully wrenched from 
familiar environments and thrown headlong into exotic landscapes, from the 
Marvel comic Planet Hulk (currently being half-inched for the movie Thor: 
Ragnarok) to the 2013 X-Men spin-off The Wolverine, in which the 
adamantium-clawed mutant visits Japan.

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story – five reasons we're still slightly worried
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/13/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-five-reasons-were-still-slightly-worried>
Alternately, Disney might borrow ideas from the Star Wars Expanded Universe – 
even though the studio declared pretty much all of it non-canonical in 2014. In 
the novel series Star Wars: The Last of the Jedi, Kenobi goes in search of a 
former Jedi apprentice, Ferus Olin, who survived the purge. He leaves Tatooine 
and travels to the troubled planet of Bellassa, where Olin is rumoured to be 
living. In the series of 10 novels, Olin eventually becomes an agent for 
Emperor Palpatine, though it emerges he is in fact a double agent, hoping for 
the chance to kill Darth Vader. The problem here, once again, is we already 
know the evil shiny-carapaced Sith Lord makes it through to the events of the 
original trilogy.

The other issue might be Kenobi’s suitability to lead his own movies. While 
the prequels presented a rather more swashbuckling take on the Jedi knight, 
there’s a sense that he fits the role of a supporting character better, at 
least on the big screen. Rumour has it that Lucas based Qui-Gon Jinn’s one-time 
apprentice on Gandalf from The Lord of the Rings, who was himself inspired by 
Merlin. Neither of those hairy old sorcerers have ever seemed prime candidates 
to lead their own blockbuster adventures, though the BBC did, of course, give 
us the early years of the mythical British wizard on the small screen a few 
years back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fewan-mcgregor-obi-wan-kenobi-star-wars-spin-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5ee175559908187c3944afd4d9ad44c1c0963a2%2F0_189_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20Ewan%20McGregor's%20Obi-Wan%20Kenobi%20land%20his%20own%20Star%20Wars%20spin-off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fewan-mcgregor-obi-wan-kenobi-star-wars-spin-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20Ewan%20McGregor%27s%20Obi-Wan%20Kenobi%20land%20his%20own%20Star%20Wars%20spin-off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fewan-mcgregor-obi-wan-kenobi-star-wars-spin-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5ee175559908187c3944afd4d9ad44c1c0963a2%2F0_189_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars: A New Hope. Photograph: 
Allstar/LUCASFILM 
McGregor’s Kenobi would be a few years younger than his aged sorcerous 
forebears, most likely in his mid-40s: a Jedi knight in his prime, yet 
currently wasted living in a cave on Tatooine. Is that where he’s best left, 
fending off sand people and occasionally venturing out to bother Uncle Owen and 
Aunt Beru with old stories of that one time he and Jinnscared the living 
daylights out of the guys from the Trade Federation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUbXyd-fK8Q>? Or do you yearn to see the 
master of the old Jedi mind trick getting one more chance to do his thing?
 