
When I was four-and-a-half, something scary happened. I was woken early, had a 
mask clamped to my face and was wheeled into a white room. I thought I was 
being abducted. But it was an operating theatre and I was having my squint 
corrected. I guess they forgot to tell me.

That wouldn’t happen today, but how good are doctors and parents at involving 
children in medical decisions? Areview 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020748908001466>, published 
in the International Journal of Nursing Studies in 2008, found that doctors 
rarely asked children for their opinions. A 2014study 
<http://epubs.surrey.ac.uk/811194/> from the University of Surrey found that 
children between the ages of seven and 16 with cancer were not involved in 
treatment decisions because “refusal was not an option”. Newrecommendations 
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/pediatrics/early/2016/07/21/peds.2016-1484.full.pdf>
 last month from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) remind doctors that 
children should know the options for diagnosis and treatment. They state that 
children as young as seven can understand and agree to tests or treatment.

Dr Joe Brierley, a consultant in paediatric and neonatal intensive care at 
Great Ormond Street children’s hospital and a vice-chair of its clinical ethics 
committee, says that, because the UK is a signatory tothe UN Convention on the 
Rights of the Child 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Documents/Publication-pdfs/UNCRC_PRESS200910web.pdf>, 
doctors must explain everything to children in a way they understand. Anyone
over the age of 16 can consent to treatment 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Consent-to-treatment/Pages/Children-under-16.aspx>
, but so can younger children if doctors think they can understand and are 
competent to make medical decisions. Neurobiological research shows that the 
prefrontal cortex, home of balancing risks and rewards, is the last area of the 
brain to mature. So can adolescents – who are often impulsive risk-takers – be 
trusted to make decisions about their health? And is the AAP suggesting that we 
ask toddlers if they are willing to be vaccinated?

The solution

Brierley says it is good for children to understand medical decisions, as they 
will be more ready to make them when they are older. There is no lower legal 
age limit for giving consent: doctors will assess how able a child is to make 
a decision. And, depending on the age and the decision, they often really are 
able. Astudy <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7172783?dopt=Abstract> of 
competency in making treatment decisions took people aged nine, 14, 18 and 21 
and gave them hypothetical treatment dilemmas. The 14-year-olds did as well as 
adults. The nine-year-olds, while not understanding information as well as the 
adults, still made similar logical decisions.

“Most children just want to get better,” says Brierley. “If everyone thinks 
it’s a good thing, they will too.”

But what if a teenager doesn’t want an HPV vaccine against cervical cancer, 
say, because they don’t like needles? “You would tell her the benefits are 
clear, but you do not want to hold down a 13-year-old,” says Brierley. But it’s 
reasonable to immunise a toddler without going into the importance of herd 
immunity.
 