
Bonding with other guys may relieve stress in men, according to media reports 
ofresearch published in the journal Neuropsychopharmacology 
<http://news.berkeley.edu/2016/03/03/bromances-may-be-good-for-mens-health/> 
last week. Men who are close with each other have higher levels of oxytocin, 
popularly known as the “cuddle hormone”which makes them better at handling 
stress <http://www.nature.com/npp/journal/vaop/naam/abs/npp201616a.html>.

The research, however, comes from a rat study, and – while rodents are often 
used as stand-ins for humans, because they similar biological and genetic 
characteristics – you’d have to assume there are differences. The researchers 
put pairs of rats in cages together for a week and then put each one in a small 
confined space for three hours. When they were reunited, the rats were even 
friendlier than before they had been stressed.

Elizabeth Kirby, an author of the paper and postdoctoral fellow at Stanford 
University, says: “We can’t speak rat, but we think the rats can’t wait to tell 
their friend that some weird people shut them in a room.” They even touched 
each other more. But before they could have too much fun, the researchers 
measured the oxytocin levels in their brains (which pretty much ended the 
friendship). They found that the levels of oxytocin among rats with mates were 
higher. The study didn’t test whether male rats got the same benefit in stress 
reduction from being roomed with a female rat because, says Kirby, they can’t 
stay platonic. They invariably have sex.

Kirby maintains that there is a takehome message for men who aren’t rats. 
Being social increases levels of oxytocin and protects you from being stressed. 
Men, she says, are sometimes accused of having superficial friendship, but her 
research suggests that a bromance doesn’t have to be deep to have health 
benefits. “Any sort of social bonding increases oxytocin levels – it doesn’t 
have to be a deep discussion,” she says. So is this the excuse you needed to 
have a pint with your mates?

Is having no social life as bad for you as smoking?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/11/is-having-no-social-life-as-bad-for-you-as-smoking>
The solution

In the world of human-friend research, men are said to have “shoulder to 
shoulder” friendships while women have “face to face” ones. What this means, 
says Geoffrey L Greif,who has interviewed 400 men and 120 women 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/0195326423?keywords=Greif%20buddy&qid=1457650089&ref_=sr_1_1&sr=8-1>
 about their friendships, is that men like to do things and women like to sit 
down and chat. “Women will say: ‘My boyfriend went out for dinner and didn’t 
find out his friend was getting divorced,’” says Grief. “Men don’t need to 
express themselves as much as women in friendships.”

Many studies show that friendships not only relieve stress but also reduce 
death from many causes, <https://aje.oxfordjournals.org/content/155/8/700.full> 
including heart disease. Also, although it may seem counterintuitive, men with 
friends are less likely to drink and smoke to excess. Another good reason for 
encouraging bromances.
 