
It’s the winner of pregnancy product of the year for Boots, so it has to be 
something that’s great for pregnant women, right? Pregnacare Max,according to 
the Boots website 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Vitabiotics-Pregnacare-Max-84-Tablets-Capsules_1247510/>
, is “the ultimate formula” for mums-to-be. It includes not only folic acid and 
vitamin D at amountsrecommended by the Department of Health 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/vitamins-minerals-supplements-pregnant.aspx>
, but also zinc, magnesium, niacin, vitamins B6, B12 and C, iron and a host of 
other vitamins and minerals. All for £19.99 for a 42-day supply. So is that the 
price a mother has to pay for the health of her and her newborn?

Well, according to a review of vitamin supplements in pregnancy 
<http://dtb.bmj.com/content/54/7/81> in the latest Drug and Therapeutics 
Bulletin, the true price may be less. The article said: “For most women who are 
planning to become pregnant or who are pregnant, complex multivitamin and 
mineral preparations promoted for use during pregnancy are unlikely to be 
needed and are an unnecessary expense.”

Women would be better off, said the bulletin, sticking to vitamin D 
(10 micrograms a day) and folic acid (400 micrograms before pregnancy and until 
the end of the first trimester) and spending their money on a healthy diet. 
Buying both tablets separately is usually cheaper than multivitamin 
preparations – Boots sells vitamin D at£1.09 for 90 tablets 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Boots-Vitamin-D-10-g-90-tablets_1277491/>. But surely 
the more vitamins your developing baby gets, the better?

The solution


This latest review agrees with guidance from the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (Nice): there is no evidence that anything other than 
vitamin D and folic acid are needed as supplements in pregnancy.Folic acid 
reduces the likelihood of brain and spinal cord defects in babies 
<http://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/take-folic-acid-before-youre-pregnant.aspx>
 (anencephaly and spina bifida) – and higher doses may be needed in women with 
greater risk of these conditions. The evidence for folic acid is strong. The 
research to support vitamin D supplements in strengthening the development of 
bones and teeth in babies is not as strong, but good enough for the bulletin and
Nice to recommend it <https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/PH11>. But there is no 
such recommendation for vitamins C and E.

High levels of vitamin A may cause birth defects, so those supplements are a 
no-no; iron is needed only for women who are anaemic, as it can irritate the 
stomach and cause constipation or diarrhoea. Only research from low-income 
countries where pregnant women are more likely to be malnourished suggests any 
benefit from multivitamins, although advice varies around the world.Pregnant 
women in the US are advised 
<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/259059-overview#a4> to take iron and 
folic acid supplements, but not vitamin D. So does it really matter if pregnant 
women take multivitamins? Probably not, as long as they check the amount of 
vitamin A in the preparation. But why spend more on supplements if they won’t 
make you or your baby any healthier?
 