
Meningitis B is a rare disease, but it could kill your child within hours – 
the fatality rate is 5-10%. There is a new vaccine, but theJoint Committee on 
Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) says it should be restricted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/294245/JCVI_Statement_on_MenB.pdf>
 to children under a year old. But parents dread meningitis B, and after media 
reports of the death of two-year-old Faye Burdett in February, more than 
820,000 peoplesigned a petition 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/108072> asking the government to 
widen the vaccination programme. In the meantime, if you can afford it, should 
you pay for your child to be vaccinated?

The solution

Meningitis is inflammation of the lining around the brain and spinal cord that 
can lead to blood poisoning. Meningococcal group B is now the commonest 
bacterial type (many others are dealt with in vaccination programmes), and 
infection risk peaks at around six months of age. It continues to infect 
children up until they are five years old, with another spike among teenagers – 
although anyone can catch it. The bacteria are carried in thenoses of healthy 
people – teenagers are the main carriers 
<http://www.meningitis.org/menb-vaccine>. Meningitis Now 
<https://www.meningitisnow.org/> suggests that vaccinating teenagers could 
reduce this risk.

The vaccine –Bexsero, made by Novartis – has so far been given to around 1 
million people 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vaccinations/pages/meningitis-b-vaccine.aspx>. It 
is considered safe, although it can cause a fever –paracetamol is recommended 
at the two- and four-month jabs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/483408/9413-paracetamol-menB-2page-A4-08-web.pdf>
.The programme should prevent 26.3% of cases in the first five years 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/349/bmj.g5725>, assuming the vaccine covers 88% of 
strains and is 95% effective against the disease. However, there is a global 
shortage of the vaccine, likely to last until summer 2016.The cost of having 
jabs privately varies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2015/sep/01/why-is-the-nhs-vaccination-for-meningitis-b-not-provided-to-everyone>
 from around £90 to £130 per jab, and three are needed.

Natasha S Crowcroft, chief of applied immunisation research at Public Health 
Ontario <http://www.publichealthontario.ca/EN/Pages/default.aspx>, says it is 
early days for this vaccine. Protection seems to wane, as trials show that some 
of the components do not last as long as was hoped, and there is no good 
evidence for it improving herd immunity – whereby those not vaccinated are 
protected. There are also other vaccines emerging that might be better.

If the JCVI approach works, and this vaccine is as good as the current one for 
Meningitis <https://www.theguardian.com/society/meningitis> C (which is offered 
to all children) then herd immunity for older children will take off.

It is also uncomfortable to think that some parents can afford a vaccine and 
others not. And there’s also the reality of the risk of meningitis B –our 
children are more likely to die from other causes, some also preventable 
<http://www.rcpch.ac.uk/improving-child-health/child-mortality/child-mortality>
. But I still have an old pack of Tamiflu I bought irrationally when swine flu 
was scary, so I’m not preaching to any other parents.
 