
A year ago, my mother finally found the courage to leave my abusive 
stepfather. I won’t go into the type of abuse here, only to say that although 
it wasn’t physical or sexual, it meant my brother and I were often terrified of 
him as children. Although he has written us birthday cards and tried to make 
contact, we have effectively “ghosted” him. However, my much younger 
half-sister (my stepfather’s and mother’s daughter) still sees him. She has 
told me that he is devastated, drinking too much, has tremors and has aged 
overnight. He misses my brother’s children – his grandchildren - so much.

I’ve always suspected he has a personality disorder and undiagnosed mental 
health issues and, although I hate what he did to us, I don’t want him to 
suffer, as there is a good side to him, too. I do not want to enter into a 
superficial relationship with him, where I only send cards or photos, and I 
find that even thinking about him or receiving his cards can plunge me into 
anxiety for days. Should I write him a letter? It would potentially be a very 
harsh one.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.


• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.


• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments).

 