
Sigourney Weaver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver> has 
signalled her interest in a return to the role of Ellen Ripley in a future 
Alien movie to be directed by District 9’s Neill Blomkamp, though the project’s 
future is unclear.

In early February, Blomkamp claimed 20th Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/neill-blomkamp-my-alien-film-is-ready-to-go>
 is ready to greenlight his highly anticipated take on Alien, which would be 
led by original star Weaver, but admitted he was unsure whether to proceed. He 
had previously released extensive concept art featuring Sigourney in a space 
jockey helmet similar to those seen in both Alien (1979) and recent Ridley 
Scott spin-off Prometheus (2012).

Interviewed by Coming Soon 
<http://www.comingsoon.net/movies/news/408665-exclusive-might-we-see-the-return-of-ripley-in-a-neill-blomkamp-aliens-movie>
, Weaver confirmed the pair began collaborating on a concept for a new film 
during production of Blomkamp’s forthcoming science-fiction tale Chappie, in 
which she stars. “He kept sending me these brilliant designs and ideas and 
everything. We’ll see what happens,” said the actor, who played Ripley in four 
Alien movies between 1979 and 1997.
 One of Neill Blomkamp’s sketches of Sigourney Weaver in an Alien sequel. 
Photograph:Neill Blomkamp/Instagram 
<http://instagram.com/p/xVY5xpKhMp/?modal=true>. Photograph: Neill 
Blomkamp/Instagram 
Weaver said that after the last instalment she was ready to work on other 
projects. “I didn’t want to manufacture a sequel, and I felt like we were 
starting to do that.” She added: “If something happens from this, it would be 
very organic and very original, and because of that it would make me want to do 
it. If it was [directed by] someone as talented as Neill, I’d certainly listen.”

Weaver’s Ripley was last seen as a human-xenomorph clone in the 1997 film 
Alien: Resurrection, after the original extraterrestrial-exterminating warrant 
officer died at the end of 1992’s Alien 3. Alien directorRidley Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> returned to the world he helped 
create in 1979 with the 2012 film Prometheus. He is expected to direct a sequel 
in which Elizabeth Shaw (Noomi Rapace) and android David (Michael Fassbender) 
travel to the home world of the human-like Engineer aliens to try and work out 
why they want to destroy their human creations.
 