
The most exciting films of 2017: returning auteurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/22/the-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs>
We all know how it is with Scorsese. At the core of his work is the solid-gold 
De Niro material with one foot in Marty’s Italian-American upbringing: Mean 
Streets, Taxi Driver, Raging Bull, King Of Comedy and Goodfellas/Casino. Then a 
second rank of DiCaprio collaborations, offering a lower rate of return: The 
Departed, Shutter Island, Wolf Of Wall Street. Then there are the oddities – 
New York New York, Cape Fear and Hugo – where he feels miscast or lost as a 
director. Then there’s this final category – movies on the subject of religious 
devotion that gestated in Scorsese’s mind over years or decades: The Last 
Temptation Of Christ, Kundun and nowSilence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>. These tend to be the Scorsese 
movies I only ever see once, feeling no compulsion to revisit or reassess them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese's%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%20trailer%3A%20Martin%20Scorsese%27s%20Japan-set%20epic%20starring%20Andrew%20Garfield%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fsilence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video&media=>
Silence trailer: Martin Scorsese’s Japan-set epic starring Andrew Garfield – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/24/silence-trailer-martin-scorseses-japan-set-epic-starring-andrew-garfield-video>
I fear that Silence expired in the womb during that long gestation period. It 
is beautiful to look at, but feels inert, humourless and overly devout (to say 
nothing of over-long; Masahiro Shinoda’s 1971 adaptation got Shūsako Endō’s 
1966 novel on to film using 30 fewer minutes than Scorsese). Perhaps that leap 
toward the devout is needed to savour it fully – and I found I couldn’t make 
it. I didn’t care: for me, Christianity is one of the Big Bs of violent 
colonial intrusion – Bullet, Bottle, Bacillus, Bible – and Silence has a “white 
saviour” complex it can’t shake. Also not helpful are the other distractions: 
US, English and Irish actors all playing Portuguese while speaking English in 
shaky Latin accents; and an American director, more comfortable with modernity, 
making an avowedly Japanese period movie, from a novel by a member of Japan’s 
Catholic minority, and with Taiwan standing in for Japan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-religious-epic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b467b5e834b293115ae0c93a943e98ceaea5c3c%2F24_0_732_439%2F732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Silence%3A%20Scorsese%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20is%20not%20worth%20making%20a%20noise%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-religious-epic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Silence%3A%20Scorsese%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20is%20not%20worth%20making%20a%20noise%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmartin-scorsese-silence-religious-epic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b467b5e834b293115ae0c93a943e98ceaea5c3c%2F24_0_732_439%2F732.jpg>
 Marty complex: Silence will challenge even the staunchest Scorsese fan. 
Silence review: the last temptation of Liam Neeson in Scorsese's shattering 
epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/10/silence-review-the-last-temptation-of-liam-neeson-in-scorseses-shattering-epic>
Missionaries Andrew Garfield and Adam Driver come to Japan in 1639 in search 
of a mentor (Liam Neeson) who has vanished while spreading the gospel in 
hostile territory. Hunted, persecuted and subjected to the full-on Stations of 
the Cross, they veer close to sainthood in Scorsese’s taxonomy of salvation, 
suffering nights on cold stone and the dark night of the soul. The succession 
of cruelties inflicted – boiling, drowning, crucifixion – did not put me in a 
godly frame of mind, however, they just reminded me of more relentless and 
overbearing Japanese-endurance movies, like Unbroken or The Camp On Blood 
Island. Scorsese’s execution recalls big, boring, overly devout Vatican II-era 
Catholic Hollywood movies such as The Cardinal and The Shoes Of The Fishermen. 
It looks beautiful, but its diverse and clashing elements never wholly cohere 
into something dynamic or kinetic. Maybe a second viewing will change my mind – 
but, as with Temptation and Kundun, I suspect there won’t be one.

Silence is in UK cinemas on New Year’s Day 
 