
Chintzy adaptations of Broadway staples may largely be propping up the 
movie-musical these days, but it’s the far lower-fi films of IrishmanJohn Carney
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/01/john-carney-keira-knightley-apology-begin-again-comments>
 that best serve the genre.Once <http:> and Begin Again <> both elegantly built 
songcraft into storytelling, and so it is again with the wholly lovableSing 
Street <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jYk2Vx1z6lk> (Lionsgate, 12) – a 1980s 
teen romance in which young love and musical inspiration blossom at the same 
tentative-then-restless rate, both in thrall to transient notions of cool. It’s 
a film that evokes the dizzy, silly rush of a first crush just as vividly as it 
does the immersiveness of a first pop obsession; as our gawky young hero forms 
a band to get the girl, the infatuations become inextricably linked, written 
into the film’s joyous original pastiche of a new wave hit parade. No 
high-school band has ever sounded this good, but let’s not fault the film for 
that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVgxxdu-gJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVgxxdu-gJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoVgxxdu-gJc&media=>
Watch a trailer for Midnight Special 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVgxxdu-gJc> 
Remaining in the spirit of that decade, Midnight Special 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1zuQTmVCEn4> (eOne, 12), Jeff Nichols’s taut, 
tormented, surprisingly touching sci-fi chase drama, revisits the uncanny 
wonderment of prime Spielberg minus theslavish kitsch of Netflix’s Stranger 
Things <http:>. The tone here is at once earnest and bracingly adult: Nichols 
takes his time revealing the hows and whys of supernaturally enabled kid Alton 
(the impressively stoic Jaeden Lieberher), who, with dad (Michael Shannon) and 
ally (Joel Edgerton), is on the run from a range of sinister, interested 
authorities. Initially withholding enough information to fill the gaps in our 
knowledge with genuine alarm, the film gets less certain of itself the more it 
gives away, and the ending feels misjudged, perhaps clarifying a bit too much. 
Still, this is often skin-prickling work.

A surprise Palme d’Or win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/cannes-2015-jacques-audiards-dheepan-surprise-winner-of-palme-dor>
 last year didn’t rally all critics to the side ofDheepan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0qB8_Q9oTuw> (Studiocanal, 15), Jacques 
Audiard’s vividly, empathetically imagined tale of Tamil refugees forging new 
lives as a makeshift family in the Paris projects; nor did its stinging 
topicality in the climate of immigrant-related insecurity. Maybe we should call 
Audiard a victim of his own high standards: this is a gutsy, sometimes 
thrillingly tactile attempt to assume an underexposed perspective, performed 
with soulful rigour by its little-known leads. But a third act, abruptly shaped 
as a revenge thriller, forgoes these human virtues for heightened genre 
exhilaration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fdvds-sing-street-midnight-special-dheepan-tale-of-tales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb67cf4017b52215104ba64c83467709c082fc3d2%2F949_288_4748_2851%2F4748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sing%20Street%3B%20Midnight%20Special%3B%20Dheepan%3B%20Tale%20of%20Tales%20and%20others%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fdvds-sing-street-midnight-special-dheepan-tale-of-tales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sing%20Street%3B%20Midnight%20Special%3B%20Dheepan%3B%20Tale%20of%20Tales%20and%20others%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fdvds-sing-street-midnight-special-dheepan-tale-of-tales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb67cf4017b52215104ba64c83467709c082fc3d2%2F949_288_4748_2851%2F4748.jpg>
 ‘Soulful rigour’: Kalieaswari Srinivasan, Claudine Vinasithamby, Jesuthasan 
Antonythasan in Dheepan. 
A Cannes regular showing a more drastic dip in form is Gomorrah director 
Matteo Garrone <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0308520/>, whose multi-tentacled 
fairytale compositeTale of Tales <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9ETi804w-E> 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 15) is a messy beast indeed. Formally bloated and 
verbally stilted in that particular Europudding way, it has a few droll, tart 
nuggets – mostly involving Toby Jones as a flea-fixated monarch and the 
marvellous newcomer Bebe Cave as his unfortunate daughter – surrounded by a lot 
of cinematic aspic.

For arthouse absurdity, I was more tickled by The Brand New Testament  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOsk1qhoaDE>(Metrodome, 15), Belgian director 
Jaco van Dormael’s antic scriptural satire, in which God turns out to be most 
emphatically alive – as a schlubby, unhappily married loser in Brussels, 
sadistically determining our individual fates via a clunky computer monitor. 
It’s not quite as daring or dangerous as it might have been: instead, it 
questions our faith (or lack thereof) in spryly chaotic, shoulder-shrugging 
fashion.

But the silliest film of the week, albeit not knowingly so, is Remember 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ujjPRZm6Lo> (Studiocanal, 15), a deeply 
dubious Nazi-hunter thriller from the now perennially off-form Atom Egoyan. 
Heavily dependent on a galumphing old twist that, sadly, isn’t hard to see 
coming, it’s given more dignity than it deserves by Christopher Plummer’s 
fine-etched performance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442402885721%2FKP_475819_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Hard%20Stop%20%E2%80%93%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20documentary%20about%20the%20Mark%20Duggan%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Hard%20Stop%20%E2%80%93%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20documentary%20about%20the%20Mark%20Duggan%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442402885721%2FKP_475819_crop_640x480.jpg>
The Hard Stop – watch the trailer for the documentary about the Mark Duggan 
shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/sep/16/the-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video>
Documentary buffs would be advised to skip past Where to Invade Next 
<http://wheretoinvadenext.com> (Dogwoof, 15), Michael Moore’s typically 
blustery, travelogue-style takedown of US social policies – relative to the 
rest of the world – that already looks behind the times in the summer of Trump 
and Brexit. Take a look instead atThe Hard Stop  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/sep/16/the-hard-stop-trailer-documentary-mark-duggan-police-2011-riots-video>
(Metrodome, 15), George Amponsah’s urgent, angry investigation of the 2011 
London riots in the wake of Mark Duggan’s fatal shooting by police, which – not 
least in the age of Black Lives Matter – seems sharply of the moment in 2016.

Commendably old-fashioned family viewing, meanwhile, is on offer in Eddie the 
Eagle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FWAiXll_jw> (Lionsgate, PG), a 
fact-fudging but dorkily likable biopic of Eddie Edwards, Britain’s supremely 
improbable but unflappably determined Olympic ski jumper. Ticking all the boxes 
of both the feelgood sports drama and the feelgood Britcom, it’s given a less 
calculated human element by Taron Egerton’s gangly, utterly winning turn in the 
title role.

Finally, there’s a treat for smaller tykes on Netflix: The Little Prince 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iloGbpCbDQE>, American animator Mark Osborne’s 
achingly gentle, adoringly rendered stop-motion interpretation of the Antoine 
de Saint-Exupery classic, which takes some resourceful liberties with the 
narrative while faithfully preserving its spirit of ingenuous intellectual 
inquiry. Billed as a “Netflix Original”, it was actually picked up by the 
streaming giant after it wasditched for release by Paramount 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/07/netflix-the-little-prince-jeff-bridges-mark-osborne-paramount-awards-oscar-1201704922/>
; it was a worthy rescue mission.
 