
Theresa May arrived at Downing Street with a promise to the nation: that the 
government she leads will initiate a complete rethink of how capitalism is 
conducted in our country, so that it can be made to work for all of us, rather 
than a mere privileged few at the top.

Theresa May to 'reform capitalism' after Philip Green BHS scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
That rethink is now urgently required, in the light of our select committees’ 
findings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/mp-says-sir-philip-green-worse-than-robert-maxwell>
 on the losers and winners from thetragic demise of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/23/all-bhs-stores-to-shut-down-by-20-august>
.

Among the losers is Mrs C Patel, who is 56 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmworpen/54/5403.htm#_idTextAnchor007>
 and has worked forBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/25/damning-bhs-report-leaves-sir-philip-green-under-pressure-business-live>
 since leaving school. She told us how she felt “so helpless about what is 
happening”. She is among 11,000 mainly low-paid workers whose jobs are now at 
risk, and 20,000 former and current pensioners whose pensionsface cuts of up to 
77% 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmworpen/54/5403.htm>
. One current BHS pensioner wrote to me to say her modest retirement had been 
put in “utter jeopardy” by the collapse of the company and its pension fund.

No such concerns afflict Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>, the man who ran BHS for 15 
years from 2000. He and his family accrued enough wealth on the back of BHS to 
propel them towards the very top of the Sunday Times Rich List. They can count 
their wealth in billions. Sir Philip and Lady Green clearly emerge as the 
biggest financial winners from BHS, although many others involved in its demise 
– includingDominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/dominic-chappell-accused-treating-bhs-money-as-own-allegations-mps-darren-topp>
 – also pocketed huge sums of money.

Much of the Green family’s enormous wealth was built up during the early years 
of Green’s stewardship ofBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>. And 
yet there is no evidence whatsoever from this period of the improved turnover, 
market share, or major increase in investment that might be expected from a 
leading retailer.

Green’s wealth escalated beyond the dreams of avarice, while the health of BHS 
and its pension fund was neglected

Investment was evidently either inadequate in scale or ineffective in 
improving the competitive edge of the business.

Here we are introduced to our second group of losers from this sorry tale, the 
BHS customers. Our select committees received reports from across the country 
of how the lifts in their local BHS had been out of service for five years, of 
gaping holes in the doors of the ladies’ changing rooms, of carpets being taped 
down, and of air conditioning systems being out of service and left to decay.

The decay which set in at individual BHS branches mirrors that of its pension 
fund – it was allowed to decline from a surplus of £43m in 2000, when Green 
bought the business, to a£571m deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/apr/25/sir-philip-green-must-do-more-to-sort-out-the-bhs-pension-mess>
 last year. Companies that are suppliers to BHS are now also under threat. So 
the picture that was presented to us in evidence was clear – the Green family’s 
wealth escalated beyond the dreams of avarice, while the health of BHS and its 
pension fund was neglected.

BHS debacle shows the true costs of corporate greed | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/bhs-debacle-shows-the-true-costs-of-corporate-greed>
I believe that two immediate responses are now required. The first is for 
Green to write a large cheque to make good the shortfall in the BHS pension 
fund. This most basic gesture is well within his capabilities – the Green 
family recently acquireda private jet 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/20/sir-philip-green-had-46m-private-jet-delivered-two-months-before/>
 and another luxurious yacht for a cool £146m – and would restore a sense of 
justice for those 20,000 workers whose pensions are at risk.

Next, we need the government to initiate a review of company governance in 
this country. This review should be undertaken with one key question in mind: 
should directors be deemed fit and proper persons if they are prone to racking 
up huge pensions deficits while adding handsomely to their own personal wealth? 
And should not such questions be applied to private limited companies, as well 
as publicly listed ones? Both of these questions will require answers if May is 
to fulfil her promise on the remaking of British capitalism, in particular the 
corporate greed we have witnessed throughout the sorry demise of a once great 
high street name.
 