
Sir Philip Green’s assets, including his £100m superyacht, could be seized by 
the courts if he refuses to comply with a legal demand tocover the £571m deficit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/former-bhs-workers-may-wait-years-for-pension-scheme-bail-out>
 in the BHS pension scheme, the chief executive of the Pensions Regulator (TPR) 
has said.

Lesley Titcomb told the work and pensions select committee that a court would 
determine how to raise funds from the billionaire tycoon, including possible 
seizure of assets, if he does not pay up when a legal demand is issued, or 
reach a settlement with the regulator.

Titcomb said: “If we are talking about a contribution notice, that creates a 
normal legally enforceable debt to the scheme and it would then be the scheme 
trustees or the PPF [the Pension Protection Fund] who, with our full support in 
any way, shape or form we could offer, would seek to recover that debt through 
the courts. The courts would determine how that would be achieved.”

Related: The Pension Regulator v Sir Philip Green – what happens next? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/sir-philip-green-bhs-v-pension-regulator-what-happens-next>

It is highly unlikely that Green’s yacht will be seized. However, one pensions 
expert said the “prospect of the bailiffs on the gangplank” might focus the 
retail tycoon’s mind on sorting out theBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> pension deficit.

A parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer found that BHS 
had been systematically plundered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 under its former owners Green and Dominic Chappell.

Green controlled the business for 15 years until he sold it to Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
, a three-time bankrupt, for £1 in March 2015. Green, his family and other BHS 
shareholderscollected at least £580m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
 from the retailer, while Chappell’s company Retail Acquisitions waspaid an 
estimated £17m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/pensions-regulator-seeks-millions-dominic-chappell-retail-acquisitions-bhs-pension-deficit>
.

TPR has started legal proceedings against Green, Chappell and their companies 
in an attempt to plug the pension deficit. It has issued warning notices to the 
former owners outlining why they are liable to support the pension scheme.

Green and Chappell now have the opportunity to respond to the warning notices 
before a determinations panel, an independent body within TPR, decides how much 
they must contribute to the BHS pension scheme. The determinations panel ruling 
is a legal demand, but could be appealed all the way to the supreme court by 
Green and Chappell.

Titcomb said the panel was unlikely to meet until the middle of next year and 
the “door remains open” to any settlement offers from Green.
 Lionheart, Green’s £100m superyacht, is among the tycoon’s assets that could 
be seized, but this is unlikely. Photograph: Livorno Daily Photo 
TPR is understood be seeking at least £300m from Green and said it is yet to 
receive a “credible and comprehensive offer”. The tycoon is understood to have 
offered a deal worth about £300m, but involving a complex structure and 
payments over many years.

Titcomb declined to provide details of talks with Green, but said the 
regulator had to consider a range of factors in any pension deal. “It’s not 
just about money, it may be about the structure of any deals,” she said.

Pushed by Frank Field, the chair of the select committee, about whether TPR 
coulddemand assets from Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/pensions-regulator-sir-philip-green-arcadia-bhs>
, particularly hisfamily’s superyacht Lionheart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/09/superyachts-and-bragging-rights-why-the-super-rich-love-their-floating-homes>
, she said the regulator did not have the power to freeze assets and it would 
be for the courts to decide how to recover any unpaid legal demand.

On the makeup of any settlement or willing payment from Green to a legal 
demand, she said: “If there is a settlement or financial support directive, 
then essentially what we are looking for there is some form of support for the 
scheme, which could be cash, guarantees or some other structure.

“There is a great deal of flexibility there in terms of what could be taken 
into account. Having said that, whatever is proposed under either of these 
routes, we would have to be absolutely sure it is robust and doesn’t create a 
continuing risk to either the members of the scheme or the PPF. For example, we 
would want to ensure that any assets that were offered would be properly 
valued. We wouldn’t just take any offer.”

However, Green will almost certainly not offer the yacht as part of any 
settlement. If the courts are forced to chase cash from him, they can target a 
family empire estimated to be worth more than £3bn, which includes property in 
London and the retail business Arcadia, which owns Topshop, Dorothy Perkins and 
Miss Selfridge.

The courts could find it difficult to make legal claims on any of the Green 
family’s assets, given that many of these are under the name of Lady Green and 
part of a network of offshore companies unconnected to BHS.

Titcomb said: “Our warning notices are targeted at certain targets, so the 
debt would be collected against these targets and the court would have to go 
through the normal process of assessing that target’s assets.”

She said TPR was “relentlessly” pursuing the best possible outcome for the 
20,000 members of the BHS pension scheme.

Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the 
prospect of bailiffs seizing Green’s yacht would be “peculiarly appealing” to 
many people.

He said: “His failure to offer the regulator a comprehensive and credible deal 
on the BHS pension scheme six months on from his promise to ‘sort it out’ has 
left no option but to pursue legal enforcement.

“The process will take many months yet though and there is always the 
possibility that he will yet make an acceptable offer – just possibly the 
prospect of the bailiffs on the gangplank will focus his mind. In the meantime, 
the scheme members continue to enjoy the security of the PPF lifeboat scheme, 
with the hope that a better deal may eventually be secured on their behalf.”
 