
Sir David Clementi cleared the latest hurdle in his appointment as the new BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> chair, after he won the backing of MPs.

The former Bank of England deputy governor was revealed as the government’s 
preferred candidate for the role last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/sir-david-clementi-bbc-chair-unitary-board-trust-bank-of-england>
 but needed support in parliament. Hours afterhe appeared before the culture, 
media and sport select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/17/new-bbc-trust-chair-david-clementi-crown-jewel-sports-rights-review>
, its members approved the appointment. The nomination will now go before the 
privy council where it is expected to be rubber-stamped.

Related: Sir David Clementi: City grandee ready to do the business at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/david-clementi-city-bbc-bank-of-england-board>

Clementi carried out a review of BBC governance that recommended a major 
overhaul of the system but has no professional experience in a media 
organisation.

The committee said: “We acknowledge his honesty in accepting there were gaps 
in his knowledge of the industry and he assured us that he would endeavour to 
plug these gaps with careful appointments of non-executive directors, who would 
bring specific areas of expertise to the unitary board.

“Despite this lack of broadcasting experience, given Sir David’s responses to 
our questions, we are content to confirm his appointment as chair of the BBC 
board and wish him well with the challenges the corporation will face in the 
new charter period ahead – under which the corporation’s trust is being 
replaced by the BBC board.

“We were also pleased that Sir David acknowledged the BBC’s shortcomings in 
the area of diversity – not least the dearth of older women on screen – and 
that he has promised to tackle this as a top priority.”

In the pre-appointment hearing, Clementi had told MPs he would be disappointed 
to see the BBC attempt to reproduce The Great British Bake Off after it lost 
the popular cookery show to Channel 4.

“It would need to be a different format,” he said. “To put an absolutely 
similar programme on would be very disappointing.”

Clementi was also quizzed on his plans to build “distinctiveness” into the 
channel’s programming. While praising original dramas such as Sherlock and Line 
of Duty, he showed a hint of scepticism about repetitive reality shows.

Commenting on the latest reality singing contest, Let it Shine, airing in 
BBC1’s prime Saturday evening slot, he said: “It isn’t a new concept, but it’s 
quite warm-hearted. We need to allow it a few more Saturdays before making a 
judgment and see how Gary [Barlow] brings it together.”
 