
Much has been written about the effect of disruptive technologies in the media 
world.Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> and 
communication being at the forefront of this so-called digital revolution. I 
use the word revolution with great caution. Revolution usually implies the 
destruction of one order, while being replaced by another. The Oxford English 
Dictionary defines it as: “A forcible overthrow of a government or social order 
in favour of a new system.” We bandy these words around with ever increasing 
alarm, and inaccuracy.

So let’s be provocative. Digital technology has not been a revolution. What it 
ushered in has been an amazing expansion of opportunity, opening up incredible 
ways of communicating with one’s audience. Just asGutenberg’s invention of the 
printing press 
<http://scarc.library.oregonstate.edu/omeka/exhibits/show/mcdonald/incunabula/gutenberg/>
 and movable type wasn’t a revolution in publishing books. Far from it; books 
had existed for hundreds of years. Gutenberg’s invention made them more 
accessible, opening them up to the general population in ways unheard of. What 
it did do is have a profound effect on the written word and the expansion of 
knowledge. In 1440 no one could have predicted its influence.

And so, today, no one can predict the unfolding impact of today’s disruptive 
digital technology.

So how do we move forward in these uncertain times? The only answer to that 
constantly asked question is to embrace more creativity.

Blind faith in big data may be dangerous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/09/blind-faith-big-data-dangerous-marketing>
There is only one certainty I’m prepared to stake my reputation on. Tomorrow 
will be more creative than today. Not that everyone in the world of 
communication will agree with that. There are those that believe rich data, or
big data <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/big-data> as some call it, 
will be the answer to all their problems. The idea that reducing us all to a 
set of algorithms will provide the answers commerce needs, is of course 
laughable. But there will always be fools that somehow believe this nonsense.

It is important to understand that technology creates opportunity, but it’s 
creativity that creates value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsir-john-hegarty-future-more-creative-technology-not-big-data-algorithm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233fcc5820e6bf4c9cb4e5d2895be8259981995%2F0_2_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20John%20Hegarty%3A%20'Tomorrow%20will%20be%20more%20creative%20%E2%80%93%20I'd%20stake%20my%20reputation%20on%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsir-john-hegarty-future-more-creative-technology-not-big-data-algorithm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20John%20Hegarty%3A%20%27Tomorrow%20will%20be%20more%20creative%20%E2%80%93%20I%27d%20stake%20my%20reputation%20on%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fsir-john-hegarty-future-more-creative-technology-not-big-data-algorithm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233fcc5820e6bf4c9cb4e5d2895be8259981995%2F0_2_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Breaking Bad … ‘Broadcast deployed greater creativity, creating programmes and 
series that captivated their audiences.’ Photograph: 
AMC/Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
Over the past decade, we’ve been told by the digerati that television was dead 
and online is the future. What we weren’t told by these oracles of wisdom is 
exactly what people were engaging with online. They were actually engaging with 
the broadcast world, spreading its fame and influence. Broadcast deployed 
greater creativity, creating programmes and series that captivated their 
audiences.Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/11/breaking-bad-smithsonian-museum-props-bryan-cranston-aaron-paul>
 is all you have to say here. The online world became the tools of these 
masters, spreading their fame to an ever growing audience. More than ever the 
power of captivating storytelling became the weapon of choice for those wishing 
to become culturally and commercially important.

In the world of advertising it became obvious. Brands such as John Lewis, with 
itsChristmas spectacular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2013/nov/12/john-lewis-christmas-ad-2013-video>
, were providing a template for how creativity could propel a brand into the 
limelight by the imaginative use of broadcast, while using an online audience 
to further their message. A classic case of persuasion and promotion, the two 
driving forces of an effective brand building campaign. BBH’s campaign forYeo 
Valley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eOHAUvbuV4o> proved this beyond doubt. 
With a limited budget and outstanding creativity, a brand could dominate the 
broadcast media and spread its fame with online engagement that outsmarted 
conventional media thinking. Broadcast wasn’t dead. It was not only alive, it 
was thriving.

But it had to be embraced with creativity. Engaging its audience with daring 
and wit. Is that a revolution? I suppose for some in the communication industry 
it is. But I don’t think they’ll be around much longer.


 Sir John Hegarty is founder of BBH <http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/london/>
 andThe Garage Soho <http://www.thegaragesoho.london/>. He will be speaking at 
this year’sGuardian Changing Media Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/oct/07/changing-media-summit-2016-programme>
.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 