
The military historian Sir John Keegan, who has died aged 78, possessed a rare 
ability to describe warfare from the standpoint of the frontline soldier. For 
this he depended in great part on imagination, since poor health prevented him 
from wearing a uniform. It was only in 1984 that he acquired a close-up view of 
battle (in the Lebanese civil war), which he described as physically disgusting 
and very frightening.

His third book, The Face of Battle (1976), made his name as a fine writer and 
is still widely regarded as his best despite more than 20 other works. He 
portrayed the life of the common soldier in three great British battles: 
Agincourt (1415), Waterloo (1815) and the Somme (1916). He used original 
sources to bring out the physical and mental aspects of warfare, including 
bloodlust, fear, comradeship and the ugliness, dirt and even stink of the 
battlefield.

Keegan was five years old when the second world war broke out. His father came 
from an Irish Catholic family and had served in the artillery in the first 
world war, but when the second came was a schools inspector, taking 
responsibility for the welfare of hundreds of child evacuees. So the family 
left Clapham, south London, where John had been born, for the Somerset 
countryside late in 1939.

The 10-year-old John was impressed by the huge buildup for the Normandy 
invasion in 1944, when southern England was flooded by military traffic. He met 
soldiers of several nationalities, learned to identify aircraft and kept up 
with the war on maps. Many a schoolboy did the same, but for him the interest 
became lifelong. While he sometimes regretted his lack of military experience, 
he thought he would not have made a good soldier because of tendencies to 
insubordination.

After he returned to London, Keegan's education at the Jesuit Wimbledon 
college was interrupted when he was 13 by a tubercular hip that led to a 
lengthy confinement in an open-air ward in the worst winter for decades. In 
eight months he was allowed home, yet the TB hip reasserted itself and took him 
to St Thomas's hospital in Lambeth, London. This time his fellow patients were 
cockney war veterans whose soldiers' tales fascinated him.

After two years of this he left with a hip "frozen" by a bone operation and a 
permanent limp. He won a scholarship to study history at Balliol College, 
Oxford, but another year-long battle with TB delayed his start.

In 1957 he graduated. Following two years of writing political analyses at the 
US embassy in London, in 1960 Keegan was appointed a lecturer in military 
history at the RoyalMilitary <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> Academy, 
Sandhurst, in Surrey, where he worked for 26 years. He wrote potted military 
histories before starting his first major work, The Face of Battle, published 
when he was 42. He was moved to write it by the realisation that neither he nor 
his cadet students had experienced the warfare they were studying. It has 
remained in print ever since. But works such as The Mask of Command (1987) 
showed that he understood generalship as well as life in the trenches. He made 
a point of visiting the sites of the battles he described.

In 1986 Keegan joined the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> as defence correspondent, 
later defence editor until his death. The books continued to appear in a 
steady, prizewinning stream. Six Armies in Normandy (1982) was a classic 
portrayal of frontline combat prefaced by elegant nostalgia for a vanished 
Britain; The Price of Admiralty (1988) was a rare voyage into naval history 
from Trafalgar to the Battle of the Atlantic.

Histories of both world wars, of military intelligence and War in Our World, 
the printed version of his Reith lectures of 1998, added to an impressive body 
of work. However, there was controversy too as Keegan drew criticism from 
colleagues for his emphatic rejection of the doctrine of the Prussian 
strategist Carl von Clausewitz that war was a continuation of policy by other 
means. He was sometimes accused of political naivety.

But his journalistic output was very influential. Highly conservative, at 
least in the non-political sense, he overcame initial doubts to become a strong 
supporter of the Falklands war in 1982 under the nom de plume (he was still 
employed at Sandhurst) of Patrick Desmond in the Spectator, and of the first 
Iraq war eight years later under his real name. He was appointed OBE in 1991.

His support for the second Iraq war in 2003 was unconditional even though he 
was highly critical of the lack of an exit strategy. He viewed western 
intervention in Afghanistan as justified if also highly dangerous, but thought 
premature withdrawal would make matters worse. Unsurprisingly he was strongly 
in favour of the British nuclear deterrent and its renewal, but was surprised 
and disturbed by the idea of a British nuclear strike against pariah states 
such as Iran and North Korea, as envisaged by Geoff Hoon, the Labour defence 
secretary, in 2002.

Keegan was knighted in 2000 and further honoured with membership of the 
Commonwealth War Graves Commission. He took to writing a whimsical column in 
the Telegraph magazine about rural life as seen from his 17th-century manor 
house in Wiltshire. More ill-health dogged his later years when he was struck 
by a spinal failure, then had a leg amputated. Using a wheelchair, he continued 
to visit the office once a week and write articles. In April 2009 he suffered a 
stroke, but made a remarkable partial recovery.

He is survived by his wife of more than 50 years, the biographer Susanne 
Everett, two daughters and two sons.

â€¢ John Desmond Patrick Keegan, military historian, born 15 May 1934; died 2 
August 2012
 