
From the late 1960s until the new century, Sir Jimmy Young, who has died aged 
95, presented a daily radio programme on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> with an enormous following. For The 
Jimmy Young Show – or as he referred to it, the JY prog – he was not just a 
disc jockey purveying recipes at the behest of the cartoon-voiced Raymondo 
(“What’s the recipe today, Jim?”), along with consumer advice, but an 
interviewer who personified the corporation’s flair for mixing entertainment 
and enlightenment.

Broadcasting had taken over from an earlier singing career that was only 
intermittently successful. In 1951 the songToo Young 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HLpBSaTEpIY> encapsulated what was in the 
hearts and minds of a new postwar generation – a desire to have the world on 
their own terms though that world considered them too young – and was an 
instant hit. Even so, when Young sought variety work, he found that the 
public’s memory was short, and that the jobs fizzled out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKosMYADnVTk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKosMYADnVTk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKosMYADnVTk&media=>
 Jimmy Young singing Unchained Melody 
Unchained Melody <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l_kJ1A_rcKg> (1955), the 
theme song of an American B movie prison drama, made the top of the pop charts, 
and Young became the first British singer to have consecutive No 1 hits when he 
took up another theme song,The Man from Laramie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-emr0KZPxI>. However, again his engagements 
tailed off, and Young recognised that his heartfelt balladeering was not going 
to flourish in the age of Elvis Presley.

Young made his first appearance presenting the BBC’s radio record request 
programme Housewives’ Choice in 1955, though it still took some time before he 
committed himself fully to broadcasting. However, by 1961, he was, as he said 
himself, “popping up everywhere”, including the show which rated the week’s pop 
tunes, Juke Box Jury. Two years later, he was doing five DJ programmes forRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> Luxembourg, one for the BBC and, 
for TV, the 625 Show for new talent. Later he introduced Saturday Special, a 
radio medley of offbeat facts from the BBC regions, plus music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce52346b1b5d846040c617cfc2b008d8f0d1e39%2F0_227_4950_2969%2F4950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Jimmy%20Young%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Jimmy%20Young%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce52346b1b5d846040c617cfc2b008d8f0d1e39%2F0_227_4950_2969%2F4950.jpg>
 Jimmy Young talking to the Labour prime minister Harold Wilson in 1976. 
Photograph: Ian Tyas/Getty Images 
In 1967, he sealed his new success by beginning The Jimmy Young Show in the 
mid-morning slot on Radios 1 and 2. He insisted that the title include his own 
name, though he was warned that if it flopped, it would mean he was off the air 
for a very long time. The first show drew an audience of five million.

A reshaping of programmes in 1973 left him solely on Radio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> with the mix of music and current 
affairs that he made his own, comfortably able to attract heavyweight guests 
who recognised the programme’s pulling power. He hosted the BBC’s first live 
direct broadcasts from the Soviet Union in 1977, live programmes from Egypt and 
Israel in 1978, and what was then Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979.

A sure sign that he had arrived, Young began to be impersonated as well as 
ridiculed. Two-page spreads about him appeared in broadsheet and popular 
newspapers. On television he was the host for Thames TV of the first British 
Telethon (1980), and for ITV he presented The Jimmy YoungTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Programme (1984-87). Variety 
Club of Great Britain and Sony awards followed. In 1979 he was appointed OBE 
and in 1993 CBE. He received a knighthood in 2002, which otherwise was not a 
good year, since his “retirement” disappointed him and enraged his admirers.

A hip operation and a dislocation of his repaired hip early that year led to 
several months’ absence from his radio show, but though he made it back to air, 
his contract was not renewed. A Manchester Evening News poll on whether the BBC 
had been right to let him go produced 7% in favour of the BBC decision, 93% 
against. Nonetheless, with something of his old ebullience returning,he 
produced an autobiography, Forever Young (2003), and took An Audience With 
Jimmy Young to theatres 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/sir-jimmy-young-you-ask-the-questions-93655.html>
. For 12 years until 2014 he wrote acolumn 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/jimmy-young/530829/Jimmy-Young-final-column-Sunday-Express>
 for the Sunday Express, and in 2011 he returned to Radio 2 for a show to mark 
his 90th birthday, and to present a series, Icons of the 50s, withDesmond 
Carrington <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006wr9d>.

For interviewing, he did his homework. He could make serious public issues 
palatable to an audience topping seven million by making every encounter into a 
quiet, respectful inquiry rather than a gladiatorial contest. He was not 
ostentatious: he spent much of his life in the same modest flat in Chiswick, 
west London.Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
 appeared on his show 14 times, always giving as good as or better than she got.

John Major was less enamoured after Young tackled him about recent cartoons. 
After suggesting that even his own voters saw him as “wet and boring,” Young 
asked the then prime minister: “Once people laugh at you and make fun of you 
and draw silly cartoons of you with your shirt tucked into your underpants, is 
it almost impossible to regain your credibility?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e8dafbbae846444281de7cde5d688019ca3c24%2F0_59_1199_1498%2F1199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Jimmy%20Young%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Jimmy%20Young%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fsir-jimmy-young-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e8dafbbae846444281de7cde5d688019ca3c24%2F0_59_1199_1498%2F1199.jpg>
 Jimmy Young receiving his knighthood in 2002. Photograph: Peter Jordan/PA 
Born in Cinderford, Gloucestershire, Jimmy, born Leslie Ronald, was the son of 
Frederick Young, a miner who became a baker, and his wife, Gertrude (nee 
Woolford). Both parents were members of local choirs. Gertrude started teaching 
Jimmy the piano when he was seven, and he was a choirboy at Gloucester 
Cathedral. At the age of 15 he left East Dean grammar school and drove the 
bakery van for his father full time.

His parents’ marriage was breaking up, and when the second world war broke out 
in 1939, he took the opportunity to try to join the army. He truthfully told 
them he was 17 and was turned down as a year too young. He then lied to the RAF 
and was accepted.

He was sought out by the variety performer Pip Norman for his army concert 
party. Young joined the army’s entertainment section in northern India, where 
he honed his skills as a singer at the piano and with a danceband. He ended the 
war after four years in India as a sergeant, not having heard a shot fired, and 
managed to get his first professional job in variety in Deal, in Kent.

To his wife, Wendy Wilkinson, whom he had married in 1946, this was the last 
straw – she had begged him to drop his showbiz ambitions and settle into his 
job as a clerk for the Ministry of Education. Their marriage ended in divorce.

Persisting as usual, Young deputised for the pianist Bill Williams and then 
became a regular at the smart Nordic Club in Hampton Court.George Inns 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0409234/>, the BBC producer who had created The 
Black and White Minstrel Show, got another BBC producer, John Hooper, to listen 
to his act; the result was a contract to sing four songs with the Ronnie 
Pleydell Orchestra. Sally Douglas, a singer with the band, became his second 
wife, in 1950.

That marriage, too, ended in divorce, and in 1996 he married Alicia Padstow.

She survives him, along with his daughter, Lesley, from his first marriage.

• Jimmy (Leslie Ronald) Young, broadcaster and singer, born 21 September 1921; 
died 7 November 2016

• Dennis Barker died last year
 