
BHS was subject to “systematic plunder” by former owners Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>, Dominic Chappell and their 
respective “hangers-on”, according to MPs, leading to the collapse of a company 
that once employed 11,000 people.

A damning report published on Monday 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/news-parliament-2015/bhs-report-published-16-17/>
 after weeks of evidence from former executives and advisers says the “tragedy” 
of BHS was the “unacceptable face of capitalism” and raises questions about how 
the governance of private companies and their pension funds should be regulated.

BHS collapse: the key players and what the report says about them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-collapse-key-players-mps-report-sir-philip-green>
 All BHS’s remaining stores will close by the end of August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/23/all-bhs-stores-to-shut-down-by-20-august>
 after the department store group went intoadministration in April leaving a 
£571m pension deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/bhs-rescue-bid-fails-putting-11000-jobs-at-risk>
. Greensold BHS for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
 in March 2015 to a consortium led by Chappell, a serial bankrupt. The retailer 
failed 13 months later.

Green’s business reputation is torn apart in the report put together by MPs on 
the work and pensions select committee and the business, innovation and skills 
(BIS) committee, who concluded there was “little to support the reputation for 
retail business acumen for which he received his knighthood”.

Their conclusions are likely to add to pressure for Green to make good the 
pension shortfall or be stripped of the honour which theCabinet Office on 
Friday confirmed was being reviewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/sir-philip-green-knighthood-under-review-bhs>
.


The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said: “If Philip Green won’t do the 
right thing by the members of theBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> 
pension fund then he should have his knighthood removed. And if he says he 
can’t afford it then he should sell up his extra yacht.”

Frank Field, the chair of the work and pensions committee, said: “[Green’s] 
reputation as the king of retail lies in the ruins of BHS. His family took out 
of BHS and Arcadia a fortune beyond the dreams of avarice and he’s still to 
make good his boast of ‘fixing’ the pension fund. What kind of man is it who 
can count his fortune in billions but does not know what decent behaviour is?”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsir-philip-green-i-apologise-for-the-collapse-of-bhs-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Philip%20Green%3A%20I%20apologise%20for%20the%20collapse%20of%20BHS%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsir-philip-green-i-apologise-for-the-collapse-of-bhs-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Philip%20Green%3A%20I%20apologise%20for%20the%20collapse%20of%20BHS%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fsir-philip-green-i-apologise-for-the-collapse-of-bhs-video&media=>
Sir Philip Green: I apologise for the collapse of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/15/sir-philip-green-i-apologise-for-the-collapse-of-bhs-video>
MPs said Green had “systematically extracted hundreds of millions of pounds 
from BHS, paying very little tax and fantastically enriching himself and his 
family, leaving the company and its pension fund weakened to the point of the 
inevitable collapse of both.”

Green was found to hold prime responsibility for the pensions black hole after 
years of refusing to provide sufficient funding, despite pleas from the fund’s 
independent trustees.

The report urges Green to bring about a swift resolution to the financing of 
the BHS pension fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/brexit-adds-100m-to-potential-cost-of-bhs-pensions-bailout>
 by making “a large financial contribution”.

If Sir Philip Green pays up in full, then maybe he can keep his gong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/if-sir-philip-green-pension-fund-shortfall-knighthood>
“He has a moral duty to act, a duty which he acknowledges. We still do not 
doubt that Sir Philip has heartfelt affection for BHS. To an extent it created 
him; it could also bring him down,” MPs said.

Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> last week set out a 
robust defence of his stewardship of BHS,claiming he put £421m into the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/sir-philip-green-defends-bhs-investment-letter-mps>
 during his 15 years at the helm.

But MPs found the demise of BHS was the result of “a series of bad business 
decisions and personal greed”.

“Sir Philip Green, Dominic Chappell and the respective directors, advisers and 
hangers-on who all got rich or richer are all culpable, with the only losers 
the ordinary employees and pensioners,” their report concludes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8b027a07b6d02031dae91983e3d8e581ee69fe7%2F0_656_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Philip%20Green's%20reputation%20ripped%20apart%20in%20damning%20report%20on%20BHS%20demise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Philip%20Green%27s%20reputation%20ripped%20apart%20in%20damning%20report%20on%20BHS%20demise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fbhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8b027a07b6d02031dae91983e3d8e581ee69fe7%2F0_656_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
 Dominic Chappell. Photograph: PA 
MPs said Chappell had put no money into BHS and “had his hands in the till”, 
personally taking £4.1m from the ailing company in 13 months of ownership 
including a £1.5m interest free loan, secured against his father’s house.


Iain Wright, the BIS committee chair, said: “BHS’s demise has created many 
losers, particularly the 11,000 staff facing the loss of their jobs and the 
20,000 pensioners facing significant reductions to their pensions. The actions 
of people in this sorry and tragic saga have left a stain on the reputation of 
business which reputable and honourable people in enterprise and commerce will 
find appalling.”


The committees said they would support investigations by the Financial 
Reporting Council, the Pensions Regulator, the Insolvency Service and the 
Serious Fraud Office.

The Pensions Regulator said its “anti-avoidance” investigation was continuing 
and it expected to have made significant progress by the end of this year. 
“Discussions are ongoing with various parties,” said Lesley Titcomb, its chief 
executive.

MPs plan to launch two new investigations that will examine regulation of the 
corporate governance of private companies and whether there should be more 
proactive regulation of pension funds.

“Some of the failures which allowed this to happen are not unique to BHS. Its 
lessons merit broader consideration of the framework in which companies 
operate,” the report says.

Their plans are likely to be supported by Theresa May, who has pledged “to 
make our economy work for everyone by getting tough on irresponsible behaviour 
in big business”.

Weak corporate governance at Green’s Taveta group, which was run as a 
“personal fiefdom by a single dominant individual”, according to MPs, meant 
there was little independent oversight or challenge to decisions.

They suggested Green had acted to conceal the true state of the BHS pension 
fund’s problems from Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions group and said his account 
of talks to sell BHS to a convicted fraudster, Paul Sutton, did not tally with 
that of his former adviser Robin Saunders.

The eventual sale of BHS to Chappell – a former bankrupt and business 
associate of Sutton who had failed to meet Taveta’s own hurdles in terms of 
providing equity, working capital and a credible retail frontman – went ahead 
without Taveta’s chairman, Lord Grabiner, even knowing about the deal.

Grabiner, a high-profile corporate lawyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/18/lord-grabiner-news-international>
, was criticised for having a “remarkably docile attitude” and representing the 
“apogee of weak corporate governance”.

“He was content to provide a veneer of establishment credibility to the group 
while happily disengaging from the key decisions he had a responsibility to 
scrutinise. For this deplorable performance he received a considerable salary,” 
MPs said.

Under Green’s control, BHS struggled to cope with tough conditions on the high 
street as he failed to invest sufficiently in stores or reinvent the business. 
MPs said the early rise in profits under his leadership was the result of cost 
cutting and asset sales and that paying out substantial dividends, mainly to 
Green’s wife Tina, who lived in the tax haven of Monaco, had weakened the 
ability of the business to keep up with its competitors and tackle its rising 
pension deficit.

They noted that companies controlled by Tina Green and registered in the tax 
havens of either Jersey or the British Virgin Islands continued to make 
millions of pounds from a loan which was used to help sell the business from 
one of the group’s entities to another. Last year, she earned £8.3m, or 8% 
interest, on the £200m loan to Taveta made in 2009 on top of a £20m per year 
loan repayment.

As BHS’s pension fund deficit soared, Green decided to offload the business 
rather than answer the Pensions Regulator’s questions about the money extracted 
from the business.

All BHS stores to shut down by 20 August
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/23/all-bhs-stores-to-shut-down-by-20-august>
As Chappell struggled to come up with the finance necessary to finalise the 
buyout of BHS, MPs said Green had attempted to make good those inadequacies to 
facilitate the sale. “He was both sides of the deal,” their report concluded.

They said that contrary to evidence from Green’s lieutenant Paul Budge to MPs 
that Chappell was a new bidder who “started from a clean sheet of paper”, it 
was clear that he had picked up the plans of Sutton “with the full knowledge of 
Arcadia board members”.

While Green insisted in his evidence to MPs that BHS was offloaded with a 
healthy balance sheet, they concluded there was “simply not enough cash in BHS 
to give it a realistic chance of medium term survival”.

Having gained control of BHS, Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions also suffered 
from “feeble” corporate governance and its board was peopled with friend’s and 
family of the former bankrupt.

Under their stewardship, Retail Acquisitions charged £11m to BHS in the form 
of salaries and fees while a string of directors jumped ship or failed to 
fulfil their responsibilities despite “profiting handsomely” from their 
positions.
 