
Speaking to Siri Hustvedt in her Brooklyn brownstone not long before the 
American presidential election, conversation naturally turns to Hillary 
Clinton. “For someone so accomplished ... who performs as superbly asHillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> does, to be 
constantly criticised,” Hustvedt muses. “When she performs brilliantly in a 
debate, they call her over-rehearsed. I have never heard anything like that 
said about a man.”

Hustvedt knows something about being an accomplished woman, and having things 
said about her work that would never be said about a man’s. I am here to talk 
about her new book of essays,A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women. One of 
them, “No Competition”, catalogues her experiences as “a woman writer married 
to a man writer (Paul Auster)”. A journalist insists that Auster must have 
taught her psychoanalysis and neuroscience. A publisher magnanimously instructs 
her to “keep writing” when she has already published three novels. A fan asks 
if her husband has written sections of her most recent novel,The Blazing World.

Best books of 2016 – part one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/26/best-books-of-2016-part-one> 
During my meeting with Hustvedt, Auster is just a low murmur moving around 
elsewhere in the house. “He is doing an interview upstairs,” Hustvedt explains. 
“I think for the first time in our history of 35 years together, we have books 
coming out one month apart.” We don’t mention him again.

Hustvedt says she often encounters surprise that she is, above all, a person 
interested in ideas. “Women who write books about ideas are not instantly 
anointed in the way that men are. You get a lot of criticism for being too 
intellectual, too cerebral. But I don’t see those same complaints addressed to 
male writers. I’m sure they’re out there, but not to the same degree.”

A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women seems likely to inspire more people to 
call Hustvedt “cerebral”, though in this context as a compliment. Somewhat 
unusually in a publishing age characterised by slim essay collections about 
personal experience, Hustvedt’s book is nearly 600 pages of learned commentary 
on everything from the nature of literature to neuroscience. It takes in a 
remarkKarl Ove Knausgaard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>
 once made to her – women writers, he said, were “no competition” – as well as 
the work of the 17th-century philosopherMargaret Cavendish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/aug/08/gender.uk>. The centrepiece is a 
200-page meditation on “The Delusions of Certainty” that ranges from the 
science of perception to neo-Cartesianism to the history of psychiatry.

Hustvedt has never been a writer of narrow or fleeting interests. “These are 
questions I have been addressing in both my fiction and nonfiction for a very 
long time,” she says. “It’s about a long, long accumulation of knowledge, and 
changing my mind, rethinking, discovering another beat I hadn’t been thinking 
about before. Or discovering some earlier thought that’s wrong.”

It should be said that this is also a pretty good description of Hustvedt’s 
conversational style. She makes a statement, then revises it, and revises it 
again. It’s not that she is uncertain of what she thinks; it’s that she’s 
precise.

Hustvedt was born in Minnesota, in 1955, to a Norwegian mother and an American 
father of Norwegian descent. As a child, she spent time in Norway, and 
graduated with a degree there in her teens. (For days after our interview I 
find myself trying to emulate her correct pronunciation of the name 
“Knausgaard” – something like “K-NOOSE-gurt”). She says she became a feminist 
at 14, “carrying around mySisterhood Is Powerful and Kate Millett, and trying 
to readSimone de Beauvoir <https://www.theguardian.com/books/simonedebeauvoir> 
and it was that terrible edition [ofThe Second Sex] translated by the zoologist 
[Howard M Parshley]”.

In the 1980s, Hustvedt had her poetry published and got a PhD in English 
literature from Columbia, writing her dissertation on Dickens. She then 
published several novels, each to greater acclaim than the last. But the 
differential treatment she received as a writer and thinker who also happened 
to be a woman became an abiding theme in her work, too. InThe Blazing World, 
the main character is a female artist whose work is largely neglected in her 
lifetime, while her husband, an art dealer, is relatively successful. “In that 
effete microcosm,” writes Hustvedt, “it is fair to say Felix had been a giant, 
dealer to the stars, and I, Gargantua’s artist wife.”

I really do not have a final position on a great many profound questions

The resurrection of female intellectuals from obscurity is a preoccupation of 
Hustvedt’s. At one point she begins to quiz me about the mathematician Emmy 
Noether. “She did work in symmetry in mathematics that then became adopted in 
physics,” she tells me. “Extremely important thinker. Praised by Einstein. 
Praised by, I think, Heisenberg. The stellar figures of 20th-century physics 
thought Noether was a genius. Does Noether set off bells in your head? No?”

The Blazing World was generally well received, but there were “quite a few 
reviews that said, ‘But she’s not likable’. Well neither is Raskolnikov,” 
Hustvedt says. “This [criticism] is so much more aimed at a woman’s book than a 
man’s book. Where did that come from? What kind of a criterion is that for a 
work of literature?”

Not that she is fond of hard definitions of literature. In another essay she 
alludes to James Wood, particularly his bookHow Fiction Works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/17/fiction.reviews>, with dismay 
and disdain. “It’s incomprehensible to me that anyone who has read a great many 
books could come to any conclusion about how books should be written.” She 
talks about telling a prize committee that in the whole history of literature 
there has never been one clear formula for what makes a good book. “Goya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/goya> said ‘There are no rules in 
painting.’ And I think there are no rules.”

Certainly Hustvedt has not been observing any rules herself. As well as 
writing she has a burgeoning career as a thinker in psychiatry and 
neuroscience. Her longstanding interest in those subjects took off after the 
success ofThe Shaking Woman, a hybrid memoir and intellectual investigation she 
published in 2009. The departure point was her own illness – a nervous disorder 
that caused her body to convulse and gave her migraines – but it quickly 
expanded into an inquiry into the nature of the self that encompassed both 
contemporary research and the work of Jean-Martin Charcot, a 19th-century 
neurologist who studied hysteria.

This sideline in science has been transformative. “You can sit and argue about 
whether or not you like a writer deep into the night, and you can make 
arguments about why, and at the same time it’s not like finding the fault line 
in somebody’s argument about the predictive brain.” The problem is that science 
tends to appeal to a limited audience. “People who are working in neuroscience, 
they can see what’s original. People outside of those worlds, they don’t know 
where I’m original. Where I’m shocking people. They can’t see.”

For Hustvedt the gulf between science and the humanities is something of a 
tragedy. In the introduction toA Woman Looking at Men …, she laments that “I 
have witnessed scenes of mutual incomprehension or, worse, out-and-out 
hostility.” She devoted her work in the sciences to drawing connections between 
what you could call humanistic ideas and scientific findings. She thinks that 
gender bias could be explained by way of the science of perception. “The brain 
as an organ of prediction is founded on prior expectations,” she explains. And 
our prior expectations are often set up to disadvantage women: we don’t 
associate them with artistic greatness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fsiri-hustvedt-trump-was-elected-because-misogyny-is-alive-and-well-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb154649175353db372537ddf1c95dfa26ba8b60%2F69_251_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Siri%20Hustvedt%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20was%20elected%20because%20misogyny%20is%20alive%20and%20well%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fsiri-hustvedt-trump-was-elected-because-misogyny-is-alive-and-well-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Siri%20Hustvedt%3A%20%E2%80%98Trump%20was%20elected%20because%20misogyny%20is%20alive%20and%20well%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fsiri-hustvedt-trump-was-elected-because-misogyny-is-alive-and-well-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb154649175353db372537ddf1c95dfa26ba8b60%2F69_251_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
 Siri Hustvedt, daughter Sophie and Paul Auster in 2004. Photograph: 
Contino/Bei/Rex Features 
The connections between body and mind fascinate her, too. For example, lately 
Hustvedt has become “very interested in the placenta”. It has only been lightly 
studied, even though scientists refer to it as a kind of “third brain” in the 
process of human development, but Hustvedt’s interest is also philosophical. 
“What does that literal mediator, that is the beginning of every human being, 
have to do with our later development? The idea of mediation is there in utero 
as an actual physical organ. This has to have an effect on what we become.”

Some of this abstracted talk may sound alienating, but in person Hustvedt’s 
engagement has an infectious quality. It reminds me of something she wrote 
about another apparently intimidating writer,Susan Sontag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/29/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
. “In every conversation I had with her I found myself amazed at the certitude 
of her opinions,” Hustvedt writes. In conversations with Hustvedt, the 
observation is slightly different: it’s hard not to be amazed at the richness, 
the texture of her views. “I’m always doing this tug of war between different 
positions. It’s not that I don’t have a position. But I really do not have a 
final position on a great many profound questions,” she says, later adding, “I 
am alarmed by all kinds of solidified knowledge.”

In the weeks after our interview, one particular piece of knowledge did firm 
up: Hillary Clinton would not be the president of the United States; Donald 
Trump would be. Hustvedt had repeatedly told me that the election was “charged 
with misogyny”. So how does she feel about things now?

“He was elected because his exploitation of the big lie technique worked, 
because misogyny is alive and well among women and men,” she says. “He was 
elected because, as a study at Yale demonstrated, when faced with an identical 
description of an ambitious politician, both men and women respond to a female 
candidate with feelings of ‘moral outrage’, but have no such feelings for a 
power seeking male candidate.” It goes back to what she has been saying about 
the science of perception, the kinds of expectations we have for men versus 
those for women. “If she’s emotional, then she’s like a woman. If she’s not 
emotional, then she’s cold and heartless,” she says of Clinton. “Whereas Trump 
actually has played the female role: the out of control, angry hysteric. And 
yet, he has been perceived as a robust, masculine figure by a large portion of 
the US public. The possibilities for a woman are infinitely more narrow.”

 * A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women: Essays on Art, Sex and The Mind by 
Siri Hustvedt (Sceptre, £20). To order a copy for £16.40, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/woman-looking-at-men-looking-at-women.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.  