
Why did you start the #BringBackOurGirls Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> campaign?

I was disturbed by the acts of terror committed by Boko Haram which were 
becoming more cruel and gruesome, even before theabduction of the Chibok 
schoolgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/15/schoolgirls-kidnapped-suspected-islamists-nigeria>
 on 14 April.


When the news of the abduction of over 200 Chibok school girls broke, I 
promised myself not to allow it go the way of other atrocities. I took to 
Twitter immediately to create awareness of what happened and to pressurise our 
government to rescue the girls and put an end to the acts of terror against 
hapless citizens, particularly schoolchildren.

Initially my tweets were without any hashtag then later under hashtags like 
#ChibokGirls, which didn’t gain much attention. Then on 23 April I saw the 
former Nigerian minister of education, Oby Ezekwesili, speak. She was among the 
few public figures that spoke out about the abduction of the schoolgirls. She 
asked people to demand that government bring back our daughters. I tweeted with 
the hashtag #BringBackOurGirls, which she retweeted. The hashtag went viral 
within few days.

Were you surprised when the campaign took off? What did you think when 
Michelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> tweeted 
#BringBackOurGirls?

I was a bit surprised with the success of the campaign. Initially, my 
intention was to create local awareness of the abduction. Surpassing that 
expectation and becoming a global campaign was really gratifying.

I was happy when I saw Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/10/michelle-obama-nigeria-presidential-address>
 and other international figures joining the campaign. The celebrity 
endorsements helped to spur our government into action. Before then, [Goodluck] 
Jonathan’‎s government denied the abduction. And even when it did admit it, it 
did nothing until the celebrity endorsements.

How can advocates such as yourself keep attention on the campaign? 

The campaign can be kept in the public eye by tweeting about it. Also, we need 
local and international media publicity and to march on the streets, as the 
#BringBackOurGirls campaign is here in Abuja.

What five things need to happen to get the girls home? 

There is need for a strong and committed leadership; to equip our military 
with the most modern weaponry to fight Boko Haram; for collaboration and 
cooperation between the federal and state governments on one hand and between
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and it’s neighbours on the 
other; for technical assistance from the international community to our 
military; and finally to leave the door of negotiation with the insurgents open.

What did you think when you heard supporters of Goodluck Jonathan had used the 
slogan #BringBackGoodluck?

Seeing the billboards and banners of #BringBackJonathan2015 was both shocking 
and disgusting. It was a mockery of the #BringBackOurGirls campaign. It was a 
callous and insensitive move by the supporters of Goodluck Jonathan. They only 
care about re-election, not about rescuing the abducted girls.


Do you worry about the attention the campaign will get with Ebola, Isis and 
other humanitarian crises?

Even before Ebola and Isis’s intensified activities, most of the world that 
stood with #BringBackOurGirls had moved on. But we here in Nigeria and a few 
others outside haven’t moved on. We have been persistent. We have been tweeting 
about it every day. We’re doing a daily one-hour sit out in Abuja and weekly in 
Lagos. We have continued to pressurise Jonathan’s government.

See our timeline  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2014/oct/13/millions-of-retweets-celebrity-backing-but-no-happy-ending-bringbackourgirls-six-month-timeline>
of the #BringBackOurGirls campaign.


Read more stories like this: 

• Girls brave violence for their education in northern Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/29/northern-nigeria-school-girls>
• #BringBackOurGirls: the verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jun/03/bringbackourgirls-nigeria-media-communications>
• Where were the grassroots voices at the Girl Summit? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/30/where-were-grassroots-voices-girl-summit>
• Advertisement feature: Meet the Ethiopian girls who refuse to be silenced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/ethiopian-girls-debut-concert-yegna>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 