
Da Vinci didn’t brainstorm the Mona Lisa

So said Sir John Hegarty, adman and co-founder of global agency BBH 
<http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/>, in a session on creativity in the digital 
age. Asked by moderator and newly-appointed worldwide chief creative officer at 
BBH, Pelle Sjoenell, about the power of brainstorms in coming up with pure and 
original creative ideas, Hegarty replied that they’re a “colossal waste” of 
corporate time and (referencing the great Italian artist and inventor): “Nobody 
has ever said: this great idea came out of a brainstorm.”

He summarised: “If you want to do good, have a brainstorm; if you want to do 
great, leave the brainstorm.”

But other voices are vital

Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP <https://twitter.com/WPP> – 
speaking later in the day during a keynote fireside chat – disagreed on 
collaboration. “Everyone can make a contribution,” he said to interviewer Rory 
Cellan-Jones, who asked him about what Hegarty had said earlier on the matter 
(“the danger of collaboration is that it leads to consensus”). “The skill of 
collaboration is getting that melting pot together and drawing from it all 
that’s best to create a better solution,” Sorrell said. “You don’t have a 
monopoly on wisdom.”

Data is making the creative decisions (and it shouldn’t)

On a related point, Hegarty was asked about the power of data to inform 
creativity. It is important, he replied, but added that over the past 10 years, 
advertising has elevated it to a point where no one is being inspired. It 
doesn’t give you the answer, he said, just information: “You sit in meetings 
where people say: research is just another opinion. But it’s not; it’s elevated 
above everything else in those meetings and it’s making the decisions.”

Sorrell later disagreed. Data can be part of the creative process, he said: 
“If you have to make a decision, surely you’re better informed by data.”

Instagram is huge
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d135768cb4dd2f53492e993f4b2f2075069c50f%2F56_2215_3655_2195%2F3655.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Guardian%20Changing%20Media%20Summit%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Guardian%20Changing%20Media%20Summit%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d135768cb4dd2f53492e993f4b2f2075069c50f%2F56_2215_3655_2195%2F3655.jpg>
 Amy Cole, Instagram’s head of brand development for the EMEA region at the 
Guardian Changing Media Summit 2016. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Its 400m-strong community shares 80m photos and videos per day (which receive 
3.5bn likes), revealed the company’s head of brand development for the EMEA 
region, Amy Cole.

More than 80% of millennial males in Germany block ads

Adblocking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> was one of the 
event’s most-discussed subjects. On the first day an entire panel weighed in on 
the subject, discussing viewability and the death of mobile advertising. Tim 
Gentry, global revenue director at Guardian News & Media shared the above stat, 
before urging the industry to think about the consumer.

Helen McRae, UK chief exec and chair of western Europe at Mindshare 
<http://www.mindshareworld.com/>, agreed. Adblocking is a symptom of something 
much larger – consumers want interesting, engaging and useful content, or 
they’ll block it. She said: “We’ve forgotten that human insight is the 
determining factor into how successful your message is going to be.”

Also on the panel was Hailo’s <https://www.hailoapp.com/> chief marketing 
officer, Gary Bramall, who said that adblocking could even be seen as a 
positive thing, because it highlights the fatigue customers have felt from 
“dumb” advertising and shows the space is ripe for disruption. It’s an 
opportunity for the industry to redefine marketing and advertising, he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0add27b4c8cfe35a51bb0e480cf8dc56c55edf08%2F1269_24_2608_3261%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Guardian%20Changing%20Media%20Summit%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Guardian%20Changing%20Media%20Summit%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fguardian-changing-media-summit-2016-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0add27b4c8cfe35a51bb0e480cf8dc56c55edf08%2F1269_24_2608_3261%2F2608.jpg>
 Richard Gingras. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Richard Gingras, head of news at Google, also tackled the subject during his 
closing presentation on day one. Ad experiences are more annoying than they are 
useful, he said, before revealing that adblocker use in the US stands at 15%.

Publishers need better metrics

Adblocking isn’t the only challenge that publishers face. During a fireside 
chat session on day two,Johnston Press <http://www.johnstonpress.co.uk/> chief 
executive Ashley Highfield spoke about several of the issues at play.

A key challenge, he said, is creating simple metrics that advertisers and the 
industry can understand (something the TV industry has tackled well). “We’ve 
created two metrics – newspaper sales and unique users – and never the two 
shall meet,” he said, before adding that we need to create a new, single, 
de-duped, audience-led metric – a total readership-like number that ad agencies 
and advertisers will buy into.

We also learned

 * British journalism is 94% white and 55% male: the results of a City 
University London survey of 700 news professionals wereshared at the event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/24/british-journalism-diversity-white-female-male-survey>
. 
 * Sorrell plays videogames on his smartphone (Fifa, bowling and cricket). 
 * Artificial intelligence and the internet of things will greatly impact 
advertising in the future. 
 * Online advertising accounts for 90% (“ish”) of Quartz’s revenue, according 
to its editor-in-chief and president, Kevin Delaney. 
 * There were tears … nicole guerretta (@nguerretta) 
Wasn't expecting to shed a tear at #GdnCMS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GdnCMS?src=hash> @keithweed 
<https://twitter.com/keithweed> https://t.co/ubb30sgwdQ 
<https://t.co/ubb30sgwdQ>
 <https://twitter.com/nguerretta/status/712578887272804352> March 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nguerretta/status/712578887272804352> 
To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 