
Last week, late in the first quarter of an NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> game in Detroit, Michigan, Myles 
Turner, the Indiana Pacers’s 20-year-old 6ft 11in center, popped out to the top 
of the three-point line and hit a 25ft jump shot with an arc so high the 
cameraman had to raise the viewing angle to follow it. Less than a minute 
later, he hit another one from the same spot. Both shots were so smooth that 
neither of them even skimmed the rim. The field goals were no anomaly. Turner 
is shooting 41% from the three-point line, well above the league average of 35%.

More than a thousand miles west in Denver, Colorado, Nikola Jokic, the Denver 
Nuggets’ 21-year-old 6ft 10in center, stood with his back to the basket, 15ft 
away, and threwa no-look, over-the-shoulder pass 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ASlYP5vO0Jg> to a cutting team-mate for a 
wide-open lay-up. The pass, more common in a Harlem Globetrotters game than an 
NBA one, was nothing new for Jokic.A three-minute YouTube compilation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1-3uL4KhOk4> posted to the site last month 
highlights dozens of them. “Jokic actually has some flair,” said former NBA 
coach George Karl,whose controversial memoir 
<http://www.sbnation.com/2016/12/22/14059470/george-karl-carmelo-anthony-relationship-book-nuggets-knicks>
 about his life in basketball,Furious George 
<https://www.harpercollins.com/9780062367792/furious-george>, was published 
this week. “He throws some balls that only guards think about throwing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-3uL4KhOk4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-3uL4KhOk4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1-3uL4KhOk4&media=>
Turner and Jokic, who both play Thursday at the O2 Arena in London when the 
Pacers and the Nuggets face off in the NBA’s only game in the UK this season, 
are their teams’ representatives of a new generation of NBA big men, all 
roughly 7ft tall, who, to varying degrees of competency, can shoot 
three-pointers, pass, and dribble, a collective set of skills that has 
historically been the province of only guards. Their recent emergence, a result 
of the evolution of the NBA game, has become so widespread that it’s shifting 
the balance of power in the league from players several inches shorter, who 
have largely been the sport’s marquee names for the last several decades, to 
the tallest the game has to offer.

Giannis Antetokounmpo: the physics warper it's impossible not to love
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/08/giannis-antetokounmpo-the-physics-warper-its-impossible-not-to-love>
The New Orleans Pelicans’ Anthony Davis, 23, is considered the cream of this 
crop of players, butGiannis Antetokounmpo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/08/giannis-antetokounmpo-the-physics-warper-its-impossible-not-to-love>
, 22, of the Milwaukee Bucks, has emerged this season as a rival candidate for 
the future face of the league, once LeBron James and Stephen Curry retreat from 
prominence. The New York Knicks’s 21-year-old Latvian star, Kristaps Porzingis, 
is another of these potential stars, as is the Minnesota Timberwolves’s 
Karl-Anthony Towns, 21, the Philadelphia 76ers’s Joel Embiid, 22, and the 
Sacramento Kings’s DeMarcus Cousins, who, at 26, is an old man among his peers.

Center – until recently the only position a 7ft tall person would ever play – 
produced the first nationally recognized legends of the NBA in the 1960s. These 
were its tallest players who could dictate the flow of a game both offensively 
and defensively by dominating the area several feet around the basket, such as 
Wilt Chamberlain, Bill Russell, and, later, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.

But with the rise of the point guard Magic Johnson, the small forward Larry 
Bird, and the shooting guard Michael Jordan in the 1980s and 1990s, the center 
became less of the focal point of NBA teams, until the position reached a nadir 
about a decade ago. By the end of Shaquille O’Neal’s peak years in the 
mid-2000s, it seemed that the only requirement to play the position in the 
league was to be “a 7ft blob of humanity,” said Scott Hastings, the Nuggets’ 
television analyst and a former center himself, when I spoke to him by phone 
last week. “No disrespect intended, but when you’ve got guys like [current 
Charlotte Hornets seven-footer] Roy Hibbert making all-star games at the center 
position [as he did for theIndiana Pacers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiana-pacers> in 2012 and 2014], the 
center position is almost dead.”

In the early 2000s, the Dallas Mavericks’ Dirk Nowitzki emerged as the first 
seven-footer to be a dominant offensive player both close to the basket as well 
as from three-point range. Additionally, Nowitzki was skilled enough as a ball 
handler that he could effectively score on drives to the basket. He was the 
original prototype of the generation of big men that is emerging now. What made 
Nowitzki so revolutionary was that his offensive versatility created 
significant match-up problems for the opposing defense.

“Spacing is so important in the game,” Karl said by phone from Denver last 
week. “Anytime that your center can bring [the other team’s center] away from 
the basket where he has to defend is incredibly important to the spacing that 
you put on the court.”

Larry Bird, now the Pacers’s president of basketball operations, said from 
Indiana in a telephone interview last week: “When the bigs stretch out there, 
you’ve got to guard them [with your bigs] and there’s nobody protecting the 
rim. It’s easier for these guards to get a cleaner shot at the basket.”

Yet Nowitzki proved to be ahead of his time. Many players were drafted in his 
image, but none had the same impact. (Italy’s Andrea Bargnani was the most 
successful, but since he fell far short of Nowitzki’s mark he was also the most 
ridiculed.) Meanwhile, an NBA rule change in 2004 that outlawed hand-checking 
above the foul line further weighted the game in favor of the smaller player. 
It allowed ball handlers, most often guards, to be more aggressive offensively. 
In hindsight, the most significant effect was that three-point-shot attempts, 
which had plateaued for several years prior to the rule change, began to 
increase. In 2004, the average number of three-point shots attempted by a team 
was 15 per game. This season it is 27.

“Not long ago we were worried about the court being too small for these 
players, and there was talk about widening the lane and some people were even 
talking about widening the whole court,” Bird said. “But the three-point shot 
has changed everything.”

Last year, the Golden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors>, who lost in the NBA 
finals, led the league in three-point shots made, at an average of 13 per game, 
which is an NBA record. The Cleveland Cavaliers, the team that beat the 
Warriors in the championship, made the second-most. Not surprisingly, most NBA 
teams have followed suit. The increase in three-point shots attempted this 
season over last (from an average of 24 per game to 27) is the largest 
single-season increase since 1994, when the NBA shortened the distance of the 
shot. (In 1997, the three-point line was extended back to its current 
dimensions.)

Out of a necessity for survival, NBA big men have had to adapt to the little 
man’s game. As more players throughout the league shoot three-pointers, more 
centers do now as well. When Karl coached the Sacramento Kings last year, he 
was responsible for Cousins incorporating the shot into his game, after Cousins 
had hardly attempted any at all in his first four years in the league. Cousins 
now shoots five per game and makes a very respectable 37% of them. This season, 
even the last of the old-school centers, the Brooklyn Nets’ Brook Lopez and the 
Memphis Grizzlies’ Marc Gasol, have begun to shoot three pointers. (Lopez is 
hitting 36% of his; Gasol makes 41%.)

What makes the new generation of seven-footers so unique is that they have 
taken the adaptation process one step further: many of them have ball-handling 
skills that rival, if not surpass, Nowitzki’s. When parked at the three-point 
line, they don’t have to settle for a jump shot. Like a guard, they can drive 
to the basket as well.

“The two best shots in basketball are the lay-up and the three-point shot,” 
Karl said. “And big guys are now becoming a very common proponent of both.”

Yet with such dramatic developments in the game offensively come dramatic 
adjustments necessary defensively. And, as former NBA coach Jeff Van Gundy, now 
a basketball analyst for ESPN, observed in a telephone interview last week, 
most of the new wave of seven-footers mentioned above are on teams with losing 
records. “What goes directly into winning that everybody overlooks is the 
impact of having enough defensive skill and mentality on the floor to 
complement the offensive skill,” Van Gundy said, “and how important it is, 
particularly talking about those guys as best players, that they exert as much 
energy into their defense as they do into their offense.”

Van Gundy continued: “Defense for a center today is harder than it’s ever 
been.” What is being asked of these seven-footers is “not low-post defense any 
more as much as it is transition and pick-and-roll defense, and being able to 
close to the three-point line and have good enough feet to be able to guard the 
dribble.”

“The game changes about every 10 to 15 years,” Bird said. It’s changing now, 
though not all of the changes may be for the best. “The game is becoming very 
homogenous,” Van Gundy said. “There’s less differences in style of play. You’re 
going to continue to see less and less low-post play.”

How the NBA reacts to these changes will determine the direction the game 
takes in coming years. For now, it’s produced a generation of seven-footers who 
have redefined what an NBA center is yet again.
 