
A new study has revealed that women prefer a slightly larger penis in a 
one-time sexual partner compared to a long-term partner.

Researchers from the University of California and the University of New Mexico 
provided women 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0133079> with 
33 different-sized 3D penis models made of rigid, odorless, blue plastic (they 
were blue “to minimize racial skin-color cues”) to choose from. In total, 75 
women, ages 18 to 65, took part in the study.

When asked to select the model which represented their preferred penis size in 
a long-term partner, the average response was 6.3 inches (16cm) in length and 
4.8 inches (12.2cm) around. For a one-time sexual experience, the average 
plastic penis the women chose was slightly larger – 6.4 inches (16.3 cm) long 
and 5.0 inches (12.7cm) in circumference.

Previous studies had presented women with 2D, flaccid penises, so this is the 
first research to provide hard evidence that women’s ideal penises are slightly 
larger than average penis size.

Notes: These are preferences for erect penises. The average peen is smaller 
than this when erect (5.2 inches long, 4.6 inches around). Source: Women's 
preferences for penis size, published in PLOS One, November 2016 #datasketch 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNpFxkwgKzU/>

A photo posted by Mona Chalabi (@mona_chalabi) on Dec 5, 2016 at 8:23am PST

The women in the study chose penises that were, on average, larger than those 
on supply. The average erect penis is 5.2 inches (13.1cm) long, and 4.6 inches 
(11.7cm) in circumference, according to a globalanalysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/03/the-results-are-in-study-reveals-average-penis-size>
 of 15,000 phalluses published last year. The interactive below, created byNick 
Evershed <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nick-evershed>, allows you to 
explore those averages.
P-values <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2015/mar/penislength/>  
P-values 
Sexual psychophysiologist Dr Nicole Prause and a team of researchers also gave 
the women a questionnaire about their past sexual experiences. Their responses 
revealed a diversity of first-hand penis encounters, ranging from 2.5 inches in 
length to 8 inches. Some women also said that they had ended a relationship 
partly because of their partner’s penis size – 7% of women said because their 
partner’s penis had been “too large”, and 20% said it had been “too small”.

In August, Dr Prause spoke to the Guardian about female pleasure as part of a 
video seriesVagina Dispatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/vagina-dispatches>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&media=>
Vagina Dispatches episode three: the orgasm gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/28/vagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video> 