
Pods and pads 

Snowpod <http://www.snow-pod.com> is a new collection of funky but cheap 
serviced apartments inTignes, France, in the Val Claret area, targeting 
snowboarders with graffiti art, salvaged furnishings and X-boxes. From £199pp 
per week B&B, £299pp half-board.Drop In Chalets <http://www.dropinchalets.com> 
(+44 (0) 7864 289 134), a new venture inChamonix, has six en-suite rooms, a 
home cinema and outdoor hot tub, offers off-piste skis and tuition, and aims to 
be eco-friendly. From £420pp per week half board. AndGreen Mountain Chalets 
<http://www.greenmountainchalets.co.uk>, new in St Martin de Belleville in the 
Trois Vallées, is a stylish option with five rooms, a cellar dining room, 
honesty fridge and free shuttle to the lifts, from €380pp per week half-board.

Lift queues can be the bane of skiing, so a Swiss hotel is pampering its 
guests by giving them their own ski lift. TheTschuggen Grand Hotel 
<http://www.tschuggen.ch> (+41 81 378 99 99) in Arosa is about to launch the 
Tschuggen Express, a futuristic mountain railway with leather seats, which 
carries 12 guests at a time.

Adventures

A new and easy way to see Norway combines skiing and rail: the trip includes 
train travel between Oslo and Bergen, two days' skiing in Geilo and a stay in 
the cosy Bardola Hotel. One week including flights from Gatwick to Oslo and 
returning from Bergen, seven nights' B&B, three dinners and lunches, costs from 
£975pp withInntravel <http://www.inntravel.co.uk> (+44 (0) 1653 617 722), 
available between 2 January and 10 April.

Where do all the pros and die-hard skiers head when they've ticked off Alaska, 
Russia and Chile?Antarctica, apparently. It may be the most expensive ski trip 
ever, but if it's adventure you're after this must be the ultimate. This unique 
holiday to the Ellsworth Mountains is offered byAdventure Network International 
<http://www.adventure-network.com>, and is tailored, so you can book a camping 
expedition or take day tours from a more comfortable base camp. Ski tourers can 
stick to easy trails or make first descents down hidden peaks, and ride 
off-piste in the backcountry, always with guides. Next departures from 16–29 
Dec and 10–23 Jan (14 days), costs US$22,450pp or $23,250pp in 2010-11, 
including flights from Punta Arenas (Chile) to Antarctica, meals and 
accommodation, group camping, equipment and expedition guide. Excludes 
international flights.

On the cheap 

Screams of "What, €10 for a beer?!" echoed around many eurozone resorts last 
season, so this season's bargain hunters will have to be savvy, or head east.
Bulgarian resorts are expecting an influx of skiers. Deals include a week's 
self-catering in Bansko in an apartment for six including flights and transfers 
from £234pp, departing Gatwick 9 January, or half-board in a hotel departing 
Manchester 3 January from £299pp, with Balkan Holidays (0845 130 1114, 
balkanholidays.co.uk). Lift pass £84 for six days.Slovakia is the fastest 
growing destination for British skiers, says Inghams (inghams.co.uk), thanks 
partly to a new route withDanube Wings  <http://www.danubewings.com> from Luton 
or Manchester to Poprad-Tatry, starting 1 December. Inghams' deals include a 
week in the biggest ski area, Jasna, from £462pp including Luton flights, 
transfers and half-board at the Grand Hotel Jasna, or from £709pp including 
four-day lift-pass, two days' lessons and lunch.

Crystal <http://www.crystalski.co.uk> has launched some "Switzerland on a 
budget" one-week breaks, from £329pp in Nendaz (links to Verbier), or £419pp in 
Davos, including accommodation and flights.

Other sources of cheap breaks include: alditravel.co.uk 
<http://www.alditravel.co.uk>, igluski.com <http://www.igluski.com>, 
snowbeds.com <http://www.snowbeds.com>, ba.com <http://www.ba.com>, 
rocketski.com <http://www.rocketski.com>, and check out our selection at 
theguardian.com/travel/lateoffers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/lateoffers>.

Festivals

Want a change from Snowbombing and the Brits? The Big Snow festival 
<http://www.thebigsnowfestival.com> (14-21 March) launches this year in Arinsal,
Andorra, featuring sets by Calvin Harris, Kissy Sell Out and DJ Hype. Packages 
cost from £399pp including flights from Gatwick or Manchester to Toulouse, 
transfers, accommodation and event access. Or tryRave on Snow  
<http://www.raveonsnow.com>(11-13 December), an Austrian Alps extravaganza in 
Saalbach Hinterglemm. It's 16 this year, yet barely known to Brits. Dozens of 
German techno DJs you've never heard of play each night in a nine-floor venue. 
Packages including event pass and two nights' hostel accommodation from €119pp.
 