
Aga Rangemaster said the steep decline in orders for its upmarket cast iron 
stoves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/13/aga-profits-down-dividend-scrapped>
 appeared to have "levelled out" as it fell to a first-half loss.

The company said orders remained 20% below last year's levels as the slump in 
the housing market continued to weigh heavily on the business.

However, William McGrath, the chief executive, sounded a note of optimism 
ahead of the key winter trading period.

"We have the products and sales initiatives in place now to respond should the 
autumn selling season bring the hoped for bounce-back in consumer confidence," 
McGrath said.

The company is not paying an interim dividend because of the "degree of 
uncertainty" affecting the business. Its net cash has dwindled from £16.9m a 
year ago to just £2.3m. Aga said it would not decide its position on the 
full-year dividend until the financial year had finished and a "medium-term 
trading outlook" could be guaged.

It added: "With markets and consumer confidence showing some more positive 
signs, we retain our underlying confidence in the prospects for the business 
given our quality products and market positions."

The dramatic slump in orders, which was even worse in North America, has 
forced the group to cut production and slash costs. The measures, which should 
save Aga £8m this year, have resulted in 550 job losses since December 2007. 
Its factories have been operating on extended shutdowns and short-time working.

Demand for its deluxe cast iron cookers, made under the Aga, Rayburn, 
Rangemaster and Stanley brands, fell off a cliff last September as the 
financial crisis intensified and is yet to recover.

Group sales dropped 19% in the six months to 30 June to £117.8m. American 
sales were £15.1m - well below the 2008 level of £20.5m. The sales declines led 
to a pre-tax loss of £2.4m compared with a profit of £12.3m in the first half 
of 2008.

Sales of its cast iron cookers were down by over 25%. The company said the 
decline in new order leads was less marked at 10% but that worried consumers 
were delaying purchases of big ticket items because of the recession.

Aga has introduced electric models, including the revived Economy 7 models, 
partly in response to last year's spike in oil prices and to improve its green 
credentials. The Guardian columnist George Monbiot hascriticised the 
environmental impact of Aga cookers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jan/13/heathrow-campaigners-environmentalism-brendan-oneill>
, prompting McGrath todefend the company's products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jan/16/response-agas-class-george-monbiot>
.
 