
The tough-minded call it naughtiness. Some parents blame dull teaching. More 
thana century after it was first described 
<http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/documents/timeline.pdf>, there are still plenty 
of people who wonder whether children who can't concentrate at school are 
really suffering from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Now a 
group of researchers think that millions of them are not, but that 
they are living with something else instead.

Sluggish cognitive tempo (SCT), as the condition has been called, was the big 
story inthe January issue of the Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 
<http://link.springer.com/journal/10802/42/1/page/1>. And to some extent it 
does tidy up a loose end that has been hanging around for decades: many of 
those diagnosed with ADHD are not hyperactive at all.

Certainly these children struggle to listen to teachers or focus on their 
schoolwork, and their performance suffers, but they are not racing around the 
classroom knocking over pencil pots. They are the ones that used to be called 
daydreamers, and their work doesn't get done just the same.

There is no mention of SCT in the latest Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders. Instead the book classifies ADHD into three subtypes: one 
predominantly hyperactive, one predominantly inattentive and one a combination 
of the two.

According to Dr Russell Barkley, a leading proponent of the SCT theory – he 
calls the condition "the second attention disorder 
<http://jkseminars.com/product_info.php?products_id=627>" – between a third and 
a half of all those diagnosed with the inattentive subtype of ADHD are, in 
fact, suffering from SCT, and about the same number again remain undiagnosed. 
In the US, that would add up to around two million children.

"These children are not the ones giving adults much trouble, so they're easy 
to miss," Dr Keith McBurnett, another contributor to the January special issue,
told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/12/health/idea-of-new-attention-disorder-spurs-research-and-debate.html>
. "Anything we can do to understand what's going on with these kids is a good 
thing."

Not everyone agrees. Dr Allen Frances at Duke University describes SCT as "a 
fad in evolution". He is concerned about the possible overdiagnosis of ADHD, 
now applied to more than six million children in the US, as well as the 
widespread use of drugs to treat it. Meanwhile in the UK, we are heading in the 
same direction.Prescriptions for methylphenidate 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-23674235>, which is used in the more severe 
cases of ADHD, rose from 420,000 in 2007 to 657,000 in 2012.

There are also familiar murmurs about "disease-mongering", not to mention the 
relationship between some of the researchers into SCT and Eli Lilly, a company 
that is trialling drugs that might treat it. There is even, let's say,a lively 
debate on Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk:Sluggish_cognitive_tempo>
 about Barkley's role in writing the SCT page. If we want the truth of the 
matter, as always in science, we will have to wait and see.
 