
Alan King thought his best chance of a winner on Saturday was Who Dares Wins 
in the first atCheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham>. He 
has never been more delighted to be proved completely wrong. Who Dares Wins 
could finish only fourth behind a 25-1 shot but King went on to complete a 
treble here and had two more winners at Doncaster, including the feature race, 
the SkyBet Chase. By the end of the day, some of his colleagues were calling 
him “Alan Mullins”.

The man who is expected to dominate the Cheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>, by contrast, had a rare 
day to forget. Willie Mullins had four starters in Britain, including three 
favourites, two of which started at odds-on. Even each-way backers did not make 
any return on their money, however, with Djakadam’s failure to complete in the 
feature chase the biggest disappointment for Ireland’s champion trainer.

Djakadam, who started at odds-on, was still travelling well when he fell with 
about a mile still to run, but had ground to make up on King’s runner Smad 
Place, who was jumping with his usual brilliance at the head of the field.Many 
Clouds, last year’s Grand National winner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/grand-national-aintree> moved 
alongside on the run down the hill, but Smad Place outstayed him readily in the 
straight on the way to a 12-length success.

The Trials day card went ahead only following an inspection after persistent 
rain overnight, while several fences, including the last, were bypassed in the 
chases to avoid the worst of the ground. It made no difference to Smad Place, 
however, and he is now a realistic contender for either the Ryanair Chase or 
the Gold Cup in March.

Buveur D’Air on course for Cheltenham Festival after Huntingdon romp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/buveur-dair-cheltenham-festival-huntingdon-romp>
King is understandably reluctant to commit to a target at this stage, and 
despite this result feels that this season’s Gold Cup could be unusually 
strong. The grey is top-priced at 16-1 to win it, and 10-1 for the Ryanair 
Chase.

“I think the Gold Cup could be exceptional this year, and he’s in the 
Ryanair,” King said. “If he’s fit and well, he’ll run in one or the other. It 
was a great exhibition of jumping and he keeps up a relentless gallop. I was 
blown away [when he won] the Hennessy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/smad-place-hennessy-gold-cup-wayne-hutchinson-newbury-alan-king>
 [in November] and slightly blown away again today.”

Annacotty, who took the Paddy Power Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/14/cheltenham-annacotty-ian-popham-paddy-power-gold-cup>
 here in November, added another valuable prize to King’s haul with a gritty 
performance in the card’s handicap chase, while Yanworth completed his treble 
with impressive ease in the card’s trial for the Neptune Novice Hurdle in March.

Yanworth had shown huge potential in three previous starts over hurdles, 
winning every time without coming off the bit. Even King seemed surprised when 
Yanworth proved similarly dominant in Saturday’s field, beating the useful 
Shantou Village by seven lengths.

“We were testing him in trip today but I just can’t believe how he comes back 
on the bridle against proper horses. I thought it was going to be a real test.

“Last year on his bumper form, he was crying out for two-and-a-half miles. 
He’s definitely quicker this year at home.”

The performance was sufficiently impressive to dislodge Mullins’s Bellshill 
from the top of the Neptune market, where Yanworth is now favourite at 3-1. He 
had also been quoted for the Supreme Novice Hurdle, where Mullins will field 
the hot favourite Min, but the longer race seems the more likely target.

“Min doesn’t come into the equation,” King said. “Barry [Geraghty, his jockey] 
has been dying to step him up in trip right the way through, and after Ascot 
[in December] we pinpointed this as his next run. The big worry on good ground 
in March in the Supreme would be that they might get him at it a bit with his 
jumping. Two-and-a-half will give him a bit more time and they go half-a-length 
slower.”

Colin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard> has also 
emerged as a trainer who may stand up to the massed ranks of Mullins-trained 
contenders in March, both with Cue Card in the Gold Cup and now also 
Thistlecrack, the certain favourite for the World Hurdle after an easy win in 
Saturday’s Cleeve Hurdle. As Yanworth had done half an hour earlier, 
Thistlecrack simply galloped away from his pursuers after the last despite the 
testing ground and is now best at 13-8 for the World Hurdle.

At Doncaster, Mullins’s disappointing day was completed by defeats for all 
three of his runners, including Up For Review, the second-favourite for the 
Albert Bartlett Novice Hurdle, behind the unbeaten Barters Hill. The winner did 
not convince with his jumping but is now 7-2 favourite for the three-mile 
novice event at Cheltenham in March.
 