
Stuart Horton is a boy at the age of 10. He moves to Beaton thinking it's 
going to be the dullest place he has ever moved to, but to his surprise it 
seems to be a rather big Adventure as he tries to find his missing Uncle Toni's 
workshop or his stage name teeny tiny Toni Horten. Stuart seems to do what ever 
it takes to find it but it turns out he is not the only one. There are triplets 
next door from him that always are trying to stick there nose into some top 
secret things to put in the Beech Road paper. Stuart can just not hold on to 
the secret of his uncle for much longer so he lets a girl from the triplets 
called April join the mission. She seems to be rather bossy but he wouldn't 
have done it without her since he was about 2 heads shorter than her. My 
favourite bit of the story was when Stuart's Uncle Toni's house was being 
demolished.

In the story there was a woman who I thought was really horrible; she was 
called Jeanie. Jeanie's assistant was called Clifford. Clifford was very 
suspicious but he might not be as suspicious as you think. There was someone 
called Leonora who was blind so she had a guide dog called Pluto. She was quite 
good friends with Jeanie at the start of the story but their friendship ended 
when she found out about uncle Toni's work shop and how and what Jeanie had 
been doing to find it. Leonora had known Toni's wife that made up a big part of 
the story.

What made this a really good book was that every chapter ended on a 
cliffhanger. Me and my dad read this book together and we loved it so much that 
we are going to write a letter to Lissa Evans saying how much we liked it.

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 