
One of the greatest technology myths of the last decade has been that smart 
fridges will take off. And they're still at it - this week, LG launched the
Smart Manager fridge 
<http://www.lgnewsroom.com/ces2012/view.php?product_code=95&product_type=95&post_index=1828>
 at the bigCES technology fair in Las Vegas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/jan/08/ces-consumer-electronics-show-2012-preview>
. It is to go on sale in the UK this year, priced around Â£2,000 and has an LCD 
touchscreen, camera and internet connection which allows it to download recipes 
and link to online shopping services such asOcado 
<http://www.ocado.com/webshop/content/information5/2362rocketerB>.

The idea is that one manages food shopping by scanning the barcodes of items, 
or a shopping receipt, with a scanner on the fridge door, or by describing the 
item via voice recognition technology. The fridge's computer can monitor its 
contents and automatically add food to a user's online shopping account when 
stocks are running low. It can even suggest recipes based on the ingredients 
you've got left and once a recipe is chosen, the fridge can switch on the oven 
to the correct temperature and set a timer via a wireless connection. The 
screen on the door then tells the cook exactly what to do. That's the latest 
smart fridge.

Idiot fridge, more like.
 The LG Smart Manager fridge, launched at the Las Vegas technology show 2012, 
which can scan food barcodes, order groceries online and switch the oven on 
The only technology that will survive the furnace of the global market is 
intuitive technology. There's a reason why Sky Plus killed off the video - 
there was nothing intuitive about programming a video. You had to consult the 
manual every time. And there's a reason why one of the biggest-selling phones on
Amazon 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/BT-Freestyle-Twin-DECT-Phone/dp/B001E967AS/ref=sr_1_28?s=electronics&ie=UTF8&qid=1326276705&sr=1-28>
 has been designed for the elderly/visually impaired. It has buttons the size 
of ciabatta rolls and a handset that looks like it was manufactured by Fisher 
Price. Even my two-year-old can use it. Actually, that's not a good thing.

Truth is, no one wants to communicate with their fridge. No one wants the 
obligation of keeping their fridge informed unless they're seriously short on 
inter-personal relationships. You want to open your fridge to get the milk, 
preferably while chatting to someone else or listening to the radio. You don't 
want to scan its barcode or let it know that you're thinking about cooking with 
smoked haddock next Tuesday. And as for beaming straight to Ocado - who wants 
to liaise with the fridge about delivery times? There's enough Ocado bickering 
in our house as it is.

This machine won't make life easier: it'll make it more annoying, like the 
mobile phone instruction booklet, still lying in the Nokia box on my desk, with 
instructions on how to download a program so that my phone can communicate with 
my computer and back up its contacts. I'd rather chew my own arm off than 
undertake this task, which probably means I'm due to lose my phone sometime 
soon. And I'd rather walk to the local Tesco Metro than communicate with my 
fridge.

Any other over-complicated home gadgets driving you nuts? Post your comments 
here
 