
Young people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> in England born 
since the turn of the century are the most clean-living generation in recent 
times, with the rates of those choosing to smoke cigarettes and drink alcohol 
the lowest on record.

Fewer than 5% of children aged eight to 15 have smoked, down three-quarters 
since 2003, while only about 17% admitted ever drinking alcohol, a fall of 
two-thirds, according to an annual survey of health trends.

At the same time, the proportion claiming to eat five portions of fruit and 
veg has almost doubled in the same period to a fifth. Despite that, 28% of 
children aged two to 15 were overweight or obese in 2015, and only one in five 
were as physically active as they ought to have been.

Teenagers more likely to eat healthily if they think it is rebellious
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/12/teenagers-healthy-eating-rebellious>
Nine in 10 mothers and eight in 10 fathers of overweight children did not 
recognise the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/parents-children-overweight-survey-obesity>
, according to the Health Survey for England 2015, published by NHS Digital on 
Wednesday, with charities warning that obesity is still an urgent public health 
epidemic.

The dramatic fall in the number of young smokers follows a cultural shift in 
the perception of smoking, as well as significantly tighter restrictions on 
tobacco sales.

In the past decade, the government has raised the legal age for buying tobacco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/jan/01/health.smoking> from 16 to 18, 
banned smoking in enclosed public spaces, introduced graphic health warnings 
and introduced rules that hide tobacco products from view in shops.

At the same time, off-licences have become far stricter about sales to 
teenagers, and bars and clubs have introduced stringent ID requirements for 
entry.

Fiona Sim, a family doctor and former chair of the Royal Society for Public 
Health <https://www.rsph.org.uk/>, said the fall in the numbers of young people 
smoking and drinking reflected a general social trend. Stubbornly high rates of 
obesity also reflected wider social attitudes, she said.


“I was listening on the radio this morning about the Gin Lane days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2012/sep/12/william-hogarth-gin-lane>
 of 200 years ago, when it was normal for your child to get up in the morning 
and have a glass of gin with their breakfast,” Sim said. “We would no longer do 
that, clearly; it hasn’t been normal for quite some time. Similarly there are 
other things which are no longer socially acceptable around smoking and 
drinking.

“But when it comes to food, we haven’t got there yet. We are now seeing almost 
60% of adults either obese or overweight so it’s not that surprising that 
children are obese or overweight as well.”

Sim added: “It’s far more than simply saying it’s because kids are sitting in 
front of screens or because parents are allowing them to, it’s a societal issue 
that we are beginning to win on tobacco particularly, and hopefully on alcohol, 
but we are no way winning the shift on societal norms when it comes to physical 
activity and our eating habits.”

Gillian Prior, the head of health at the National Centre for Social Research, 
which carried out the survey of 8,034 adults and 5,714 children on behalf of the
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, said: “Changes to the law mean 
that under-18s are prohibited from buying cigarettes and the Challenge 25 
policy adopted by many retailers has meant that these laws are more rigorously 
enforced than they have been in the past.

“But we should not underestimate the importance of changes in the nature of 
childhood; changes in technology and society mean that teenagers in particular 
spend their time in a very different way compared to teenagers 15 years ago.”

The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said: 
“We are committed to helping people lead healthier lives so it is encouraging 
to see a decline in smoking rates and fewer children drinking alcohol.

“However, this survey reaffirms that we can’t let up in our efforts to tackle 
childhood obesity – and we are confident our world-leading plan will make a 
real difference in the long term.”

 