
Snap Inc, the company formerly known as Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat>, has announced that it will 
set up its main international hub in the UK, in what is likely to be seen as a 
vote of confidence for British tech following the EU referendum result.

The company says it chose Britain because of the nation’s “strong creative 
industries” in a move that bucks the trend of US tech companies favouring 
low-tax jurisdictions such as Luxembourg (where Amazon is based) or Ireland 
(where Facebook and Apple have their international headquarters).

Claire Valoti, Snap’s UK general manager, said: “The UK is where our 
advertising clients are, where more than 10 million daily Snapchatters are, and 
where we’ve already begun to hire talent.”

Although Britain has yet to leave the EU, or even begin the process by 
invoking Article 50, smaller technology companies have expressed fears over the 
likely effect Brexit, particularly a “hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/hard-brexit-would-damage-almost-every-sector-of-uk-economy>
”, would have on the sector. However, larger firms,including Facebook and Google
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/google-facebook-brexit-uk-technology-sector-skills>
, have recently committed themselves to more investment in the country.

The new British company is called Snap Group Limited, following its American 
parent’s rebranding from Snapchat to Snap Incorporated. The name is intended to 
focus on Snap’s new self-image as a camera company first and foremost. “We 
believe that reinventing the camera represents our greatest opportunity to 
improve the way people live and communicate,” the company tells users on its 
website.

That reinvention was supported by Snap’s second ever product, a pair of 
glasses with a built-in Wi-Fi camera calledSpectacles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/24/snapchat-launches-video-capture-sunglasses-spectacles>
. The gadget, which has only been sold through custom-built vending machines 
temporarily installed in various locations around the US, has been a hit among 
fans, despite its limited availability.


Spectacles have yet to hit the rest of the world, but when they do, much of 
the revenue will come through the UK. A spokeswoman confirmed that Snap Group 
Limited will not only record revenue made in Britain, but also revenue from 
other countries where Snap has no local presence. The choice is deliberately 
intended to align Snap’s corporate structure with the firm’s business, she 
added.

With a stated user base of over 150m, Snapchat is smaller than seeming 
competitors like Facebook and Twitter, with a billion and 350 million users 
respectively. But the company has focused on dominating a few particular niches 
over the broad-based reach of the larger firms, and is particularly popular 
among young people in Britain and the US. The company says more than 60% of 
British smartphone users aged between 13 and 34 are Snapchatters. Those numbers 
add up: research firm eMarketer estimates the company could pull in almost $1bn 
advertising revenue over 2017.
 