
Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> has teamed up 
with Goldie Hawn for a mother-daughter comedy called Snatched.

Amy Schumer says trolls' backlash over Barbie casting shows she’s right for 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/07/amy-schumer-says-trolls-backlash-over-barbie-casting-shows-shes-right-for-role>
The first trailer for the movie shows the controversial comedian heading on 
vacation with the Oscar-nominated star of Private Benjamin after her boyfriend 
dumps her. But the two become involved in a nefarious kidnapping plot.

It’s from director Jonathan Levine, who was behind Seth Rogen’s Christmas 
comedy The Night Before, and scripted by Katie Dippold, whose work includes The 
Heat and Ghostbusters. Paul Feig, who directed both of those films, is also on 
board as producer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsBWnst8f7w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsBWnst8f7w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPsBWnst8f7w&media=>
It’s Hawn’s first big-screen role since 2002’s The Banger Sisters, where she 
starred opposite Susan Sarandon. In an interview with theLos Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/la-en-st-amy-schumer-emmys-20160803-snap-story.html>
, Schumer said that she was focused on getting her in the movie.

“I met [Hawn] on an airplane a couple of years ago and told her there’s a 
movie I really want to make with her,” she said. “And she was very nice. ‘OK, 
honey.’ She probably thought I was a psycho. ‘OK, crazy person.’ Then I’d meet 
her at different things, saying, ‘We’re making this movie together,’ and I 
think, eventually, some people got in her ear and told her I wasn’t crazy, that 
I make things.”

The film’s already received some negative publicity after the pair released a 
tribute to Beyoncé’s Formation video earlier this year. Some claimed they were 
guilty of cultural reappropriation, which Schumer denied. “If you watched it 
and it made you feel anything other than good, please know that was not my 
intention,”she said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/28/amy-schumer-defends-formation-beyonce-video-tribute>
. “The movie we made is fun and the women in it are strong and want to help 
each other. That’s what it was about for me.”

The film was fast-tracked after Schumer’s first lead role in Trainwreck was a 
surprise hit, with the film making $140m worldwide from a $35m budget.
 