
Edward Snowden has waded into the simmering debate over Canada’s controversial 
anti-terror law, saying thatJustin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> was reluctant to repeal the 
law out of a fear of appearing soft on terror.


Speaking to an audience in Toronto on Tuesday, Snowden pointed to a campaign 
promise by the Canadian prime minister to amend the sweeping legislation, which
gives security forces heightened powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/canada-anti-terror-lawsuit-bill-c51>
 to apprehend suspected terrorists and disrupt their activities. “But he’s been 
in office a little while now and we haven’t seen that actually come to pass,” 
said Snowden, appearing at the SecTor cybersecurity conference via videolink 
from Russia.


Bill C-51 was introduced in early 2015 by the country’s then Conservative 
government,spawning protests across the country as it became law. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/canada-anti-terror-law-public-consultation-campaign>
 Hundreds of thousands of Canadians, including legal scholars, civil liberties 
groups and pundits from across the political spectrum, spoke out against the 
law and its perceived attempt tosupplant the country’s democracy with a 
creeping police state. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/05/canada-anti-terror-law-despite-widespread-protest>

Trudeau vowed to amend the “problematic elements” of the law, rather than 
simply repeal the legislation, noted Snowden. “Because he’s afraid of being 
politically attacked on the basis of being soft on terrorism, regardless of 
whether or not this law actually helps prevent any terrorist attacks,” he said. 
“This is just the way the politics of fear work.”

Last month the Liberal government launched a wide-ranging consultation on 
national security 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/services/defence/nationalsecurity/consultation-national-security.html>
, meaning any potential changes to the law will probably be delayed until next 
year. The extra time will offer the government the opportunity to get it right, 
said Ralph Goodale, Canada’s public safety minister, as he announced the 
consultation. “A lot of people felt shut out, and we promised to give them the 
opportunity to be heard.”

On Tuesday, Snowden suggested what he described as the minimum changes needed 
to the law, such as the creation of a judicial body that would carry out a 
case-by-case review of every individual exercise of these powers. “And this 
means those individuals working in those spy agencies know simply that as long 
as they follow the law, they’ll be fine,” he said.

The law allows information on Canadians to be shared between more than a dozen 
federal institutions. “All the activities held in our private lives, our 
private records, are being used as a kind of currency to gain standing and 
status within this surveillance network,” said Snowden. “We’re being traded 
like baseball cards.”

Any sharing of information – by those within Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and with foreign agencies – that 
doesn’t result in a trial or charges should be disclosed to individuals once a 
particular time frame has lapsed, he said, allowing people to ensure their 
rights have not been violated in any way.

Snowden also took aim at the law’s vague and undefined language. “A lot of 
what classifies as terrorism in the political context – individuals that the 
news calls terrorist – are really common criminals,” said Snowden. “But they do 
not constitute the kind of super criminal threat that is represented by our 
terrorism legislation.”

He pointed to the obvious need for law enforcement to have the right tools to 
counter these threats. “But we do not want to sacrifice everything that makes 
our societies great,” he said. “We do not want to reorder the boundaries of our 
rights for the convenience of law enforcement officials, if it’s not truly 
necessary, if it means we lose everything that we’re trying to defend.”
 