
What do you get if you cross a handful of superheroes with the Death Star and 
a forgetful fish? Box office gold. Walt Disney Studios is tipped to amass a 
record $7bn (£5.6bn) in cinemas around the world this year, having already 
passed $6bn thanks toDoctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/30/doctor-strange-observer-reveiw>, 
Captain America: Civil War and Finding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/31/finding-dory-review>. It expects 
to set a new all-time high with the upcoming release ofanimated feature Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/07/moana-review-disney-polynesian-princess-movie>
 and the all-but-guaranteed Christmas bonanza ofRogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-five-things-we-learned>
 – which sees the return of Darth Vader.

Industry analysts say Disney’s success is hardly surprising. This is a studio 
that has systematically bought up great franchises, characters and talent in 
recent years, and now it is reaping the benefits.

“What is happening at Disney is no accident,” says Guy Bisson, research 
director at research firm Ampere Analysis, who points to the benefits of the 
$15bn spending spree that has underpinned its film business. “It is the fruit 
of a long-term strategy based around strong characters and franchises.”

In 2006, Disney spent $7.4bn on Pixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/jan/25/citynews.filmnews>, the hit 
factory behindFinding Nemo, its new sequel Finding Dory, Toy Story and The 
Incredibles. This helped Disney win its struggle to produce modern versions of 
the blockbuster animated movies on which it built its reputation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ba2bd06d0aba12a01adecbd6c14db6987b63a1%2F3511_0_9631_5782%2F9631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ba2bd06d0aba12a01adecbd6c14db6987b63a1%2F3511_0_9631_5782%2F9631.jpg>
 A scene from the forthcoming animation Moana. Photograph: ©2016 Disney 
In 2009 came the riskier $4bn purchase of Marvel Comics’ sprawling superhero 
universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/aug/31/disney-marvel-buy-out>, 
comprising 5,000 characters including the X-Men, Iron Man and Captain America, 
which saw Disney branch out from wholesome family creations such asThe Little 
Mermaid and The Lion King to edgier, more violent fare.

This was followed by nailing down the world’s most famous sci-fi franchise by 
buying Lucasfilm, maker ofStar Wars, in a $4bn deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/30/disney-lucasfilm-star-wars-deal> 
that has paved the way for a string of new releases, includingRogue One, a 
spin-off story about a plot to steal the plans to the Death Star. The deal also 
included the rights to theIndiana Jones franchise and two highly prized, 
hi-tech production companies, Industrial Light & Magic and Skywalker Sound.

“They’ve made acquisitions that initially looked really expensive but turned 
out to be very lucrative,” says Brian Wieser, analyst at Pivotal Research. 
“They’ve managed them well, kept creative leadership in place, and they keep 
making amazing properties.”

Disney films have enjoyed a stellar year, with four blockbusters to date: 
Captain America, Zootopia and Finding Dory made more than $1bn each and The 
Jungle Book made $966m. But its film arm accounted for only 18% of the 
company’s total $42.5bn revenues in the nine months to the end of July; the 
rest of the business is not performing so well. Shares in theWalt Disney Company
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walt-disney-company> have fallen 16% over 
the past year and the company’s fourth-quarter results undershot expectations 
last week.

Investors’ concerns are focused on ESPN, Disney’s sports cable network and the 
company’s biggest profit driver, which is struggling as consumers ditch 
expensive pay-TV packages and switch to cheaper services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc617fde42a67cdcc85e1fed99675a5cd638367%2F267_0_3821_2294%2F3821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dc617fde42a67cdcc85e1fed99675a5cd638367%2F267_0_3821_2294%2F3821.jpg>
 Finding Dory, this year’s sequel to the Pixar hit Finding Nemo. Photograph: 
Rex Shutterstock 
Disney’s broad character franchises – like Mickey Mouse and Jack Sparrow of 
Pirates of the Caribbean fame – are exploited across its theme parks and 
resorts business, which accounts for 30% of revenues, and its merchandise and 
licensing unit, which accounts for a further 10%.

Disney is currently constructing a “Star Wars land” at its flagship US theme 
parks in Orlando and Anaheim, which will include a ride where visitors take 
control of the Millennium Falcon, and dining options featuring a take on the 
famous Mos Eisley cantina from the original 1977 film.

And in just the first year following the premiere of 2015’s Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens, merchandise sales are predicted to hit $5bn, with Disney 
reportedly taking about 10%. Another Disney blockbuster,Frozen, is reportedly 
the biggest merchandise moneyspinner of all time, with sales of more than 
$107bn.

“The parts of the business interact strongly,” says Bisson. “The big character 
franchises – superheroes,Star Wars, children’s output – all are so dependent on 
the whole stream from theme parks and resorts.”

The global appeal of Disney’s character franchises also plays well in the 
increasingly important international movie market – which has been driven by a 
boom in Asian countries such as China and Indonesia, where much Hollywood fare 
has traditionally not performed well – as well as the rise of markets in Latin 
America and eastern Europe. In 2015, 61% of Disney’s total $5.88bn global box 
office take came from outside the US.

“The major studios are moving to fewer, but bigger and bigger, films to drive 
the box office,” says David Hancock, the head of film and cinema at analysts 
IHS Technology. “And it is working. Part of the key to this is now the wider 
picture: the international market is so much bigger than just appealing in the 
US.”

Disney is also aware that the Marvel and Lucasfilm acquisitions have helped it 
pull in large numbers of millennials: exactly the demographic film-makers and 
TV companies are most concerned about losing as they threaten to abandon 
traditional media.

“Remember, Disney is rumoured to be looking at a potential acquisition of 
Netflix,” says Bisson. “An international over-the-top [streaming on-demand] 
business that would fit into its channels business is hugely attractive. Disney 
already has an exclusive film deal with Netflix in the US.”

The only barrier to Disney hitting the magic $7bn box office total is whether 
Rogue One proves to be a winner with diehard Star Wars fans this Christmas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe667c5910acdb7ec2d86de8be189bd4a567228f%2F0_56_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Soaring%20Disney%20Studios%20hopes%20for%20%247bn%20fairytale%20ending%20to%20its%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdisney-hopes-for-fairytale-ending-7bn-box-office-moana-rogue-one-finding-dory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe667c5910acdb7ec2d86de8be189bd4a567228f%2F0_56_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 A scene from Captain America: Civil War. Photograph: AP 
In August, Bob Iger, chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, said that the 
level of fan enthusiasm forRogue One was “roughly on par” with what had been 
seen at the same point in last year’s marketing campaign forThe Force Awakens. 
That film clocked up more than $2bn from cinemagoers, with $1.33bn of that 
banked as box office takings in the 2015 calendar year.

Disney will be hoping that its force will be strong enough to net the 
$1bn-plus it needs to make history this year.

HOT TICKETS

Disney’s billion-dollar blockbusters in 2016
1. Captain America: Civil War: $1.15bn
2. Zootopia: $1.023bn
3. Finding Dory: $1.022bn
4. The Jungle Book: $966m
5. Star Wars: The Force Awakens: $2.07bn ($736m in 2016)
 