
The first time in the presence of United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/unitedarabemirates> coach Mahdi Ali can 
be a little confusing. He talks about his experience at past World Cup 
quarter-finals and lifting Asian titles. Yet, 1990 apart, the nation has never 
appeared on the global stage and when it comes to the continent, a final on 
home soil in 1996 is as good as it gets. Ali refers to youth tournaments as if 
they are the full deal as he and many of his present group of players came up 
through the ranks together. Now, as the UAE prepare for a 2015 Asian Cup 
semi-final with Australia in Newcastle, a first continental senior title is 
within sight. It would be a magnificent achievement for so many reasons.

 It would only widen the smiles that have been everywhere. The boss, so 
relaxed that it has almost been suspicious, has been sporting a grin as often 
as that red cap of his. Star player Omar Abdulrahman has been beaming in 
training and during media duties and the small press pack from the Middle East 
are friendly and genial. There is plenty to smile about as the Australian 
public is starting to see. One security guard at Canberra professed not to know 
anything about football before claiming that Abdulrahman was something else.

Socceroos plan to exploit 'lazy' Omar Abdulrahman in Asian Cup semi-final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/25/asian-cup-semi-final-omar-abdulrahman>
The Saudi-born star has a way of catching the eye and it’s not just due to his 
David Luiz-style haircut – the Brazilian wishes he had anything like the same 
talent as the 23-year-old who came close to joining Manchester City in 2012 – 
but it is the way he has been the best player on pretty much every pitch he has 
played on inAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> over the 
past two weeks. It has happened before. In 2012 after the first half of the 
Olympic opener with Uruguay at Old Trafford, I received a text from my brother 
at the stadium asking who on earth was this bushy-headed magician running the 
game against the South Americans.

 For an afternoon, thousands of people in Manchester fell in love a little 
with the slight star and the UAE team but it was a fleeting feeling in the 
context of a massive event like the Olympics, one highlight of hundreds. Here, 
it’s different and it’s growing. There weren’t that many people at the first 
UAE press conference at the 2015 Asian Cup. Not that many people heard coach 
Ali talk of a semi-final target. Not many to heard him discuss the importance 
and fitness of Abdulrahman and not many to heard him describe the evolution of 
a young team. There are plenty listening now.

 For decades, the country drove the west Asian stereotype, hiring big-name 
foreign coaches for short-term stays. Don Revie made the headlines in the 1970s 
but others followed: Roy Hodgson, Dick Advocaat, Valery Lobanovsky, Mario 
Zagallo and plenty more. Ali has shown a trigger-happy federation, and others 
too, that going local is not loco and thinking long is not loony.

 After his success at youth levels, Ali was given the senior job in August 
2012. It was the right time. The failure in qualification for the 2014 World 
Cup gave the former electrical engineer the chance amid an atmosphere more open 
than usual for a shift in philosophy. Ali has crafted a new side in his 30 
months in charge though he says it is more than seven years in the making. 
Members of this squad such as goalscorers Ahmed Khalil and Ali Mabkhout (joint 
leading goalscorer in the tournament with four and attracting serious interest 
from European clubs) as well as Amer Abdulrahman, Abdelaziz Sanqour, Hamdan Al 
Kamali, Abdulaziz Hussain, Mohamed Fawzi and Habib Fardan have played 
tournaments under Ali before.

Iran fail in bid to overturn Asian Cup defeat to Iraq
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/25/asian-cup-iran-overturn-result>
 It is a club environment on a national scale. In press conferences, the boss 
finishes his players’ sentences. No coach in the country’s history has been as 
well-liked as the genial tactician and it’s not just because he is local. It is 
the establishment of a footballing identity.

 While it didn’t start with the 4-1 win over Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/11/uae-coast-to-comfortable-win-over-error-prone-qatar-at-asian-cup>
 two weeks ago, in terms of the Asian Cup, it was a perfect way to kick off and 
a major victory. Heading into the tournament, Qatar were looking to do to the 
UAE on the pitch what Doha would love to do to Dubai off it – overtaking. The 
Maroons were the form team in Asia with the UAE posting some poor results in 
the Asian Cup build-up (something that Tuesday’s opponents will understand). 
Both were seen as tournament dark horses but Qatar were looking lighter. A home 
defeat at the hands of Uzbekistan, a sixth game without a win, in October saw 
Ali criticise the lack of support and atmosphere.

 If these were cracks, the federation stayed strong (though the issue of a 
contract renewal became a thorny one – less so now) and the country was 
rewarded with a fine attacking display.A win over Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/16/iran-uae-qualify-asian-cup-quarterfinals>
 and a place in the last eight followed but the group stage ended withan 
unlucky and late defeat at the hands of Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/20/asian-cup-iran-uae-match-report>
. That put the Whites in the path of Japan. For Ali, it was not just about 
achieving the target of the last four finish, but for a team that is often 
reduced to playing neighbours, it was a chance to break out of regional 
concerns to prove they are a genuine continental force. To show the whole of 
Asia what the country was capable of – a good old football coming-out party.

Iranian women stand united in protest and hope at Asian Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/23/asian-cup-iran-fans-protest>
The UAE rode their luck at times against the Samurai Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/united-arab-emirates-beat-japan-penalties-asian-cup>
 but more important was belief. It was symbolised by Abdulrahman. He may not 
help out in defence as much as some but in the first penalty of the shoot-out, 
his panenka was not only delicious, it sent out a magnificent message to 
team-mates and opponents alike.

 This swagger and skill is now focused on the host nation. The semi-final 
target has been achieved. Japan has been disposed of and the talent in the 
squad has been displayed. The greatest achievement in the country’s football 
history is within reach. More than that, it shows the whole region of west Asia 
that there are alternatives to the short-term, hire and fire approach. Plenty 
at stake then. “Sometimes you have to play with your heart,” Ali said after the 
Japan win. Socceroos should beware. The UAE has heart and more besides.
 