
The Socceroos have branded United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/unitedarabemirates> star Omar Abdulrahman 
as lazy and promised the playmaker a torrid time in their Asian Cup semi-final.

The Australians have noted the mop-topped Abdulrahman’s arrogance and believe 
they can exploit his lack of work ethic. Socceroos defender Trent Sainsbury 
says the Australians, wary of Abdulrahman’s quality, will get in his face in 
Tuesday night’s fixture in Newcastle.

“Very tidy on the ball, not the hardest worker and I think we can exploit 
that,” Sainsbury said on Sunday of Abdulrahman. “But at the same time, if we 
have got the ball, we have also got to keep one eye on him defensively. That is 
going to be the biggest thing for us as a defence.”

Abdulrahman, a 23-year-old attacking midfielder rated by many as the player of 
the Asian Cup so far, has attracted interest from giant clubs including 
Manchester City, Barcelona and Borussia Dortmund.

“He has just got that arrogance about him,” Sainsbury said. “He has got the 
cheekiness to chuck in a nutmeg here and there and he’s a very quick thinker on 
the ball. So if we can counteract that and get in his face and not let him get 
his head up, hopefully we can stop him.

“If we can keep him facing our goal, then he’s not going to be able to face 
forward and play that killer ball. So to keep him playing backwards would be a 
good plan for us.”

The Socceroos enter the knockout bout with an extra day of rest – and they won 
their quarter-final in regulation time, while UAE scraped past Japan on 
penalties after extra-time.

“I don’t think the UAE has got the legs and the stamina to go with us for 90 
minutes,” Sainsbury said. “It is just going to be quick ball movement, player 
movement. And as soon as we lose the ball, try and win it back - try and choke 
them until they’re blue.”

The Socceroos expect the Emirates to play with caution, in stark contrast to 
what the host nation has planned.

“You have got to go for it in this game - you can’t hold back,” Sainsbury 
said. “I think we have got a massive opportunity to change the way people look 
at football inAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> and 
the boys know the importance of it. So we’re going to go out there and give 100 
per cent.”
 