
In last week’s autumn statement, the chancellor failed to even acknowledge the 
crisis facing adult social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
. Ignoring one of the country’s most under-appreciated public services has 
become a bad habit of governments of all colours. Yet it was a habit that 
charities, councils, social care workers, NHS managers, former ministers, and 
of course those who need care, had all hoped the government was finally going 
to break, as part of its bid to build “a country that works for everyone”. It 
was not to be.

Government inaction on social care funding needs a radical response
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/30/government-inaction-on-social-care-funding-needs-a-radical-response>
It is not an overstatement to describe care as life support. It is as basic as 
washing, dressing or eating. If you have a family member who relies on it, you 
will know what it means for the whole family foryour loved one to get the care 
they need to be safe and to live with dignity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/28/women-who-care-for-elderly-parents-need-support>
.

Yet demographic changes, combined with chronic underfunding, mean that while 
more and more people need care, fewer and fewer get it. Indeed, more than 1 
million older and disabled people do not get the care they need, and investment 
has shrunk by athird in just five years 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/media/5379/adass-budget-survey-report-2016.pdf>. This 
amounts to an overall shortfall of £4.6bn in investment in social care, because 
of £1.6bn worth of cash cuts in social care budgets.

What this means in practice is that some of those who are most in need of 
help, whether it’s because they are living with dementia or Parkinson’s or 
fighting cancer,are not being given the help they need 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/Documents/EN-GB/For-professionals/Research/Briefing-The_Health_and_Care_of_Older_People_in_England-2015-UPDATED_JAN2016.pdf?dtrk=true>
 to get up in the morning, manage around the home or go out. More than a 
million older and disabled people are unable to get the care they need. As many 
families will know, the impact of this lack of help can be heartbreaking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chancellor%20wrong%20on%20social%20care%20funding%2C%20says%20former%20health%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chancellor%20wrong%20on%20social%20care%20funding%2C%20says%20former%20health%20secretary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fchancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video&media=>
Chancellor wrong on social care funding, says former health secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/nov/27/chancellor-wrong-on-social-care-funding-says-former-health-secretary-video>
Councils are unable to pay for the full price of care, as the funding is 
simply not there, and care homes are closing at increasing rates. Government 
figures released from the Insolvency Service show that 380 care homes, nearly 
100 more than originally reported,have collapsed since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/care-homes-insolvencies-autumn-statement>
. When care homes close, people have to go further away from family to find a 
place, which makes it harder on families to visit.

This lack of help can cause increased physical and mental health issues. For 
example, a third of autistic adults have experienced severe mental health 
problems due to a lack of support. In addition, it has a massive knock-on 
impact on carers – stress and absenteeism caused by juggling work with caring 
is estimated to be costing UK businesses more than £3.5bn every year.

Underfunding of care 
<https://www.adass.org.uk/media/5379/adass-budget-survey-report-2016.pdf> also 
has a significant impact on the NHS. The latest delayed discharge figures have 
remained at a record–breaking high for three consecutive months. We are now 
witnessing delays that we would normally only see during winter crisis times. 
Social care consistently accounts for 30% ofall delayed discharge 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/delayed-transfers-of-care/2016-17-data/>
, and last year it resulted in 650,000 lost bed days and a waste of up to £300m.

Given these challenges have been in place during summer months, health 
experts’ warnings of an impending winter crisis in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> need to be heard. Investment in care 
will help prevent entry into the health system as well as supporting discharge.

The government needs to look urgently and seriously at this issue, right the 
wrongs of overlooking those that need care and move urgently to develop a 
sustainable care system that is fit for purpose.
 