
It could be a football fairytale. If South Korea’s soldier-striker Lee 
Jeong-hyeop, nicknamed ‘Gunderella’ (a play on the Korean words for army and, 
well, Cinderella) can find the net against Australia - as he did in the group 
stage - in the Asian Cup final on Saturday, then one of the biggest turnarounds 
in the fortunes of any national team in recent years will be immortalised 
forever.

Hardly anyone in South Korea had heard of Lee when South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southkorea> arrived back home after 
collecting just one point from the 2014 World Cup. The heckles and the shower 
of sweets that they were greeted with at Incheon International Airport did not 
just come as a genuine shock to the players, but also convinced coach Hong 
Myung-bo to re-submit his resignation and the Korea FA to do at home what they 
had not done in Brazil and accept it.

 The reception was not so surprising to those who had been in Seoul for the 
duration. Fan feeling was febrile. As well as disappointment at the results in 
Brazil, anger at the perceived favouritism in team selection and resentment 
towards the politics of a so-called ‘KFA mafia’, there was frustration towards 
a media that was lagging behind public opinion in the anger stakes. Hong saw 
this and left, as did two high profile members of the KFA. It was the lowest 
point for the national team, an institution genuinely loved, in the 21st 
century and for sometime before that.

Old media hands shook their heads but this was a new era, disquiet bringing 
change from the bottom up. Fans demanded a foreigner and the KFA was happy to 
look to Europe and appoint someone completely new. Uli Stielike was certainly 
that and he was announced in September.


 KFA officials were quick to lower expectations, quick to acknowledge that the 
German was not a top-level coach, not world famous, not Mr Right perhaps but Mr 
Right Now. Unlike some bigger names they said, he really wanted the job. 
Despite a stellar playing career, his coaching resume was nothing special. The 
reaction wasn’t negative, it wasn’t really anything.

 For the former Real Madrid and West Germany star once known as ‘The Stopper’, 
this was a good time to start. Expectations were as low as at any time since 
2002 and he was told that he would not be judged on the Asian Cup – though he 
won’t mind if that is the case now. Korea had not won the tournament since 
1960, not been in the final since 1988. After the World Cup, there was 
acknowledgment that this was a time for rebuilding and that barring an absolute 
disaster in Australia, Stielike would continue. Getting to the last eight would 
have been just about enough. Solid though not spectacular.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422533420056%2Fcrop_KP_81207_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korea%3A%20Australia%20have%20home%20advantage%20in%20Asian%20Cup%20final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korea%3A%20Australia%20have%20home%20advantage%20in%20Asian%20Cup%20final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsouth-korea-australia-asia-cup-final-video1&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422533420056%2Fcrop_KP_81207_640x360.jpeg>
 South Korean players Lee Keun-Ho and Kim Chang-soo talk about their upcoming 
Asia Cup final against Australia on Saturday. 
 And this is what his team has become, solid with the occasional spectacular 
moment. South Korea with a defence that was possibly the worst at the World 
Cup, one that conceded a higher percentage of goals from set pieces on the road 
to Brazil than any of the 31 other teams there, have reached the final without 
conceding a goal. It is not shocking to see the Taeguk Warriors, even one in 
transition, in the final of the continental competition but the fact that it 
has happen off the back of 480 goal-free minutes is something that nobody would 
have predicted.

 Especially after Kuwait. It could be this second group game, a second 1-0 
win, that may just become the turning point for Korea and Stielike. Despite the 
injuries and the illness that affected nine players, the German was genuinely 
nonplussed at the nervousness among the ranks after going one goal up. He did 
what few had done before and questioned the once-fabled and rarely-doubted 
mentality of the Korean players. Here was an honest coach asking how players so 
good in training looked so scared on the pitch. The shadow of Brazil, where a 
young team bereft of leadership crashed and burned, was casting a Canberra 
shadow. Those famous red shirts were heavier than ever before.

 Asking the right questions is one thing but results suggest that the German, 
assisted by 2010 Asian Champions League winning coach and the Asian Mourinho 
Shin Tae-yong, is on the right track towards discovering the answer. The win 
over Australia, achieved despite injuries and half the team still recovering 
from illness, gave the collective confidence a nudge in the right direction and 
those shoots of recovery have been nurtured by the coaching staff and 
strengthened greatly by deserved wins over Uzbekistan and Iraq in the knockout 
stage. Five successive clean sheets is impressive -and astounding to Korean 
fans – and going forward the team is improving. There is discipline in this 
team. There may have been some good fortune and bad finishing along the way but 
no defence stays lucky for eight hours of competitive football.

 While there is always pressure in the final -which could be watched by as 
many as 20 million on television - there will be no recriminations that usually 
come with defeat, should it happen. Stielike has helped to return the national 
team to something approaching its former place in the nation’s affections and 
done so without two of his biggest and most experienced names in Lee Chung-yong 
and Koo Ja-cheol who did not survive the group stage.

Cha Du-ri, the last connection to the 2002 World Cup semi-final reaching team, 
has starred at right-back. The ‘Chaminator’ has become feared around Asia just 
as he retires from the international game - Saturday is his swansong – and may 
still have a couple of old missiles in the armoury. The central defensive 
partnership of Kwak Tae-hwi and Kim Young-gwon often gives the impression that 
it is about to fall apart without actually doing so and Kim Jin-soo, who missed 
the World Cup through injury has been excellent.

 With Ki Seung-yeung the best midfielder of the tournament and Son Heung-min 
potentially the best attacker, there are always possibilities going forward. 
Nam Tae-hee, highly technical but lowly-rated by some past coaches has grown 
into his role behind the striker Lee Jeong-hyeop. Lee, a man with a goal 
roughly every nine games in the Korea second division was a big call from 
Stielike and one that he copped flak for.

 Not any more - Koreans love nothing more than a nice sentimental soldier 
story and Lee scoring the goal that wins the Asian Cup before returning 
barracks would certainly be that and whatever happens on Saturday, the 
homecoming next week will be a lot sweeter than it was a few months ago.
 