
Showbiz insiders joke that the fastest route to an Oscar is to make a 
Holocaust film. That’s particularly true in the foreign language category, 
where Hollywood voters counter their fear of the exotic with the security of 
known history. Yet when Hungarian debut director László Nemesscooped this 
year’s statuette <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=irrV-p_UCbc> for Son of Saul 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 15), you could hardly say he’d pandered his way to the 
podium. A Holocaust film it may be, but Nemes finds one remarkable way after 
another to make abrasive and unfamiliar that which we already know. It’s a film 
that dives headlong into the chaos and carnage of Auschwitz in the crumbling 
stages of Nazi rule, landing with dirt in its face and rank despair in its gaze.

Our perspective is filtered through that of Saul, a Hungarian-Jewish 
Sonderkommando prisoner played by Géza Röhrig, another newcomer, with calm, 
startling grace. As Saul herds his brethren into the gas chambers, Röhrig’s 
performance brilliantly articulates the profound sadness petrified beneath his 
get-on-with-the-job mien. As the handheld camera snakes through the horror in 
uninterrupted tracking shots, we see nothing that Saul does not, which makes 
the film by turn more revelatory and more restricted than previous 
concentration camp dramas. It’s a formal coup tantamount to virtual reality on 
35mm. Some dissenters have argued that it’s exploitative. I disagree, while 
wondering if the film astonishes me more as an experiential exercise than as 
fully felt drama. It’s an astonishment nonetheless.

Kidman gives raging, chewed-nail conviction to an otherwise wildly teetering 
melodrama

It certainly makes German post-Auschwitz drama Labyrinth of Lies (Studiocanal, 
12), already a resolutely old-fashioned effort, look even dustier by 
comparison. In terms of performance and construction, there’s nothing 
especially wrong with director Giulio Ricciarelli’s fictionalised, televisually 
diverting tale of a young public prosecutor seeking to bring a former Auschwitz 
commander to justice in 1958, but it’s just the kind of film that makes people 
assume its subject has been creatively exhausted.

Meanwhile, Son of Saul is unlikely to face an indignity often inflicted on 
foreign Oscar winners: the English-language remake. Secret in Their Eyes 
(Universal, 15) is the latest example. A proficiently beige US adaptation of the
popular 2009 Argentine thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/136955/secret-in-their-eyes>, with 
post-9/11 paranoia replacing 1970s political excavations, Billy Ray’s film is 
no insult to its memory, just a secondhand reminder of its more exhilarating 
moments (yes, that stadium scene is recreated) and, if we’re being honest, its 
hokier ones. One asset it has all to itself: a sternly committed Julia Roberts, 
elevating every scene as a weathered anti-terror agent. She gets more to do in 
the film, alas, than Nicole Kidman, though the latter gets a more generous 
homecoming showcase inStrangerland (Kaleidoscope, 12). As an Australian mother 
devastated when her two children disappear into an outback dust storm, Kidman 
gives raging, chewed-nail conviction to an otherwise wildly teetering melodrama 
that desperately needs her emotional anchoring.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN3b0PFCrayE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN3b0PFCrayE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN3b0PFCrayE&media=>
 Secret in Their Eyes trailer 
Not a lot of laughs in this week’s release slate, then, and that extends to 
the comedies too: Sacha Baron Cohen’s class-baiting spy rompGrimsby (Sony, 15), 
for which you need only search “elephant scene” on YouTube in a few weeks’ 
time; Ben Stiller’sZoolander 2 (Paramount, 12), a return to the gleeful 
absurdity of 2001’s fashion satire, minus the glee; and the self-explanatory
Fifty Shades of Black(Signature, 15), a spoof that’s a good deal less knowing 
than its target.

Best to stick with the deliberately unfunny stuff, then. Swedish director 
Magnus von Horn makes a debut nearly as impressive as his name withThe Here 
After(Soda, 15), a deftly controlled, cold-handed slap of a film centred on a 
teenager haunted by a criminal past that emerges in gradual, unhappy slivers. 
It’s a chilly sit, but a magnetic one. Same goes for the week’s most enticing 
re-issue: American duo David Siegel and Scott McGehee’s glistening 1993 debut
Suture(Arrow, 15), a noir-hued stainless-steel jigsaw puzzle revolving around 
identities mistaken and manipulated. Fashionable in its day, but rarely 
discussed now, it’s fascinating to consider as an early primer for subsequent 
work by the likes of Christopher Nolan and Shane Carruth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2zOR7d6fLA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2zOR7d6fLA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2zOR7d6fLA&media=>
Watch the trailer for Suture. <https://youtu.be/U2zOR7d6fLA> 
Carruth, the visionary behind the 2013 sci-fi drama Upstream Colour, is one of 
several indie iconoclasts contributing toThe Girlfriend Experience – and he 
just did the score. Premiering in the UK onAmazon Prime, 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Girlfriend-Experience-Season-Trailer/dp/B01H44Z2PW/ref=sr_1_1?s=instant-video&ie=UTF8&qid=1467200387&sr=1-1&keywords=girlfriend+experience>
 it’s a slinkily unexpected TV drama about a law student moonlighting as a call 
girl. Its executive producer is Steven Soderbergh, on whose 2009film of the 
same title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/04/the-girlfriend-experience-film-review>
 the series is based, but it’s chiefly steered by Lodge Kerrigan and Amy 
Seimetz. Their joint intelligence and rigour, plus the dauntless flint of Riley 
Keough, makes a tough psychosexual investigation out of what could have been 
seamy cable-network provocation.
 