
Let me paint for you, just for a moment, a nightmarish scenario to compare 
with the hellish visions seen in HR Giger’sNecronom IV 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/d/db/H.R._Giger_-_Necronom_IV.jpg>, 
the Swiss surrealist painter’s inspiration for his later work on the hideous 
xenomorphs in 1979’s Alien.

Imagine for a moment that George Lucas, not long after Disney hired JJ Abrams 
to direct the first new Star Wars movie in more than a decade – perhaps even 
after the release of thatfirst teaser trailer for The Force Awakens 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMOVFvcNfvE>, which sent everyone into 
apoplexies of expectation – found something in the small print that allowed him 
to change his mind about handing over the long-running space saga to a bunch of 
newbies.

Neill Blomkamp reveals concept art for 'abandoned' Alien project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project> 
Phones suddenly buzz in Tinseltown, frowns are seen erupting on the foreheads 
of Mouse House lawyers, and within days the creator of Luke Skywalker and Darth 
Vader announces that the whole darn $4.05bn sale of Lucasfilm to Disney is off. 
Instead, Star Wars fans can look forward to a Lucas-scripted spin-off about Jar 
Jar Binks’ ongoing political battle with the Trade Federation.

Fortunately for Star Wars fans, gorgeous George remains locked out of the Jedi 
braintrust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/21/star-wars-george-lucas-films-disney>
. But a similar dynamic of huge anticipation followed by crushing 
disappointment has been playing out for real among Alien acolytes over the past 
year or so. Ridley Scott’s middling Prometheus may not have been the Phantom 
Menace of Alien prequels, but compared withNeill Blomkamp’s uber fan-friendly 
pitch for a belated sequel to 1986’s Aliens starring Sigourney Weaver and 
Michael “I wanna introduce you to a very personal friend of mine” Biehn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/02/neill-blomkamp-alien-art-project>
, it might as well have been.

Blomkamp’s Alien concept was very nearly the Deadpool of sci-fi movies, 
resurrected by 20th Century Fox from Hollywood development hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/05/deadpool-ryan-reynolds-superhero-week-in-geek-leaked-footage>
 after the film-maker began posting concept art for an “abandoned film” 
featuring Weaver as Ripley, Biehn as Corporal Dwayne Hicks, and an all-new take 
on Giger’s famous xenomorphs on Instagram. The internet went into predictable 
meltdown and the District 9 directordramatically announced in February last year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/alien-neill-blomkamp-officially-greenlit-instagram-film>
 that the studio had given him permission to move ahead.

Ridley Scott plans three more Prometheus films before Alien
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/23/ridley-scott-three-more-prometheus-films-alien>
Then Scott, like some terrifying party-pooping alien critter bursting out of 
fun’s chest cavity, stepped in to make it clear that his own Alien movie, a 
sequel to Prometheus now titled Alien: Covenant, must take priority. So instead 
of a Weaver-led movie from one of Hollywood’s most promising young science 
fiction film-makers aimed at restoring the saga to its pre-Alien 3 glory, we 
face the prospect of another portentous pseudo-origin story about mankind’s 
connections to the xenomorphs and their utterly tedious extra-terrestrial 
“Engineer” creators. Or if things go really badly,another three movies on said 
subject matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/23/ridley-scott-three-more-prometheus-films-alien>
.

“Ridley asked Neill not to make our Alien ’til after Prometheus 2,” confirms 
Weaverin new comments published by Indiewire 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/sigourney-weaver-talks-alien-neill-blomkamps-film-script-20160423>
. “He wanted his movie to shoot and be released first. But [our Alien film is] 
an amazing script, and Neill and I are really excited about doing it ... It’s 
just going to take a little bit longer to get out to you, but it’ll be worth 
the wait.”

So why is Blomkamp’s movie a more attractive prospect than Scott’s, especially 
when the veteran British film-maker kicked off the entire slasher-in-space 
subgenre with 1979’s searingly superbAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien>? The answer lies in Weaver’s return 
and the pitching of the new movie at the point just before the long-running 
sci-fi saga began to haemorrhage all credibility.

In the real world, David Fincher’s Alien 3 – by no means a terrible film, yet 
hardly one which makes any real argument for its own existence – debuted in 
1992, followed by the ersatz afterthought of Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s Alien 
Resurrection (complete with clone Ripley and her half-xenomorph “child”) in 
1997. Let’s not even mention the two execrable Alien vs Predator spin-offs.

But in Blomkamp’s wonderful new fantasy timeline, these movies never happened. 
With the slate miraculously wiped clean (no one knows quite how, andthe 
film-maker himself partially backtracked on his own promise at one point 
<http://collider.com/alien-sequel-neill-blomkamp/>), Ripley and Hicks can set 
off for new adventures after destroying the xenomorph-infested planetoid at the 
end of James Cameron’s Aliens (it was, after all, the only way to be sure 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GCcSCuQJYQI>). There might even have been 
space to bring back poor little Newt, the tough little orphan girl who many 
fans never forgave Fincher for killing off at the start of Alien 3.

In the grand pantheon of great Ripley moments, almost all emanate from the 
first two Alien films. The warrant officer’sbeautifully bleak sign-off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-mmbStFrAA> after destroying the final 
xenomorph in Alien;her sweary mecha-suited battle with the giant queen in Aliens
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DnOIvn8hMS4>. These are performances 
unparalled across three famous genres: action, horror and science fiction.

Meanwhile, Alien Covenant will offer us a film set on a mysterious planet 
(possibly the Engineer’s home world), where Michael Fassbender’s David the 
androidhas been kicking his heels for 10 years 
<http://collider.com/costume-designer-janty-yates-the-martian-alien-covenant-interview/>
 waiting for a new human crew, led by Katherine Waterston, to turn up. There 
will be xenomorphs this time, but you get the impression Scott only agreed to 
include the monstrous beasties as a result of the popularity surrounding 
Blomkamp’s concept. As recently as 2014,he was still indicating that Giger’s 
creations were gone forever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/25/ridley-scott-no-xenomorphs-prometheus-2-alien>
.

Star Wars began to get back on track when it brought back centrepiece figures 
from the hugely popular original trilogy to inject The Force Awakens with some 
much-needed authenticity. Now it’s time for Alien to follow suit.

If the saga has any hope of getting back to its own 70s and 80s high point, it 
surely needs to bring the original all-action Hollywood scream queen along for 
the ride. Then fire up the afterburners and nuke the rotting corpse of Alien: 
Covenant from space.
 