Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfqFWn1pZawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfqFWn1pZawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfqFWn1pZawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
South African author Lauren Beukes has won the UK's top science fiction prize, 
theArthur C Clarke award <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward>
, seeing off the favourite, Ian McDonald, with a story of the criminal 
underclass in an alternate Johannesburg.

Published by the tiny UK press Angry Robot, Zoo City beat not only McDonald, 
but also the US National Book award winner Richard Powers and the Guardian 
children's fiction prize winner Patrick Ness.

Speaking after the "unexpected" result, Beukes said she felt "like Gwyneth 
Paltrow – but I promise I won't burst into tears".

"I had a speech prepared and it was curse you McDonald," she said. South Africa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, is an "an incredible place to 
live ... and write about", she added. "It's really where science fiction is. 
It's in the developing world, it's first world, it's third world – the way we 
use technology is different to the way it's used elsewhere. This book is about 
magic and technology and it's very special to be here."

Described as "Jeff Noon crossed with Raymond Chandler", Zoo City tells of the 
festering Zoo City slum, where psychic criminal guilt takes the form of an 
animal familiar and where Zinzi December, looking for missing pop starlet 
Songweza, uncovers secrets that the local crime lord and dark magician wants to 
stay hidden.

According to judge and author Jon Courtenay Grimwood, Zoo City was the "clear 
winner".

"Zoo City filters brutal social honesty through a stunning imagination to 
produce a world recognisably ours and obviously different," he said. "The 
plotting is tight, the characterisation strong and the writing superb."

Chair of judges Paul Billinger agreed, describing the novel as a book that 
"realises the enormous potential of SF literature, and as a piece of social 
commentary it is unsurpassed in the field".

Beukes wins £2011, and becomes the ninth woman to take the Arthur C Clarke 
prize since Margaret Atwood first won it 25 years ago. She was presented with 
the award last night (Wednesday 27 April) by China Miéville, who last year won 
it for a record-breaking third time with his novel The City and the City.

The author later revealed on Twitter – whose users she had earlier thanked for 
their advice "on good places to dump a body in Johannesburg" – that "those are 
red wine stains down the front of my dress in the Clarke award photos".

McDonald, meanwhile, might have missed out on the Arthur C Clarke to Beukes, 
but he can comfort himself with the fact that his tale of a near-future 
Istanbul, The Dervish House, beat the South African author to the British 
Science Fiction Association award for best novel on Tuesday – an award he has 
now won with each of his last three novels. McDonald was alsoshortlisted for 
the Hugo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/apr/26/women-hugo-awards-shortlist> best 
novel prize earlier this week.

"It seems extraordinary to think that Ian McDonald has won [the BSFA award] 
for each of his last three novels until you read him, and realise he really is 
that good. The Dervish House may even be his most complete achievement, 
vigorous and enthralling," said Niall Harrison, editor in chief of Strange 
Horizons. The BSFA prize is voted for by members of the British Science Fiction 
Association.
 