
It's a sad fact that the biggest exposure for Korean animation came courtesy 
of Banksy in 2010, when hisopening titles for The Simpsons 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DX1iplQQJTo> wept blood for the poor 
downtrodden Asian artists toiling in sweatshops to draw the TV show on the 
cheap for Fox. Banksy was operating in hisusual sloganeeringly simplified moral 
universe <http://www.banksy.co.uk/> – raw animation for The Simpsons has been 
partly done atSeoul's AKOM studio <http://akom-studio.com/> since 1989: hardly 
a sweatshop – but he did spotlight the fact that Korean animation is mainly 
known for what it has done on behalf of others.

Next to the precinct-stomping, laser-eyed behemoth that is its Japanese uncle 
(worth nearly aquarter of a billion in international sales in 2005 
<http://www.jetro.org/trends/market_info_anime.pdf>) the Korean industry seemed 
to have settled for second-class status: a key outsourcing destination for the 
hard grind on US shows such asFamily Guy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/family-guy> and Justice League 
Unlimited. (South Korea even started outsourcing the outsourcing to North Korea 
– something touched on inGuy Delisle's excellent graphic novel Pyongyang 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/comics/9780224079907/pyongyang-journey-in-north-korea>
.)

But there have been signs in the past couple of years that Korean animation 
might be awakening from its slumber. In 2011,Leafie, a Hen into the Wild 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9icA3j6IrtI> – about a chicken who escapes from 
a farm and adopts a duckling – managed to do what seems routine in the rest of 
the world: tap into the inexhaustible family-film dollar; and in the process 
became the highest-grossing Korean animation ever. The previous record-holder 
had been the country's first feature-length cartoon,Hong Gil-dong, released 
back in 1967 <http://www.koreanfilm.org/ani-history2.html>. Leafie also secured 
one of the crucial foreign-film release slots in China, the first Korean 
animation to play in the country. Meanwhile, also in 2011,Green Days: Dinosaur 
and I <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6RLfhoSVYWE>, a coming-of-age story about 
an insecure girl athlete, was attracting attention on the global festival 
circuit.

You might notice a theme developing here: the underdog is obviously a cause 
dear to the Korean animator's heart. But the inferiority complex is rendered in 
more shocking hues inThe King of Pigs <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2086830/>, 
released this week in the UK. A nihilist howl of a cartoon directed by 
up-and-comer Yeon Sang-ho, it subjects its high-school protagonists to 
beatings, piss-dousings, sexual abuse and a general irreversible demolition of 
their self-esteem; the Korean education system – overseen by ruthless headboy 
"dogs" from rich families at the expense of the "pigs" – seems like a training 
run for an unforgiving and impregnably Darwinian adult world. It's powerful 
stuff, with elemental animation – produced on a tiny $130,000 budget – 
squeezing the emotions up into contorted, indelible facial expressions.

Not exactly Gangnam Style <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/gangnam-style>, 
then, but The King of Pigs – apparently inspired byJapanese tsunami drama Himizu
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/31/himizu-review> and Clint Eastwood's
Mystic River <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96638/mystic.river> – 
definitely comes from that dark Korean cranny that producedOldboy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102821/oldboy>, its most celebrated 
high-school trauma story. That extreme-Asia tag certainly won the country some 
global street cred in the noughties, but what's mysterious is why the animation 
industry, as one of the country's more promising soft-power exports, hasn't 
received the same zealous state support as its live-action cinema.

Animation has never enjoyed the same prestige as in Japan. After an early rush 
of work, feature-length cartoons collapsed in Korea in the 70s due to TV-based 
competition; now some think the video game industry is more seductive to young 
creatives. The country has some pedigree in the character-creation stakes:CGI 
penguin Pororo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pororo_the_Little_Penguin> and 
Mashimaro <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashimaro> (best described as a 
marshmallow cross-bred with a rabbit) are both global brands.

What's exciting is that South Korea's animation industry is actually the 
world's third-largest, behind the US and Japan; clearly the talent base and the 
potential is there. But it's not certain that the audience is there, given the 
scarcity of homegrown animation successes. If a KoreanStudio Ghibli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jul/14/studio-ghibli-arrietty-heroines> 
feels some way off, then the industry shouldn't lose heart: independent 
thinking and outsider mystique can be its calling cards for now. The King of 
Pigs shows the power of flaunting those spiky edges.

• Next week's After Hollywood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/series/after-hollywood> looks at Les Misérables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150107/miserables> and global musical 
brands. Meanwhile, what global cinematic stories would you like to see covered 
in the column? Let us know in the comments below.

• This article was amended on 23 January 2013. In the original, the standfirst 
describedSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> as the 
Hermit nation. This has been corrected.
 