
Jacob Zuma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, South Africa’s 
beleaguered president, is facing the most serious challenge of his seven years 
in power after three ministers called for his resignation.


The News24 agency, citing sources in the ruling African National Congress 
(ANC) party,said the calls came at a weekend meeting of senior officials amid 
heated debate over Zuma’s future. 
<http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/exclusive-3-ministers-ask-zuma-to-step-down-20161128>

He has faced mounting criticism of his leadership and a corruption probe 
unearthed fresh allegations of misconduct this month.

But the former ANC security chief retains strong loyalty among many party 
members and politicians, and easily survived a vote of no confidence in 
parliament on 10 November.

However, that vote was called by opposition politicians from the Democratic 
Alliance (DA) party. At the time, commentators said that though a significant 
number of ANC officials wanted the president to resign, no one wanted the party 
to be pushed into a decision by outsiders.

Now the challenge appears to have come from within the ANC.

“There is no doubt that Zuma is fighting for his political life,” Ranjeni 
Munusamy, an analyst and commentator, wrote on the Daily Maverick website. 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-11-28-the-endgame-zuma-on-the-ropes-as-anc-tactical-manoeuvre-unfolds/#.WDwEjqJ95cA>

“He is hanging on while it is clear that large sections of the ANC … no longer 
want him as president … The countdown for Zuma’s exit has begun.”

Mmusi Maimane, leader of the DA, the biggest opposition party, said the ANC 
was steadily losing popular support.

“The ANC has lost support, but how much is because of Zuma, how much because 
of the economy, how much just due to sheer corruption? The current battle is 
not about the fitness of the president but about the soul of the ANC”, Maimane 
said.


The release of the report by the country’s public protector, an independent 
state office charged with uncovering maladministration, this month was a major 
blow.

It focused on Zuma’s close relationship with billionaire brothers Ajay, Atul 
and Rajesh Gupta, who run a business empire ranging from media to mining. Zuma 
has denied giving the Guptas undue influence and they have denied seeking it.

A campaign by Zuma allies to oust Praveen Gordhan, the respected finance 
minister, has rattled investors.

Though the ANC is still has massive support, the unprecedented loss of major 
municipalities to a coalition of opposition parties after elections in August 
has also worried many among the party’s “reformist” faction.

The ANC led the struggle against the racist and repressive apartheid regime 
and then took power in 1994 in South Africa’s first free elections.

Zuma’s enemies within the ANC are backed by increasing numbers of 
anti-apartheid veterans, trade unions, civil groups and business leaders.

A rally organised by a group called Save South Africa, described by one local 
newspaper 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/politics/2016/11/02/The-leading-figures-supporting-the-Save-South-Africa-protest>
 as “a who’s who of [anti-apartheid] struggle stalwarts‚ religious leaders‚ 
business people and civic activists”,attracted hundreds in the capital, 
Pretoria, this month. <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/jacob-zuma-protest-pretoria-south-africa-report>

Some of the country’s best known political cartoonists have also called for 
Zuma to step down, even though it would mean losing one of their “richest 
sources of material”.

However, the 74-year-old veteran politician retains significant popularity 
among provincial ANC branches and grassroots activists. 
<http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/anc-in-kzn-backs-zuma-amid-nec-calls-for-resignation-20161128>

“We are not aware of any justified reasons for the president to not conclude 
his term of office,” said Mdumiseni Ntuli, ANC provincial spokesman in 
KwaZulu-Natal, a stronghold of support for Zuma.

One senior ANC official, who asked to remain anonymous, said Zuma would 
probably manage to survive the latest attempt to dislodge him by the growing 
number of ANC figures unhappy with his leadership.

“Even if there’s secret ballot, he’s still likely to get the numbers,” the 
official told Reuters.

An ANC spokesman did not respond to calls for comment. 

Analysts said the new bid to oust Zuma would be weakened if the president’s 
allies managed to secure an open vote, one of the main ways he has controlled 
the party since taking over from Thabo Mbeki.

The ANC’s national executive committee, which is meeting in Pretoria, is the 
only body in the ruling party that can remove its leader, besides its 
five-yearly congress.

Zuma himself is one of the committee’s 104 members, most of whom were elected 
in 2012 and many of whom are loyal to the president.

The president apologised earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/zuma-denies-acting-dishonestly-over-nkandla-scandal>
 afterthe constitutional court said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
 he flouted the constitution ina scandal over more than £13.7m in state funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/03/jacob-zuma-pleasure-dome-south-africa-elections>
 used to upgrade his rural home. Heeventually paid back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/jacob-zuma-bank-loan-repay-state-home-improvements-south-africa>
 7.8m rand (£474,268), an amount determined by the national treasury.

The next national elections are due in 2019. External experts have warned ANC 
strategists that the party’s popularity was eroding fast.

But internal polls revealed that dissatisfaction with Zuma was only a minor 
factor for voters, with the ANC’s failure to deliver high-quality services such 
as water, schools, power and housing playing a greater role.
 