
Nostalgia! Boy, does it come in handy at times like this. Why dwell on the 
impending doom ushered in by a Donald Trump presidency when you can travel back 
to a happier, simpler time – maybe a time when cartoon characters played 
basketball with Michael Jordan?

Yes, it’s the 20th anniversary of the theatrical release of Space Jam – the 
alleged classic in which the Chicago Bulls icon Jordan teamed up with the 
Looney Tunes to play a collection of jacked-up aliens in a game of basketball 
where punches, kicks, slaps, and dynamite were all legal.

Romeo + Juliet at 20: Baz Luhrmann's adaptation refuses to age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/01/romeo-juliet-baz-lurhmann-leonardo-dicaprio-claire-danes-20th-anniversary>
In the years since this 90-minute product placement was unleashed, it’s taken 
on a significance within the culture that might not be appropriate for a film 
where Porky Pig wets himself. Some have begged for the long-rumored sequel 
starring LeBron James to finally come to fruition. Others, such as the NBA 
player Patrick Patterson, have claimed that Space Jam is “the perfect movie 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/space-jam-2-patrick-patterson/>” and is too 
sacred to ever replicate. “It felt like … it actually happened,” he says in a 
piece for the Player’s Tribune.

Could Space Jam have actually happened, like Patterson said? Could aliens 
really kidnap animated characters and force them to play sports? IsBill Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray> really capable of a crisp, Magic 
Johnson-esque behind-the-back pass? Is this movie even actually good, or have 
clinically depressed millennials turned Space Jam into an avatar for their 
dashed childhood hopes and dreams, a salve for the crushing disappointment that 
is literally everything about being an adult? Let’s find out, shall we?

It’s taken on a significance within the culture that might not be appropriate 
for a film where Porky Pig wets himself

The film begins simply enough, with a young MJ shooting hoops in his backyard 
in 1973. His father does what any self-respecting dad should do: he encourages 
his kid to keep practicing and developing his game. This portion of the film 
resembles a naturalistic sports movie, an underdog story about a young black 
child who wants to learn to fly.

The journey for our hero is simple: after a stint as a minor league baseball 
player, Jordan must recapture his love of basketball in time to prevent the 
owner of a failing amusement park on another planet from kidnapping the Looney 
Tunes (Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, the Tasmanian Devil, Tweety Bird, etc) and 
forcing them to work as sideshow attractions. Why the Looney Tunes? Because 
said owner has a wall of TV monitors playing classic cartoons starring the 
Looney Tunes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoKNy-MWjkcU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoKNy-MWjkcU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoKNy-MWjkcU&media=>
You might be wondering how Jordan is as an actor. After all, this was his one 
and only cinematic starring role. Like Eminem in 8 Mile and Pamela Anderson in 
Barb Wire, he went out on top, an unquestioned master of his craft.

Just kidding, he’s terrible! It doesn’t matter what the situation is: Jordan 
will crack a wry smile. He could be riding in Wayne Knight’s beat-up old car or 
being sucked through a hole in a golf course and spit back out in a parallel 
universe full of talking animals – he will eventually smile. I have to assume 
this is a residual from his highly lucrative career as a commercial pitchman. 
At the end of an advert, the pitchman must smile, so that you, the potential 
consumer, will be aware that the product in question will render all of your 
pain and torment manageable. Here’s Michael Jordan smiling at the end of aHanes 
commercial <https://youtu.be/SDI6tpsBV80?t=30s>. Here’s Michael Jordan smiling 
at the end of aMcDonald’s commercial <https://youtu.be/_oACRt-Qp-s?t=48s>. 
Here’s Michael Jordan smiling in Space Jam, in a scene wherehe’s supposed to 
look imposing <https://youtu.be/K1lKk5IU4ZE?t=10s>.

The Looney Tunes don’t fare much better. The script crams in every cliched 
old-timey joke the writers can think of, even referencing the movie Patton, 
which is, of course, every child’s favorite movie. After Jordan travels to the 
Earth’s core, where scary cartoon land exists, he’s examined by Daffy Duck to 
make sure he’s as impressive a physical specimen as his reputation suggests. 
Daffy peers into Jordan’s ear canal and in addition to a fair amount of waxy 
build-up, there’s a lone paper clip inside Jordan’s skull. Is this implying 
that NBA Hall of Famer and six-time NBA champion Michael Jordan puts metal 
objects inside his own ear canal? Was this a childhood injury? Will the paper 
clip prove to be crucial in the third act denouement?

Absolutely not on all counts. It’s just a cheap visual gag. Michael Jordan 
doesn’t put paper clips inside his ears. That was a dirty rumor started by Karl 
Malone, who, to this day, is still upset he was not given a part in Space Jam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fspace-jam-20th-anniversary-michael-jordan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef951ec8a86702358000a6f2c8797dfc56ccd7dd%2F0_0_3304_1982%2F3304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Space%20Jam%20at%2020%3A%20'The%20perfect%20movie'%20or%20one%20of%20modern%20cinema's%20biggest%20follies%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fspace-jam-20th-anniversary-michael-jordan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Space%20Jam%20at%2020%3A%20%27The%20perfect%20movie%27%20or%20one%20of%20modern%20cinema%27s%20biggest%20follies%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fspace-jam-20th-anniversary-michael-jordan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef951ec8a86702358000a6f2c8797dfc56ccd7dd%2F0_0_3304_1982%2F3304.jpg>
 Space Jam: Bill Murray, Bugs Bunny and Michael Jordan. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection/REX 
The NBA players who did make the cut include Charles Barkley, Patrick Ewing, 
Muggsy Bogues, and the 7ft Mormon bust Shawn Bradley, whose presence in this 
film is more mystifying than even the presence of the sexy rabbit Lola Bunny, 
whom all the cartoons want to make love to. I don’t mean to slut-shame an 
animated character, but the presence of a female Bugs Bunny in short shorts 
adds nothing to the film except a few scenes of male cartoons cat-calling her 
after she dunks and bends over to retrieve the ball.

Sex isn’t just for anthropomorphic, English-speaking critters. The minions of 
the owner of the amusement park (subtly named Moron Mountain) steal the 
basketball ability of the aforementioned NBA players, turning them from puny 
mutant punching bags into the Monstars – a fearsome collection of meatheads and 
thugs. So, in other words, the 1994 New York Knicks. Patrick Ewing, stripped of 
his talent, seeks out the aid of a psychiatrist. “Are there other areas of his 
life besides basketball where you find yourself unable to perform?” the 
psychiatrist asks. Ewing takes a beat to consider his query before responding 
no. Never forget this powerful axiom: Patrick Ewing is never not horny.

The Looney Tunes (or Tune Squad, as they are referred to on the hardwood) 
hardly practice before what the announcers call “the ultimate game”. It shows, 
as the Monstars take a commanding lead in the first half. It’s exactly what 
you’d expect in a contest between the greatest player of all time and five 
brightly colored creatures that look like they’ve gotten into Barry Bonds’s 
personal juice stash. The Tune Squad comes back to tie the game in predictable 
fashion thanks to a tepid Jordan halftime pep talk (and a clever gambit by Bugs 
where he pretends that a bottle of water is actually a special potion Jordan 
uses to play better). In lieu of any basketball skill, the Tune Squad uses 
explosives, deception, unchecked sex appeal, and the five-time NBA MVP to even 
the odds with the freakish beasts.

How Twitter killed the official movie website
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/16/twitter-movie-website-hashtag-film-social-media>
The Monstars try their best to reclaim the lead, going as far as maiming their 
opponents, necessitating Jordan adding Bill Murray to fill the final roster 
spot. Murray is obviously having a great time acting with Michael Jordan and a 
collection of tennis balls on sticks where cartoons are supposed to be, so good 
for him. Jordan wins the game with a miraculous dunk from the half-court line 
over an impossibly large defender as the clock slowly ticks to zero. The Tune 
Squad absolutely benefit from a game clock that stretched the final ten seconds 
into about two-and-a-half minutes of screen time. Also, Michael Jordan develops 
the ability to stretch his arms like Reed Richards from the Fantastic Four, 
which came in handy in the 1998 Finals.

Finally, Jordan stands triumphant, makes the Monstars return the NBA players’ 
talent (though I don’t think Shawn Bradley ever got his back), and rejoins the 
Bulls as the credits roll. Is Patrick Patterson right? Is this the perfect 
movie? Only if your idea of the perfect movie includes Newman from Seinfeld 
being flattened by a giant alien ass and then getting reinflated with what 
looks like a leaf blower. I laughed once, and it was when the psychiatrist 
asked Patrick Ewing if he was impotent. Actually, I also laughed any time Larry 
Bird had to try acting. If you are truly invested in Space Jam getting a sequel 
where the Monstars are out for revenge, but uh oh, they didn’t count on LeBron 
James, then I recommend you rewatch the original Space Jam. If, after Michael 
Jordan’s arm stretches 30ft to enable a physically impossible game-winning 
dunk, you are still prepared to greenlight this film tomorrow, then by all 
means, create a whitehouse.gov petition. I can see Trump making this a key 
tenet of his re-election campaign.
 