
They say if you throw enough money at a movie, it is bound to stick. I was one 
of those who saw Sony's move to revive Spider-Man on the big screen just five 
years after the failure of Sam Raimi's Spider-Man 3 as a wholly commercially 
driven decision. Two years ago, Marc Webb'sThe Amazing Spider-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140156/spider-man-reboot> failed to 
come up with anything remotely fresh in its perfectly adequate retelling of the 
wallcrawler's origin story. But the studio has turned round matters with its 
$200m (£120m) sequel: all those greenbacks are now firmly trapped in Spidey's 
web, waiting for Hollywood to collect them as the movie drives all before it at 
the box office.

The Amazing Spider-Man 2 currently has a rating of 83% "fresh" on the review 
aggregator Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_amazing_spider_man_2/>, while the 
Guardian's Xan Brooksreports that Webb has delivered a "savvy, punchy and 
dashing" sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/09/amazing-spiderman-2-review>. 
Webb's sequel has careered to the rescue of on of Hollywood's most 
controversial of revisited superhero sagas by finally delivering a story 
audiences have not seen before. With requiredSpidey origins story segues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/04/willem-dafoe-spider-man-reboot> 
such as the death of Uncle Ben and that fight with Flash Thompson out of the 
way, it dives headlong into new territory with an audible cry of relief.

Without giving away too much of the plot, these new developments also 
retrospectively explain and endorse Andrew Garfield's appointment to the role 
of Peter Parker. While predecessor Tobey Maguire is a fine comedic actor with 
self-effacing googly eyed charm, there are moments inThe Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2> that require a 
starkness and delicacy that might have been beyond him. One particular scene at 
the film's denouement is so perfectly and soulfully underplayed that one cannot 
imagine anyone else but Garfield pulling it off.

Emma Stone's slightly insipid Gwen Stacy seemed to pale in comparison to 
Kirsten Dunst's fiery Mary Jane Watson in the earlier instalments. She comes 
into her own in the sequel; Star Trek screenwriters Roberto Orci and Alex 
Kurtzman give her hopes and dreams beyond being Parker's girlfriend, as well as 
her own crucial part to play in Spider-Man's continuing development as a 
superhero. New villain Electro (Jamie Foxx) lends the new film most of its 
thrills and spills. But it's the chemistry between Stone and Garfield – 
crackling with a very different kind of electricity – that gives the sequel its 
emotional weight.

The Amazing Spider-Man 2 also beautifully sets up future films in the series, 
whichat this point includes two confirmed sequels and a proposed Sinister Six 
movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/mar/13/week-geek-film-spiderman-spinoff-sony>
. The latter is likely to head into full-on supervillain terrain, with 
Spider-Man's enemies Doctor Octopus, Sandman, Electro, the Vulture, Mysterio 
and Kraven the Hunter taking centre stage. As producer Avi Arad explained last 
month: "With [our] characters, the villains are victims of circumstance … nice 
and complex."

This plan to imbue the saga's villains with as much charm as its heroes – and 
they will need it if the Sinister Six film is to dispense with Spidey 
completely – finds currency through the arrival of Dane DeHaan's Harry Osborn 
in The Amazing Spider-Man 2. The new Green Goblin may not be as thrillingly 
demented as Willem Dafoe's take, but he emerges as the perfect conduit to blow 
the story wide open.
 Back on the beat ... The Amazing Spider-Man 2. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex 
Webb's film is obsessed with Osborn's Oscorp, with its penchant for genetic 
manipulation and its shadowy, Batmanesque "special projects" department. 
Fortunately, this new world is weird enough to transcend the inevitable 
comparisons to the trilogy by Christopher Nolan. Sony has delivered a 
comic-book film that feels more like a slightly far-out sci-fi piece: the big 
screen answer to JJ Abrams' Fringe, perhaps.

These futuristic confections are undoubtedly far-fetched, but they all make 
thrilling sense within Spider-Man's world – one that sits just beyond the 
bounds of possibility, yet just close enough to make these fantastical 
predictions irresistibly intriguing. Sony seems to have stumbled on a way to 
expand its universe that will sound a different note with audiences than the 
comic-book vistas being developed by Warner Bros andMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>, but one that might just be even 
more satisfying than either of the above. Money talks, but imagination and 
innovation shout.
 