
Sprinter Sacre <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sprinter-sacre>, the best 
chaser in training, has recovered from the minor illness that ruled him out of 
the Tingle Creek Chase earlier this month and will attempt to extend his 
unbeaten record over fences to 11 races when he lines up for the Desert Orchid 
Chase at Kempton Park on 27Â December.

The news that last year's brilliant winner of five Grade One races, including 
the Queen Mother Champion Chase at the Cheltenham Festival, will contest the 
Grade Two event should add significantly to the crowd for the second day of the 
track's Winter Festival meeting.

Despite being required to carry a 10lb penalty for his Grade One successes 
last season, however, the race is unlikely to be anything more than an 
additional exercise and schooling session for Sprinter Sacre, who is already 
long odds-on to win a second Champion Chase in March.

"Sprinter will go to Kempton," Nicky Henderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nicky-henderson>, the gelding's trainer, 
said on Tuesday. "We've had a lot of people asking, so we thought it best to 
let everybody know. The antibiotics he took cleared up his little problem he 
had before the Tingle Creek in no time at all.

"He worked very well on Saturday and again this morning and we scoped him 
yesterday and it was clean. As he missed his first target, we were still keen 
to give him a run, and it still gives us three weeks until the [Grade One] 
Sodexo Clarence House Chase [at Ascot ]."

Brian Clifford, Kempton's clerk of the course, was understandably delighted to 
hear that Sandown's loss will be the Sunbury track's gain. "It's sensational 
news," Clifford said. "Normally we would hope that it would be an 8,000 day, 
and having something in the region of 30,000 across the two days is how we look 
at it.

"It's very much a winter festival and you'd hope it would entice a lot of 
people to come racing on the second day [too]. We've been trying hard to build 
the quality of that card.

"I was lucky enough to go to Punchestown [in April] to see Sprinter Sacre 
attract an enormous crowd, they were six or eight deep around the parade ring 
and onto the horse walk. He is the public horse at present, the horse that 
everyone wants to see.

"He was impressive in the Wayward Lad Chase here [on the same card] a couple 
of years back. He was awesome that day and we're really looking forward to it."

Opposition to Sprinter Sacre is likely to be thin, though the race was 
suggested as a possible target for Sire De Grugy, the eventual winner of the 
Tingle Creek Chase, after his success at Sandown earlier in the month.

Nico de Boinville, Sprinter Sacre's regular work rider, said while riding at 
Fakenham on Tuesday that the chaser's "last two bit of work have been just 
sensational" and that "the turbo's back".

De Boinville had mixed fortunes from his two booked rides at the East Anglian 
track. He was unseated from Carobello, the 7-2 joint-favourite for the Mulled 
Wine Novice Handicap Chase won by Hopeland, and then rode the first 100-1 
winner over jumps since 1 May as Miss Biscotti sprang a major surprise in the 
mares' novice hurdle. "That's racing all over," de Boinville said afterwards, 
"but it's a big boost."
 