
A plan to restrict second home ownership in a picture postcard Cornish harbour 
town has been boosted after a high court judge ruled its proposal did not 
breach human rights legislation.

 The decision means that St Ives <http:// 
https://www.visitcornwall.com/places/st-ives>, beloved of art lovers, surfers 
and beach fans, is a step closer to being able to enforce a planning provision 
allowing the building of new houses only if they are reserved to people who 
live in the area full time.

It is also likely to trigger similar moves by other communities where local 
people are forced out by soaring prices driven up by second home owners 
elsewhere inCornwall <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall> and the UK.

St Minver, the parish that includes the north Cornwall holiday hotspots of 
Rock and Polzeath, already has a similar policy planned and was waiting for the 
judgment before putting it to its residents.

Mevagissey and Polperro in south Cornwall are also considering the inclusion 
of such a policy in their plans.

The 12,000 parishioners of St Ives voted overwhelmingly in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/01/st-ives-residents-to-vote-in-referendum-on-second-home-ownership>
 in favour of theneighbourhood development plan 
<http://www.cornwall.gov.uk/environment-and-planning/planning/neighbourhood-planning-toolkit/neighbourhood-planning-in-cornwall/tab-placeholder/s/st-ives-area-neighbourhood-development-plan/>
 that includes the planning provision.

 St Ives town council and Cornwall council were challenged, however, by the 
local land agent RLT Architects, which argued that the plan infringed the 
rights of people who live in a capitalist society to buy property where they 
want.

 Sitting in Bristol, Mr Justice Hickinbottom ruled that the plan was not 
incompatible with article eight of the European convention on human rights 
<http://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/format.cgi?doc=/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2016/2817.html>
, which states: “Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family 
life, his home and his correspondence” and, except in certain circumstances, 
“there shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this 
right”.

‘English out’: Cornwall’s fightback against second homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/cornwall-fightback-second-homes-house-prices-ban>
 The judge said: “The council considered the article eight implications in 
detail before determining that the policy was justified … The council 
considered that further development in St Ives was unsustainable without the 
restriction.”

Cornwall council welcomed the judgment and said it meant town and parish 
councils with similar policies in their neighbourhood plans would also be able 
to include a similar restriction.

Edwina Hannaford, Cornwall council’s cabinet member for planning, said: “This 
is a hugely important judgment for Cornwall, St Ives town council and for the 
residents of St Ives who wanted to ensure that any new homes in the town would 
be the resident’s sole or main residence.

“We also know that a number of other local communities, both in Cornwall and 
across the rest of the country, are also interested in including similar 
policies in their own neighbourhood plans and have been watching this case with 
interest.”

Chris Tofts, RLT’s solicitor, said the hearing had given some clarity about 
how the policy might work 
<https://www.stephens-scown.co.uk/planning/restriction-st-ives-second-homes-compatible-human-rights/>
. “Cornwall council submitted that a person whose principal residence is in St 
Ives can work away from that home without being in breach of the policy. Much 
will turn in the future on how the term ‘principal residence’ is applied.” 

Tofts said it could result in people wanting to buy in St Ives targeting old 
homes in the historic centre rather than on the outskirts, where most new homes 
tend to be built. “It is anticipated that these town centre homes will now 
command an additional premium to reflect them being free of the restriction.”

According to the plan, in 2011 25% of residential properties in St Ives were 
second home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/cornwall-fightback-second-homes-house-prices-ban>
s, an increase of almost 70% from 2001.


There is concern among some that the policy may make St Ives seem unwelcoming. 
Carl Lamb, the town’s business improvement district manager said: “The vote 
does not mean that St Ives does not welcome all-comers.

“The town has been voted the number one seaside destinations in the UK many 
times, not only for its charm, beautiful beaches and top quality food, but for 
its friendliness and welcoming attitude as a community and a town. That will 
never change.”


 