
After American Phaorah’s colors were lowered in the Travers Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/saratoga-stunner-american-pharoah-upset-by-keen-ice-in-travers-stakes>
 at Saratoga, the sense of shock and awe still bristling the packed grandstand, 
the Triple Crown winner was led over to the post-race test barn where samples 
of his blood and urine were taken. These samples were then numbered before 
being sent to the New York’s Equine Drug Testing Program at Morrisville State 
College for analysis to ensure that no medications in his system exceeded 
threshold levels.

Samples of American Pharoah’s blood and urine have been taken after all of his 
races this year. He has appeared seven times so far in 2015 at six different 
tracks in five different states, and three separate laboratories have been used 
to analyze his post-race samples. Only, no standardized system dictates the way 
in which these samples are tested. Rather, the laboratories’ methods very much 
depend upon the origins of the sample, as regulations and procedures differ 
from state to state.

Just how varied these different standards are was brought into stark relief 
last year when theJockey Club released a report 
<http://www.bloodhorse.com/pdf/TestingEnforcementFindings10142014.pdf> into 
equine medication testing and violation enforcement. The findings were damning, 
though familiar to those who have followed the issue closely.

The findings illustrated, among others, a “high degree of variance” between 
drug testing procedures, the different amounts of money racing jurisdictions 
spend on drug testing as well as a lack of research into emerging drugs and 
other substances – an unsurprising scenario given the checkered state of the 
nation’s drug testing system, and the alphabet soup of different organizations 
with input in the issue.

As it stands, each of the 38 racing jurisdictions contracts drug testing out 
to one of 15 laboratories around the country. Some, like California, are 
obligated by state statute to work with an in-state laboratory. The others are 
free to choose a laboratory from elsewhere. And there are accreditation bodies 
to help steer racing commissioners during the selection process.

As of July this year, 12 of the 15 laboratories were ISO 17025 
<http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=39883> accredited (a 
standard laboratory accreditation). Of those 12, five have been awarded Racing 
Medication and Testing Consortium (RMTC) accreditation, one has been granted 
interim accreditation with the RMTC while a further three have already 
submitted an application with that organization. Unlike ISO laboratory 
accreditation, RMTC accreditation is horse racing-focused.

That leaves three laboratories in Louisiana, Iowa and Michigan – all of which 
provide in-state testing only – with no ISO or RMTC accreditation. But even if 
a laboratory is accredited with both, the success and rigor of each racing 
jurisdiction’s drug testing program is dependent not necessarily upon the 
accreditation status of the laboratory but upon the particulars of the contract 
they have with each laboratory. And the problem is, not all contracts are 
created equal.

“The issue then becomes this: what is required under their contract with the 
individual jurisdiction?” said RMTC executive director Dr Dionne Benson. And 
the Jockey Club report shone a bright light on exactly this issue.

Different states, different standards

There are essentially three main testing methods in post-race sampling 
analysis: thin-layer chromatography (the cheapest and least effective), 
enzyme-linked immunoassays, otherwise known as Elisa kits (neither the most nor 
the least effective), and liquid or gas chromatography/mass spectronomy (the 
most expensive but the most sensitive and therefore most effective method). 
Different contracts require these methods to be used in different combinations 
(though it should be noted that not all of the 15 laboratories continue to use 
thin-layer chromatography).

Then there’s the issue of extractions, which is an integral procedure in the 
analytical process to identify levels of individual compounds. Some states 
don’t require the full level of extractions in blood and urine. When budgets 
are tight, some states pool samples to save dollars, but pooling of samples 
potentially dilutes the levels of substances.

The lack of out of competition testing was another worry. The proportion of 
out of competition testing administered in Australia is 21% of the total 
testing. In France it’s 10%. In the US, it’s 1%.

Other issues were raised, such as a disparity in the amount of money each 
state invests in research – an important topic considering therecent furor 
surrounding cobalt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/14/royal-ascot-australia-cobalt-doping-charges-racing-victoria>
, and thelack of scientific understanding 
<http://www.paulickreport.com/news/ray-s-paddock/when-the-cheaters-get-it-wrong-cobalt-latest-in-a-list-of-misestimations/>
 into its effect on a racehorse’s performance.

One of the more positive aspects of the report was to highlight current 
efforts to institute double blind testing for which there is currently no 
accredited source in equine testing.

The whole issue, however, can be boiled down to one of finance (the cost per 
test can range from $55 up to $230).

“In states where they’ve had problems, there are issues in the contracting 
processes,” said Dr Rick Arthur, equine medical director at the University of 
California’s School of Veterinary Medicine. “That’s because states go for the 
lowest bidder not the best bidder.”

Since the release of last year’s report, and in light of Thoroughbred 
Horseracing Integrity Act of 2015 
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/3084/text> (Thia) – a 
bill recently introduced into Congress requiring a uniform medication program 
to be adopted nationwide – a number of stories have emerged that have continued 
to place drug testing under a harsh spotlight.

Earlier this year, Hall of Fame trainer Bill Mott was fined and suspended when 
the New York Drug Testing and Research Program found overages for flunixin (an 
anti-inflammatory) and Lasix in the post race sample from one of Mott’s runners 
last September. The New York Drug Testing and Research Program is ISO 
accredited and has applied for RMTC accreditation. Because a third party 
veterinarian had administered the Lasix, however, suspicion was cast over the 
accuracy of the high levels detected. Only, no split sample verification could 
be administered because insufficient blood had been drawn. Mott subsequently
filed a federal lawsuit 
<http://www.courthousenews.com/2015/04/24/horse-doping-suspension-unfair-trainer-claims.htm>
 against the New York State Gaming Commission, its officers and officials with 
the state’s drug-testing lab.

An investigation by the Paulick Report 
<http://www.paulickreport.com/news/ray-s-paddock/new-yorks-drug-testing-program-has-its-own-style/>
 poured further doubts over the validity of the findings, pointing to the 
laboratory’s “atypical drug testing results” as well as the lab’s promise of 
cost effectiveness when the contract for a new testing facility in New York was 
open. In a later statement to the Paulick Report, the New York State Gaming 
Commission defended the quality of their work: “The Commission abides by the 
statutory requirements relative to equine drug testing.”

Then in May of this year, The Indiana Horse Racing Commission terminated their 
contract 
<http://www.in.gov/hrc/files/Indianas_Successful_Quality_Assurance_Program_Final.pdf>
 with Truesdail Laboratories in Southern California after the lab failed to 
detect elevated levels of corticosteroids in three samples that subsequently 
showed up in split samples sent to two audit labs.A later report 
<http://www.in.gov/hrc/files/Drug_Testing_Quality_Assurance_Program_Staff_Report_-_final.pdf>
 by the Indiana Racing Commission found that Truesdail Laboratories failed to 
detect a total of seven missed positives – one for a Class 1 drug – over a 
period of 26 days.

Truesdail Laboratories remains RMTC accredited. Benson said that the RMTC will 
send a site inspector back to inspect the facilities.

“People say that it invalidates the accreditation program, but it really 
doesn’t,” said Arthur. “What it does is invalidate the contracting processes. 
We know the lab is capable of doing this work. Whether they do it or not is a 
different question.”

Uniform rules: internal or federal?

When one considers that roughly 158,000 starters in 2014 competed in more than 
one state, it’s a question that gets asked a lot. And what with the recent 
Jockey Club Round Table Conference and the Saratoga Institute on Equine, Racing 
& Gaming Law forum, discussion around these issues has reached a crescendo in 
recent weeks. Much of the debate has hovered around the Thoroughbred 
Horseracing and Integrity Act (Thia), and the possibility of federal oversight 
of drug testing in horse racing.

This issue is a contentious one, and many who balk at the idea of federal 
involvement point towards the National Uniform Medication Program (Nump) as an 
example of how the industry can clean its own cupboards.

The program is broken down into four parts: the Controlled Therapeutic 
Substances (CTS) list, which provides thresholds and withdrawal times for 26 
medications; third-party administration of Lasix; a Multiple Medication 
Violation (MMV) penalty system; and a requirement that states use RMTC 
accredited laboratories. Over the past two years, a certain number of the 38 
national racing jurisdictions have been in the process of adopting the program 
either whole or piecemeal.

As of July 
<http://www.rmtcnet.com/content_pressreleases.asp?id=&s=&article=2146>, the 
number of jurisdictions on the Controlled Therapeutic Substances list totaled 
15 (though Louisiana has recently jumped on board). Sixteen commissions 
required third-party administration of Lasix. Ten commissions had implemented 
the MMV penalty system. Twenty-four used an RMTC-accredited lab. While nine 
commissions had adopted the program in its entirety. In comparison to the 
number of commissions that were in compliance with one or more parts of the 
Nump even a year ago, these numbers show a marked increase.

Nevertheless, for many, adoption of the Nump is happening far too slowly. This 
suspicion that can only have been exacerbated when California, traditionally at 
the vanguard of the nation’s most progressive drug policies – the UC Davis 
laboratory is one of five reference labs being developed by the International 
Federation of Horseracing Authorities –recently delayed 
<http://www.chrb.ca.gov/press_releases/2015_08_22_press_release.pdf> plans to 
adopt third-party administration of Lasix.

This incremental adoption of the Nump has many worried that it will never be 
fully successful in its aims: that as the program evolves and changes, and as 
each state goes through the process of adopting the very latest 
recommendations, some states will forever be playing catch-up. Which is one of 
the reasons why Thia has been so warmly embraced by certain heavy-hitters 
within the industry.

Thia is shaped to place governance of drug testing into the hands of a 
centralized Thoroughbred Horseracing Anti-Doping Authority (Thada) - a board 
comprising the US Anti-Doping Agency (Usada) and a number of racing industry 
experts.

“It grants pre-emptive right to Thada to go in and fully occupy that space as 
it relates solely to anti-doping issues like drug testing and enforcement,” 
said Matt Iuliano, executive vice president and executive director of The 
Jockey Club. The Jockey Club belongs to a coalition of industry groups 
advocating for the Act’s successful passage through Washington.

The debate around the Act takes many shapes, such as a reluctance to give an 
agency like Usada, one with no prior involvement in horse racing and a
questionable history 
<http://www.kentucky.com/2015/08/31/4012987_barrs-drug-testing-bill-unnecessary.html?rh=1>
 overseeing other sports, broad-sweeping jurisdiction over the industry – a 
contention that supporters of the Act hope will be ameliorated by inclusion of 
industry insiders within Thada’s board.

Money invariably raises its ugly head. Should the Act pass, individual 
jurisdictions, many of them cash-strapped, will ultimately be responsible for 
finding the necessary funding to make mandated improvements.

“We’ve left it to the discretion of the state so that they can look at a 
number of mechanisms at their disposal, whether it’s on a levy per start, or 
whether they decide to use another funding mechanism,” said Iuliano.

As to how the Act would bring about standardization of laboratory practices, 
the specifics become a little hazier. Iuliano said that Thada will have a “very 
robust technical and advisory committee” that will turn to multiple avenues of 
“input” for direction. This will include “international best practice standards 
and procedures,” as well as theRMTC’s model RFP 
<http://www.rmtcnet.com/resources/Model%20RFP%20Document.pdf> – a 40-page 
document designed to help commissioners in the laboratory selection process.

“The objective of Thada is to ensure there’s uniformity in the detection of 
substances as measured through a quality assurance program, the details of 
which can be worked out in the technical discussions that occur,” he said. “The 
universal consideration as they go about developing this is that they have a 
mandate within the bill to look and study and contemplate all these various 
inputs.”

As to the feasible chances of Thia passing, Iuliano remained coy: “We see it 
to be the most viable option to comprehensively and simultaneously implement 
uniform medication rules, enforcement processes and lab accreditation across 
all jurisdictions.”
 