
Stanley Kubrick ruined my childhood. And don’t get me started on Elizabeth 
Taylor orMarianne Faithfull <http://www.mariannefaithfull.org.uk/>. Of the 
hundreds of actors, directors and producers my mother worked with as a 
publicist in the UK and Hollywood, mention of these names still conjures 
memories of her muttering darkly while wreathing our London flat in clouds of 
cigarette smoke and pouring another glass of chianti. Her name wasEdna Tromans 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/films-tv-people/4ce2ba0320a40>. She was a baker’s 
daughter from the West Midlands who travelled the world in the company of 
Hollywood stars but who believed that most of the so-called “glamour” of 
showbusiness was in the eye of the beholder. She died six years ago, her ashes 
scattered in a Kent bluebell wood. Like Nora Ephron (with whom she worked on My 
Blue Heaven, starring Steve Martin) she believed that “everything is copy”. She 
wouldn’t have minded her son spilling a few beans. In fact, she would have 
loved it.

Perhaps it’s unfair to blame Kubrick for blighting my entire childhood but I 
was 10 when shooting began on 2001: A Space Odyssey and nearly 13 by the night 
of the 1968 premiere. I came to dread my mother’s return from long days dealing 
with the brilliant but mercurial director. Normally a calm, good-humoured soul, 
she would arrive home from Borehamwood studios drained and snappy – “Why 
haven’t you tidied your room?”

Handling publicity for Alain Delon and Marianne Faithfull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marianne-faithfull>, co-stars of The Girl 
on a Motorcyle, had a similarly chilling effect on the atmosphere in our flat 
opposite Battersea Park. At the time of filming, Faithfull was 22, improbably 
beautiful and dating Mick Jagger. It’s not hard to see why what Edna called the 
actress-singer’s “diva-like nonsense” caused her to roll her eyes and double 
her intake of Benson & Hedges. She had a more indulgent attitude to the antics 
of Elizabeth Taylor (they worked together on Night Watch) and Bette Davis 
(Death on the Nile). These were “proper” stars who had paid their Hollywood 
dues. Any mention of Richard Gere (Yanks) would induce a fit of yawning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea116adde521e5991630b4aa2a5cb9aedf0ccc6%2F0_171_3037_1823%2F3037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ea116adde521e5991630b4aa2a5cb9aedf0ccc6%2F0_171_3037_1823%2F3037.jpg>
 Edna with the film director John Schlesinger. Photograph: Courtesy Simon Booker
There were many actors Edna admired, both as performers and people. Working 
withKatharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/01/guardianobituaries.film>, Henry 
Fonda and Jane Fonda during the 1981 shoot of On Golden Pond was a career 
highlight, as was The Spy Who Loved Me starring Roger Moore as 007. Michael J 
Fox and Patrick Swayze were “good fun”.Walter Matthau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jul/01/news>, Peter Ustinov, Richard 
Attenborough, Dudley Moore and Glenda Jackson all received honourable mentions. 
Michael Caine was a favourite. “A publicist’s dream,” she told me after working 
on The Wrong Box and Deadfall. “He’d ask, ‘What’s on the menu today, Edna?’

“I’d say, ‘A set visit from Woman’s Own; lunch with the Financial Times; 
drinks with the Sunday Mirror.’

“He’d nod, mulling the best angle for each interview. ‘So that’s “me and my 
dear old mum”; “why taxes are too high”; and “my working-class roots”. Sorted.’”

A divorcee in the Mad Men era, when single mothers were rare and “career 
women” rarer still, Edna worked long hours and was often abroad on location for 
extended periods, raising me with the support of her parents and a stream of au 
pairs. I never met my father and regret snubbing his sole overture, a card on 
my 21st birthday. There was an address in Weston-super-Mare and a handwritten 
message. “In case you ever feel like getting in touch.”

Now, I find it heartbreaking but as a callow 21-year-old, I could only view 
him as the man who had failed to help my mother in any way, refusing even to 
honour a promise to pay child support. Chased by the courts, he once grudgingly 
sent a cheque for £50. She splashed out on a taxi to Kings Road and bought me a 
leather jacket. Long after his death, I told her that he’d made a surprise 
“appearance” at a seance (the psychic briefly challenging my scepticism by 
delivering a spookily plausible message from “Donald”). Edna simply smiled and 
said, “Good. About time he showed up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fe65a6e802e12a9d1db223cc18db806c767610%2F0_16_1311_787%2F1311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47fe65a6e802e12a9d1db223cc18db806c767610%2F0_16_1311_787%2F1311.jpg>
 Edna and Simon in New York. Photograph: Courtesy Simon Booker 
She wasn’t the sort of mother who baked cakes or helped with homework, taking 
a laissez-faire attitude towards my schooling. But education takes many forms. 
While my contemporaries wrestled with Pythagoras’ theorem, I was at the 
Palladium watching the Beatles or riveted by Laurence Olivier in Long Day’s 
Journey into Night, or bored by Tosca at Covent Garden, or mesmerised by 
Sinatra at the Royal Albert Hall.

Working as a freelance in the fickle film industry meant that household 
finances were unpredictable. One term I’d be at an expensive prep school in 
Belgravia, the next at the local state school. I never questioned this. It was 
my version of normal. When my best friend went away to boarding school, aged 
13, returning with exciting tales of girls and spliffs, I begged to follow 
suit. The fees must have been eye-wateringly expensive but Edna didn’t blink, 
enlisting the support of a suave actor boyfriend – an Errol Flynn lookalike – 
to play the role of “father figure” at the make-or-break interview with the 
headmaster. Perhaps all this explains why I never find Absolutely Fabulous 
funny. To me, it seems like a documentary.

In good times, my mother would fly me out to spend half term on location, once 
to Rome’s Cinecittà studios where she was working with Ian McShane on Pussycat, 
Pussycat I Love You. When skint, she would hop on the bus to my boarding school 
in north London, balancing a birthday cake on her knees. In 1968, on the set of 
Women in Love starring Oliver Reed, Alan Bates andGlenda Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/glenda-jackson>, she told me that the 
director, Ken Russell, needed me to do a walk-on as a miner’s boy. I was 
thrilled to be an extra and delighted when he slipped me a fiver.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba5a3ea656185f06b1f53b3758ca432283e1eff4%2F0_477_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stanley%20Kubrick%20ruined%20my%20childhood%3A%20my%20mum%2C%20the%20Hollywood%20publicist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fstanley-kubrick-ruined-my-childhood-my-mum-the-hollywood-publicist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba5a3ea656185f06b1f53b3758ca432283e1eff4%2F0_477_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
 Simon Booker today in his study. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Hopeless with money, she moved us from Battersea (then deeply unfashionable) 
to Mayfair, a three-bedroom flat off Grosvenor Square. Our rent doubled to £32 
a week; our corner shop was Selfridges. But the freelancer’s rollercoaster soon 
took another dive and film work dried up. In 1973, down to her last fiver (no 
exaggeration) she was saved, in true Hollywood fashion, by an eleventh-hour 
phone call fromRichard Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-attenborough>. He was starting a new 
London radio station, Capital Radio. Would she do publicity for the launch? She 
would.

After I left home, she fell for another actor, a craggy American she met in 
1979 while working on John Schlesinger’s Yanks. The day after the wrap party 
they flew to America on a holiday intended to last three weeks. The trip took 
her to Los Angeles for the first time. She managed to acquire a green card and 
stayed for 15 years.

She had many proposals of marriage. When I asked why she turned them down she 
told me, “There’s a high price to pay for being able to say ‘we’.” Aged 65, 
however, she agreed to marry the man who was to be her final boyfriend. An 
impoverished English charmer, J had a big smile and an even bigger drink 
problem. During a Christmas Day lunch at Elizabeth Taylor’s Bel Air house (a 
friend was house-sitting while Taylor dried out at the Betty Ford Clinic), I 
witnessed my mother patiently explaining to J, clearly for the umpteenth time, 
that one more drink would mean the end.

He swore he was on the wagon. So deep was his state of denial that he was 
swigging chablis at the time. For years, Edna had tried everything to help him, 
including ruinously expensive rehab programmes and stomach implants designed to 
counter alcohol dependency. She was at her wits’ end. It was time for an 
intervention.

On 31 December, I booked J on to a New Year’s Day flight to London. I slept on 
cushions by the front door, fearing he would try to escape. Sure enough, 
at 2am, he pushed past, stole the car keys and drove off into the night. Edna 
and I sat up into the small hours, desperately trying to work out how to get 
the poor man on to the 10am flight. This was Hollywood. Surely we could hire a 
few extras to pose as police officers and convince him that he was being 
deported? At 6am, J phoned from a 24-hour bar on Sunset Boulevard, roaringly 
drunk. We picked him up in my car. After their tearful farewell, I drove him to 
the airport, handed over all the cash in my wallet and put him on the plane. He 
died a year later.

Although deeply affected by J’s death, my mother never complained when her 
rollercoaster life took another dive. Not when the cigarettes caught up with 
her, triggering emphysema. Not even when she lost her life savings to Jodie 
Foster’s conman father. That’s a whole other story but I wish she’d lived to 
see Foster in his prison-issue orange jumpsuit, receiving a prison sentence for 
grand theft. I’ll be sure to mention it next time I visit the bluebell woods.

• Without Trace by Simon Booker is published by Bonnier Zaffre, £7.99. To 
order a copy for £5.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409161/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846
 