
Saturday’s Hall H programming at San Diego Comic-Con was a curious mix of 
looking forward and casting an eye backwards.

Comic Con 2016: Brie Larson to play Captain Marvel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/24/comic-con-2016-brie-larson-to-play-captain-marvel>
The Warner Bros and Marvel panels took the convention by storm, with bombastic 
panels previewing forward-looking cinematic slates.Justice League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/23/comic-con-san-diego-justice-league-batman-wonder-woman>
, Wonder Woman, Black Panther, Spider-Man and the rest all have quite a few 
months (or years) before they’re released.

Mixed in with those bold snippets of big-budget tentpole features were two 
panels dedicated to brands that exist mostly through the hazy glance of 
nostalgia:Star Trek <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/star-trek> and Aliens, 
two franchises celebrating anniversaries their respective studios hope will 
continue to translate into the social media era.

The Star Trek panel, hosted by Star Trek: Discovery showrunner Bryan Fuller, 
presented representatives from the previous fiveStar Trek TV series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/star-trek-chris-hemsworth-film-tv-show-netflix>
: William Shatner for the original, Brent Spiner for The Next Generation, 
Michael Dorn for Deep Space Nine, Jeri Ryan for Voyager, and Scott Bakula for 
Enterprise. The ostensible topic was the50 years of Star Trek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/the-toughest-star-trek-film-quiz-in-the-known-universe>
 and the continued relevance of Gene Roddenberry’s hopeful vision for the 
future of humanity.

“Two hundred and fifty years into the future, think about where we are today, 
think about where we are as America, and think about the promise of Star Trek 
and what we can do to get there,” Fuller said.

Much of the panel was focused on his idea of what Star Trek can mean to a 
world consumed by conflict – a noble cause, but one that made for a peculiar 
event. Comic-Con audience members are often more concerned with revealed 
secrets and special footage than they are with philosophy.

The reserved nature of the crowd didn’t stop the group advocating for social 
justice and a renewed focus on tolerance, the guiding principle of Star Trek 
for half a century.

“The time is coming to figure [our problems] out. We need to figure it out,” 
Shatner said. The original Captain Kirk was especially passionate about his 
desire for our planet to overcome the many obstacles – environmental, social, 
and political – that consume us. Star Trek has always been a liberal, inclusive 
voice in entertainment.

Pressed for details on the new series, which premieres in January 2017, Fuller 
said: “[It] has to continue to be progressive, to push boundaries, to tell 
stories in the way Gene Roddenberry promised.”

The big reveal of the title and the name of the spaceship, Discovery, ended up 
being the highlight of the panel. The vessel bears a rather uncanny resemblance 
to an unused design from the mind of Ralph McQuarrie for the aborted first Star 
Trek feature,Star Trek: Planet of Titans 
<http://www.startrek.com/article/introducing-the-u-s-s-discovery>. Reusing that 
design is an interesting choice, especially for a project that is being 
promoted as projecting a fresh future. But that is the line classic franchises 
must walk in this modern age – new content, with a taste of the familiar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcomic-con-star-trek-aliens-cast-panels-nostalgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1356867adf3ed6370899ff1b2d32e11e8eca86%2F0_21_4347_2607%2F4347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Trek%20and%20Aliens%20cast%20members%20try%20to%20launch%20nostalgic%20space%20trip%20at%20Comic%20Con&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcomic-con-star-trek-aliens-cast-panels-nostalgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Trek%20and%20Aliens%20cast%20members%20try%20to%20launch%20nostalgic%20space%20trip%20at%20Comic%20Con&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fcomic-con-star-trek-aliens-cast-panels-nostalgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1356867adf3ed6370899ff1b2d32e11e8eca86%2F0_21_4347_2607%2F4347.jpg>
 The writer and director James Cameron, from left, the producer Gale Anne Hurd, 
and the actors Sigourney Weaver, Bill Paxton, Lance Henriksen, Michael Biehn, 
and Paul Reiser attend the Aliens: 30th Anniversary event on Saturday. 
Photograph: Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP 
The 30th anniversary panel for Aliens aimed for a similar note. The main cast 
and creative team for the seminal sci-fi/horror film assembled to pay homage to 
one of the great works of the genre, with the director James Cameron, the 
producer Gale Anne Hurd and the starsSigourney Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sigourney-weaver>, Lance Henrikson, Michael 
Biehn, Bill Paxton, Paul Reiser and Carrie Hein in attendance. Hein, who played 
the young orphan Newt, is now a fourth-grade teacher, and had some of the more 
fascinating anecdotes. In particular, she related a story about going back to 
her hotel covered in alien slime and being mistaken for a Dickensian street 
urchin during Christmas in England.

Again, the Hall H crowd hoped for some new material. It’s common knowledge 
among the geek set that Ridley Scott is filming the prequel Alien: Covenant. 
Sadly, no footage was shown, though Weaver teased the potential Aliens sequel 
to be written and directed by District 9’s Neill Blomkamp, whom she worked with 
on the film Chappie.

“That whole first day [on Chappie] we started talking about it. Four months 
later, I got a script. It gives fans everything they’re looking for,” Weaver 
said of the in-development project. “He has work to do, I have work to do. I’m 
hoping when we finish those jobs, we’ll circle back.”

Deadpan John Goodman is king of Kong: Skull Island Comic-Con panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/23/john-goodman-king-kong-skull-island-comic-con>
As pleasing as it can be to reminisce about the films and TV shows of the 
past, there is an appetite for further stories in both universes. Some stories 
never die; they just get renewed and refreshed for the present.

In the case of Star Trek, that story has never been more necessary. Toward the 
end of the panel, Fuller requested the audience turn to the person next to them 
and take their hand.

“Let’s make a promise to everyone in this room. Look at each other and leave 
this room with love,” he said.

Everyone did as he asked, because if there is one thing that defines the Star 
Trek fan, it’s their belief in the inherent goodness of the human race and 
their undying optimism that even as we gratify the years behind us, we never 
forget that the great project given to us by Gene Roddenberry was one defined 
by a never-ending passion for making the world better each and every day that 
we have on this planet.
 