
The UK government must make “urgent changes” to the information it provides 
about the newstate pension <https://www.theguardian.com/money/state-pensions> 
as retirement expectations among women are being “smashed”, an influential 
group of MPs have warned.

The new system – which from April will replace basic and additional pensions 
for people reachingretirement age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/retirement-age> – is “widely misunderstood” 
and is the latest in a series of “bungled” efforts to reform the state pension, 
the work and pensions select committee said.

Some women, who had expected to receive their pension at 60, have only recently
discovered that their retirements have been postponed by up to six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
. This is part of theplanned equalisation of the state pension age 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/310231/spa-timetable.pdf>
 for men and women to 65 by November 2018, followed by a further increase to 66 
in October 2020.

Women’s state pension age rise: an unfair burden or a necessary reform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
The alarm has been sounded just three months before the introduction of the 
new state pensionto those reaching pensionable age on or after 6 April 2016 
<https://www.gov.uk/new-state-pension/overview>. Although aims to simplify the 
system have been welcomed, concerns have been raised that poor communication 
has led to confusion about the value of retirement pots and the age at which 
payments will begin.

Frank Field MP, chair of the committee, said: “Successive governments have 
bungled the fundamental duty to tell women of these major changes to when they 
can expect their state pension. Retirement expectations have been smashed, as 
some women have only been told a couple of years before the date they expected 
to retire that no such retirement pension is now available.

“We are also concerned about the accuracy of existing information that is 
being sent out to women about their state pension entitlement. Groups 
representing this grotesquely disadvantaged group of women have suggested a 
pension entitlement notice. And so have other experts who have given evidence 
to the committee.

“We expect the Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> [DWP] immediately to call into the 
department these witnesses, hammer out a new pension entitlement notice, and 
begin supplying all women with accurate information on their pension 
entitlement.”

100,000 back call to compensate women caught out by state pension rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/04/100000-compensate-women-state-pension-rise>
The committee’s inquiry into the new state pension 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/work-and-pensions-committee/news-parliament-2015/state-pension-launch-15-16/>
 was launched in October and is continuing. However, it says it is “so 
concerned about misinterpretation attributable to confusing state pension 
statements that we are issuing this urgent interim report”.

Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at financial services group Hargreaves 
Lansdown, said: “The fundamental aims of the various changes – to move to a 
simpler state pension, payable at a later age to reflect improved life 
expectancy and without discriminating according to age – were and still are the 
right thing to do.

“However, successive governments have given inadequate consideration to the 
impact of these changes on individuals and how they should be communicated.

“Even now, just a few months before its launch, the present government is 
scrambling to get its new state pension statements fit for purpose. They have 
had years to prepare, in some cases decades. This poor decision-making and 
complacency regarding the importance of good communication have undermined what 
were fundamentally good policies.”

The DWP said: “We are committed to ensuring that the public fully understands 
the changes being made to the state pension, that is why we launched a 
multimedia campaign in 2014, which will continue over the coming months and 
years.

“We’ve sent out about half a million new state pension statements since first 
launching them in September, 2014. These statements include comprehensive 
information explaining the rules of the new scheme, and how we work out an 
individual’s estimate.

“And we will soon be launching a new digital service with HMRC, that will help 
all working age customers better understand their state pension and how their 
national insurance record affects this.”
 