
There were more than a few familiar aspects to Steven Gerrard’s last 
appearance on a Major League Soccer pitch. Not for the first time, he stroked 
home a penalty past Tim Howard as theLA Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/losangelesgalaxy> vied with the Colorado 
Rapids for a place in the Western Conference final. And again, not for the 
first time, the 36-year-old finished a shoot-out on the losing side. It was an 
appropriate way for Gerrard to bring this stint of his career to a close.

Of course, that isn’t reflective of the glittering 18-year career Gerrard has 
enjoyed, during which he hoisted the Champions League (among other trophies) 
and captained England at a World Cup, butMLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> fans won’t remember him in the same 
way the Anfield faithful will. In truth, the midfielder’s North American jaunt 
only underlined his decline. Gerrard will surely one day admit regret over the 
move.

Steven Gerrard ‘considering next stage of career’ after leaving LA Galaxy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/steven-gerrard-leaving-la-galaxy>
On the face of it, Gerrard never fully committed to his MLS task. He spoke of 
seekinga more relaxed lifestyle in California 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/sportsnow/la-sp-sn-steven-gerrard-malibu-luxury-home-20150403-story.html>
 upon signing from Liverpool last year, doing little to dispel the familiar 
slights that MLS is little more than a retirement home for aging European 
stars. Hetook a job as a television pundit 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/steven-gerrards-champions-league-punditry-6192673>
 on top of his responsibilities as an LA Galaxy player. What’s more, the job 
was in England with BT Sport, meaning sapping trans-Atlantic flights every few 
weeks. Gerrard couldn’t have been too bothered about the laid-back lifestyle he 
supposedly wanted.

While David Beckham and Robbie Keane were embraced by the Galaxy and MLS, 
Gerrard was an unfortunate scapegoat for some. He might have been a big name 
but he was very rarely a big player for the Carson club. There were hints of 
his pedigree at times, most notably during a summer spurt that saw Gerrard 
assist on four straight Galaxy goals, but his inconsistencies were reflective 
of the team’s as a whole. They never quite found their groove together.

It’s somewhat unfair that after such an illustrious and successful career 
Gerrard has been depicted by some as a tragic figure. In the same way Zinedine 
Zidane is remembered in some quarters for his red card in the 2006 World Cup 
final for a chest-butt, Gerrard has been immortalised in meme and gif form as 
the playerwhose slip effectively cost Liverpool their first league title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/steven-gerrard-liverpool-slip-chelsea-premier-league-title>
 in 24 years. It’s an image he struggled to shake off in MLS. He was a figure 
of derision for some.

Well past his best, it’s true that Gerrard never truly belonged at the LA 
Galaxy. At the the least, he was a misfit, struggling to find a role in a side 
that was frequently better without him. Whether he bought into MLS or not, 
regardless of all other factors, the 36-year-old never demonstrated his true 
ability Stateside.

Although Gerrard can hardly be blamed for the troubles the Galaxy faced since 
his arrival in the summer of 2015. Bruce Arena arguably had the greatest squad 
ever assembled by a MLS club at his disposal, but he couldn’t find the right 
shape to make the most of it. Gerrard’s stint with the league’s most successful 
franchise became synonymous with underachievement.

Now, with Gerrard gone, the Galaxy can rebuild. The club have enjoyed great 
success in recent years, winning three MLS Cups in four years between 2011 and 
2014, but this current generation has run its course. Rejuvenation is needed 
and the rumour mill has already started to churn out names of those who could 
be targeted to help achieve that transformation during the off-season. The 
Galaxy have been in a state of transition for some time, but now they can 
finally start anew.

Frank Lampard's legacy with New York City FC remains difficult to assess
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/frank-lampards-legacy-with-new-york-city-fc-remains-difficult-to-assess>
The statement released by Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/steven-gerrard-leaving-la-galaxy>
 upon news of his LA Galaxy exit conveyed a certain chagrin over the way his 
time in MLS unfolded. “When I left Liverpool, I came to Los Angeles with the 
goal of helping the Galaxy lift another MLS Cup,” he said. “I am of course 
disappointed to have not achieved that objective, but I can look back at my 
time at the club with pride at what we accomplished, including two straight 
playoff appearances and countless memorable moments on the pitch.”

Gerrard says he is now considering the next stage of his career, with some 
suggesting he may do as Beckham did when he left the LA Galaxy by joining a top 
European club for a swansong. Celtic, where Brendan Rodgers is now the manager,
have been mentioned as a possible destination 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/11/15/celtic-remain-favourites-to-sign-former-liverpool-captain-steven-gerrard-6258749/>
.

Another option would see Gerrard become a member of the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> coaching staff, which is 
perhaps what he should have done 18 months ago rather than embarking on an 
assignment he never seemed truly sold on. Gerrard, still regarded a legend at 
Anfield, would have more to offer Jürgen Klopp and the Reds than he ever did 
the LA Galaxy.

His initial farewell, posted to Instagram on Monday 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMxARS4DZ6p/?taken-by=stevengerrard&hl=en>, 
provided an insight into the midfielder’s true sentiment over his MLS stint. 
“Special place incredible view I will miss you LA #lalaland,” he posted, 
accompanying picture showing him in front of a spectacular Los Angeles 
skyscape. There was no mention of the LA Galaxy, just the city they play in. 
That’s what Gerrard really came for, and that’s what he’s really leaving.
 