
With 100-year-old Vogue and design and lifestyle bible Wallpaper producing 
their biggest-ever issues – and“handbag” size pioneer Glamour seeking to bulk 
up to a bigger, glossier edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/glamour-magazine-scraps-handbag-size-after-15-years>
 – the luxury magazines appear to be defying the advertiser and reader exodus 
rapidly eroding the rest of the magazine market.


More than a million British consumers stopped buying print magazines, or gave 
up their subscription, in the year to the end of June. Titles such as Loaded, 
Zoo, Nuts, FHM, Company and InStyle have closed or embarked on digital-only 
reimaginings, while the 64-year-old music bible NME has been forcedto go free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/nme-to-go-free-with-larger-circulation>
 to find an audience as paying print fans dry up.

This is in contrast to the fortunes of the luxury magazine market, which 
appears resilient to the wider change in consumer reading habits in the digital 
age.

Nicholas Coleridge, international president of Vogue to Tatler owner Condé 
Nast, said that content on a tablet or iPad cannot match the experience of that 
“magazine moment”.

“It is very hard to replicate the physical allure of a luxury magazine on 
other platforms,” he sid. “[It is] something to do with the sheen of the paper, 
the way that the ink sits on the page, the smell of money and desire that wafts 
off the page. Readers move into a different mode when they engage with a 
glossy. Advertisers understand this.”


While WPP’s Group M media arm has forecast print ad spend on consumer 
magazines in total will fall 14% this year, to £320m, the luxury market is 
breaking records.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6795e586d16ed1685414a9e69d652809bb01e019%2F0_0_2599_3367%2F2599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Still%20in%20vogue%3A%20luxury%20magazines%20defy%20print%20market%20gloom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Still%20in%20vogue%3A%20luxury%20magazines%20defy%20print%20market%20gloom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6795e586d16ed1685414a9e69d652809bb01e019%2F0_0_2599_3367%2F2599.jpg>
 Vogue’s centenary issue was its biggest ever at 464 pages. Photograph: Josh 
Olin/PA 
Vogue’s centenary issue in June, which featured the Duchess of Cambridge on 
the cover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/30/duchess-of-cambridge-appears-as-vogue-cover-star>
, was at 464 pages its biggest ever – and contained a record number of pages of 
advertising (264). Time UK’s Wallpaper – in its 20th year – put out a record 
508-page edition in September with a bumper 230 pages of advertising.


“Many people say that press advertising is dead or dying, but glossy magazines 
are holding their own,” said Jo Blake, head of publishing at Havas Media Group. 
“For many luxury [advertising] clients it is first and foremost the prime 
medium, more so than TV, because they know competitors will all be in there. 
[High-end] magazines are still number one for those advertisers.”


Earlier this year Coleridge, whose goddaughter Cara Delevingne’s appearance on 
September’s Vogue helped drive sales to 230,000, pointed out that a number of 
its luxury titles are doing better than in the pre-internet days. Vogue sold 
135,000 copies in 1989 but now sells about 200,000 on average; Tatler has grown 
from 25,000 to approximately 90,000 and GQ is up from 40,000 to over 100,000.

Condé Nast’s latest trend-bucking move is to ditch the famous “handbag” size 
that revolutionised the market when Glamour launched 15 years ago.

In a seemingly costly, and counterintuitive, move the magazine is to get 
bigger, to the size of Wired, even though paper costs are expected to rise 
because of the weakness in the pound since the Brexit vote..


Publishing director Jamie Jouning says that the move is fuelled by a demand 
from premium advertisers, who felt that the smaller size “has not always done 
full justice to their creative”.


Rival Hearst UK – publisher of Harper’s Bazaar, Esquire, Elle and Good 
Housekeeping – has started to take a different approach with some of its 
titles. Elle is being given away in beauty boxes, while Harper’s Bazaar has 
been offered at events such as the Blenheim Palace horse trials. Such moves 
have helped boost total circulation figures and pushed the brand to new 
consumers.

Even so, there is a sense that the digital revolution is looming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1f99b6b8cbfa2a3498dd932ea96c7e941331eb%2F152_70_1240_815%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Still%20in%20vogue%3A%20luxury%20magazines%20defy%20print%20market%20gloom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Still%20in%20vogue%3A%20luxury%20magazines%20defy%20print%20market%20gloom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fstill-in-vogue-luxury-magazines-defy-print-market-gloom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1f99b6b8cbfa2a3498dd932ea96c7e941331eb%2F152_70_1240_815%2F1240.jpg>
 Wallpaper’s two 20th-anniversary covers, a 508-page edition with 230 pages of 
advertising. Photograph: Wallpaper Magazine 
Hopes were initially high for digital tablet versions of magazines following 
the launch of Apple’s iPad in 2010. However, that has given way to a more sober 
assessment: while digital edition circulation is up 50% year-on-year, to 
585,000, most of this is driven by brands in the news and current affairs 
sectors, such as the Economist, The Week and Spectator.

Group M estimates that if this sector of magazineswas stripped out, digital 
circulation actually fell by as much as 10% across all other titles it samples 
in the first half of the year.


“We don’t think digital editions of magazines have worked at all, bar one or 
two exceptions,” said Douglas McCabe, chief executive at Enders Analysis. 
“While these premium brands will continue to play an important role with 
advertisers and readers, there are risks from [social and digital] media from 
the rise of bloggers and vloggers.

“Digital has brought down the barriers of entry for [creating and showcasing] 
content, recommendation and discovery of products.Magazines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/magazines> will have to fight hard to 
compete with that going forward.”


• This article was amended on 24 November 2016. An earlier version mistakenly 
included Reveal in a list of magazines that have “closed or embarked on 
digital-only reimaginings”.
 