
It’s been three years since we’ve had new material from Sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/25/interview-the-thing-about-sting> 
– and while many would like to think his time has been spent crossed-legged in 
a Goan yoga retreat, the reality is quite the opposite. Sort of. According to a 
new interview with the singer, the songwriting featured on his 12th album – 
named 57th & 9th, after the intersection in New York he travelled through on 
his way to the studio – revolves around world events he absorbed during his 
time out, such as the deaths of David Bowie and Prince, and the mounting 
catastrophe of climate change.

“If you sit at home, you get anxious, but that anxiety is a sort of engine for 
you. It makes you think, “OK, what am I going to do?” The first single [I Can’t 
Stop Thinking About You] is about looking at a blank sheet of paper and seeing 
what looks like a field of snow, with no clues as to what’s underneath,” the 
star toldEntertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/08/30/sting-57th-9th-david-bowie>.

On one song, 50,000, he sings about the deaths of rock stars, inspired by the 
passing of Motörhead’sLemmy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lemmy>, David 
Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> and Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>, as well as his friend the actor 
Alan Rickman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman>, in quick 
succession. ‘It was a strange time because you think that these people are 
immortal, but then suddenly they’re like the rest of us, they die. It intrigues 
me that great success is this brilliant light, but also every brilliant light 
creates a dark shadow. I think wisdom only comes when you can navigate both. 
I’m getting philosophical.”

Sting's musical The Last Ship ends its voyage on Broadway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/06/sting-musical-the-last-ship-ends-its-voyage-on-broadway-neil-simon-theater>
On One Fine Day, meanwhile, Sting <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sting> 
addresses global warming sceptics. “I pray that climate sceptics are right. I’d 
like the scientists to be wrong! But I think it’s happening. This is my ironic 
take on that whole thing.”

57th and 9th is out on 11 November, and follows the 2013 concept album The 
Last Ship, which featured artists with connections to north-east England, 
including Brian Johnson from AC/DC, Jimmy Nail and the Unthanks. A tribute to 
the closed yards in the shipbuilding town of Wallsend, where Sting grew up, it 
was made into a musical onBroadway 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/08/theater/last-ship-to-close-on-broadway.html>
, which closed three months after launching.In an email quoted in the New York 
Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/06/sting-musical-the-last-ship-ends-its-voyage-on-broadway-neil-simon-theater>
, its producers Jeffrey Seller and Kathryn Schenker acknowledged: “We have been 
bewildered and saddened by our inability to sustain an audience for this 
musical that we deeply love.”
 