
Stock markets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets> hit record 
highs on Monday as traders continued to bet on a Trump-backed boom for 
business. Rising oil prices drove gains in the energy sector, where the 
president-elect has promised to roll back regulations, and the S&P energy index 
gained 2.2% and closed at its highest levels in 16 months.

At the close of the New York stock exchange (NYSE), the Dow Jones industrial 
average rose 88.76 points, or 0.47%, to 18,956.69, the S&P 500 gained 16.28 
points, or 0.75%, to 2,198.18 and the Nasdaq Composite added 47.35 points, or 
0.89%, to 5,368.86.

The levels marked a record close for each of the three major Wall Street 
indexes, but market participants cautioned that trading volume was likely to be 
light this week ahead of the US Thanksgiving Day holiday on Thursday.

Brent crude oil settled up 4.4% at $48.90 and US crude settled 3.9% higher at 
$47.49 after touching their highest levels in about three weeks as the dollar 
weakened. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said he believed there was “a 
strong likelihood” that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(Opec) would agree to cap production later this month.

European equity markets also moved higher as a jump in oil prices helped spur 
energy gains.

“The post-election rally is continuing,” said Bucky Hellwig, senior 
vice-president at BB&T Wealth Management in Birmingham, Alabama. “There was 
some concern that rates might rise too far, but it looks like they may have 
slowed down a little bit.” The Fed chair, Janet Yellen, said an interest rate 
hike could be “appropriate relatively soon” on Thursday, citing “excessive 
risk-taking” as a danger were rates to remain low.

The dollar was down 0.3% to 100.89 against a basket of major currencies, 
pausing after a 10-day streak in which it gained nearly 5%. That rally was 
fueled by expectations of policies by President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> that would lead to interest 
rate increases.
 