
Confident assertions are being made about what will happen to the City after 
Brexit. Sir Charlie Bean, former deputy governor of the Bank of England, said 
last week that he had “absolutely no doubt at all” that euro-denominated 
clearing of interest rate derivatives would be moved into the European Union.

Then chancellor Philip Hammond said the exact opposite, suggesting the EU 
would be foolish to attempt such a manoeuvre because it would only hand 
business to New York. London, Hammond argued, benefits from economies of scale 
that EU countries shouldn’t try to smash out of “narrow and hypothetical 
national advantage”.

Such arguments go to the heart of the debate about the wisdom of allowing the 
London Stock Exchange to merge with Deutsche Börse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/lse-shareholders-expected-to-back-deutsche-borse-merger-london-stock-exchange>
, a £24bn deal that now faces about six months of regulatory scrutiny.

Before the vote for Brexit, the pitch from the pair was straightforward, 
almost compelling. The duo would be a European powerhouse to compete with the 
big US houses, led by ICE (owner of the New York Stock Exchange), and oil the 
wheels of the European economy. All that was required was for both sides to 
accept a new structure in which the holding company would be based in London 
but local regulators would continue to oversee local entities as if nothing had 
changed.

The structure is clever and shareholders duly approved the terms, so now it’s 
up to the regulators and politicians to protest if they wish. The European 
commission will fret about the possible loss of competition. The specific UK 
worry, however, is obvious: if, despite Hammond’s advice, EU governments try to 
slice off chunks of City business, are their chances improved by the 
LSE/Deutsche merger?

Hammond’s relaxed stance is understandable up to a point. The Frankfurt-based 
European Central Bank has always been infuriated that London dominates 
euro-denominated trading but it has lost one court battle on the matter and, 
say most lawyers, the UK’s exit from the EU wouldn’t alter the basis of the 
relevant judgment. What’s more, sensible EU business folk might complain if 
Berlin or Paris tried to undermine London; they would worry that the price of 
capital could go up for them.

All the same, Bean’s warning shouldn’t be dismissed lightly, or without proper 
scrutiny. It’s very odd, for example, that Xavier Rolet, chief executive of the
London Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>, is in charge 
of studying market infrastructure for Baroness Vadera’s post-Brexit financial 
services taskforce; as an architect of the Deutsche deal, he’s hardly impartial.

What’s needed is a specific national interest study. If it concludes that the 
merger should be paused until the terms of Brexit are decided and proper 
assessments can be made, so be it. The Deutsche/LSE deal is too important to 
the City to be waved through on the merry assumption that things will probably 
work out OK in the end.

Who are the UK’s fat executives?

International trade secretary Liam Fox, if he had wanted to attack the UK’s 
“lazy” business culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/09/fat-and-lazy-britain-is-ill-prepared-to-secure-future-outside-eu-says-fox>
 seriously, could have pointed to the UK’s large balance of trade deficit and 
compared it with Germany’s surplus.

Fox didn’t do that, however. Maybe there were two reasons why. First, 
successful German exporters tend to enjoy more financial support from local and 
central government, which doesn’t suit Fox’s agenda. Second, the UK’s exports 
of goods and services per capita are the third highest in the G7, after Germany 
and Canada, as economist Andrew Sentance pointed out.

Downing Street declined to endorse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/theresa-may-declines-to-endorse-liam-fox-attack-on-fat-and-lazy-uk-firms>
 Fox’s remarks. That was wise. Theresa May, let’s hope, will go further and 
invite Fox to shame those “fat” UK executives he thinks play golf on Friday 
afternoons instead of negotiating export deals. If the golf line was a 
throwaway, let’s hear about all the deals Fox thinks could have been done. 
Without evidence, his generalisations are absurd.

Exit Shafik

Deputy governors of the Bank or England are meant to last more than two years, 
soDame Nemat Shafik’s escape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/bank-of-england-deputy-governor-quits-nemat-minouche-shafik-london-school-economics>
 to the London School of Economics is big news in the small world of central 
banking.

It’s hard to detect any falling-out in the glowing tribute from governor Mark 
Carney. And the Bank’s review of fair and effective markets, overseen by 
Shafik, received generally favourable reviews. So one assumes she really does 
find the pull of academia too great.

Yet it would be struggle to say Shafik has established a high profile. When 
she arrived from the IMF in August 2014, some people thought Carney had hired a 
potential successor; it’s been a while since that theory was aired.
 