
Global stock markets took Donald Trump’s shock victory in the US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 in their stride, defying earlier predictions of a major slump in shares.

The FTSE 100 fell 147 points on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-defy-predictions-of-slump-after-trump-victory>
 as trading got underway, but the scale of the decline was far less than the 
230-point drop predicted. Ameasured acceptance speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/09/president-victory-speech-annotated>
 from the president-elect as European markets opened soothed some of the 
immediate fears facing investors and the decline was arrested and then 
eradicated. By the close, the UK index had climbed 68.71 points, or 1%, to 
6911.84.

Germany’s Dax added 1.56% to 10,646 after falling as low as 10,174 while 
France’s Cac closed up 1.49%. In Italy, which holds a key referendum on 
constitutional reform next month amid thisperiod of popular revolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/far-right-first-to-congratulate-donald-trump-on-historic-upset>
, the FTSE MIB was virtually unchanged, down 0.1%.
FTSE 100 reaction to Trump's victory 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-09T16:55:34/embed.html>
The European markets were helped by a positive, if mixed, performance on Wall 
Street, where theDow Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones> 
Industrial Average was around 150 points higher by the time London traders 
headed home. Earlier forecasts had suggested the Dow could fall by as much as 
800 points. The S&P 500 rose 0.95% to a one-month high.

The only market to take a Trump tumble was Asia, where Japan’s Nikkei dropped 
5.3% as Trump’s victory overHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> emerged.

Connor Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadex, said: “Trump’s presidential 
promises during his victory speech have reassured investors. Simply it is too 
early to tell what exactly President Trump has in store, something that may 
make for a rocky rest of November, even if today has confounded expectations 
market-wise.”

David Kelly, chief global strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management, told 
investors on a conference call: “This is a pretty muddled playbook and that is 
why the market reaction is muted,” adding that “people shouldn’t overreact 
here”. Given that Trump had won the election he could now afford to sound less 
aggressive and be more pragmatic, Kelly said. “The hallmark of aDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> presidency will be a certain 
amount of pragmatism.”

Wall Street election reaction: peaceful transition to Trump cheers stocks – 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
Kerim Derhalli, chief executive of investment group invstr , said: “The 
reality is that Trump’s victory could actually turn out to be a better option 
for the global economy than a Clinton win would have been.

“He has promised to cut corporate taxes, give US companies a tax holiday to 
repatriate the billions they have been stashing overseas and to invest in 
infrastructure. All of this on top of an economy that is already at 4.9% 
unemployment and showing sufficient increase in inflation to make a cautious 
Fed likely to hike rates in early December.”

Among the risers were pharmaceutical stocks as the threat of Hillary Clinton’s 
price controls disappeared, while precious metal miners gained ground as 
investors bought gold and silver as havens for their cash.

Companies benefitting from Trump’s plans to increase infrastructure spending 
were also in demand, including construction stocks and equipment makers such as 
Caterpillar.

But shares in Smith & Wesson and Sturm Ruger, the US’s two largest gun 
companies fell back as investors bet that the huge surge in gun sales driven by 
fears of reform had ended. Trump’s election has effectively put an end to the 
gun control legislation proposed by Democrats.

Elsewhere, US 10-year bonds – another port in a storm – initially moved 
higher, pushing yields to a one-month low of 1.71%. But yields rebounded 
sharply to more than 2% on optimism that Trump’s measures could boost US 
economic growth.


An initial fall in the dollar was also reversed, as investors bet that a Trump 
victory would not after all rule out a rate rise by the US Federal Reserve in 
December. Kathleen Brooks, research director at City Index, said: “A Trump 
presidency does not appear to be an obstacle for a rate hike from the Fed.


“This could be for two reasons: firstly, Trump’s softer approach in his 
victory speech may suggest that he will leave the Fed alone, and allow them to 
get on with their job, which includes hiking interest rates. Secondly, 
considering the win for Trump hasn’t been America’s Brexit, the Fed does not 
need to refrain from hiking interest rates to suppress market volatility and 
protect from stock market declines. Interestingly, expectations for more than 
one hike next year have also risen on Wednesday.”

But the Mexican peso, which fell 13% to a record low following Trump’s 
victory, was still down 8% by the time London trading closed. The currency had 
been hard hit due toTrump’s pledge to build a wall between the country’s border 
with the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mexico-responds-donald-trump-border-wall>
 and his comments on immigration.
 