
It’s a strange summer for Roland Emmerich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/18/roland-emmerich-on-independence-day-resurgence>
, gay German doyen of the action ridicu-spectacle. Practically unnoticed 
beneath the bang and clatter of hisdaft Independence Day sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/26/independence-day-resurgence-review>
, his passion project,Stonewall 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Stonewall-DVD-Jeremy-Irvine/dp/B01FMTSAOQ> 
(Metrodome, 15), slips straight to DVD tomorrow. A clumsy but oddly endearing 
fictionalisation of 1969’s LGBT riots in Greenwich Village, it wasirrecoverably 
lambasted <http://www.ew.com/article/2015/09/24/stonewall-scathing-reviews> at 
last year’s Toronto film festival. Not without reason either: it’s a cosy, 
cliche-reliant telling of a still-nervy slice of social history, filtering its 
tale of outsider representation through the Colgate-white perspective of Jeremy 
Irvine’s hero.

Rejigging facts to let an indecently chiselled midwest farmboy cast the first 
Stonewall stone, among other cornball artistic liberties, is a clear own goal 
on Emmerich and writer Jon Robin Baitz’s part. But the sentimental virtues of 
the film-makers’ approach survive their own worst impulses. It’s a film told 
with a warm, affectionate sense of community, easy to denigrate by those who 
know theStonewall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stonewall> story inside 
out, but emotionally accessible to those with more to learn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJOURNEMfHls&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJOURNEMfHls>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJOURNEMfHls&media=>
Watch a trailer for Holding the Man. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JOURNEMfHls> 
Pair it up with Holding the Man  
<https://www.peccapics.com/product/holdingtheman/>(Peccadillo, 15), another 
soft-but-sweet-centred period tale of gay self-realisation. Drawn from the late 
Australian writerTim Conigrave’s bestselling memoir 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Holding-Man-Timothy-Conigrave/dp/0143009494> of his 
15-year romance with boyfriend John Caleo, initiated on the school football 
field and continuing through the Aids crisis of the 1980s, Neil Armfield’s 
brightly lit, tenderly performed film eschews the gut-spilling emotional 
candour of his excellent 2006 junkie love story,Candy. Its gentle, 
unpretentious empathy prickles the tear ducts all the same.

Withholding less on its queer subject is Mapplethorpe: Look at the Pictures 
<http://dogwoof.com/mapplethorpe/> (Dogwoof, 18). A frank, saucily absorbing 
documentary study of the American photographer, whose pristine images of 
swollen appendages and S&M activities, among other subjects, inspired heated 
political debates about public arts funding, Fenton Bailey and Randy Barbato’s 
film examines his work with as sharp an eye as it does his rollicking personal 
life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fstonewall-holding-the-man-mapplethorpe-batman-v-superman-hardcore-henry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0eadeb4cdce6d2ddacdf4faa8f3c3b630a811%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stonewall%3B%20Holding%20the%20Man%3B%20Mapplethorpe%3B%20Batman%20v%20Superman%3B%20Hardcore%20Henry%3B%20A%20Kind%20of%20Loving%3B%20Film4%20downloads%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fstonewall-holding-the-man-mapplethorpe-batman-v-superman-hardcore-henry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stonewall%3B%20Holding%20the%20Man%3B%20Mapplethorpe%3B%20Batman%20v%20Superman%3B%20Hardcore%20Henry%3B%20A%20Kind%20of%20Loving%3B%20Film4%20downloads%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fstonewall-holding-the-man-mapplethorpe-batman-v-superman-hardcore-henry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0eadeb4cdce6d2ddacdf4faa8f3c3b630a811%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Critical drubbing’: Ben Affleck, left, and Henry Cavill in Batman v Superman: 
Dawn of Justice. Photograph: Clay Enos/AP 
Amid this wealth of gay-focused titles, it would be tempting to write that the 
week’s most homoerotic release is actuallyBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Batman-Superman-Dawn-Justice-DVD/dp/B01D64VT6K> 
(Warner, 12), but that would be attributing a level of wit and sensual 
awareness to Zack Snyder’s pompous, honkingly ugly superhero conference that is 
far beyond its skill set. As it is, it’s hard to add much to the critical 
drubbing it deservedly met with in cinemas. Presuming that the meeting of two 
equally stolid, overworked caped crusaders is enough of an event to magic a 
sense of purpose into a narrative devoid of urgency, this is effectively a 
cinematic Spaghetti Junction: noisy, busy, full of converging vehicles with 
somewhere else to go (hi, Wonder Woman!), but nothing like a destination in 
itself.

There are higher-octane action kicks to be had in Ilya Naishuller’s Hardcore 
Henry <https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hardcore-Henry-DVD-Haley-Bennett/dp/B01G3LR3S6> 
(EIV, 18), an enthusiastically antic sci-fi thriller shot entirely from its 
unspeaking soldier protagonist’s perspective. Aping the form of first-person 
shooters, it’s hardly an unprecedented gimmick, though the film’s cocky enough 
– wearisomely so, in the long run – to have you believe otherwise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHgU6hlu02yI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHgU6hlu02yI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHgU6hlu02yI&media=>
Watch a trailer for Hardcore Henry. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HgU6hlu02yI> 
Re-release of the week is a smart polish-up of John Schlesinger’s 1962 
social-realist classicA Kind of Loving 
<http://www.studiocanal.co.uk/Film/Details/9bb10cc6-670e-4556-ba6d-9e8400332dad>
(Studiocanal, 15) – not that you’d want to remove too much grain or grit from 
this scuffed, scowling drama of a rocky shotgun marriage. If the film has 
retained slightly less of its brute impact over the decades than some of its 
kitchen-sink contemporaries, Alan Bates’s hot, roiling presence in the lead is 
intact.

Finally, the week’s best streaming news concerns Film4’s heavily stuffed back 
catalogue, from which 39 films, never previously available for digital 
download, are hitting iTunes and Amazon . The selection runs the gamut fromAlice
 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Alice-DVD-Blu-ray-Kristyna-Kohoutova/dp/B004LNSFMM/ref=sr_1_1?s=instant-video&ie=UTF8&qid=1469634461&sr=8-1&keywords=alice+jan+svankmajer>
, Czech stop-motion master Jan Švankmajer’s marvellous adult Wonderland riff, 
to Julien Temple’s starry, jangly rockumentaryJoe Strummer 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Joe-Strummer-Future-Unwritten-DVD/dp/B000S398N4>, as 
well as a couple of titles currently unavailable even on DVD. Those in the 
latter group include Andrew Bujalski’s still-winning mumblecore standard-setters
Funny Ha Ha <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0327753/> and Mutual Appreciation 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0446747/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_8>. But the most 
unexpected excavation is Claude Chabrol’s shadow-washed curioDr M 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099445/>, a Fritz Lang-inspired noir nightmare 
fronted by a more weathered Alan Bates. Get digging.
 