
If the title card at the end of Roland Emmerich’s Stonewall is to be believed, 
the film is intended as a tribute to the “unsung heroes of the Stonewall 
Riots”, namely the homeless LGBT youth at the centre of the 1969 uprising.

Given the wholesale rejection of the film by the LGBT community following its 
disastrous premiere at the Toronto film festival last year, that dedication 
might seem somewhat suspect, but getting to the heart of Stonewall requires 
taking Emmerich at his word and examining exactly how he pays tribute to those 
whom history has largely forgotten. For this, he uses an old tactic, one that’s 
served him well in rendering everything from Mayan apocalypse to alien 
invasions somehow relatable: he creates an emblem. This single figure is 
designed to represent all those who joined together to jumpstart the gay 
liberation movement. And, like so many of Hollywood’s emblems, his is a white 
guy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGEJmPwB4yI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGEJmPwB4yI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGEJmPwB4yI&media=>
Jeremy Irvine plays Danny Winters, a small-town closet case from Middle 
America. He’s got a homophobic American football coach for a dad and a sexually 
confused quarterback for a love interest. After a parking lot blowjob goes 
awry, Danny heads from Indiana to NYC, where he falls in with a diverse group 
of LGBT street kids in the perpetually sun-soaked studio backlot that the film 
mistakes for Greenwich Village.

Bohemia ensues, and the film quickly morphs into a bad impression of Rent – 
though it offers little to threaten that musical’s status as the defining 
seaside postcard of 20th-century queer squalor. Indeed, while Rent continues to 
attract both sincere and ironic devotion 20 years on from its debut, 
near-universal derision has rendered Stonewall a straight-to-DVD proposition.

A lot of that has to do with the film’s denouement, in which our hero more or 
less singlehandedly emancipates the LGBT community from its shackles. As many 
have pointed out, the actual instigators of the Stonewall Riots – among them 
lesbians, drag queens and trans women of colour – looked considerably less like 
Abercrombie & Fitch models than Danny does.

But then, that’s the fatal flaw of any emblem – he can no more represent every 
Stonewall rioter than Jake Gyllenhaal can represent every victim of climate 
change in The Day After Tomorrow, another Emmerich brainchild. If the problem 
is particularly hard to swallow in this case, maybe it’s because it leads to an 
uncomfortable question: if the bulk of the Stonewall rioters had looked like 
Jeremy Irvine, would the world have been so quick to forget them?
 