
McDonald’s early history looks set to hit the big screen in a tale of 
corporate intrigue described as being in the style of Oscar-winning Facebook 
movie,The Social Network <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network>.

John Lee Hancock, director of The Blind Side and Walt Disney biopic Saving Mr 
Banks, is in talks to direct the project,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/blind-side-director-tackling-story-756293>
. Titled The Founder, the biopic will focus on the 1950s battle for control of 
the nascent fast-food restaurant chain between founders Mac and Dick McDonald 
and Illinois businessman Ray Kroc.

Kroc, a salesman known for his aggressive business practices, became involved 
with McDonald’s in 1954, a year after the company began franchising its 
fast-food system, name and restaurant design. By 1961 he had moved from selling 
the brothers eight “multi-mixer” milkshake machines to purchasing the company 
in its entirety for $2.7m (£1.7m). The McDonald siblings retained their 
original restaurant in San Bernardino, California, but were forced to rename it 
“The Big M” as they had failed to retain rights to the original name. Kroc 
later forced the brothers out of business by opening his own McDonald’s 
restaurant nearby.

The business’s new owner is also said to have reneged on a handshake 
arrangement for the McDonalds to receive 1% on gross sales at all the chain’s 
restaurants, which would have brought the brothers and their heirs more than 
$100m a year if it had been honoured. Kroc later went on to build the firm into 
the most successful fast-food operation in the world: there are now 35,000 
outlets in the McDonald’s Corporation, serving 68m customers daily in 119 
countries.

The Founder is being put together by the FilmNation and The Combine production 
companies, with the tone of the screenplay by The Wrestler’s Robert Siegel 
described as similar to The Social Network and another Oscar-winning tale of 
ruthless greed, Paul Thomas Anderson’sThere Will Be Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122167/there.will.be.blood>. Hancock’s 
previous films sawSandra Bullock 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/film/sandra-bullock> win the best actress 
Oscar for her turn as Leigh Anne Tuohy in The Blind Side, and Emma Thompson 
receive Golden Globe and Bafta nominations for her portrayal of Mary Poppins 
creator PL Travers in Saving Mr Banks.
 