
It’s been called the curse of The Mummy. On Tuesday afternoon, for the 
briefest of moments, the Imax YouTube page accidentally hosted an unfinished 
trailer of Tom Cruise’s new film. Every aspect was in place – the stunts, the 
music, the dialogue – except for one thing: the sound effects had completely 
disappeared. And since the trailer for The Mummy is almost all sound effects, 
it made for a discombobulating watch.

When Cruise’s plane hits turbulence, all its passengers bob up and down 
silently. And when it dives into a tailspin, the only thing we can hear are 
Cruise’s disembodied grunts and screams. The windscreen smashes, and he makes a 
noise like he’s vomiting spaghetti. He lands on the floor with a thud, and he 
makes a noise like someone’s just snuck up on him. As the wings fall off and he 
plummets to his apparent death,Tom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise> screams “BLARRGH!”, twice and 
identically.

Copies of the trailer keep popping up online, but Universal shuts them down 
within minutes. This is a shame because – and I say this with no irony 
whatsoever – it is the best Tom Cruise trailer in years. It’s practically a 
love letter to the man.

Cruise’s greatest gift is his utter commitment to every aspect of his life. 
Whether it’sacting <https://youtu.be/FFrag8ll85w?t=85> or running 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJdMDvjfyQ0> or observing a religion or 
driving a car around the Top Gear test track 
<https://youtu.be/qexo0eI3eE4?t=125>, Cruise’s effort is always palpable. He 
never gives anything less than a billion per cent, and the audience can feel it.

So how wonderful that this commitment remains intact even when it comes to 
delivering background paralanguage. Those screams aren’t meant to be heard at 
the top of the mix. They’re supposed to be drowned out by several layers of 
wind and engine roar. Everyone else understands this – the best Annabelle 
Wallis can muster in the trailer is a breathy sigh – but Tom Cruise gives these 
moments everything. He’s grunting like his life literally depends on it.

Of course, this is to his benefit. Imagine Ryan Gosling in the same scene. 
Imagine James Franco. Imagine the half-hearted, slightly ironic nearly-screams 
they would have produced. Now compare that with the ultra-sincere jet engine 
that is Tom Cruise. You’d pick Cruise for the role every time, wouldn’t you?

That he’s capable of this shouldn’t be a surprise. After all, the best moment 
of the best Tom Cruise film in recent years –Edge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/01/edge-of-tomorrow-review-tom-cruise-emily-blunt-born-again-blockbuster>
 – was an offscreen yell. Remember it? Cruise tried to abandon his troop by 
rolling under a lorry, but mistimed it and got squished beneath its wheels. As 
this happened, he made a kind of shrill squawk, the sort of noise you’d make if 
you where goosed by a ghost in a haunted mansion. It was brilliant.

Five things we learned from the first trailer for The Mummy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/05/five-things-learned-from-first-trailer-the-mummy-tom-cruise-russell-crowe-universal>
Just when we thought we knew Tom Cruise, just when we thought we’d seen every 
possible permeation of his narrow yet effective onscreen skill set, the botched 
Mummy trailer has suddenly thrust him into a bold new paradigm. Turns out he’s 
a tremendous screamer. He’s just as good at screaming as he is at running 
really fast and playingcharacters called Jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/19/jack-reacher-never-go-back-review-tom-cruise>
. And he should use this.

Every new Cruise film should contain at least one scene where he screams at 
something, be it a baddie or an accident or a chicken in a hat. His entire back 
catalogue should be digitally remastered,George Lucas-style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/07/star-wars-has-gone-digital-but-how-should-you-actually-watch-it>
, to add a scene where he treads on Lego barefoot or goes down a waterslide or 
accidentally chews a mouthful of tinfoil, just so we can hear his glorious 
yells once more. Or, now that Tom Cruise is in the monster movie business, a 
remake of King Kong where he plays Fay Wray. This must happen. Every day that 
this does not happen is an affront to mankind.

At a time when his career was starting to lose a touch of steam, mired in 
unnecessary sequels and remakes, this half-finished trailer has reinvigorated 
the public’s love affair with Tom Cruise. Universal should let it live online 
forever, as a Christmas gift to the world. Cruise is the only man who can save 
2016.
 