
This week on Students Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/students-express> we’re asking 
you to submit what you would have said in your Ucas application if you were 
truly being honest.


If you bent the truth or exaggerated a little on your statement – which had to 
be submitted by January 15 –you’re not alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/25/students-exaggeration-university-statement>
. University places are competitive and most students are more than happy to 
take advice on what to include, emphasize and leave out.

You had to squeeze enough enthusiasm, academic success, part-time jobs and 
extra-curricular activities in to stand out from the crowd; from the netball 
team you captained, to the time you played Scrabble with Auntie Doris. In the 
process, perhaps you surprised even yourself with how much passion you 
apparently have for statistics or business law.

But what if you had to write a completely truthful statement? What are the 
real reasons you’re applying to university? Do you really want to study a 
course because it’s your passion – or do you simply not know what else to do? 
What are your true selling points? And what kind of student would you really be?


Let us know. You can remain anonymous, and submit your response in no more 
than 50 words. Here’s what students have already said:

jo barrow (@JoBarrow) 
@gdnstudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> i swear i read ts eliot for 
pleasure & not just because its the most pointlessly complex text i could find 
that wasn't ulysses
 <https://twitter.com/JoBarrow/status/686907620100313088> January 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JoBarrow/status/686907620100313088> Caitlin 
(@_CaitlinDoherty) 
@gdnstudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> Geeky, overly keen, and 
desperate to impress. I'll probably make it to most of my 9am lectures.
 <https://twitter.com/_CaitlinDoherty/status/686884435304837124> January 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/_CaitlinDoherty/status/686884435304837124> Andrew_1910
(@andrew_1910) 
@gdnstudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> You'll get £9k a year and 
numbers aren't capped. You'd may as well let me in.#moneyforoldrope 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/moneyforoldrope?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/andrew_1910/status/686927828357648384> January 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/andrew_1910/status/686927828357648384> 
How to submit your work


Submit your work through GuardianWitness – it’s really straightforward. You 
can share your work by clicking on the blue “Contribute” button on this 
article. You can also use theGuardianWitness smartphone app 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> or the Guardian app 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
 and search for “GuardianWitness assignments”. If you’re on Facebook, Twitter 
or Instagram you can share your art using #guardianstudents.


Alongside your entry, let us know your name, educational instituion and what 
you are currently studying.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 