
Investors flocked into the haven of gold on Wednesday amid jitters in the 
global financial markets prompted by fears thatDonald Trump  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>could pull off a shock Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>-style victory in the US 
presidential race.

Shares and the US dollar also fell after opinion polls suggested that the 
contest between Trump and his Democrat opponent,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, was now too close to 
call.

Wall Street’s assumption that Clinton was cruising to a comfortable victory 
has been shattered bythe FBI’s announcement on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 that it was looking into a batch of freshly discovered emails that might have 
a bearing on its investigation into the former US secretary of state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: ‘There is no case’ in FBI email investigation – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
As the battle for the White House entered its final days, evidence that 
Clinton’s seemingly unassailable lead has been whittled away led investors to 
speculate on a repeat of the UK’s EU referendum in June, when opinion polls 
were suggesting a victory for the remain side throughout the campaign and up 
until the polls closed.

“Now that it’s a bit less certain that [Clinton] is going to win, we’re seeing 
the impact of investors finally taking evasive action – probably evasive action 
which they should have taken a month ago,” said Ken Odeluga, market analyst at 
City Index. “The caution is setting in.”

Paresh Davdra, chief executive of RationalFX, said: “Despite seeming 
improbable to most of us for the majority of the last year, the prospect of a 
Trump presidency has long unsettled economists and market analysts, who 
predicted he would bring uncertainty to markets.


“This was highlighted [on Wednesday] by a poll that showed that a Trump win 
was the likely result of next week’s election, causing global markets to panic 
and investors to back away from the dollar. Now that the stability represented 
by Clinton is no longer assured, the following week will be a tense period as 
global markets seek to avoid the kind of complacency shown before the Brexit 
vote.”


Gold rose $15 to stand at just over $1,300 an ounce as investors sought out 
safe havens in the event of a defeat for Clinton. Meanwhile, the dollar lost 
ground against the euro, the Japanese yen, the Swiss franc and the recently 
battered pound. Sterling was up two-thirds of a cent against the greenback to 
just over $1.23 – its highest level in three weeks.


Shares dropped on the world’s major bourses, with the leading index of UK 
shares – the FTSE 100 – closing 72 points lower at 6,845. In New York, the S&P 
500 was on course in early trading to post its seventh consecutive day of 
losses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-potential-victory-financial-markets-panic-hillary-clinton-us-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adbd99dcdf5822ced5d91bcc92331c7430ee360%2F0_192_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sudden%20prospect%20of%20Trump%20victory%20sends%20shiver%20through%20markets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-potential-victory-financial-markets-panic-hillary-clinton-us-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sudden%20prospect%20of%20Trump%20victory%20sends%20shiver%20through%20markets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-potential-victory-financial-markets-panic-hillary-clinton-us-presidential-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adbd99dcdf5822ced5d91bcc92331c7430ee360%2F0_192_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump smiles during a campaign rally in Miami. Photograph: Carlo 
Allegri/Reuters 
Financial markets were also rattled by a 3% drop in oil prices following news 
of the biggest increase in crude stocks in the US since modern records began in 
1982. The cost of a barrel of US light crude dropped by almost $1.50 on news 
that oil inventories in the past week had jumped by more than 14bn barrels 
compared with the 1bn barrel increase dealers had expected.

The Federal Reserve 
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20161102a.htm>, the 
US central bank, continued its wait-and-see approach to interest rates at the 
end of a two-day meeting. But the Fed dropped a broad hint that it would act at 
its next meeting in December by saying that there was not enough evidence “for 
the time being” to warrant higher borrowing costs.

Andrew Hunter, US economist at Capital Economics, said there was a risk that 
the unsettled mood in the financial markets could linger on even when the 
result of next Tuesday’s election was known since there was a risk of a repeat 
of events 16 years ago when the race between George Bush and Al Gore was 
finally decided by the Supreme Court weeks after polling day.


“The presidential election race is now too close to call, raising the 
possibility of a near-tied election result that would be aggressively disputed 
by one or both of the candidates,” Hunter said. “Under those circumstances, the 
infamous 2000 election suggests that the uncertainty could persist for at least 
a month and could weigh heavily on the stock market during that time.”



 