
Breakfast is considered by most nutrition experts, including Public Health 
England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/children-consume-half-of-daily-sugar-quota-at-breakfast-alone-study>
, to be the most important meal of the day. It gets your brain and your 
metabolism going, and it suppresses the hunger hormone in your stomach so you 
won’t overeat at lunch. But in our busy lives, it’s easy to turn to what is 
quick, cheap, or what you can eat on the go. Cold cereal. Instant oatmeal. For 
those die-hard “I’m gonna serve something hot for breakfast” types, it’s 
microwaveable breakfast sandwiches. Gotta get out the door now? Granola bars. 
Protein bars. Yoghurt smoothies.

Children consume half of daily sugar quota at breakfast – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/children-consume-half-of-daily-sugar-quota-at-breakfast-alone-study>
Sadly, as the National Diet and Nutrition Survey found 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-diet-and-nutrition-survey>, 
what you’re really doing is giving your children a huge sugar load while 
sending them on their way: half of their daily intake on average. There’s a 
reason that theWorld Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/guidelines/sugar_intake_information_note_en.pdf?ua=1>
 andthe United States Department of Agriculture 
<https://health.gov/DietaryGuidelines/> have provided upper limits of sugar – 
because dietary sugar fries your kids’ liver and brain;just like alcohol 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20800122>.

Alcohol provides calories (7kcal/g), but not nutrition. There’s no biochemical 
reaction that requires it. When consumed chronically and in high dose, alcohol 
is toxic, unrelated to its calories or effects on weight. Not everyone who is 
exposed gets addicted, but enough do to warrant taxation and restriction of 
access, especially to children. Clearly, alcohol is not a food – it’s a 
dangerous drug, because it’s both toxic and abused.

Dietary sugar is composed of two molecules: glucose and fructose. Fructose, 
while an energy source (4kcal/g), is otherwise vestigial to humans; again, 
there is no biochemical reaction that requires it. But fructose is metabolised 
in the liver in exactly the same way as alcohol. And that’s why, when consumed 
chronically and at a high dose,fructose is similarly toxic and abused 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v482/n7383/full/482027a.html>, unrelated 
to its calories or effects on weight. And that’s why our children now get the 
diseases of alcohol (type 2 diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/growing-numbers-of-children-have-type-2-diabetes-figures-show>
,fatty liver disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/03/most-liver-transplants-linked-to-over-eating-not-alcohol>
), without alcohol. Because sugar is the “alcohol of the child”. Also similar 
to alcohol, sugared beverages are linked tobehavioural problems in children 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23968739>.

On average, cereal contains a whopping 12g of sugar, all added, in a typical 
serving. In the US, the Environmental Working Group (EWG) in 2011identified 17 
breakfast cereals <http://www.ewg.org/research/sugar_in_childrens_cereals> 
marketed to children in which added sugar constituted more than 50% of 
calories, and 177 with 40% or more. Despite the notoriety of that disclosure, 
the EWGfollow-up study 
<http://static.ewg.org/reports/2014/cereals/pdf/2014-EWG-Cereals-Report.pdf?_ga=1.136058292.467546724.1483463702>
 in 2014 noted that not one of these breakfast cereals on the top 10 worst list 
had reduced its sugar content.

Here are two examples of the corporate ploy to ply our kids with sugar. 
Consider Raisin Bran. Just raisins and bran, right? There are 19g of sugar in a 
serving; but the raisins only account for 11g. That’s because the raisins are 
all dipped in a sugar solution to make them much sweeter. Second, my favourite 
– Lucky Charms – they’re “magically delicious”. Why are there marshmallows in 
the box? Because oats cost more than marshmallows. They take up room in the 
box, yet the company gets to charge more. A great business strategy.

The sugar conspiracy | Ian Leslie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
But it doesn’t end there. Consider a pot of pomegranate yoghurt, which has 19g 
of sugar. A plain yoghurt has 7g of sugar, all lactose (milk sugar), which is 
not a problem. Thus, each pomegranate yoghurt has 12g of added sugar. Plus, the 
industry hides the sugar well. There are56 different names for sugar 
<http://www.responsiblefoods.org/sugar_names>; by choosing different sugars as 
the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth ingredients, sugar can rapidly add up to 
be the dominant ingredient. The US Food and Drug Administration haspromised 
labelling changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/08/food-labeling-us-fda-eu-health-food-safety>
 to abolish this practice, but the EU has yet to follow suit.

Perhaps the most pernicious danger is that of infant and toddler food 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/center-science-and-democracy/fighting-misinformation/hooked-for-life-weak-policies-added-sugar#.WGv1MfNfngR>
. In 2015 the US Centers for Disease Controlexamined 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25647681> the nutritional information of 
1,074 infant and toddler food products. It found 32% of toddler dinners, the 
majority of child-orientated snacks, and infant-aimed juices contained at least 
one source of added sugar, with 35% of their calories coming from sugar.

Don’t let your child be a loser by succumbing to corporate interests. Make 
sure they eat a real breakfast of champions.
 