
In today’s Guardian there was a Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> advert proudly stating that all 
their 251 drinks will be below the government’s proposed sugar levy. In other 
major supermarkets there are aisles full of similar drinks labelled 
“sugar-free” and even “healthy option”. Most have added artificial sweeteners, 
which may not be fattening but are known to have negative side-effects. Why are 
they being allowed to get away with selling this stuff?
Julie Perry
Shipley, West Yorkshire

• I have never had another migraine attack (Help! migraine attack! G2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/07/everything-you-ever-wanted-to-know-about-migraines-but-were-in-too-much-pain-to-ask>
, 7 November) since giving up chocolate, oranges and cheese many years ago, 
after reading that they can trigger migraine in some people. I have suggested 
to many migraine sufferers that it is worth trying the effect of giving these 
up those three things; every now and then someone comes back and says it has 
worked for them.
Jean Cardy
London

• Rebecca Nicholson (G2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/07/women-swear-as-much-as-men-so-heres-to-equal-opportunity-cursing>
, 8 November) thinks it’s great that women are now effing and blinding as much 
as men. How sad. We were always able to adopt the moral high ground – “don’t 
you use that word to me”. Now what comeback do we have to the Trumpish 
tendency? And what words do Rebecca and her friends use when they are hopping 
mad?
Jane Ghosh
Bristol

• I’m sitting in my favourite cafe surrounded by women of “a certain age” (
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/07/happy-memories-of-visiting-snowdonia>
, 8 November), all of whom are wearing jeans (myself included). Some are even 
wearing leather jackets and high-heeled boots. What is this world coming to?
Evelyn Ross
Cheltenham

• Has Natalie Nougayrède looked at what is in the Ceta treaty (Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/ceta-europe-far-left-activists-canada>
, 7 November)? It is far from a trade deal. Like TTIP, it includes a provision 
for corporations to sue governments that legislate in a way that may reduce 
their profits. The cases are to be tried in special tribunals, not courts. This 
overrides the sovereignty of governments. Since most US corporations have 
branches in Canada, it will bring in TTIP by the back door. People are right to 
oppose it. It is a terrible treaty, deserving of outrage.
Jeanne Warren
Oxford

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 