
Suicide Squad v Batman v Superman v Susan Sarandon v Debra Messing – the 
Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/apr/01/suicide-squad-v-batman-v-superman-v-susan-sarandon-v-debra-messing-the-dailies-film-podcast>
In Hollywood, as in nature, to everything there is a season. Except that these 
seasons do not comport with the cycles of actual nature: rebirth, abundance, 
harvest and death. In Hollywood’s autumn and winter, there comes abundance and 
“quality”, as the Oscar contenders lay out their wares for the enervating rites 
of spring. January to March – Hollywood’s cold Tuesday of the soul, when all 
the unwatchable, inept or misguided movie bodies are buried – are overshadowed 
by backward-looking celebrations of last year’s awards-season crop. Every year, 
as surely as the turning of the Earth, this pattern repeats itself.

What’s new, however, is that summer, when the wheat is high and the orchard 
heavy with fruit, is now, in Hollywood terms, a dead zone during which no one 
over 30 need bother entering the multiplex. Rarely have we endured as dreary a 
summer season as this year’s wasteland. I think it’s because those stupefying 
superhero-surplus movies and Marvel adaptations, in their endless and scarcely 
varying ubiquity, have made modern Hollywood a soil-and-soul-destroying 
monoculture, punctuated only by gross-out comedies of wildly oscillating 
quality (Mike And Dave Need Wedding Dates) and animated movies like The Secret 
Life Of Pets that treat their eight-year-old audiences with markedly more 
respect than is afforded the adults. Even as I write, next year’s crap-crop – 
OMG, Justice League!! – is being trailed at Comic-Con, the gathering of the 
geeks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0myB9YZIzeI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0myB9YZIzeI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0myB9YZIzeI&media=>
Suicide Squad's Harley Quinn is the new killer queen bee of superhero movies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/harley-quinn-suicide-squad-margot-robbie-dc-comics>
I’ve given the Marvel/DC mentality all the chances I plan to. Every time 
there’s a promising “new” twist (spoiler alert: same as the old twist), or a 
lively-looking reboot, I pays my money and I takes my lumps. Deadpool? I lasted 
an hour. Batman v Superman? I’d rather watch Roe vs Wade. Another Spider-Man 
reboot? Tie me up in web-wire and push me down the stairs. More X-Men? Can’t 
they have a real apocalypse? No matter what superpowers these superfools have, 
somehow their movies always climax with a harrowingly tedious punch-up, and the 
tacked-on socio-political subtexts are usually dim-witted and often, as with 
Zack Snyder, unrepentantly rightwing.

The upcoming Suicide Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad> 
will most likely offer more of the same: boringly dysfunctional superhero 
“family”; superstar actors uglified to the max but cashing in big time; CGI 
that will look horribly dated within 18 months; focus group-approved 
screenplay; bloated runtime; and all the creativity confined to the marketing. 
Go see it, by all means. But in the meantime, get off my dried-out lawn. I’ve 
got to put the sprinklers on.
 