
Directed and co-produced by Clint Eastwood, the film Sully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/sully-review-clint-eastwood-and-tom-hanks-turn-a-mile-high-miracle-into-middling-drama>
 claims to tell the true story of the“miracle on the Hudson” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hudson-river-plane-crash>. Instead, it is 
another rightwing attempt to delegitimize government – and in the process 
undermine the safety of millions who travel by air, train, road and boat.

The miracle happened in January 2009 when US Airways flight 1549 smashed into 
a flock of geese, just three minutes from New York City’s LaGuardia airport. 
With both engines out, pilotChesley “Sully” Sullenberger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/17/hudson-plane-crash-pilot-sullenberger>
, aided by co-pilot Jeffrey Skiles, made the gutsy decision to forgo trying to 
get to an airport runway. Instead, Sullenberger dead-sticked his Airbus 320 to 
a landing in the Hudson river, saving the lives of 155 people. The flight 
lasted six minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clint%20Eastwood%E2%80%99s%20Sully%3A%20Miracle%20on%20the%20Hudson%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fclint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer&media=>
Clint Eastwood’s Sully: Miracle on the Hudson – exclusive trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/30/clint-eastwoods-sully-miracle-on-the-hudson-exclusive-trailer>
Sully <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sully> depicts this feat of gifted 
airmanship with all the vérité that Hollywood’s cinematographic wizardry can 
bring to bear. It also, generously and wisely, includes others who played vital 
roles, such as the unflappable flight attendants and the ferry boat crews that 
plucked passengers from the deadly cold.

However, Sully is mostly concerned with the subsequent investigation, and it’s 
here where it diverges from reality.

Sully is, in theory, based on Sullenberger’s 2009 memoir Highest Duty  
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=121345792>(co-authored 
with Jeffrey Zaslow). “Until I read the script, I didn’t know the investigative 
board was trying to paint the picture that he had done the wrong thing.They 
were kind of railroading him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/sully-hudson-river-plane-crash-investigators-clint-eastwood>
,” says Eastwood in one promotional trailer. It’s not surprising Eastwood was 
ignorant of any railroading by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), 
since it’s a narrative absent from Highest Duty, or anything actually said or 
written by the NTSB.

In fact, in his memoir, Sullenberger reflects that he was “buoyed by the fact 
that investigators determined that Jeff and I made appropriate choices at every 
step”. When he and Skiles were invited to the cockpit voice recorder playback, 
Sullenberger notes the investigators were eager for the opportunity to hear the 
pilots’ thoughts. As he describes, the playback happened four months after the 
flight in a room with six people. Yet in Sully the playback occurs days after 
the flight before a packed kangaroo court. The exhausted pilots are hounded by 
ankle-biting bureaucrats, and presented with incriminating simulations that 
show test pilots easily making runway landings.

Sully: Hudson river plane crash investigators object to their portrayal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/sully-hudson-river-plane-crash-investigators-clint-eastwood>
Ultimately, the investigators are embarrassed into decency. Sullenberger 
achieves victory by demanding – essentially from the dock – that the 
simulations include the time needed for adequate situational assessment.

In reality, investigators first asked simulator pilots to attempt airport 
landings immediately after engine loss to establish the bounds of practicality. 
Notably, even with the benefit of perfect hindsight, barely half of these 
optimal test runs made it back. And then the investigators – not Sullenberger – 
asked a pilot to wait 35 seconds before attempting an airport return. That 
flight didn’t make it. Consequently, the NTSB was unequivocal in its 
declaration that the Hudson was the right call.

But does Sully’s portrayal of NTSB investigators as bullying incompetents 
matter? After all, whenever a movie based on true events is released, there are 
always cries of “it didn’t happen that way!” This occurs because of the 
inevitable changes required when dramatizing real-life events. These include 
creating composite characters, eliding side issues and compressing chronologies.

In evaluating such storytelling decisions, what’s important is whether or not 
the top-line takeaway is fair. For example, despite considerable 
fictionalization inThe Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/16/the-imitation-game-review-engrossing-thriller-benedict-cumberbatch>
, viewers come away with the correct impression that Alan Turing was a 
computing pioneer, who was persecuted for his homosexuality and made major 
cryptographic contributions to defeating the Nazis.

With Sully, the film-makers were faced with a problem: how to make a 
feature-length movie about a six-minute flight? They took the easy way out and 
invented an antagonist. As a result, the takeaway is that the NTSB – as I heard 
one person leaving a screening say – “tried to stitch Sully up”.

It’s not hard to see why this tack appealed to strident libertarian Eastwood 
<http://reason.com/blog/2012/09/19/clint-eastwoods-leave-everybody-alone-de>. 
In its populist zeal, the American right wing has been increasingly unwilling 
to accept the legitimacy ofany branch of federal government. Sully meshes 
perfectly with a worldview where petty and clueless civil servants obstruct 
real Americans from being great.

Most people – including elected officials – are not familiar with how NTSB 
investigations work. Asa box-office hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/america-flocks-to-tom-hanks-in-sully-with-thriller-bough-second-at-box-office>
, Sully will form the first, lasting, impression for many. This has real risks.

Around the world, the NTSB’s investigations are regarded as setting the gold 
standard for impartiality, perceptiveness and making recommendations with 
important safety benefits. The NTSB has saved countless lives. Yet the NTSB has 
no regulatory ability: to turn its recommendations into practice, the board 
relies solely on a moral authority founded on its reputation for diligence. The 
stakes are high – the board currently has a list of 10 critical safety 
improvements that it’s trying to get implemented, including, for example,
positive train control <https://www.aar.org/policy/positive-train-control>, 
something that would have spared 243 people last year from a deadly Amtrak 
derailment.

Sully has smeared this reputation for the sake of a hero who needed no 
defending. It will create a headwind in the minds of the public and 
policymakers that the NTSB will be struggling against for years to come.
 