Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwtMZKYnLg5c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwtMZKYnLg5c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwtMZKYnLg5c&media=>
Towards the end of his life, Bob Hoskins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bob-hoskins> granted an interview to the 
Guardian in which he was asked to name the worst job he’d ever done, his 
biggest disappointment, and the one thing he would change if given the 
opportunity to edit his past. To all three questions, he replied simply, “Super 
Mario Brothers”.

Hoskins was far from alone in his distaste for the 1993 drains-and-dungarees 
romp, which debuted to the kind of critical mauling normally reserved for Nazi 
propaganda films, drone-strike recordings and Adam Sandler comedies. Widely 
acknowledged as the first film based on a video game,Super Mario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> Bros set a low bar that 
the genre would struggle to raise for decades to come.

Understandably then, the film’s re-release comes with a certain amount of 
baggage in tow. Though its flaws were vastly overstated in 1993 by commentators 
fearful of the growing influence of game adaptations, Super Mario Bros’ 
enduring notoriety will ensure that this new restoration appeals as keenly to 
ironic consumers as earnest ones. Luckily, the disc comes with a bonus feature 
specifically designed to bridge this gulf.

The hour-long documentary This Ain’t No Video Game stitches together 
interviews with all the key players bar Hoskins, who died before he had a 
chance to further disown the film on camera. What emerges is a comprehensive 
portrait of one project’s descent from surefire box-office hit to unmitigated 
Hollywood disaster. Among the revelations are tales of storyboards burned in 
bins, cast members driven to alcoholism, and a disgruntledDennis Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dennis-hopper> stalking the deactivated set 
in character as Saurian overlord King Koopa.

In light of such a tortured production, Super Mario Bros seems like something 
of a noble failure, a bizarre but worthy anomaly on the resumés of its stars. 
At the very least, it’s far from a career low-point for a man who also appeared 
in Garfield 2, Maid In Manhattan and Son Of The Mask.

Second Sight, DVD & Blu-ray




ALSO OUT THIS WEEK




The Fault In Our Stars Teen cancer weepie. 

The Hobbit: The Desolation Of Smaug Dragon squatter’s dispute.

The Christmas Candle SuBo yuletide drama.

Mad Men: S7 Pt 1 Beginning of the end for Draper. 
 