
In a US election cycle of unprecedented absurdity, much of 2016’s best 
political comedy has simply allowed the candidates to speak for themselves. 
Satirist Vic Berger regularly takes unedited comments byDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and amplifies their lunacy 
with the aid of hyperactive visual editing and the odd airhorn sound effect. 
Film-maker Mike Diva’s recent viral video Hillary Clinton: Meme Queen satirised 
the former secretary of state’s desperation to appeal to young voters by having 
a lookalike instruct them to “Pokémon Go to the polls”. Believe it or not, the 
line was a direct quote from a recent Clinton stump speech.

Berger and Diva are among the bright sparks over at Super Deluxe, a “community 
of creative weirdos” responsible for some of the strangest viral hits and video 
series on the web. Mini Last Meals parodies the current YouTube fad for cooking 
tiny versions of popular dishes, only with miniature reproductions of serial 
killers’ final meals. Stoned Mode offers such strangely therapeutic sights as 
artisanal head shaving, neon sign bending and clowns shooting firearms in the 
desert. The History Of Butts is exactly what it sounds like.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJl8NUwCeDrs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJl8NUwCeDrs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJl8NUwCeDrs&media=>
Central to Super Deluxe’s success, however, is its political content. Since 
the brand’s relaunch last December, at a time when the presidential primaries 
were only just beginning to descend into farce, Vic Berger has been on a 
one-man mission to refit political satire for the Snapchat era. In the vein of 
Britain’s Cassetteboy, Berger’s work often features no original material 
whatsoever, instead turning politicians’ own speeches, debate performances and 
social media efforts against them. A pandering video of Jeb Bush answering a 
series of tech-themed either-or questions thereby becomes a dead-eyed 
recitation of Apple’s product line, while one of Donald Trump’s quotidian 
self-aggrandisements mutates into a boast about his ability to form a clenched 
fist.

Of late, Berger has stepped in front of the camera to anchor the Vic Berger 
Election Special, in which he brings the Super Deluxe ethos direct to the 
Democratic and Republican national conventions. Across 45 glorious minutes, our 
host strives courageously to pick up his press credentials, has more than one 
encounter with right-wing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones and unsuccessfully 
schemes to get 60s chart-topper Chubby Checker inducted into the Rock and Roll 
Hall of Fame. Directed by Tim Heidecker of comedy duo Tim & Eric, the two-part 
video is every bit as riotous and ridiculous as the election itself. If the 
most polarised presidential race in a generation isn’t doing much for the state 
of contemporary political discourse, at least it’s making satire great again.
 