
When you have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to shape the face of global 
development, you want to make sure you make the most of it.

This is the challenging task governments face as they negotiate the goals and 
targets that will form the sustainable development goals (SDGs), an ambitious 
framework that could transform the world by 2030. There are many competing 
issues that could end up in the SDGs; the proposed framework includes no less 
than17 goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
. Choosing the right targets will be essential to measure progress and focus 
efforts on where they will have the most impact. That is why governments should 
agree on a target “to end child, early and forced marriage”.

Not a niche issue

We have learned a lot since the millennium development goals (MDGs) were 
established. We now understand just how big the problem of child marriage is 
and how it undermines so many of our efforts to improve the wellbeing of 
millions. It’s a practice that traps15 million girls a year 
<http://www.data.unicef.org/corecode/uploads/document6/uploaded_pdfs/corecode/Child-Marriage-Brochure-HR_164.pdf>
 into a cycle of poverty, ill health and inequality, and which has hindered the 
achievement of six of the eight MDGs.

Take goal three, for instance, which sought to “promote gender equality and 
empower women” – yet made no mention of child marriage. How can we empower 
women when so many girls are married off and denied their rights to health, 
education and a life free from violence and exploitation?

Nigeria: Child brides facing death sentences a decade after child marriage 
prohibited
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/11/the-tragedy-of-nigerias-child-brides>
Child marriage and education (goal two) are intrinsically linked too. Girls 
without any education are three times as likely to marry before 18 as girls 
with secondary or higher education 
<http://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/MarryingTooYoung.pdf>. This 
in turn affects efforts to eradicate extreme poverty (goal one), since child 
brides miss out on the educational and economic opportunities needed to lift 
themselves and their families out of poverty.

Child marriage <https://www.theguardian.com/society/child-marriage> also 
undermines progress towards reducing maternal and infant mortality (goals four 
and five). Child brides are often pressured to have children – many and quickly 
– leaving them and their children vulnerable to injuries and even death.

A smart target

Thus setting a target “to end child, early and forced marriage” will not just 
help monitor progress on reducing child marriage globally. It will also help 
catalyse efforts towards achieving a number of the proposed SDGs on poverty, 
nutrition, health, education, economic growth and reduction of inequality – 
especially gender equality.

Will the SDGs be the last hope for lost causes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/20/will-the-sdgs-be-the-last-hope-for-lost-causes>
Delaying the age at which a girl marries is “smart investment”, according to 
an independent high-level taskforce of advisers on population and development. 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/HLTF-FinancingBriefSmartInvestments.pdf>
 The advisers say this will lead to “improved educational attainment, higher 
earnings and greater health-seeking behaviour”. It could also have a multiplier 
effect that will benefit girls, their families and ultimately their communities 
and countries.

We don’t even need to work hard to set up new indicators if reducing child 
marriage is chosen as target. Every year, Unicefcaptures 
<http://www.data.unicef.org/child-protection/child-marriage> the percentage of 
women aged 20-24 who are married or in union by the age of 18 and 15 around the 
world.

Encouragingly, there is support for such a target. Ban Ki-moon has already 
called <http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/69/700&Lang=E> for 
the practice of child marriage to be ended everywhere, while the open working 
group on the SDGsproposed a target 
<http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/68/970&Lang=E> on “child, 
early and forced marriage” under a gender equality goal.

How girl activists helped to ban child marriage in Malawi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/26/girl-activists-child-marriage-malawi-let-girls-lead>
The means to achieving the SDGs

Of course, a target is not the be-all and end-all. As governments discuss how 
to finance the SDGs, it is vital that adequate funding goes to gender equality 
and realising the needs of adolescent girls. Ending child marriage and 
achieving gender equality requires policy change and political will. In 
addition, it will require implementing policies, services, programmes and 
broader social norm change initiatives – all of which require additional 
resources.

Agreeing on a target is an important starting point. If we miss this 
opportunity to make ending child marriage a global priority, it will be 15 
years before we get another chance. That’s a whole generation of girls whose 
lives will be curtailed. Ultimately, it is to them that we will be accountable.

Ommera Zafar is policy and advocacy officer at Girls Not Brides 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/>. Follow @GirlsNotBrides 
<https://twitter.com/GirlsNotBrides> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 