
In a year that has been generally short on nice things, on soft things, on 
comfortable things,Swallows and Amazons (StudioCanal, PG) settles on the screen 
like a gingham picnic blanket. It’s not new, and it falls some distance short 
of great, but Philippa Lowthorpe’s handsome, sun-warmed adaptation of Arthur 
Ransome’s Lake District larks is indubitably nice: populated with amiable kids 
mostly playing well with others, and facing only mild peril courtesy of a 
shoehorned-in spy plot. Its pleasures lie less in its plotting than in its 
cream-tea retro trappings. WherePaddington gently but cannily brought its 
cuddly literary source into the 21st century, this is an unabashed period 
piece, in outlook as well as in milieu. Quite what contemporary pre-teens make 
of the film’s inward-looking world, I can only guess; it may be plainer sailing 
for their wistful parents.

Maria Bello forever deserves better than whatever film she’s in

There’s a different kind of British heritage preservation at play in David 
Brent: Life on the Road (Fox, 15), a belated, debatably necessary victory lap 
of sorts for the most affectionately loathed sitcom character of the past 20 
years. In taking him out of the miserable Slough workplace that made his name 
and putting him on an itinerant sales beat, Ricky Gervais’s spinoff seeks to 
cement Brent as a pop-culture icon entirely separate fromThe Office  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/aug/31/office-ricky-gervais>
(its own brand having been partially pilfered by thehit US adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/may/18/iprefertheamericanversion>
). It’s not quite clever or inventive enough to do that – the familiar 
mockumentary format, in particular, is strained over the course of a 95-minute 
feature – but the queasy comedy value of Gervais’s creation remains intact: I 
laughed and winced in appropriately equal measure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2279cc5e0002d7e1f2815a38b58707365e775180%2F0_55_3075_1991%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2279cc5e0002d7e1f2815a38b58707365e775180%2F0_55_3075_1991%2F3075.jpg>
 Aubrey Plaza, Anna Kendrick, Adam Devine and Zac Efron in Mike and Dave Need 
Wedding Dates. Photograph: Gemma LaMana 
I wanted to laugh more with (or even at) Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates 
(Fox, 12), an inoffensively randy but slightly low-energy dudebro-romcom that 
could as easily have been made inWedding Crashers’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107105/wedding.crashers> immediate 
wake, instead of 11 years later. Pitting two doofus jock brothers (Zac Efron 
and Adam Devine) against the two unexpectedly feisty blind dates (Anna Kendrick 
and Aubrey Plaza) they enlist for a family wedding, the film’s general 
celebration of party-hearty irresponsibility proves pleasingly well-matched in 
terms of gender. It’s a more progressive romp, for example, than last year’s
surprisingly misogynistic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/06/trainwreck-gift-man-uncle-judd-apatow-amy-schumer-review>
 Trainwreck. I wish the game quartet had been given slightly more reckless 
material to work with, though Efron remains Hollywood’s most baby-smooth 
funnyman of the moment.

Developed from a reputedly jumpily effective calling-card short, Swedish 
director David Sandberg’sLights Out (Warner, 15) is one of those simple enough 
horror exercises that appears to be predicated on a nifty concept – before the 
shaky execution takes even the idea’s credibility down with it. Maria Bello, 
forever deserving better than whatever film she’s in, is the Los Angeleno mum 
who finds her family is plagued by a mysterious female spectre who appears and 
reappears with the flick of a light switch. Having established this tidy lo-fi 
threat, however, the film struggles to develop much three-dimensional drama 
around it – Sandberg, at least, is a dab hand at visual shadowboxing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6273a7cdcc550a46503dfa326d808338d6dfaac6%2F0_0_2572_2003%2F2572.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6273a7cdcc550a46503dfa326d808338d6dfaac6%2F0_0_2572_2003%2F2572.jpg>
 Old-fashioned policing: Jimmy Hanley in The Blue Lamp. Photograph: Ronald 
Grant Archive 
Instead, I’d happily switch on The Blue Lamp (StudioCanal, PG): very cleanly 
restored on Blu-ray, Basil Dearden’s 1950 film is a milestone in British social 
realism that has been little discussed in recent years. That’s partly 
understandable, given the cracks and creaks apparent today in the semi-gritty 
surface of this Paddington-set police station study – not to mention an 
ennobling stance on the boys in blue that not all viewers will see as 
on-message these days. But it’s a gripping, fascinating glance back at 
procedural conventions that remain firmly embedded in cop dramas even today.

Meanwhile, the new Blu-ray boxset Woody Allen: Six Films: 1979-1985 (Arrow, 
12) is not quite as overdue a reissue – given the profile and availability of 
the titles – but it’s a handsome Christmas gift for fans. Covering a 
particularly expansive and resourceful creative stretch of Allen’s career, from
Manhattanto the jewel-box joys of The Purple Rose of Cairo, it’s also 
splendidly packaged and annotated – including a 100-page volume of old and 
newly commissioned critical writing on the films in question.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a82fe9a8fe341b7984d86bac3f186a9e1a8cfc7%2F70_0_2252_1351%2F2252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swallow%20and%20Amazons%3B%20David%20Brent%3A%20Life%20on%20the%20Road%3B%20Woody%20Allen%3A%20Six%20Films%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fswallows-and-amazons-david-brent-woody-allen-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a82fe9a8fe341b7984d86bac3f186a9e1a8cfc7%2F70_0_2252_1351%2F2252.jpg>
 ‘Gentle romantic shuffle’: Mark Duplass and Sarah Paulson in Blue Jay. 
Finally, Netflix’s growing library of in-house feature films covers the 
mumblecore base to mostly winsome effect inBlue Jay 
<https://www.netflix.com/title/80117746> – starring and written by indie 
mini-industry Mark Duplass in his distinctively shaggy style, and somewhat 
shyly directed by first-timer Alex Lehmann. It’s Sarah Paulson, currently on 
something of a hot streak, who brings the most vivid inner life to this gentle 
romantic shuffle between two former high-school lovers unexpectedly reunited 
for a day in their small California home town: the ensuing trip down memory 
lane covers the expected bittersweet pit stops, but it’s played with palpable 
warmth and good humour.
 