
Sydney Morning Herald journalists had a bit of fun for a good cause on 
Wednesday, holding a sausage sizzle outside their office at Pyrmont to raise 
awareness that the gender pay gap in newspapers is surprisingly high, according 
to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency. Newspaper publishing pays its female 
employees on average 23.2% less, and that is across the board – not just 
journalists. Staff sold sausages on a roll for a gold coin and donated the 
proceeds to the Luke Batty Foundation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a85a075f277239014e88831c8209ee7c462d78e%2F0_0_2480_3507%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20sausage%20sizzle%20sparks%20Fairfax%20fair%20pay%20fizzle%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20sausage%20sizzle%20sparks%20Fairfax%20fair%20pay%20fizzle%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a85a075f277239014e88831c8209ee7c462d78e%2F0_0_2480_3507%2F2480.jpg>
 The Fairfax staff poster 
“If you want to find out more about what your colleagues are doing to help 
balance the ledger, come along to our inaugural Sausage Fest, guaranteed to add 
some sizzle to your week,” read the cheeky poster, which showed Rosie the 
Riveter holding a sausage impaled on the end of a fork.

But not everyone appreciated the humour. Weekly Beast understands that Sean 
Aylmer, the editorial director of Fairfax’s metropolitan newspapers, was 
particularly grumpy, and wandered the newsroom floor making his displeasure 
known. One journo told Beast: “They’re unhappy about Rosie holding a phallic 
snag on a stick but OK with 175 years of gender pay gap.”

ABC’s narrow road

It was a very strange week at ABC TV. One program which was widely publicised, 
Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On, was pulled from the schedule at the 11th 
hour with little explanation while another program, Life After Death, was so 
studiously ignored by ABC publicity that when it did got to air it was watched 
by very few.

Life After Death is a BBC documentary about the Australian writer Richard 
Flanagan, who journeyed with the presenter Alan Yentob through his native 
Tasmania and then to Thailand to visit the sites that inspired his novels. The 
Narrow Road to the Deep North, set on the Burma “death railway”, won the Man 
Booker in 2014. The doco has also been successful,winning a British Bafta award 
last month 
<http://www.bafta.org/media-centre/press-releases/british-academy-scotland-awards-2016-winners-announced>
. It was described by Radio Times as a “finely crafted and sensitive film about 
his life and work” when it aired on the BBC.

Be under no illusion: Malcolm Turnbull wants to destroy Australian literature 
| Richard Flanagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/be-under-no-illusion-malcolm-turnbull-wants-to-destroy-australian-literature-election-richard-flanagan>
It might surprise you then to hear that the documentary was broadcast on the 
ABC on Tuesday 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/programs/richard-flanagan-life-after-death/> and you 
probably missed it. For reasons unknown even to people inside Aunty, the doco 
was completely sidelined: not given the courtesy of a press release, a 
publicity campaign or an-air promo.

“It is more than strange when a documentary on an Australian writer can 
succeed on the BBC and be set up for resounding failure a year and a half later 
on the ABC,” one insider said.

So why did they bury something that would be popular, given the right 
handling? Politics? Resentment that the BBC made a successful blue-chip, 
Bafta-winning documentary about an Australian writer? We have no clue.

Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On was to screen on ABC TV last Monday and 
everyone knew about itbecause it was given quite the opposite treatment to Life 
After Death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/26/plumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers>
. But hours before it was to be broadcast a statement was sent out by the 
film-maker, Aviva Ziegler, saying it had been postponed “due to a late legal 
matter”.

Ziegler said: “Making this film, from the very start, has been a labour of 
love. Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On represents a relationship spanning over 
15 years, with a wonderful and compassionate headmaster and a group of young 
women I have come to know and care about, as I watched them and their children 
grow.

Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On – how a teacher changed lives for pregnant 
teenagers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/26/plumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers>
“I am so sorry they won’t be seeing their stories told and their voices heard 
tonight. But I do hope their lives, and Glenn Sargeant’s commitment to giving 
them every opportunity through education with a school program that supported 
them and their community, will nevertheless still be seen very soon on the ABC.”

Weekly Beast understand that a collaborator on the original film claims 
certain rights and went to the broadcaster’s ombudsman with a complaint at the 
last minute.


Long player

The cuts to Radio National’s music programs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
 are just the latest assault in several years of cutting shows from ABC Radio. 
On Wednesday hundreds of artists including Paul Kelly, Gurrumul, Missy Higgins, 
Archie Roach, Kate Ceberano, Tim Freedman, Sarah Blasko, Megan Washington and 
Katie Noonan wrote an open letter to the managing director, Michelle Guthrie, 
and the ABC board saying they are appalled by the decision to axe Daily Planet, 
Inside Sleeve, The Live Set, Rhythm Divine and Jazztrack.

A staffer with a long memory told Beast the cuts under the director of radio, 
Michael Mason, are a drop in a bucket compared with all the music programs lost 
since 2012 on RN, Classic FM and Triple J. Taken from RN alone: Sound Quality 
(electronic music), Quiet Space (ambient and electronic music) and Weekend 
Planet (world music), plus the mixed bags that were Into the Music, Radiotonic, 
The Night Air and Poetica..

The ultimate catch-up: a complete guide to pay TV in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/29/the-ultimate-catch-up-a-complete-guide-to-pay-tv-in-australia>
Chris Scaddan, ABC Radio’s head of music, defended the cuts in a bracing 
interview <http://www.abc.net.au/pm/content/2016/s4584730.htm> on PM with Mark 
Colvin on Wednesday. Scaddan might have been hoping no one would dig up his 
commentary on the importance of music radio which he penned in 2013:Why Music 
Radio Still Matters 
<http://about.abc.net.au/2013/04/why-music-radio-still-matters/>. “If you 
follow the commentary, you’d be forgiven for thinking that the medium of radio 
was in some state of massive decline, relegated to the ‘old media’ basket while 
new services reign supreme,” Scaddan said, before going on to quote US data 
which stated that 48% of people still discover music via radio, well above any 
other method.


One National

The artists behind the campaign to save RN music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/abc-bosses-morally-and-spiritually-bankrupt-for-axing-catalyst-rn-presenter-says>
 sentthe open letter to the ABC Board and Guthrie <https://www.savernmusic.com> 
to all members of the federal parliament as well. One of the politicians sent 
this (presumably automated) reply: “Dear Sir or Madam, Thank-you for your email 
regarding free speech and section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act. Pauline 
Hanson’s One Nation Party is passionate about the importance of free speech and 
Senator Roberts will certainly be voting in favour of removing the words 
“insult” and “offend” from the legislation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb48a5bc4c3a30ef20e756b728fc322c05d46eb5f%2F0_0_4000_2678%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20sausage%20sizzle%20sparks%20Fairfax%20fair%20pay%20fizzle%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20sausage%20sizzle%20sparks%20Fairfax%20fair%20pay%20fizzle%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsydney-sausage-sizzle-sparks-fairfax-fair-pay-fizzle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb48a5bc4c3a30ef20e756b728fc322c05d46eb5f%2F0_0_4000_2678%2F4000.jpg>
 Senator Malcolm Roberts’s mind may have been on other things. Photograph: Mick 
Tsikas/AAP 
Switzer-land

Not only has the conservative commentator Tom Switzer, former opinion editor 
of the Australian and an adjunct fellow of the Institute of Public Affairs,
secured two programs on Radio National next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/radio-national-to-lose-eight-staff-as-abc-cuts-several-programs-from-2017-schedule>
 but the two shows are programmed to be broadcast back to back. According to 
the 2017 draft schedule we’ve seen, Sunday Extra with Tom Switzer will start at 
7.30am and run through to 10am. At 10am Between the Line, also hosted by 
Switzer, will start and run though to 10.30am.


Grisly for Bearup

Donald Trump’s election has caused some reorganisation of priorities in 
Australian media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media>. Greg 
Bearup, south-east Asia correspondent for the Australian, has been prematurely 
recalled to Sydney after the Oz editors decided to close the India bureau. 
Bearup and his family had only been there for a year so it came as something of 
a shock. But Paul Whittaker, the Oz’s editor-in-chief, has reopened the 
Washington bureau and the associate editor Cameron Stewart will be dispatched 
to keep an eye on Trump early next year. Whittaker told staff a review of 
overseas postings after the election had sparked the changes: “The US is 
undergoing significant economic and political change and it is essential that 
we have a bureau in the capital.”
 