
Minutes after her 25-hour flight touched down in Toronto, Shoruk Alsakni burst 
into tears.

Some four years earlier, she – along with her husband, mother-in-law and six 
children – had fled the growing violence and terror of Aleppo, ending up in 
Turkey. Now the family was again starting over – this time in a country she 
knew almost nothing about.

“I was afraid of everything,” Alsakni said. “I was scared for my children. I 
didn’t know anyone inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.”

Her family was among the 35,745 Syrian refugees brought into Canada in the 
past year, in what now ranks as one of the largest refugee resettlement 
movements in Canadian history.

Canada had previously granted asylum to a small number of Syrian refugees. But 
one year ago this week,163 Syrian refugees were greeted at the airport by 
Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/plane-carrying-syrian-refu> in 
scenes that contrasted sharply with the hostile rhetoric emanating from some US 
politicians, including then Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump.

Thousands more refugees would arrive in Canada the following months, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/canada-syrian-refugee-airlift-john-mccallum-immigration-citizenship>
 supported either by the federal government or by private citizens who 
committed to covering their expenses for their first year in Canada.


Trudeau greets Syrian refugees as Canada prepares for more arrivals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/canada-syrian-refugees-arrive-whitehorse-yukon>
For Alsakni’s family, trepidation surrounds the one-year anniversary. Since 
arriving last February as government-assisted refugees, the family has managed 
to find affordable housing and has fallen in love with their new home country. 
All of the children are in school and have thrown themselves into their new 
lives, trying out ice skating and carving a pumpkin for Halloween.

All of them feel incredibly lucky, Alsakni said, pointing to generous 
neighbours who have helped them navigate their new country and a healthcare 
system that has helped her fully recover from a bout of cancer that began 
before the war inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> erupted.

But the one-year mark means an end to the monthly living allowance from the 
government that has, along with food banks and donations, sustained their new 
lives. From February onwards, the family must either support themselves – a 
seemingly monumental task considering the parents’ search for jobs have so far 
been fruitless – or enroll in the province’s social assistance program, in 
which they would likely receive less of an allowance than what they’re 
currently receiving.

“All the Syrians say the same thing, we’re worried about what happens after 
one year. We don’t know. With no stipend, how are we going to live?” Alsakni 
said through a translator. “It’s like we’re blindfolded. We don’t know what is 
coming.”

Her and husband’s job search has been hampered by their limited English 
skills. Alsakni began language classes some five months ago, doing her best to 
share everything she learns with her husband, who stays at home to look after 
his sickly mother.

The only solution, Alsakni said, is to encourage her three older children, who 
range in age from 17 to 20 and have a relatively high level of English, to 
focus on finding jobs.

But it’s a solution that stands to jeopardise what ranks as one of the 
family’s proudest accomplishments in Canada so far – having all their children 
in school. “It’s hard,” Alsakni said. “My first dream is for my children to 
complete their education and to live in safety.”

Across Canada, thousands of Syrian refugees are facing the same dilemma. 
Settlement agencies have launched workshops to help them cope with the anxiety, 
while others have taken aim at the federal government for turning its back on 
refugees as they struggle to find work and learn English or French.

“If you help them, you help them to the end,” Canadian senator Thanh Hai Ngo – 
who arrived in Canada as a Vietnamese refugee in 1975 – told reporters this 
week. “You don’t leave them in the middle of the street and say, ‘OK, that’s 
it, I’ve done my job.’”

The result is the provinces and municipalities shoulder much of the tough work 
of integration, said Michael Qaqish, an Ottawa city councillor who serves as 
the city’s refugee liaison. “There’s no question there’s a bit more pressure on 
the schools, on the community resource centres, on the food banks.”

Some 1,700 or so refugees have settled in Ottawa, with 60% of them younger 
than 14. The federal government’s focus onbringing the most vulnerable refugees 
to Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/canada-exclusion-refugees-single-syrian-men-assad-isis>
 means many of those who arrived don’t speak any English while a good number 
don’t read or write Arabic, Qaqish said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d11e26cc9896313934b2b5fc7bdfc2582cbd671%2F0_0_3881_2892%2F3881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Canada%20lose%20support%20one%20year%20on%3A%20'How%20are%20we%20going%20to%20live%3F'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Canada%20lose%20support%20one%20year%20on%3A%20%27How%20are%20we%20going%20to%20live%3F%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d11e26cc9896313934b2b5fc7bdfc2582cbd671%2F0_0_3881_2892%2F3881.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau helps a young Syrian refugee try on a winter coat after she 
arrived with her family from Beirut. Photograph: Mark Blinch/Reuters 
Many of them, however, have valuable skills that are in demand across the 
country, in sectors ranging from agriculture to trades. “We’ll see the rewards 
of this in the long term,” he said, describing it as “short-term pain for 
long-term gain”.

Much of the worry around the one-year mark centers around finding jobs, said 
Sam Jisri of Syrian Active Volunteers, an Ontario group launched tohelp Syrian 
refugees settle into their new lives in Canada. 
<https://www.facebook.com/SAVsyria/> While more than half of the privately 
sponsored Syrians who arrived in the past year have found employment – working 
in grocery stores, coffee shops or launching their own small businesses – data 
collected by the federal government suggest the employment rate among 
government-assisted refugees hovers around 12%.

Language remains the primary obstacle. Some 60% of Syrian refugees in Canada 
don’t speak English or French, according to data from the federal government. 
“How can someone work without learning English?” Jisri asked.

The situation leaves many refugees facing a question that could have serious 
implications for long-term integration, he said. “Do they learn English or 
work?”

It’s a debate that has been exacerbated by a dearth of federal funding for 
language classes across the country. In the province of British Columbia, 5,000 
people – refugees and immigrants from around the world – are currently on 
waitlists for English courses.

John McCallum, Canada’s minister for immigration, refugees and citizenship, 
said the government has increased funding for language training to address 
shortages across the country. After the one-year mark, refugees will still have 
access to language classes and employment-related support services, he added.

Canada’s ambitious project to settle tens of thousands of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/canada-syrian-refugee-airlift-john-mccallum-immigration-citizenship>
, while not perfect, has gone extremely well, he said in an interview. “And 
what makes me proud is not just that we got the job done, which we did – but 
there is still more to do – but really that if you compare Canada with other 
countries around the globe which are tending to close their doors to refugees, 
Canadians responded so overwhelmingly positively to the refugees.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F295a87abef3465f6ff4db2f9117729c1018e4029%2F0_77_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Canada%20lose%20support%20one%20year%20on%3A%20'How%20are%20we%20going%20to%20live%3F'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Canada%20lose%20support%20one%20year%20on%3A%20%27How%20are%20we%20going%20to%20live%3F%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsyria-refugees-canada-government-stipend-justin-trudeau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F295a87abef3465f6ff4db2f9117729c1018e4029%2F0_77_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
 Shoruk Alsakni and her husband, Abdullmunim Nanaa. Photograph: Ashifa Kassam 
for the Guardian 
The program has become a Canadian success story, providing an alternative 
blueprint on how a western country can respond to a refugee crisis that ranks 
among the worst since the second world war, a Canadian senate committee on 
human rights said this week.

But Canadians must not become complacent, it warned. “We can’t abandon them. 
This is a particularly crucial time for the Syrian refugees we have welcomed to 
Canada,” said committee chair Jim Munson. “We want more for these families than 
to see them living along the poverty line and going to food banks. No refugee, 
or any Canadian for that matter, should have to choose between feeding the 
family well and paying for their rent.”

The committee also raised concerns about the mental health provisions being 
made for the refugees. The years of trauma –fleeing the horrors of a civil war 
in their home country and living in refugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/jun/09/a-migrants-journey-from-syria-to-sweden-interactive>
 – have left some battling post traumatic stress disorder.


Others have seen their mental well being take a hit as they grapple with guilt 
over family members left behind, said Chris Friesen of the Immigrant Services 
Society of BC. “It really has a lot of folks on edge.”

But these are manageable issues, he said. “Settlement and integration 
indicators all point to the fact that Syrians are well on their way as far as 
socially and economically integrating,” he said. “Where other countries turned 
their back on them, there is a lot of gratitude from the community that we’re 
constantly hearing around the one-year anniversary.”

Syrian refugee comes to the rescue of Canadian bride's wedding dress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/syrian-refugee-comes-to-the-rescue-of-canadian-brides-wedding-dress>
The point was emphasised in a survey his organisation recently carried out 
among 301 newly settled families in the region. The last question was an 
open-ended one, inviting families to add anything else they thought was 
relevant. More than 85% used the space to simply state, “thank you”.

It’s a sentiment echoed by Alsakni in Toronto. “So many people have been so 
kind to us.” Sitting next to her in their sparsely decorated family room, her 
husband, Abdullmunim Nanaa chimed in. Nobody here treats us like we’re 
outsiders, he said. “I wish the best for this country. They opened the door to 
us,” he added. “You don’t have to worry about waking up to bombs and wondering 
what’s happening. It’s safe.”

Alsakni nodded, her eyes filling with tears. “I was surprised when Canada 
opened the door. Turkey, Jordan, Lebanon and many other countries were closing 
everything,” she said. “When Canada opened the door, I said now I have the 
opportunity to take treatment and for my children to complete their education. 
Canada has done so many good things for us.”
 