
For the tabloids, one story has trumped the US presidential choice: Prince 
Harry’s romance with an American actor, Meghan Markle.

And newspapers were anything but pleased about the prince’s advisers daring to 
issuea public statement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/prince-harry-lambasts-press-over-meghan-markle-coverage>
accusing them of misbehaviour.

What? Us? Don’t blame us, guv. How very dare you! We were just fulfilling the 
people’s right to know what the fifth in line to the throne is up to. It is a 
matter of public interest.

Aware, however, that the public’s interest is always tempered by hypocrisy – 
leave the guy alone but do please tell us more – editors were careful to echo 
that humbug in their responses.

Prince Harry attacks press over 'wave of abuse' of girlfriend Meghan Markle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/prince-harry-lambasts-press-over-meghan-markle-coverage>
So here are the opening sentences to Wednesday’s leading articles: “Anyone who 
has been in lovewill understand Prince Harry’s urge to protect his girlfriend 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3918628/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Day-deep-shame-Scotland-Yard.html>
…” (Daily Mail)

“Prince Harry is a decent bloke whose heart is in the right place. His new 
girlfriend Meghan Markle is a breath of fresh air who we’d love to see become a 
regular fixture of life at Kensington Palace…” (The Sun)

“Decent people everywhere will wish Prince Harry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> well in love, and his desire to 
protect American girlfriend Meghan Markle is both admirable and 
understandable…” (Daily Mirror)

You can sense the “buts” that follow. And here they are:

Mail: “But where, oh where, were the wise courtiers who should have advised 
the headstrong prince against issuing such an emotional, blanket condemnation 
of the media?”

Sun: But “Harry’s attack on the media for ‘crossing the line’ was ill-judged”.

Mirror: But “scrutiny comes with the job when you’re a royal”.

Anyway, we’re innocent of all charges. We have rules and stick to them. It was 
that nasty US media wot dunnit along with irresponsible social media users.

The Mail said it did not “defend anyone who may have breached the strict code 
of practice governing the British press”.


Nor does the Sun: “The UK press isn’t to blame for his most serious 
allegations.The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> abides by strict 
rules against intrusion and harassment – and we agree Meghan shouldn’t be 
hounded.”

In fact, according to the Mirror, it is time for Facebook and Twitter to deal 
with the “poisonous sexist and racist abuse” by “trolls spewing bile”.

The Daily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, in 
welcoming “the news of the prince’s relationship with a beautiful and talented 
young woman”, said: “Trolling on social media … is nothing to do with 
responsible media outlets such as this newspaper.”

That said, Harry “needs to get real”, argued the Sun. “Media attention is 
unavoidable. When a prince falls for a glamorous American TV star, interest is 
bound to explode worldwide.” The Mail agreed:


The public has a legitimate interest in the life story of a woman romantically 
connected to the son of our future king – a woman who has herself assiduously 
courted publicity to promote her commercial interest.

Indeed, there is a worrying tendency, particularly among the young royals, to 
expect all the advantages that go with their birth, while at the same time 
wanting to enjoy the privacy afforded to those of the Queen’s subjects who have 
to work nine-to-five for a living.

Sun columnist Jane Moore thought the prince should “develop a thicker skin in 
a modern world that prays at the altar of all things celebrity 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2143587/lets-face-it-harry-you-may-be-royalty-but-youre-still-a-celebrity-get-yourself-a-thicker-skin/>
”.

And the Mail’s columnist, Sarah Vine, thought it preposterous for publicity 
hungry Markle to 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3918786/Harry-s-admirable-chap-claim-publicity-hungry-Ms-Markle-hapless-victim-proposterous-says-SARAH-VINE.html>
claim she is a hapless victim 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3918786/Harry-s-admirable-chap-claim-publicity-hungry-Ms-Markle-hapless-victim-proposterous-says-SARAH-VINE.html>
: “You live by Instagram, you die by Instagram.”

As for Harry, she surmised that despite his life of “unbelievable privilege” 
he was seeking “exactly the same privacy [as] the humblest dweller of the 
humblest bungalow”.

The Times took a somewhat similar view: “It is inconceivable that a 
relationship between a popular British prince 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/comment/the-prince-and-the-papers-770cghxx9>
, who is fifth in line to the throne, and a beautiful American actress is of no 
interest to the public and the press.”

It thought Kensington Palace had taken a “remarkable step” by criticising 
press coverage. Why had the royal household not foreseen the likely level of 
interest?

Having conceded that “invasive paparazzi hounding” had been a contributory 
factor to the death of Harry’s mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, the Times 
returned to its criticism of royal aides.

“It would have been wise of the palace to have warned her that she would be 
the subject of intense public and media interest.”

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> reminded readers 
of the detail from the statement: journalists had tried to enter Markle’s home, 
her ex-boyfriend had been offered bribes and her mother had been harassed by 
photographers.

The tabloids, it said, “are at their old game again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/the-guardian-view-on-prince-harrys-complaint-the-media-hunt-is-wrong>
 … deliberately confusing what is in the public interest with what is 
interesting to the public”.

Having survived the Leveson process relatively unscathed, editorial confidence 
at the Mail and the Sun “is soaring”. Their editors feel “liberated” and the 
misfortune for the couple is “that news of their relationship has broken just 
as the tabloids are relishing their renewed sense of impunity”.


With Harry deemed to be “fair game for the kind of press behaviour that was 
supposed never to happen again”, the Guardian calls on the Independent Press 
Standards Organisation to show “that it is ready to prove its worth”.
 