
From a distance, the United States can look like the wild west: a country of 
broad civilian gun ownership, frequent shootings, and stubborn resistance to 
stricter gun control laws.

But lots of Americans know that’s not right. Many parts of the country – even 
many parts of cities that struggle with gun violence, like Chicago, Oakland and 
Baltimore – are almost completely safe. Local residents know that the 
devastation of gun violence is clustered in particular areas, often racially 
segregated neighborhoods that have been shut out from a wide range of different 
resources, from good schools to grocery stores.

What Americans didn’t know was what this local concentration of gun violence 
looks like at the national level. How much of the toll of the nation’s gun 
violence is clustered in the small neighborhoods that suffer the most? And what 
does that mean for devising policies that might address it?

For many years, the data to answer these questions did not exist. Undermined 
in part by the political debate over guns, even basic statistics on the toll of 
gun murders and non-fatal shootings in the United States are lacking. After the 
mass shooting at Sandy Hook elementary school in 2012, small organizations 
stepped in to fill this government data gap, providing everything fromnew 
counts of mass shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/oct/02/mass-shootings-america-gun-violence>
 tonew estimates of gun ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/us-gun-ownership-survey> 
across the United States.

The nonprofit Gun Violence Archive <http://www.gunviolencearchive.org/>, which 
began tracking shootings and gun deaths using media reports, began to collect 
geolocation data for each incident – allowing, for the first time, a nationwide 
look at the precise geographic concentration of gun homicides.

Want to fix gun violence in America? Go local.
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/09/special-report-fixing-gun-violence-in-america>
The Guardian spent months analyzing the Gun Violence Archive’s 2015 data – 
matching the locations of more than 13,000 gun homicide incidents to the 
demographic data of particular census tracts, and analyzing the patterns of 
violence from single streets to neighborhoods to cities to the country as a 
whole.

We found that the toll of gun violence in America is dramatically 
concentrated. Thousands of cities and towns in the United States saw gun 
homicides in 2015. But the majority of them suffered only a single incident.

Half of America’s gun homicide victims died in just 127 cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/09/special-report-fixing-gun-violence-in-america>
 that represent less than a quarter of the nation’s population. Within those 
cities, gun homicides were further concentrated in tiny neighborhood census 
tracts that had seen multiple gun homicide incidents.

Nationwide, neighborhoods that contained just 1.5% of America’s population saw 
26% of the nation’s total gun homicides.

This intense and predictable concentration of gun violence points the way to 
new solutions – local strategies whose success could have a dramatic impact on 
America’s overall toll of violence.









Republicans and the Trump White House are likely to block any federal gun 
control measures for the next four years, even as they advance legislation to 
expand gun rights. But that doesn’t mean that the fight to reduce gun violence 
has to be put on hold for the next four years.

At the local level, the path to saving lives is wide open. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Famerica-gun-violence-hotspots-local-initiatives-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a996bc20f6dfa80b240721fde6d60d8c9e43cb1%2F0_24_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tackling%20America's%20gun%20violence%20hotspots%3A%20where%20do%20we%20go%20from%20here%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Famerica-gun-violence-hotspots-local-initiatives-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tackling%20America%27s%20gun%20violence%20hotspots%3A%20where%20do%20we%20go%20from%20here%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Famerica-gun-violence-hotspots-local-initiatives-solutions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a996bc20f6dfa80b240721fde6d60d8c9e43cb1%2F0_24_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 James Clark, left, vice-president of Community Outreach for the non-profit 
Better Family Life, congratulates Keith Dixon on getting a new job. Photograph: 
Sid Hastings for the Guardian 
The majority of gun violence in America is a profoundly local problem – one in 
which local police chiefs, prosecutors and mayors have much more control over 
what happens than Congress, or the White House.

For the past 20 years, research on policing strategies has shown that 
extremely targeted strategies – ones that focus a city’s resources on the 
people and places where violence clusters – can have dramatic success in 
reducing gun violence. The best-known of these strategies are the Boston 
Ceasefire, or “focused deterrence” model, which reduced youth homicides by 63% 
in the mid-1990s by coordinating police, prosecutors, social workers and black 
ministers to talk directly to the groups of young men driving the shootings, 
and the Cure Violence model, which uses former gang members and other outreach 
workers to defuse local conflicts and broker truces between feuding groups.

But the emerging body of research on what works to prevent local gun violence 
simply hasn’t translated into widespread success in making neighborhoods safe.

The National Rifle Association isn’t stopping cities and states from devoting 
more resources to the tiny neighborhoods burdened by violence. The biggest 
barrier is the lack of interest – and financial support – from the Americans 
outside the hardest-hit neighborhoods.

In St Louis, home to some of the nation’s deadliest blocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2017/jan/10/st-louis-gun-crime-missouri-natural-bridge-avenue>
, residents described the devastating toll of this concentrated gun violence. 
Fearful for their lives, young men escalate small conflicts into deadly 
confrontations. Children grow up struggling with the traumatic loss of their 
parents. One St Louis resident said he was afraid to honk his horn at another 
car, worried that even that interaction might spark a shooting.

Grasping for change on America's most violent streets: 'We must stop killing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2017/jan/10/st-louis-gun-crime-missouri-natural-bridge-avenue>
These patterns of intense gun violence are rooted in decades of economic 
struggle and racist policies. The same St Louis blocks burdened with the most 
violence were forged out of racially exclusionary housing policies and on the 
receiving end of systematic disinvestment in favor of whiter, more affluent 
city regions.

But you don’t have to end poverty or eliminate racism to to reduce, if not 
erase, the toll of shootings.

Few St Louis residents hang their hopes on the passage of legislation that 
makes it harder to get a gun, but many believe it should be possible to 
de-escalate petty conflicts before they trigger cascades of needless death, 
retribution and suffering.

James Clark is one of the most trusted gun violence prevention advocates in St 
Louis – someone respected by both community members and some in the police 
department. He’s been working to prevent violence for nearly a quarter-century.

Early this fall, his organization had just three outreach workers and no case 
managers trying to work with high-risk men to defuse conflicts across America’s 
most dangerous gun violence blocks. Since then, he’s expanded slightly, to 
seven outreach workers and two case managers. To “change the trajectory in the 
St Louis metro area”, he said, the city needs a total of 50 outreach workers 
and 20 case managers. With that level of support, he believes, “St Louis would 
be more like Boston and less like Chicago.”

Instead, the ongoing violence has dragged down even some of the local residents
trying to stop the shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/ferguson-protest-leader-darren-seals-shot-dead-burning-car>
. Darren Seals, a controversial but beloved local activist and Ferguson 
protester, was found shot to death in a burning car this September, just days 
before he was planning to meet with Guardian reporters to talk about his 
violence prevention work.



Rather than making the problem easier to fix, the intense concentration of gun 
violence has simply made it easier for many Americans to ignore the ongoing 
devastation.

“The places that need the most help generate the least tax. Nobody wants to 
pay additional money to help their neighbor a few miles away,” said Jerry 
Ratcliffe, a policing expert at Temple University in Philadelphia.

A national survey of 600 African Americans conducted in early 2016 found that 
80% considered gun violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/black-voters-gun-violence-police-misconduct-poll>
 an “extremely serious” problem, but the majority believed that “most people in 
America don’t care about the gun violence that is affecting communities of 
color”.

For the past eight years, Barack Obama’s justice department pushed to support 
proven local violence prevention programs, and to help cities across the 
country replicate them. But it has done so with little financial backing from 
Congress and little bully pulpit support from Obama, who has remained focused 
on stricter gun control laws. The justice department’s flagshipviolence 
reduction program <https://www.bja.gov/programs/vrn.html>, which focuses on 
helping cities with the highest rates of violence, has worked with only 15 of 
America’s 127 highest gun homicide cities.

For local advocates, the constant reinvestigation of the question “What can be 
done to prevent urban violence?” is exhausting and frustrating.

They know what can be done. They just don’t have the support to scale it. 

“We’ve reached the point of what I’m calling analysis paralysis,” Clark said. 
“What we’ve got to be able to do now is come out of our comfort zone and go 
into the belly of the crisis.”
 