
Three years ago, The Fullbright Company helped to redefine the nature of 
narrative video game design. The tiny independent studio, based in Portland, 
Oregon, released Gone Home, a first-person exploration drama about a young 
woman who travels back to visit her family and finds nothing but an empty house.

Wandering the hallways and rooms alone, players used environmental clues such 
as audio recordings and notes to piece together what had happened. The game 
cleverly employed the tropes of survival horror (an abandoned house, rumours of 
a murder) to suggest there was a mystery or supernatural element to the story, 
thereby hooking players familiar with gaming conventions into the experience. 
But eventually we discover something much more human, grounded and emotionally 
complex. Gone Home wasn’t about horror, it was about friendship, music and 
first love.

Alongside Dear Esther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/06/dear-esther-original-walking-simulator-playstation-4-xbox-one>
 from UK studioThe Chinese Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/oct/15/horror-amnesia-a-machine-for-pigs-chinese-room>
, Fullbright’s debut exemplified a new strain of interactive narrative 
story-telling, which became known, rather pejoratively, as ‘the walking sim’. 
These games relied on environmental cues, text, voice overs and music, rather 
than traditional game mechanics like puzzles or combat, to provide a more 
meditative, abstract experience. In the process they kicked off a debate 
throughout the industry about the nature of game design, competition and 
challenge; but they also inspired a host of interesting titles, all designed to 
explore story and atmosphere in similar way. The likes of Firewatch, Fragments 
of Him and That Dragon Cancer, all owe something to Gone Home and other 
progenitors of this much-discussed genre.

Now Fullbright is back with a second project Tacoma, set aboard a space 
station orbiting between the Earth and moon. Until recently, the Tacoma lunar 
transfer station had a full-time crew of six personnel, assisted by an AI 
computer named Odin, tasked with handling all the automated systems. But before 
the game starts there has been an incident on the station and the crew have 
been evacuated. Now, the station’s owner, the Venturis Corporation, needs to 
recover the sensitive data from Odin’s memory banks. As private contractor Amy 
Ferrier, it’s the player’s job to go aboard and do just that.

Once again then, this is a first-person narrative exploration game, and your 
role is to pick up on environmental clues to discover what has happened. But 
this time, the mechanic is very different. It turns out at that Tacoma is 
riddled with 3D cameras that have recorded every moment of the crew’s life 
aboard the ship – on top of that, all the crew wore augmented reality headsets 
as their primary interfaces with the station itself – all these were also 
recording point-of-view footage. As Amy, the player has access to snippets of 
these recordings so is able to view three-dimensional replays of key moments. 
Its through this AR interface that you must piece together what happened to the 
crew and why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c3f76772a353c1fc703bd76e371e64a62134d4a%2F46_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tacoma%20%E2%80%93%20%20Gone%20Home%20meets%202001%3A%20A%20Space%20Odyssey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tacoma%20%E2%80%93%20%20Gone%20Home%20meets%202001%3A%20A%20Space%20Odyssey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c3f76772a353c1fc703bd76e371e64a62134d4a%2F46_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The Tacoma Station is is a series of habitable rings around a zero-g hub, 
reminiscent of the space port in 2001. Photograph: Fullbright Company 
And while Gone Home used many of the conventions of horror games to 
acclimatise players, Tacoma is similarly toying with science fiction 
traditions. The abandoned space station, the sinister intelligent computer, the 
claustrophobic crew, the lone investigator – these are all hugely recognisable 
components that SF movie and game fans will be familiar with. Furthermore, 
Fullbright is using visual design to supplement those associations. Tacoma has 
a centrifugal design, with a centra zero-g hub surrounded by outer rings that 
simulate Earth gravity – an architecture clearly influenced by 2001: A Space 
Odyssey, which also had an omniscient computer at its core.

With Venturis it also has a classic psychopathic corporation in the style of 
Weyland Yutani and Cyberdyne. When you’re stepping aboard the station, a 
computerised voice intones, “while aboard the Tacoma station please remember 
that all activity on this facility is monitored by AR recording. All AR 
recordings become sole property of the Venturis Corporation”. We have that 
familiar sci-fi model of corporate paranoia and mandatory mechanised 
surveillance.

Inside, the interiors are sterile and minimalist, hinting at Ridley Scott’s 
designs for the Nostromo crew quarters. As Gaynor explains, “One of our big 
focuses during the last year has been rebuilding the station in this very 
functional way - a way that might work if people were going to live in space 
for a long period of time. We almost wanted to allow the player access to all 
the parts of that system so they can feel how it would all work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41226698f4350e03954f7fd4ec6006ecd995a96e%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tacoma%20%E2%80%93%20%20Gone%20Home%20meets%202001%3A%20A%20Space%20Odyssey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tacoma%20%E2%80%93%20%20Gone%20Home%20meets%202001%3A%20A%20Space%20Odyssey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Ftacoma-fullbright-company-narrative-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41226698f4350e03954f7fd4ec6006ecd995a96e%2F60_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 Players must view augmented reality recordings of key moments, working out how 
the drama of the space station unfolded. Photograph: Fullbright Company 
This is, then, a game about exploration of both time and space. You must 
trigger AI recordings of the crew, going about their daily business, chatting 
in the dining room, conversing with Odin; you can rewind sections and re-study 
them, and you can also switch to different points of view. Importantly, certain 
events happen simultaneously, so while there may be a group meeting in one 
section of the ship, another crew member may be elsewhere. The player will get 
the chance to see key incidents from a variety of perspectives.

“It’s about these layers of public and private information and how they all 
add up to an overall interpretation of the story as a whole,” says Gaynor. 
“When we created Gone Home, we wanted a very solitary experience, something 
that was just you and the environment, about what you were finding, and how 
that added up to a story.

“Our challenge to ourselves with Tacaoma was how can we give the player more 
direct access to these events, to experience them with the characters, as they 
happened without sacrificing control over how you engage with the setting? More 
than anything, that’s what justified the near-future setting to us - the AR 
technology enables the story and gameplay mechanics we wanted to explore.”

So Tacoma is a game about studying the interpersonal dynamics of six people 
thrust together in space and working out what happened to them. So did 
Fullbright research the real experiences of people in this situation? “Nasa is 
not exactly forthcoming with that stuff,” says fellow Fullbright co-founder 
Karla Zimonja. “However, there have been a lot of studies done, and we’ve drawn 
upon the experiences we’ve been able to read about. The Canadian astronaut 
Chris Hadfield wrote an entire book about what it’s like being in space – it’s 
very good stuff. And a lot of the ISS astronauts actually have blogs and 
they’re really interesting.”

Gaynor mentions, though, that what you don’t tend to find out about are the 
frictions between inhabitants. “It seems that Nasa keeps the tone pretty locked 
down,” he says. “There’s nothing like ‘Ihated this Russian guy’. Some of that 
stuff does come out when astronauts start to write memoirs - we’re seeing those 
from the people on the Apollo programmes; they’re like ‘well, I’m retired, I’m 
never going back into space, so when I was trapped in a capsule with this 
guy... what an asshole.’ A space station is like a housemate situation except 
you literally can’t leave the house.”

One thing Fullbright did learn was that astronauts often create artificial 
calendar events in order to break up the monotony and give a sense of structure 
in an environment where there are no day/night cycles. In the game, the crew 
celebrate an anniversary they call Obsolescence Day: it marks the day when the 
Venturis Corp informed all its employees that they were being replaced with 
computerised systems. It never happened, but they ironically celebrate the 
moment anyway. This also brings up a sense of tension between the human 
inhabitants and that all-seeing AI.

So what is the disaster that befalls the crew? We don’t know just yet – the 
demo hints at some sort of cataclysmic system failure, limiting the available 
oxygen – but how it happens and why are things the player must discover.

But Fullbright is keen to point out that this isn’t a cold sci-fi detective 
thriller – it’s not Outland. Like Gone Home, it’s a study of human 
relationships and pressures – and as the investigator you’re going to gain a 
certain perspective based on the AR artefacts you discover.

“The game has these non-linear local webs of story happening in each section 
of the station,” says Gaynor. “There are events later in the game that split 
off from shared moments and you can follow the strands and see how certain 
characters individually react to something everyone experiences together. It’s 
interesting: if you follow Path A and check out these characters before you see 
what the others were doing, your initial take may be very different than if 
you’d known these things in a different order. There will be a process of 
building all the perspectives of the crew into an overall picture of what 
happened. The way the story plays out has more dynamism than Gone Home did.”

Three years ago, Gone Home made a huge impact, its artful, measured 
story-telling systems contrasting with the heft and noise of most mega-budget 
narrative adventures. Now some of its techniques have been subsumed into the 
wider industry, it’ll be interesting to see how Tacoma – a more expansive and 
ambitious games – fares. Triple A titles like the Batman: Arkham titles have 
already toyed with the analysis and manipulation of recorded events, of course. 
But with Tacoma, you sense that the mystery – and the solution – will be very 
different indeed.

Tacoma is released on PC and Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> in spring 2017
 