
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook

Kieren Fallon has apparently been riding in Indiana, for those of you 
following his progress across the States. The 50-year-old, six times a champion 
in the UK, had been riding in California, most recently at Del Mar, but has now 
headed east in hope of more turf rides.

“I’m basing myself at Churchill Downs [Kentucky],” he told the Racing Post. 
“There are more turf races in this area and plenty of turf horses.” Fallon’s 
aim is to build up connections in time for September’s Kentucky Downs meeting. 
He appears to have decided that he is simply too old to be adapting to dirt 
racing.

I’m hoping that Richard Hannon could have a bit of luck on Kempton’s Polytrack 
today, starting withPremier Currency (2.45), who is 7-4 to add to last week’s 
course and distance success, for which the juvenile carries a penalty. He has 
taken time to win but the look of him suggests there is plenty of progress to 
come.

Bay Of St Malo (3.45) should have some precocity in her, for all that she was 
a one-paced seventh on her recent debut at Newbury. She’s out of an unraced 
mare who is a half-sister to a Group One juvenile winner and another Group Two 
juvenile winner. She’s been backed this morning but you can still get 7-2.

Tipping competition – a new week

Congratulations to bigboozer, who swooped in to take last week’s prize in the 
very last race, turning around a difficult five days with My Dream Boat (33-1) 
for a final score of +19, beating Mai11 (+11). Congratulations bigboozer! We’ll 
be in touch.

This week’s prize is a copy of Value Seeker by Anthony Gibson, in which the 
author offers his system for identifying value bets from “statistics allied 
with form”, leading to picks that are “overlooked by the general betting 
population”. It’s the sort of book which may have insights to offer that could 
help your own strategy, although we certainly don’t recommend adopting anyone 
else’s system blindly. If you don’t win this competition, you can read more 
about the book andorder it here 
<http://shop1.racingpost.com/Value-Seeker-The-Betting-System-by-Anthony-Gibson-p/value.htm>
.

To kick things off, we’d like your selections, please, for these races: 5.15 
Kempton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kempton>, 6.40 Carlisle, 6.55 
Leicester.

As ever, our champion will be the tipster who returns the best profit to 
notional level stakes of £1 at starting price on our nominated races, of which 
there will be three each day up until Friday. Non-runners count as losers.

In the event of a tie at the end of the week, the winner will be the tipster 
who, from among those tied on the highest score, posted their tips earliest on 
the final day.

For terms and conditions click here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/sep/07/talking-horses-tipping-competition-terms-and-conditions>
.

Good luck!

Click here <http://guardian.sportinglife.com/GU_Meetings> for all the day’s 
racecards, form, stats and results.

And post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 