
“Can we just start with today’s story that the prime minister prevented you 
from including a council tax increase in the autumn statement?” Andrew Tyrie, 
the chair of theTreasury select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-treasury-social-care-considering-lettting-councils-raise-council-tax-to-fund-social-care-politics-live>
, inquired casually.

Philip “Lurch” Hammond did his best to look shocked. “As with so many stories 
in the papers there is no truth in it whatsoever ... ”

“Really?” said Tyrie.

Philip Hammond says post-Brexit transitional deal will be needed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
“The prime minister and I may have had a conversation,” Lurch reluctantly 
admitted. A conversation in which Lurch had come off second best.

“Thank you for that,” Tyrie continued breezily. “And thank you for publishing 
the distributional analysis we have been asking for.” Lurch gulped. When Tyrie 
thanks you for giving him something, you can be sure you’d have been better off 
keeping it to yourself. “Can we turn to graph 1(h)?” said Tyrie. “It seems that 
people in the three lowest-income deciles are worse off as a result of your 
autumn statement. Is that right?”

Lurch fidgeted awkwardly. “I’ve been very mature in giving you this 
information,” he said pompously. “And I expect the committee to be equally 
mature in the way it deals with it. The simple matter is that the government 
was elected on a manifesto to cut welfare and make the poorest people poorer 
and that’s what we have done.”

So much for Theresa standing on the steps of Downing Street whining on about 
ruling for everyone. It was one thing to help thejust about managings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>
, quite another to lift a finger for the not managing at alls.

Next on the agenda was Brexit. What were the chancellor’s views on 
transitional arrangements? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 “Every business, regulator, civil servant and thoughtful politician believes 
they would be generally helpful,” Lurch replied, for the first time in the 
session looking as if he was enjoying himself. The word thoughtful was said 
with particular emphasis. He’d got sick of being rubbished by David Davis and 
Liam Fox for being such a Brexit wimp. Who cared if everyone now knew he 
thought the pair of them were halfwits?

“Can I take it then that transitional objectives will be a key objective in 
the government’s Brexit negotiations,” said Tyrie.

“Ooh, I don’t think I could go quite that far,” Lurch responded in a 
disconcertingly coquettish manner.

“That sounds like the diplomatic answer of a former foreign secretary,” said 
Tyrie. “Though not of course the current one.”These days it’s open season on 
Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/boris-johnson-emphasises-friendship-with-saudi-arabia>
. Right now, Boris would probably rather be tortured by the Saudis than his own 
parliamentary colleagues.

“Thank you for being so positive about Brexit,” declared the Conservative 
Jacob Rees-Mogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/jacob-rees-mogg-boris-johnson-ubiquity-toffs>
. Even Lurch appeared taken aback by that. As far as he could remember he 
hadn’t said anything remotely upbeat about Brexit. If he had, then it had 
certainly been a mistake. “I can’t tempt you to say ... ”

“No,” replied Lurch. “You can’t tempt me to say anything.”

Thereafter Lurch lapsed into psychedelic passive-aggression by appearing to be 
thrilled about government policy, only to instantly dismiss it as deranged 
lunacy made up on a daily basis. Could he explain why the prime minister was 
insisting the UK was on the verge of becoming a global leader in free trade 
when the Office for Budget Responsibility had said Britain’s trade intensity 
would fall for the next 10 years?

“Not really,” said Lurch. “These things take time I suppose.” Talk to the hand.

Labour’s Rachel Reeves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/27/time-to-write-women-back-into-parliamentary-history-rachel-reeves>
 was keen to analyse the government’s immigration projections. Lurch had said 
he didn’t want Britain’s key industries to suffer skills shortfalls and the 
Office for National Statistics had predicted the government had no chance of 
getting anywhere near its net migration target of 100,000 a year; so how did he 
propose to square that circle?

Lurch shrugged. He didn’t. Talk to the other hand. “We’ll get there in the 
medium term,” he eventually said, as much to fill the awkward silence as to be 
helpful.

“What’s the medium term?” asked a dogged Reeves.

“When does autumn start and finish?” said Lurch. His minders looked horrified; 
maybe it hadn’t been such a good idea to let the chancellor take a couple of 
tabs of acid before his select committee appearance.

“So medium is ... ?”

“Medium is whatever you want it to be.” Man.

Lurch checked through his list. Theresa. Trashed. Boris. Trashed. David and 
Liam. Trashed. The economy. Trashed. It had been his best panto performance 
ever. Only not quite so funny for the country as it had been for him.
 