
11.30am Gilgamboa and Goonyella plot returns for National

Tony Paley: Irish challengers Gilgamboa and Goonyella, fourth and fifth in 
Saturday’s Grand National, are already being aimed at next year’s running of the
Aintree spectacular, won this time round by Rule The World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
.

Emotional trainer Mouse Morris wins the Grand National after year of tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/grand-national-rule-the-world-mouse-morris-aintree>
Enda Bolger, who trains Gilgamboa, said: “The horse is in good form, he came 
out of it well and I’m still on cloud nine. He ran a great race and he’s 
something to look forward to for next season. We’ll put him away now.

“I was chuffed to bits with how he ran and Robbie [Power] gave him a lovely 
ride and held on to him. The ground went against him, but he was staying on 
again in the last 150 yards.

“He’s home, he’s safe and sound and there are a lot of positive things to take 
out of it. He’s only a young horse - the third horse was 13 [Vics Canvas] - and 
hopefully we’ve a lot to look forward to.”

Jim Dreaper is also plotting a return to Aintree for the mudlark Goonyella. 
Although not quite having the pace to go with those at the head of the field, 
last year’s Midlands National winner stuck on well to take fifth on his third 
outing over the unique fences.

Dreaper said: “We were delighted that he got round and came back safe and 
sound. He arrived back in at 7.10 [on Sunday morning] and he was certainly a 
lot fresher than the two men that got off the lorry with him. There were a few 
minor scratches on his hind legs, and he is now out in the field with his mate.

“I tried to be honest as I could before the race - for him to have a chance he 
would have needed a Red Marauder year [2001] as he needs it bottomless as he is 
just missing a gear or two.

“He has had a hard race and the owners would prefer it if he didn’t run again 
this season and I don’t think there are too many races around now for horses 
like him. If everything goes right, the long-term plan would to be to go back 
to the National next year.”

Monday’s best bets, by Greg Wood

The first card of the new Flat turf season at Redcar was a bruising experience 
for punters, with winners at 33-1, 22-1, 16-1 and 12-1, and though the track’s 
second meeting of the year looks a little more accommodating, it might be worth 
treating with a little caution given that three fascinating days at Newmarket’s 
Craven meeting start on Tuesday.

Horse racing tips: Monday 11 April
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/10/horse-racing-tips-monday> 
If there is a bet to be had on the card, it might be Smart Mover (4.00) in the 
one-mile handicap. John Quinn’s filly is making her seasonal debut, but was a 
four-length winner on very soft ground at Leicester on her final start as a 
juvenile. She looked capable of finding further improvement there despite a 
busy two-year-old campaign, and could be up to defying a 10lb higher mark today.

Windsor’s Flat meetings on Monday evenings are immensely popular, but their 
season gets off to a more low-key start this afternoon whenTop Diktat (4.50) 
goes to post with every chance. He put up a noteworthy performance on the clock 
to win on soft ground at Nottingham last November and ran as if he was still in 
form when third of four at Kempton in February.

Elsewhere on the card, Freddy With A Y (3.20) is on a fair mark, while at 
Kelso,Westend Theatre (4.20) may be able to recent Hexham form with Whats Up 
Woody on 6lb better terms.Bollin Ace (4.10) also has fair prospects on the same 
card.

Tipping competition - a new week

Congratulations to cornsay, who won last week’s tipping competition on a final 
score of +33.64, chased by 23skidoo (+22.14) who had Ballyoptic (9-1) on 
Friday, while Tommy2002 (+16) closed into third place thanks to Eastlake 
(22-1). Cornsay bagged the £100Grand National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> bet from Skybet and divided 
it into £25 each-way bets on Ucello Conti and, more importantly, Gilgamboa 
(50-1), who came fourth and bagged Cornsay a nice return for his week’s work.

This week, we’re offering a second copy of Racing & Football Outlook’s Flat 
Guide 2016, the handy annual which as ever is packed with facts, analysis, tips 
and insights into the new season to help lift your spirits from the 
post-Aintree slump. If you don’t win, you can buy a copyhere 
<http://shop1.racingpost.com/RFO-Flat-Racing-Guide-2016-p/lkf16.htm>.

To kick things off, we’d like your selections, please, for these races: 3.30 
Redcar, 3.40 Kelso, 4.50 Windsor.

As ever, our champion will be the tipster who returns the best profit to 
notional level stakes of £1 at starting price on our nominated races, of which 
there will be three each day up until Friday. Non-runners count as losers.

In the event of a tie at the end of the week, the winner will be the tipster 
who, from among those tied on the highest score, posted their tips earliest on 
the final day.

For terms and conditions click here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/sep/07/talking-horses-tipping-competition-terms-and-conditions>
.

Good luck!

And post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 