
The thing about destiny is that it can so nearly not happen and, even when it 
does, rarely looks like what it is.

It's just a phone ringing routinely at three in the afternoon (not alarmingly 
in the middle of the night) and the person on the other end is not telling you 
that the results of your blood test have come back positive or that your 
girlfriend's partly clothed body has been discovered floating in the Ganges. 
That would be handy, that would lend narrative continuity and drive - albeit of 
a not very novel kind - to the purposeless drift of events. But no, it's just 
an editor asking if you can go to India at short notice, to write a travel 
piece about Varanasi.

'Should be really nice,' she said. 'Business-class flight to Delhi. Short wait 
for a connecting flight to Varanasi. Five nights at the Taj Ganges. I'd do it 
myself, if I could get away.' The trip had been set up for one of her regular 
contributors, who had fallen ill. ('You'd have thought he could've waited till 
he got there, like everyone else,' she said.) That's why she was calling at the 
last minute like this. And she only wanted twelve hundred words. There was 
nothing I had to do in London in the coming week...So I said, yes, OK, I'd go.

The journey from the airport to the hotel was fine. It was terrifying, 
chaotic, dangerous, but it bore some kind of relationship to journeys I'd 
experienced previously, in other places.For a few minutes after leaving the 
hotel all seemed quite normal - crowded, busy, noisy - but nothing more than 
expected. Then everything began to converge, contract and - this was the 
interesting part - accelerate.

I had been warned that the bhang lassis were strong, far more potent than the 
strongest grass, but because Darrel and Lal were having one I thought I'd join 
in. Things started weirdly, in that they were prepared for us not in a cafe, as 
one might have expected, but by a tailor who wanted to throw in a couple of 
suits for good measure.

For the first half an hour it was like being stoned, the early stages of a 
trip. The three of us walked with our arms around each other's shoulders, 
laughing at everything, at the river for instance, solid and grey as a 
motorway, busy with amphibious traffic. Then it was like being completely 
deranged. We weren't sure exactly where we were, but we had sense enough to 
stay away from Manikarnika and not to linger near Harishchandra where, in 
Darrell's words, 'all the death could really bum us out'.

At one of the ghats we saw a thin man with a pale snake draped around his neck 
like a boa, like a feather boa, except this boa, plucked smooth, was a pet 
snake. The air grew so still it seemed about to congeal. Mountains of cloud 
swelled as if a storm were crouching over the city - only to disperse without a 
drop of rain falling.

Then it was like being a ghost. Darrell wandered off and it was just Laline 
and me on our own, wondering where he'd gone, and then I was wandering round on 
my own, wondering where Lal had wandered off to too. I was not unduly alarmed , 
but I wished they'd been around when I came across the baba with the road atlas 
and the wild beard.

I thought something was wrong with my hearing, then I deduced that it was only 
him I couldn't hear and the reason I couldn't hear him was because there was 
something majorly wrong with his voice, in that it had gone completely and he 
was completely inaudible. Because he had no words, he gesticulated wildly. 
Expressing himself solely through gestures, his method of communicating was a 
form of seated, silent dance. Watching closely I could make out, from these 
gestures, odd phrases, even an occasional sentence.

As I watched I began to piece together parts of what he was narrating. After a 
while, without conscious effort, I was able to understand him perfectly. He had 
come here, he said, to find something he had lost. What was the thing he had 
lost? An umbrella, apparently. And several Biros. Did this strike us as absurd? 
It did, yes, but I took this as meaning that the things most of us cared about 
- iPods and favourite T-shirts - were scarcely more important than the things 
we routinely lost, things like brollies and Biros to which we attached no value 
whatsoever, useful though they were for keeping one dry in a storm or jotting 
down thoughts and phone numbers.

I thought that's what he was saying, but then it dawned on me that this 
metaphorical interpretation was too literal, because although he thought he had 
come here on the pretext of finding his lost property, it dawned on him that 
what he had lost was precisely the reason for coming here, that he was here to 
find out why he had ended up here. He paused, sat motionless for a while, 
letting the complex simplicity of his message sink in, and then, in a superb 
bit of theatre, he picked up and flicked open an umbrella. But not just any old 
brolly. No, this was a very old, totally useless, busted flush of an umbrella. 
Entirely devoid of fabric, it was no more than a spindly metallic skeleton, 
incapable of providing shelter from rain or shade from sun.

Later, as the light faded, I saw the goat again, the one with the clean white 
coat and the cute black socks. The one I had thought was going to speak to me. 
As I passed by, he began walking beside me. He smelled a bit of cheese, goat's 
cheese. I felt something touch my leg. He was butting me gently with his head. 
I looked down at his goat-face.

'Sah, boat?' he said. 

'No, thank you,' I said. 

'Very cheap, sah.' 

'No, thank you,' I said. 

'Sah want boat?' the goat repeated. 

'I walking. No want boat.' 

'Very cheap,' said the goat. 

'No, thank you,' I said. 

I had slowed down and the goat, sensing my hesitancy and interpreting this as 
a willingness to be detained, tried a different approach.

'Sah, you think is nice being goat here in city? Life here hard for me. I have 
children. I offer you boat, but what I most want is to engage in conversation, 
a little philosophical discourse.'

I stopped walking so that I could give the goat the attention he obviously 
craved and deserved.

'OK. What would you like to talk about?' 

The goat paused and then said, 'You take boat, sah?' 

'I thought you wanted a philosophical conversation.' 

'Joking, sah. What I want is ask what it is like, having thoughts in human 
head. How human consciousness different to goat consciousness?'

'Well, that's a very difficult question. To answer it, I'd need to have a 
clearer idea of what it was like to be a goat. I'll be honest, I assumed you 
were just kind of lost in your goat-world.'

'That is problem, sah. Because I am goat I do not have tools to explain what 
it is to be goat.'

'Well, you see, that is probably the difference. The ability to articulate 
things. Language. Self-examination... ' I didn't know what else to say. It 
seemed that I was lacking exactly the qualities I claimed distinguished me from 
my interlocutor.

The more I tried to articulate the difference between myself and the goat, the 
more we had in common. 'You know, I'm really going to have to think about this. 
You've taken me by surprise. Also, to be frank, I'm somewhat past my 
philosophical best at the moment. Could we talk about it another time?'

'Tomorrow, sah?' 

'Yes, maybe tomorrow.' 

'One other thing, sah. Ganoona appear soon.' 

'Ganoona? How do you know about Ganoona?' 

'I know only that Ganoona will appear soon. In pouch of a kangaroo. But only 
those who are Ganoona will be able to see him.' With that the goat turned and 
trotted off and I heard people calling someone's name. The name sounded 
familiar, but it took a while to cotton on: it was my name, and the people 
calling it were my friends, whose names, for the moment, escaped me.

'Well, I don't think we'll be doing that again in a hurry,' one of them 
(Darrell, that was it!) said the next day. He said it as though it was over and 
done with, but I suspected that part of me was still doing it.

Â· This is an edited extract from Jeff in Venice, Death In Varanasi, to be 
published by Canongate in April 2009
 