
Creating a “best of” list is always a dicey proposition, as many writers can 
attest. As soon as the list is published online,someone has to pop up in the 
comments to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/23/best-tv-of-2014-no-1-happy-valley>
: “How could you leave out my favorite?” or “Since you included this, there is 
no way I can trust your list”. The rage at such lists is part of what makes 
them so popular; people skim the selections hoping to have their own opinions 
ratified, and if they are not, well, look out.

It’s even harder when the list is a permanent object like a book. Just look at 
Taschen’s Favorite TV Shows, the coffee table book giant’s compilation of the 
top shows of the past 25 years. Taschen gets away from the “best of” debate by 
claiming that the shows are, instead, its favorites – and since there is no 
accounting for taste, the writers hope the book-buying public doesn’t try to 
account for theirs.

If it only had a rope attached, the giant, 748-page oversized book could be 
used as an anchor for a small craft

If it only had a rope attached, the giant, 748-page oversized book could be 
used as an anchor for a small craft, but mostly it will just weigh down the end 
tables and bookshelves of TV addicts. There are some obvious selections that 
such a book couldn’t be published without – The Simpsons,Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>, Mad Men, The Sopranos 
– and all of those are included here, with 60 other shows.

Each program gets a handful of pages explaining why it is included in the list 
and going over the basics of character, plot, influence and other details that 
make it important. This being a coffee table book, there are far more pictures 
than words; it relies mostly on old promo photos as well as high-resolution 
screen captures of some of the most classic scenes. They’re interspersed with 
quotes from the show, which are fun to cruise through but always seem to fall 
short of any of the show’s most memorable quotes. In the entry for Seinfeld, a 
show with so many additions to the pop culture lexicon, there isn’t a “no soup 
for you” or “I’m the master of my domain” to be found. I can’t even remember 
which episodes any of theSex and the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sex-and-the-city> quotes are from, and I’ve 
seen all of those episodes at least five (OK, 10) times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438007363056%2Fde8ec4ed-9101-49fa-97fc-086652ef7593-1020x379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taschen's%20Favorite%20TV%20Shows%3A%20at%20least%20it%20gives%20fanatics%20something%20to%20argue%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taschen%27s%20Favorite%20TV%20Shows%3A%20at%20least%20it%20gives%20fanatics%20something%20to%20argue%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438007363056%2Fde8ec4ed-9101-49fa-97fc-086652ef7593-1020x379.jpeg>
 Mad Men in Taschen’s Favorite TV Shows. Photograph: Taschen 
The writing, by a few dozen professors, entertainment journalists and other 
professional lovers of the medium, isn’t going to win any Pulitzers and the 
information in the entries doesn’t contain any factoids that even a casual fan 
wouldn’t know. As for those programs that the reader has never watched, why 
would she want to read about those when they’re probably streaming on Netflix, 
Hulu or Amazon? A real TV nut is going to take the time to watch them.

Yes, this is a book made for flipping through, though it is so large that 
casually meandering through without losing circulation in your thighs is a bit 
of a challenge. The layout and paper quality for this $69.99 doorstop are both 
absolutely superb, but since it is made for leisurely viewing rather than 
cover-to-cover consumption, the biggest discussion to be had about Taschen’s 
Favorite TV Shows is about what did and did not make the cut.

The list tends towards critical favorites (The Wire, Twin Peaks, Homicide, 
Arrested Development, Girls, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, The West Wing, Rome, 
Louie) as well as popular favorites (The Big Bang Theory, Two and a Half Men, 
How I Met Your Mother, The Walking Dead, Game of Thrones, CSI). Those are all 
deserving of spots on the list – well, maybe not Two and a Half Men. There are 
even a few well-deserved cult shows (Firefly, Veronica Mars, Battlestar 
Galactica).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438007873281%2F9a03be15-461a-4dc4-95bf-6caa260f3e56-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taschen's%20Favorite%20TV%20Shows%3A%20at%20least%20it%20gives%20fanatics%20something%20to%20argue%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taschen%27s%20Favorite%20TV%20Shows%3A%20at%20least%20it%20gives%20fanatics%20something%20to%20argue%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftaschens-favorite-tv-shows-book-simpsons-breaking-bad-mad-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438007873281%2F9a03be15-461a-4dc4-95bf-6caa260f3e56-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vital signs: how did ER not make the cut? Photograph: NBCU Photo Bank/Rex 
Features 
But there are some head-scratchers. Bored to Death was great, but isn’t it too 
slight to be forever enshrined in such a way? Revenge andGlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/glee> had great first seasons but 
immolated themselves so spectacularly afterwards, do they still deserve 
recognition? Do we really need to include miniseries Mildred Pierce and Band of 
Brothers? Will anyone remember Dollhouse or Magic City in five years? Does 
anyone remember them now?

Then we could get into all the shows left out of the book (Friday Night 
Lights, ER,The Good Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-good-wife>, and any and all 
reality shows) and really get into a good discussion of how the list is 
created. But TV is now such a vast enterprise that it is nearly impossible to 
try to distill it into a book at all, no matter how big or selective. Still, 
Taschen gave it a go and the result – comprehensive if shallow, beautiful if 
flawed – is as good as we’re ever going to get. And at least it gives 
small-screen fanatics something to argue about.
 