
A taxi firm has been criticised over a “sexist” marketing campaign featuring 
an apparently overweight middle-aged woman and the slogan “If I start to look 
sexy book a taxi. Don’t make bad decisions because you’ve had one too many.”
Bristol Post (@BristolPost) 
Outrage over Bristol taxi firm's 'sexist', 'fat and age-shaming' advert 
https://t.co/xzzCwYM3Bq <https://t.co/xzzCwYM3Bq>
 <https://twitter.com/BristolPost/status/816562468545818625> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/BristolPost/status/816562468545818625> 
The company behind the advert, Bristol-based CityFox, insisted it carried a 
serious message about getting home safely after drinking and said it would not 
apologise for using humour to make a point.

However, the campaign group Bristol Women’s Voice 
<http://www.bristolwomensvoice.org.uk/> condemned the image, claiming it 
reinforced harmful gender stereotypes.

The group’s chair, Penny Gane, said: “We are appalled to see this advert being 
used by CityFox taxis. Images such as this are antiquated and reinforce harmful 
gender stereotypes and messages that women are to be judged by their physical 
appearance alone as well as being fat- and age-shaming.

“It is unacceptable for businesses to use derogatory and sexist images, 
especially when targeting younger audiences. This should be seen as an 
opportunity to present modern images that challenge harmful stereotypes and 
present a broad range of representations that young people can relate to.”

The campaign also featured an image of a man in a vest with a rose tattoo and 
a paunch leering at the camera with a beer in his hand with the same slogan.

CityFox Group defended its intentions but said the campaign had been withdrawn.

Sophie Palmer, the company’s marketing and communications manager, said: “As 
one of the west country’s biggest taxi providers, we see all too often the 
effects that excessive alcohol consumption can have on people’s safety and 
wellbeing, and the destructive consequences for society when this leads to 
antisocial behaviour.

“This campaign featured two posters – one depicting a male and one a female – 
in an attempt to encourage people to think about the need to be able to get 
home in a safe and orderly manner when they’ve had a few too many to drink.

“We make no apology for using humour and hard-hitting messages to highlight 
this issue – in order for people to think about the possible effects of their 
behaviour it is necessary to get their attention and get a reaction. The 
campaign has attracted many positive comments. However, it would never be our 
intention to cause embarrassment or offence, and as such we have withdrawn the 
campaign.

“We want people to enjoy the benefits of a night on the town, but also to make 
sure they get home safely afterwards, and we are always happy to work 
positively with any individual or organisation to achieve this aim.”

CityFox might have seen the controversy coming. In 2015, a Southampton-based 
company, West Quay Cars, used the same image of the woman with a similar 
slogan: “If I Start To Look Sexy – Book A Taxi”. It led to members of 
Southampton University’s Feminist Societycalling for students to boycott the 
firm 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/11331064/Sexist-anti-drink-drive-taxi-advert-sparks-complaints.html>
.

CityFox <http://www.cityfoxgroup.co.uk/cityfox-taxis/4593108116> provides taxi 
services in Bristol, Bath and Plymouth. It has more than 100 vehicles and 
employs 120 people.

In 2015, a Cardiff-based bus company came under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/11/bus-company-pulls-topless-ride-me-adverts-after-outcry>
 for promoting a new route with a poster on the back of its vehicles showing an 
apparently topless woman holding a sign saying “ride me all day for £3”.


 