
Memory Banda beat the odds. In Malawi, five out of every 10 girls marry before 
the age of 18 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/03/06/malawi-end-widespread-child-marriage>. Her 
sister married aged 11, but Banda vowed to finish school. When girls in her 
village were subjected to sexual initiation, Banda organised literacy classes 
to teach them how to read.

Growing up in rural Malawi as the eldest of six siblings, Banda remembers 
hearing aboutkusasa fumbi 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/02/04/health/malawi-girls-initiation/>, the 
traditional practice of sexual cleansing common in southern Malawi. This 
initiation practice forces young girls to have sex with an older man to cleanse 
their “childhood dust” and prepare them for adulthood. Known as the “hyena”, 
this man travels between villages, paid by the community to have sex with girls 
as young as nine, often exposing them to unwanted pregnancy and HIV infection.

This socially sanctioned form of gender-based violence violates girls’ basic 
human rights, and has devastating repercussions. “Malawi has one of the highest 
rates of maternal mortality in the world and 10% of the population is 
HIV-positive,” said Dr Howard Kasiya, health expert and director of the
Adolescent Girls’ Advocacy Network of Malawi 
<http://agaliprogram.org/ending-child-marriage/>. “Being forced to undergo 
kusasa fumbi is often a death sentence for girls.”

Many of the girls who undergo kusasa fumbi are subsequently forced to marry 
and stop their education. AHuman Rights Watch report 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/03/06/malawi-end-widespread-child-marriage> found 
that, between 2010 and 2013, 44,000 girls attending primary school in Malawi 
dropped out due to marriage or pregnancy.

In 2011, Memory Banda met Faith Phiri, the co-founder of Malawi’s Girls 
Empowerment Network (Genet) <http://www.genetmalawi.org/>. Phiri invited Banda 
to join Genet’s stop child marriage campaign. As part of the campaign, Genet 
conducted research with 40 girls from local villages to learn about the 
prevalence ofkusasa fumbi and forced marriage. The organisation designed a 
storytelling programme called “The river of life” in which each girl shared her 
personal story using art, poetry and creative writing to discuss the obstacles 
she faced, and her hopes for the future. Banda and the girls shared how harmful 
traditional practices created pressure to drop out of school and get pregnant. 
Banda said participating in Genet’s river of life was transformational: “Until 
then, I always thought I was the only one who suffered. But sharing my story 
gave me strength to know that I wasn’t alone.” From the girls’ stories and 
artwork Genet publishedI Will Marry When I Want 
<http://www.genetmalawi.org/Resources/I%20will%20marry%20when%20I%20want%20to-comp.pdf>
.

“Girls’ stories and experiences are powerful. By raising their voices, girls 
can create change,” said Phiri. “When girls speak out, our leaders must 
listen.” Genet trained the girls in leadership, advocacy and public speaking so 
they couldpresent their publication to village chiefs 
<http://www.malawivoice.com/2013/10/23/genet-malawi-empowers-girls-communities-to-fight-child-marriage/>
 and Members of Parliament.

The girls’ advocacy led to an alliance with a female head chief from the 
community of Chitera in the Chiradzulu district of southern Malawi. Genet and 
the girls worked with her and other village chiefs to develop bylaws that 
penalise men who engage inkusasa fumbi and child marriage. This girl-led 
advocacy campaign led totraditional authorities increasing the legal age of 
marriage to age 21 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/in-malawi-group-words-to-end-early-marriage-for-girls/1609830.html>
, penalising men who marry underage girls with significant fines paid in goats, 
chickens and land. Parents who allow their underage daughters to marry are 
required to perform three months of janitorial service in the local school.

Genet is working with the Chiradzulu District Council and the Social Welfare 
Office to monitor implementation. “Over 60 chiefs have ratified these bylaws, 
protecting thousands of girls from child marriage,” said Phiri. An external
evaluation commissioned by the UN Foundation 
<http://www.letgirlslead.org/assets/pdfs/External_Evaluation_4-page_summary_FINAL_4.9.14.pdf>
 showed that community leaders now viewkusasa fumbi and child marriage as 
shameful, andhave created community-led Girls’ Education Funds 
<http://www.globalfundforwomen.org/storage/documents/campaigns/agents_of_change.pdf>
 to help survivors of child marriage return to school.

Leveraging growing momentum to end early and forced marriage in Malawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malawi>, Human Rights Watch is calling upon 
the government to set a minimum legal age for marriage. Malawi’s Adolescent 
Girls’ Advocacy Network is pushing for a national law to raise the legal age of 
marriage from 16 to 18, but struggles with limited political commitment. “Our 
leaders see the evils of child marriage. They talk of change but they are not 
yet taking action,” said Kasiya. “But through sustained girl-centred advocacy, 
we will increase the marriage age once and for all.”

Malawian communities are adopting innovative strategies to wipe out kusasa 
fumbi and child marriage. Genet is working with village leaders to make the 
content of girls’ initiation camps more girl-friendly, while upholding positive 
cultural traditions. “Where 10-year-old girls used to learn how to please their 
husbands in bed, they now learn life skills – leadership, self-esteem, and how 
to become strong women in the community,” said Phiri.

Memory Banda is now attending college in Malawi, and mobilises girls to raise 
their voices and beat the odds through her advocacy with Genet and Let Girls 
Lead. “You will never know you are a leader until you stand up,” said Banda, 
who is speaking at theUnited Nations General Assembly on 22 September 
<http://csonet.org/?page=view&nr=214&type=13&menu=14>. “Help a girl child 
develop. Let’s influence change.”

Denise Dunning is the executive director and founder of Let Girls Lead 
<http://www.letgirlslead.org/> and Joyce Mkandawire is co-founder of Genet 
<http://www.genetmalawi.org/>. Follow @DeniseRDunning 
<https://twitter.com/DeniseRDunning> and @genetmalawi 
<https://twitter.com/genetmalawi> on Twitter.

Read more stories like this: 

• FGM and child marriage: grandmothers are part of the problem and the solution
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/17/mothers-grandmothers-fgm-child-marriage>

• Aids, pregnancy and the church: young Hondurans take a stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jun/11/honduras-hiv-teen-pregnancy-rates>

• Child marriage in Nepal: what do you do when it’s by choice? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/feb/24/child-marriage-trends-nepal>

• Advertisement feature: World’s first insta-doc #Freedomis focuses on ending 
FGM and child, early and forced marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-girl-effect/freedomis-world-first-insta-doc>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 