
The teenage suicide rate in New South Wales has jumped to its highest point in 
19 years.

At the same time, deaths from road accidents – which used to be the leading 
killer for 15-17 year olds – has been gradually declining, according to figures 
in theNSW Child Death Review Team’s 
<https://www.ombo.nsw.gov.au/what-we-do/coordinating-responsibilities/child-death-review-team>
 2015 report.

Overall, 504 children died in 2015 from all causes – the lowest the rate has 
been since 1996. But 58% of those children were infants aged less than 12 
months and 42 of them died suddenly and unexpectedly.

The acting NSW ombudsman, John McMillan, said as the report was tabled to 
parliament on Tuesday: “There are still too many preventable deaths.”

The suicide rate in Australia is a humanitarian crisis that we can no longer 
ignore | Gerry Georgatos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/the-suicide-rate-in-australia-is-a-humanitarian-crisis-we-can-no-longer-ignore>
Children from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander backgrounds continue to be 
more at risk of death, with their mortality rate 2.3 times higher than 
non-Indigenous children.


Almost all of the infants who died were exposed to one or more known risk 
factors such as placing an infant to sleep on their front or sharing a bed with 
them, particularly while alcohol or drug-affected, McMillan said.

The report said safe sleeping advice should include strategies to avoid 
unintentional bed sharing, particularly for disadvantaged and vulnerable 
families.

For children aged between one and four years, the report found drowning was 
the second leading cause of death, after congenital and chromosomal conditions.

In a separate review, the CDRT also looked at children’s deaths from vaccine 
preventable infectious diseases. It found that 23 deaths between 2005 and 2014 
were preventable or potentially preventable by vaccination, with influenza and 
meningococcal the most common causes.

The report’s findings highlight that immunisation has been successful in 
dramatically reducing the number of child deaths from infectious diseases, 
McMillan said.

• Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 
<http://www.lifeline.org.au/> 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 
<http://www.suicidecallbackservice.org.au/> 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 
<http://www.kidshelp.com.au/> 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 
<http://www.mensline.org.au/> 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 
<https://www.beyondblue.org.au/> 1300 22 4636
 