
Not everyone loves reading as much as I do. It’s something I accept (with a 
heavy heart) as a fact, and that’s fine. While I do love most of English, I 
feel as though sometimes studying certain texts in class can turn people off 
reading even more, and that makes me really sad.


Having now completed my English GCSE a year early, I can look back with a 
nostalgic smile and say “Ahh, remember when we did that?” when looking at my 
friends’ work like I’m 50 and not 15.

Despite me being dubbed “bookworm” by my friends and classmates over the past 
few years, I found the subject to be a bit of a mixed bag.

At the beginning of the course, I did quite enjoy Of Mice and Men 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/of-mice-and-men-12.html>, but a year down the 
line I ended up slamming my head on the table many a time as I thought about 
the pain of reading Emily Bronte’sWuthering Heights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-37.html> or Romeo and 
Juliet and having to analyse the characters and themes. I didn’t want to read 
about Cathy and Heathcliff’s destructive relationship or tragic Shakespearean 
lovers; I wanted something exciting, something to make me think instead of 
wanting to cry every time I opened the pages.

I love books so why do I hate studying English GCSE?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/05/i-love-books-so-why-do-i-hate-studying-english-gcse>
I’m not bashing you if you like either of those books, but ask the majority of 
people my age and they’ll say the same as me: a lot of the books we study 
aren’t engaging. They’re just… well, not for us. Even my English teacher, who 
shows a clear passion for words and writing in all our lessons, admitted he 
finds it a struggle to read novels outside of teaching. Is that really how we 
want this wonderful subject to be? English is supposed to be about creativity 
and opening doors, not closing them. I found myself looking longingly at my own 
beloved books whilstwherefore art thou, Romeo? taunted me from my copy of the 
text.

One thing I think the government needs to take into consideration is: will 
teenagers enjoy the books they’re studying? Will they want to read more? Or 
will they, like my classmates and I did, dread the prospect of having to write 
essays on books that they didn’t love or genuinely care about? If you give an 
already underwhelmed teenager a copy of Romeo and Juliet, they’re not exactly 
likely to be bouncing off the walls with excitement. If they’re anything like 
me, they’ll probably spend more time complaining about the book than they do 
studying it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fteenagers-studying-books-english-gcse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd033fc02065d7ba1197ea3fba33526d18d146ad2%2F0_16_2178_1306%2F2178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teenagers%20need%20to%20enjoy%20the%20books%20they%20are%20studying%20at%20GCSE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fteenagers-studying-books-english-gcse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teenagers%20need%20to%20enjoy%20the%20books%20they%20are%20studying%20at%20GCSE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fteenagers-studying-books-english-gcse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd033fc02065d7ba1197ea3fba33526d18d146ad2%2F0_16_2178_1306%2F2178.jpg>
 JB Priestley, author of An Inspector Calls, provided a turning point in 
Wordsarelife’s English GCSE despite being born in back in 1894. This pictures 
was taken in 1980. Photograph: Jane Bown/Guardian/Observer 
However, a big turning point for me was reading JB Priestley’s 
An Inspector Calls <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/inspector-calls-4.html> 
with my class. I don’t suppose any of us were expecting much, but from page one 
we got absorbed into the themes and the mystery, the hidden messages of the 
play. It was fascinating. Everyone wanted to find out what happened, and we 
laughed and gasped at the revelations the story gave us. We loved reading it, 
and because we liked the book we liked coming up with ideas, liked talking 
about what the book meant to us. For the first time, even the most reluctant 
readers were engaged in something new. We stopped talking about how boring 
classical literature was and started arguing about socialism and justice, and 
our favourite characters and why. My love for English was finally reignited 
after so long.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
That’s how all lessons should be. We should be engaged in what we’re studying, 
should have an interest in the bigger themes of literature. Most teenagers 
don’t care about forbidden love or family feuds. They want stories to spark 
their interest, things they haven’t read before. I personally disagree with 
having such a fine-tuned set of books to study at GCSE. Why should the 
government get to decide what we do when we’re the ones who have to study the 
books? Books like George Orwell’s1984 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/1984.html> or William Golding’s Lord of the 
Flies <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lord-of-the-flies.html> would be better 
suited to us - reading about savage boys or terrifying future societies would 
be so fascinating. That’s why I’ve chosen to studyIB English 
<http://www.ibo.org/programmes/diploma-programme/curriculum/language-and-literature/language-a-literature-slhl/>
, an alternative to A- levels. I have the freedom to study lots of texts, but 
then write about the ones that interest me the most. To me, that sounds far 
more interesting; and what English should be all about. Without interest, it’s 
just a bunch of empty words.

Are you burning with desire to express your teen opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/series/teen-opinion> on a 
book-relating subject?Join the site here if you’re a keen reader and not 
already a member! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>

Your responses

Site member HorseLover3000
Personally, I think that the author hasn’t considered that they are speaking 
from the point of view of one person. My class studied Lord of The Flies in 
year 9 and hated it with a passion, and weren’t exactly in love with An 
Inspector Calls either. However we also studied Shakespeare’s Merchant of 
Venice which got everyone talking (or arguing) over the play and we all got 
very involved. I think that no matter what books are selected to study at GCSE, 
some people will always dislike them and others like them, as it is with any 
book. Also, when you have studied a book for 2 years for GCSE, of course the 
enjoyment is likely to be taken out of it at some stage. In my opinion, 
changing the books we study is unlikely to result in any more or any fewer 
teenagers reading.
 