
From the classroom to the boardroom, standing up and making a presentation in 
front of peers, colleagues, or the public can be something that shakes even the 
most confident of people.

But for entrepreneurs, doing so is likely to become a necessary part of life, 
whether that involves pitching to people for investment, talking to an audience 
at an industry event, or selling a product to a retailer. Getting over nerves 
is one thing, but convincing and engaging an audience is another. Here are ten 
steps to becoming a better presenter.

Research and practice

A well-structured and short presentation will be easier to talk through – and 
will engage an audience – better than a lengthy, detailed one. Sam Farmer, who 
founded an eponymousteen toiletries company <http://www.samfarmer.co/> after 
becoming frustrated with the way some brands marketed deodorants to young 
people, says practising is critical.

“Work on what you’re going to say, because the words are the things that will 
carry you through. Cut out anything you don’t need. Short and passionate is 
much better than long and dull.” Farmer says, adding that he would practice all 
the time. “My wife made me stand up at odd times of the day and start talking, 
when I least wanted to do it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2268d753d40da5706bac4df6052d74b83a0e2ff7%2F0_0_1748_1272%2F1748.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2268d753d40da5706bac4df6052d74b83a0e2ff7%2F0_0_1748_1272%2F1748.png>
 Sam Farmer, founder of Sam Farmer cosmetics. Photograph: Matt Austin 
Say your script before you write it

Emma Zangs, co-founder of public speaking consultancy Metaspeech 
<http://www.metaspeech.com/>, advises entrepreneurs not to write and learn a 
script, because when spoken, the language won’t seem natural. “Stand up, say 
what you want to say, record yourself, watch yourself, and write it down,” she 
says. You can then change the structure of the presentation accordingly, and 
use notes as prompts when you stand up in front of an audience.

Think about body language

While the content of your presentation needs to be convincing, how you move is 
something your audience will notice before you’ve opened your mouth. Fidgeting 
or playing with a pen will distract people, says Zangs, a former choreographer.

“Any erratic movement is ‘noise’. [An audience] reads movement before hearing 
content. So if your movement is saying you’re anxious, that is the first thing 
the audience will have to deal with, before understanding what you’re talking 
about.”

Customise your presentation

If you’re pitching for money, make sure you tailor your presentation to each 
potential funder. For Raj Dhonota, an angel investor as well as an 
entrepreneur, not doing so is a turn off.

“Really understand what the [individual] investor is looking for, their 
motives and the types of things they want to invest in. If you’re pitching 10 
investors, you should have ten different presentations.” Dhonota says investors 
will have their own “hot buttons” – elements of a business they are very 
interested in – so presenters should try to hit these.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee96e4c5ee79d996b3872b1c829ce6a482e9a262%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee96e4c5ee79d996b3872b1c829ce6a482e9a262%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Raj Dhonota, angel investor. Photograph: Sam Armstrong 
Focus on preparation, not nerves

Geraldine Grandidier started children’s bookcase company Tidy Books 
<https://www.tidy-books.co.uk/> from her home in 2004, and has had to present 
to retailers, investors and to a large audience as part of a Goldman Sachs 
small business programme.

She says focusing on preparation, rather than anxiety about public speaking, 
is her way of dealing with nerves. “I realised that whether I’m nervous or not, 
I’m going to do [the presentation] anyway. It might make you procrastinate 
[instead of] preparing, so your attention goes on the nervousness.”

Mariana Marquez, who founded Metaspeech with Zangs, suggests recalling a 
moment when you felt total self-confidence, at work or home, just before you 
begin presenting. “We know what confidence feels like, it’s just we haven’t put 
it in the right place for pitching.” Thinking about that state of confidence 
will help your mind and body feel calmer.

Don’t sell: state the facts

“The more we stay with facts, the more we stay away from sales speak,” says 
Marquez. People can worry that talking about their achievements comes across as 
a brag, but in a pitch, the audience will want to know about a presenter’s 
background and how it might aid the future success of the product.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb641b10166b003797f878771c915edfe7dc0bdd%2F0_767_3328_3328%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb641b10166b003797f878771c915edfe7dc0bdd%2F0_767_3328_3328%2F3328.jpg>
 Tidy Books founder Geraldine Grandidier. Photograph: Nicola Tree 
Grandidier’s attitude is more about having confidence in her product than 
trying to push for a sale, so she approaches investors in a conversational way. 
“I tend not to say ‘this is what we need,’ so they don’t feel under pressure. I 
make it clear that I believe so much in what we do that regardless of the 
outcome, I’m going to carry on with my plans.”

If something goes wrong, keep going

Farmer recently presented to 1,500 marketing executives at a conference where 
technology let him down: his slides froze and a video wouldn’t play. This might 
be every presenter’s nightmare, but because he’d practised thoroughly, he was 
able to carry on regardless. Dhonota points out that listeners are likely to 
forgive tech failures or nerves.

“Audiences are accommodating. If you do lose track, take a deep breath, have a 
glass of water and be honest with the audience.” He also advises being prepared 
for something to go wrong and trying to be relaxed about it. “Then transition 
back to the message you want to convey,” he says.

Think substance over style

If you’re presenting to an investor, be aware that they might not want to sit 
through all of your beautifully-designed slides. “I won’t typically wait until 
the presentation is over, I’ll go straight to the areas I need to know 
[about],” says Dhonota. Similarly, entrepreneurs should expect an audience to 
ask detailed questions about sales forecasts, strategy or target markets. 
“People who come with great presentations but don’t understand the substance of 
what they’re presenting – that’s another alarm bell for me, he adds.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c37895f7b0ea56e085fdafbf8efd6a8aa04a1f1%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20steps%20to%20becoming%20a%20better%20presenter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2Fkia-fleet-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ften-steps-to-becoming-a-better-presenter-small-business-kia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c37895f7b0ea56e085fdafbf8efd6a8aa04a1f1%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Metaspeech founders, Mariana Lucia Marquez (left) and Emma Zangs (right). 
Photograph: Heiko Prigge 
Be yourself

Most entrepreneurs have a personal passion for the business they founded, and 
it’s important to let this come across. “People have an idea about how they 
should pitch, they look at pitches on the internet and try to replicate that,” 
says Zangs at Metaspeech.

“That’s a big mistake, because you are so unique, and that’s your value. 
People try to be Steve Jobs or Mark Zuckerberg, but that doesn’t work.” She 
advises people to ground their feet and let their upper bodies be flexible, 
which will help with confidence and authenticity.

Learn from your experiences

Farmer recalls a presentation where he challenged a retailer on how his 
products – which are gender-neutral – would sit on a shelf next to larger 
brands whose packaging used male and female stereotypes. “In a room full of 
people wanting to start a cosmetics business I talk about my journey and my 
reason for doing it, but in a pitching situation, you need to tell [retailers] 
how you’re going to market your product and drive people into their stores. Not 
everyone has the same view on things and you’ve got to learn from that 
experience.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>, sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 