
It’s easy to forget when reading about James Cameron’s latest ventures, from 
pro-environmental short films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/james-cameron-new-film-not-reality-tv-donald-trump-climate-change>
 to the10 million Avatar sequels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/james-cameron-four-avatar-sequels-planned-cinema-con-san-diego>
 we seem to have been waiting eons for, that this was once the youthful master 
of a kind of grounded, blue-collar futurism, a purveyor of science fiction able 
to conjure up stories in which ordinary people were often just one or two wrong 
turns away from encountering vicious, multi-jawed, acid-blooded beasties, or 
grim, unflinching red-eyed robots from the world to come.

James Cameron calls Donald Trump a 'madman' over climate change denial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/james-cameron-new-film-not-reality-tv-donald-trump-climate-change>
In many ways 1984’s The Terminator is now remembered best as one of the twin 
pillars of Arnold Schwarzenegger’s early Hollywood career. The hulking Austrian 
had previously been considered virtually uncastable thanks to his preposterous 
frame and thick Styrian accent, but along with John Milius, whose film Conan 
the Barbarian hit cinemas two years earlier, Cameron worked out that it was 
only necessary to find freakily eccentric roles for the oversized actor to 
introduce the world to perhaps the biggest star of the 1980s.

And yet The Terminator’s true quality, especially when taken alongside its 
sequel, 1991’s T2: Judgment Day, is the manner in which Cameron brought sci-fi 
to the people. The genre often ignores ordinary lives in favour of those lived 
by the elite, in the form of space explorers, scientists and engineers. 
Hollywood seems to think that those who have reached society’s top rung will be 
the most likely to discover that we are not alone in the universe, whether by 
encounter with aliens, AIs or evil cyborgs from the machine-ruled future. Yet 
Terminator’s real hero is Linda Hamilton’s Sarah Connor, a perfectly ordinary 
woman who time-travelling resistance fighter Kyle Reese (Michael Biehn) first 
meets in a nightclub.

Even in the film’s blockbuster follow-up, T2, Cameron is at pains to flag up 
the simple family life of the movie’s Oppenheimer figure, the Cyberdyne Systems 
engineer Miles Dyson. Whenever the movie’s themes become too fantastical, 
Cameron ruthlessly pulls them back down to earth, building brutal, humanist 
foundations for his futuristic castles in the air. So Dyson is first imagined 
as a figure of evil, the destroyer of worlds, until we visit his home and see 
his kids cowering at the thought of their daddy being hurt by Connor and her 
sinister and unwelcome compadres.

James Cameron tells CinemaCon crowd: four Avatar sequels planned, not three
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/james-cameron-four-avatar-sequels-planned-cinema-con-san-diego>
Cameron must have jumped at the chance to take on a sequel to Alien, Ridley 
Scott’s pioneering slasher flick in space, because the British film-maker’s 
1979 sci-fi horror appears to have been built with exactly the same toolbox. 
Influenced by the vision of grinding cosmic boredom presented in John 
Carpenter’s early 1974venture Dark Star 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSccwmmrS5A>, Scott gave us a crew of 
blue-collar workers who are clearly only in space for the money, the diametric 
opposite of the wide-eyed, cosmic Boy’s Own optimism of Luke Skywalker in the 
Star Wars films.

Aliens, Cameron’s 1986 sequel, presents another vision of ordinary people 
dealing with horrific circumstances, from Sigourney Weaver’s Ripley (forced 
back to the alien-infested planetoid in exchange for the return of her unfairly 
revoked flight licence) to the heavily armed but ultimately helpless grunts 
sent to take down the xenomorphs. This almost unspeakably extreme vision of 
humanity’s future in space is constantly grounded in the cold reality of life 
beyond the borders of our solar system, and is never allowed to slip into the 
realms of starry-eyed Spielbergian space fantasy.

Cameron did his best to inject Avatar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar>
, his 2009 blockbuster megalith, with the same icy reality-shot to the heart. 
It’s made clear in the opening scenes, as we meet Sam Worthington’s disabled 
soldier Jake Sully, that future Earth remains a place of poverty and shrinking 
resources, where the working-class are forced to waste their lives in military 
servitude. The tiny details that push Cameron’s players beyond the realms of 
caricature are in place for Weaver’s chain-smoking exobiologist Grace Augustine 
and Stephen Lang’s ruthless alien-hating bigot Colonel Quaritch. But it’s hard 
to conjure up a sense of spiky realism when your movie’s key characters are 
14ft-tall space elves with ethernet-capable tails, dragons for pets and 
symbiotic relationships with sentient, god-like megaflora.

The Terminator films and Aliens should be required viewing for new sci-fi 
film-makers, especially those hoping to break into the big budget arena. 
Without Cameron’s eye for detail and obsession with the lives of ordinary 
people, later movies in both futuristic sagas have languished in a sea of 
vapidity, unable to interest their audiences in protagonists with less apparent 
humanity than the merciless extraterrestrials and metal killing machines whose 
eternal task it is to hunt them down.

Compare Emilia Clarke’s version of Sarah Connor in last year’s Terminator 
Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/terminator-genisys-review-arnold-schwarzenegger>
 to the original, Hamilton-essayed iteration, or Christian Bale’s shouty take 
on John Connor with Edward Furlong’s vivacious turn as mankind’s teenaged 
sci-fi messiah. In each case, the recast versions are thinly drawn facsimiles, 
plastic people about whom we know next to nothing and who make us care even 
less.

Cameron has now been working almost exclusively on Avatar and its sequels for 
at least a decade, and one suspects it could easily be another 10 years before 
all four (yes, four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/james-cameron-four-avatar-sequels-planned-cinema-con-san-diego>
) new films find their way into cinemas. In his absence, no one has quite taken 
up the mantle – thoughNeill Blomkamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/mar/03/neill-blomkamp-chappie-video-interview>
 has at times essayed a similar street-level vision of things to come.

The Titanic director is only 61, but you wonder if his passion for the 
environment and fondness for the untapped possibilities of motion-capture tech 
will leave time for a return to the stark sci-fi of those early films. Like 
Furlong’s ever-optimistic Connor in T2, we can only hold out hope that good 
things eventually come to those who keep the faith.

 