
One of the most unchallenged, zany assertions during the war on terror has 
been that terrorists present anexistential threat 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/10/lindsey-graham-syria_n_5665831.html> 
to the United States, themodern state 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/7578.html>  
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/7578.html>and civilization itself 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A37954-2004Jul8.html>. This is 
important because the overwrought expression, if accepted as valid, could close 
off evaluation of security efforts. For example, no defense of civil liberties 
is likely to be terribly effective if people believe the threat from terrorism 
to be existential.


At long last, President Barack Obama and other top officials are beginning to 
back away from this absurd position. This much overdue development may not 
last, however. Extravagant alarmism about the pathological butself 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2014/09/16/the-islamic-state-will-probably-be-defeated-but-its-not-thanks-to-president-obama/>
-destructive 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-islamic-state-threat-is-overstated/2014/09/12/acbbebb2-33ad-11e4-8f02-03c644b2d7d0_story.html>
 Islamic State (Isis) in areas of Syria and Iraq may cause us to backslide.


The notion that international terrorism presents an existential threat was 
spawned by the traumatized in the immediate aftermath of 9/11. Rudy Giuliani, 
mayor of New York at the time,recalls 
<http://www.cnn.com/2005/US/07/22/giuliani/index.html?_s=PM:US> that all 
“security experts” expected “dozens and dozens and multiyears of attacks like 
this” and, in her book The Dark Side, Jane Mayer observed that “the only 
certainty shared by virtually the entire American intelligence community” was 
that “a second wave of even more devastating terrorist attacks on America was 
imminent”. Duly terrified, US intelligence services were soon imaginatively 
calculating <http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-88746975.html> the  number 
<http://www.upi.com/Top_News/2002/10/31/UPI-Special-US-al-Qaida-cells-attacked/75381036108294/>
 of trained al-Qaida operatives in the United States to be between 2,000 and 
5,000.

Also compelling was the extrapolation that, because the 9/11 terrorists were 
successful with box-cutters, they might well be able to turn out nuclear 
weapons. Soon it was being authoritatively proclaimed 
<http://www.amazon.com/Nuclear-Terrorism-Ultimate-Preventable-Catastrophe/dp/0805078525>
 that atomic terrorists could “destroy civilization as we know it” and that it 
was likely that a nuclear terrorist attack on the United States would transpire 
by 2014.

No atomic terrorists have yet appeared (al-Qaida’s entire budget in 2001 for 
research on all weapons of mass destruction totaled 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/atomic-obsession-9780195381368?cc=us&lang=en&>
 less than $4,000), and intelligence has been far better at counting al-Qaida 
operatives in the country than at finding them.

But the notion that terrorism presents an existential threat has played on. By 
2008, Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff declared 
<http://www.govexec.com/defense/2008/03/homeland-security-chief-looks-back-and-forward/26507/>
 it to be a “significant existential” one - carefully differentiating it, 
apparently, from all those insignificant existential threats Americans have 
faced in the past. The bizarre formulation survived into the Obama years. In 
October 2009, Bruce Riedel, an advisor to the new administration, publicly 
maintained 
<http://www.tv.com/shows/pbs-newshour/newshour-for-october-16-2009-1979112/> 
the al-Qaida threat to the country to be existential.

In 2014, however, things began to change.

In a speech at Harvard in October, Vice President Joseph Biden  offered 
<http://reason.com/blog/2014/10/03/truth-or-gaffe-biden-talks-terrorism> the 
thought that “we face no existential threat – none – to our way of life or our 
ultimate security.” After a decent interval of three months, President Barack 
Obamareiterated  
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/18/remarks-president-obama-and-prime-minister-cameron-united-kingdom-joint->
 this point at a press conference, and then expanded in aninterview 
<http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1502/01/fzgps.01.html> a few weeks 
later, adding that the US should not “provide a victory to these terrorist 
networks by over-inflating their importance and suggesting in some fashion that 
they are an existential threat to the United States or the world order.” Later, 
his national security advisor, Susan Rice, echoed the point 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/02/06/remarks-national-security-advisor-susan-rice-2015-national-security-stra>
 in a formal speech.


It is astounding that these utterances – “blindingly obvious” as security 
specialist Bruce Schneier puts it 
<https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2015/02/obama_says_terr.html> – appear 
to mark the first time any officials in the United States have had the notion 
and the courage to say so in public.

Whether that development, at once remarkable and absurdly belated, will have 
some consequence, or even continue, remains to be seen. Senators John McCain 
<http://dMcCainavidstockmanscontracorner.com/no-admiral-mccain-sectarian-stife-in-mesopotamia-is-not-an-existential-threat-to-arizona/>
 and Lindsay Graham 
<http://townhall.com/columnists/patbuchanan/2014/08/12/is-isis-an-existential-threat-n1877527/page/full>
 have insisted for months that Isis presents an existential threat to the 
United States. An alarmed David Brooksreported 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/shields-brooks-obamas-war-authority-request-ukraine-ceasefire/>
 that financial analysts have convinced themselves that the group has the 
potential to generate a worldwide “economic cataclysm.”

And General Michael Flynn, recently retired as head of the Defense 
Intelligence Agency, has beeninsisting 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/01/27/ex-pentagon-spy-chief-blasts-white-house-paralyzed-by-radical-islam.html>
 that the terrorist enemy is “committed to the destruction of freedom and the 
American way of life” while seeking “world domination, achieved through 
violence and bloodshed.” It was reported 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/01/27/ex-pentagon-spy-chief-blasts-white-house-paralyzed-by-radical-islam.html>
 that his remarks provoked nods of approval, cheers and “ultimately a standing 
ovation” from the audience.

Thus even the most modest imaginable effort to rein in the war on terror 
hyperbole may fail to gel.
 