
What a shame, Tesco and Unilever have declared peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 just as the great Marmite bust-up was getting exciting. In round two, Tesco’s 
chief executive, Dave Lewis, could have pointed out that Unilever has grown fat 
on profit margins of 14.9% and contrasted his old employer’s easy life with his 
own struggle to restore the supermarket chain’s margins to even 3%.

Or he could have alleged that Unilever’s strong-arm tactics were not simply 
currency-inspired but flowed from the weaker rate of sales growth revealed on 
Thursday in Unilever’s third-quarter trading update. Or he could have argued 
that the company was trying to milk the great British shopper to fund expansion 
in the emerging markets of Asia and Latin America.

Now will we be denied such entertainment. Mutual self-interest was always 
likely to prevail but Lewis’s determination to fight to the point where stocks 
of Marmite and otherUnilever <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> 
goods ran low is admirable. After sterling’s fall, there will many companies 
trying to force through unmerited price increases under the cover of Brexit.

It’s impossible to know how guilty Unilever was on that score. It would be 
silly to deny the company’s right to try to pass on some of the higher costs 
from commodities and dollar- and euro-denominated packaging, but an alleged 10% 
across-the-board price hike did indeed look too much, too soon. Lewis worked at 
Unilever for 27 years and will have a keen sense of when his former colleagues 
have overplayed their hand.

From a tactical point of view, he played a blinder in positioning Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> as stout defender of UK consumers’ 
interests. It makes a welcome change after his predecessors at the grocer spent 
a decade bleeding UK shoppers to fund their wasteful foreign adventures in the 
US, China and eastern Europe.

Who won the Marmite scrap? We’ll never be told the details of the settlement, 
but one suspects Tesco had the better of the skirmish because Unilever, a 
company that can come across as holier-than-thou at times, was ill-prepared for 
a dirty public fight. In the long run, though, Unilever’s profit margins will 
remain considerably plumper than Tesco’s.

Yet more blue-sky thinking over Murdoch revolt
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F047bcf1074f4529f34e9f29c096d38f5aedbfa69%2F0_149_2358_1415%2F2358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20played%20a%20blinder%20against%20Unilever%20in%20Marmite%20price%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20played%20a%20blinder%20against%20Unilever%20in%20Marmite%20price%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F047bcf1074f4529f34e9f29c096d38f5aedbfa69%2F0_149_2358_1415%2F2358.jpg>
 James Murdoch, Sky chairman. The broadcaster has vowed to engage with those 
shareholders who voted against the resolution. Photograph: David Moir/Reuters 
Dad controls 39% of the shares, so James Murdoch’s job as chairman of Sky is 
safe. Yet50.6% of outside shareholders want him out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sky-shareholders-revolt-against-james-murdoch-appointment-chairman-agm>
, a result more embarrassing than the satellite broadcaster (and Murdoch Jr) 
would have expected.

 Naturally, the company’s reaction was to blame the dissenters for being 
box-ticking ignoramuses. Sky, taking a well-trodden path, thinks US investors 
rely too heavily on proxy advisory agencies like ISS, which is wedded to the 
idea that a chairman should be independent, which Murdoch obviously isn’t. It 
promises to “engage” with the shareholders directly – shorthand for telling 
them why they are wrong.

Such a bull-headed reaction was predictable; and, yes, it would be a good 
thing if shareholders did not outsource their thinking to third parties. But 
Sky should look in the mirror. When contemplating a new chairman in January, 
the company didn’t bother to consult outside shareholders and instead presented 
the return of Murdoch as a done deal.

Given the history – the failed bid by News Corp (now 21st Century Fox) in 2011 
and the phone-hacking scandal at News International that contributed to 
Murdoch’s resignation from Sky – the lack of consultation was arrogant.

It is nice to know Sky is now in a mood to talk. But the right moment to do so 
was before the appointment was signed off. If Sky had done so, it might have 
converted a majority of independent shareholders to its way of thinking. The 
board brought the embarrassment on itself.

Two reasons to pause over Sir Philip Green de-gonging
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0c5737e17a944dfb187816a59f69adc0d0fdb3%2F0_33_1443_866%2F1443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20played%20a%20blinder%20against%20Unilever%20in%20Marmite%20price%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20played%20a%20blinder%20against%20Unilever%20in%20Marmite%20price%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Ftesco-unilever-marmite-price-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0c5737e17a944dfb187816a59f69adc0d0fdb3%2F0_33_1443_866%2F1443.jpg>
 Sir Philip Green gives evidence to the Commons business select committee on 
the collapse of BHS in June. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> was 
warned often enough that his knighthood would be at risk if he did not make 
good on his promise to “sort” the deficit in the BHS pension fund. Six months 
have passed since the chain collapsed so he can hardly be surprised that MPs 
have decided to vote on his de-gonging.

The honours forfeiture committee has the final say, but a recommendation by 
MPs would carry weight. It would also be popular. And, yes, if Green intends to 
shirk responsibilities to BHS pensioners that he has acknowledged, an honour 
for “services to retail” would be a nonsense.

But there are two reasons to hesitate at this time. First, are MPs sure the 
foot-dragging is all down to Green? ThePensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator, with whom negotiations 
continue about a settlement, is not famed for being speedy. Second, if Green is 
de-gonged, he might descend into an even bigger sulk and persuade himself he 
has been wronged. Better to tell him how much he owes, and set a deadline for 
payment – then decide on the knighthood.
 