
The flood of Chinese domestic blockbusters since the turn of the year is the 
strongest hint yet that the country is capable of being a Hollywood for Asia, 
and setting the cinema agenda for the region. But it's not the sole player 
around. At the end of March Thai audiences flocked to see horror comedyPee Mak 
Phrakanong <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IjBJ_M_myuA> – based on the Mae Nak 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mae_Nak_Phra_Khanong> folktale about a man who 
returns from war and unwittingly settles back in with the ghost of his wife, 
who has died in childbirth. It had the second biggest opening (21.2m 
baht/£478,000) ever for a Thai film, and with over 300m baht to date, it is 
closing on the all-time box-office record (550m baht) held by 2001's war epic
The Legend of Suriyothai <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXmpMe8dUJY>.

Thai audiences seem to love their history: their domestic all-time top 10 is 
dominated by it, including Suriyothai, theKing Naresuan series 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_Naresuan_%28film%29> – about to get its 
fifth instalment – and the1999 version of the Mae Nak legend 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xuvexm_nang-nak-1999-full-movie-p1-english-subtitle_shortfilms#.UW0Bdsrhfhx>
 (set in the late 18th/early 19th centuries).

But it's an irreverent take on tradition that has pulled people in for this 
one. Pee Mak Phrakanong, directed byBanjong Pisanthanakun 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1802294/> (also responsible for 2004 global horror 
hit Shutter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nwy8QSQliGk>), has been transformed 
from a lovelorn, nostalgic fable to a slick comedy that affectionately teases 
source material deeply embedded in the Thai collective consciousness. There 
have been about 30 film adaptations of the story – including animation, porn 
and, last year, a3D version <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xuRhdDeXPBU>.

As well as making the most of photogenic soap stars Mario Maurer and Davika 
Horne, Pisanthanakun's version adds copious pop-culture references – to the 
likes of The Last Samurai and David Blaine – and 21st-century snark, making fun 
of ineffectual monks. It's that injection of attitude that sets Pee Mak 
Phrakanong on a nimble contemporary tangent to the country's history-obsessed 
box office: it's easily outpaced second world war love storyKhu Kam 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IPM_YkZC9j8>, another national favourite that 
has seen multiple adaptations, which was released at the same time. "The reason 
Pee Mak makes crazy money is because it's loose and funny," writes theBangkok 
Post's Kong Rithdee <http://www.bangkokpost.com/print/344179/>, "and perhaps 
because it triggers this cool, shallow belief in the star-crossed lovers 
overcoming the odds set by ideology and death."

The film also seems to be a leap in quality for an industry that has struggled 
commercially over the last few years and only has a global presence thanks to 
its arthouse branch, led byApitchatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> and Pen-Ek 
Ratanaruang <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pen-Ek_Ratanaruang>. "The real good 
news is that Pee Mak is actually pretty good," writesWise Kwai, for Thai 
newspaper the Nation 
<http://www.nationmultimedia.com/life/Scaring-up-laughter-30203368.html>, 
"Distinguishing itself from most other Thai horror comedies, this one follows 
an actual script, which is smartly co-written by the director."

Thailand could make horror comedy – compared to the more baleful Japanese 
spookers, or the bloodier Korean variants – its speciality:Kao Krian 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fye4nLurQ1M>, about ghosts scuppering a 
property developer, andCountdown <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=heGqvVqNDFk>, 
by Pee Mak's youth-focused studio GTH, are just two of the recent films.

And it's a good time to export horror comedy, with a steady flow of it – 
especially from thezombie contingent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131768/zombieland> – having carved out 
a significant market for it in the last decade. Pee Mak could be too geared to 
Thai palates to travel all the way around the globe, but judging by a tight 
south-east Asian release schedule (Indonesia, 5 April; Hong Kong, 16 May; 
Cambodia, 23 May; Malaysia, 6 June; Singapore, 13 June; Taiwan, 6 August), it 
fancies its chance in the neighbourhood.

So it should: it draws on the vein of wronged-woman folklore that recurs 
throughout Asia (Ringu <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/121191/ringu> 
drew similarly on Japan'sYotsuya Kaidan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yotsuya_Kaidan> story), and there seems to be a 
strong appetite for horror in that part of the world. Indonesia is a prolific 
producer of films with the same fetid perfume of tropical morbidity that 
underlines the Pee Mak legend; Malaysia has been banging horror films out since 
a three-decade ban on the genre, for being contrary to Islam, was lifted in 
2003.

If Pee Mak can secure a release in the massive Chinese market, and stake a 
claim for the Thai industry, that would be fine news for film diversity in the 
eastern hemisphere.

• Next week's After Hollywood will ask whether it's crunch-time at the Chinese 
box office for Hollywood. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see 
covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 