
Soldiers stood watch on the streets of the Gambia’s capital, Banjul, on Sunday 
as most residents went about daily life despite concerns after the president,
Yahya Jammeh, said he would not accept election results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
 that would force him to step down after 22 years in power.

International and regional bodies and governments joined together over the 
weekend to call for a peaceful transition in the west African country of about 
1.9 million people.

Jammeh initially conceded defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 afterGambians voted in the president-elect, Adama Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
, on 1 December. However, Jammeh announced on Friday that he no longer accepted 
the election results and called for another vote, saying there were 
irregularities.

Has Africa had its fill of ‘strongmen’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/africa-strongmen-angola-dos-santos-zimbabwe-mugabe-uganda-sudan>
Jammeh’s ruling APRC party said on Saturday that it would follow up the 
president’s rejection of the election results by filing a petition to the 
supreme court. By law, election results can be contested up to 10 days after 
the vote.

Barrow said on Sunday that he had moved to a safe house for his security.


On the quiet streets of Banjul, there has been an increased military presence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/the-gambia-troops-deployed-to-streets-as-president-rejects-election-defeat>
 sinceJammeh made a televised appearance saying he rejected the election result.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
 Soldiers piled up sandbags and propped up machine guns on them but merely 
waved people through checkpoints.

In Serrekunda, the largest urban centre in The Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia>, armed soldiers stood on many street 
corners as people went about their business.

 Some Gambians thought that Senegal, the UN or other international powers 
should come to their aid.

“We don’t want him any more and we need help from the world because he said he 
won’t move,” said Maju Tunkara, a seller of phone credit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&media=>
Gambian president rejects election result in television address to the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Assan Njie, a former Jammeh supporter who changed his mind when the president 
threatened his Mandinka tribe, said people were too afraid to demonstrate. 
“They have guns. We don’t have guns,” he said. “We cannot go out because he 
will kill us.”

Halifa Sallah, a member of the coalition, said: “We must help Jammeh have a 
steady mind. Jammeh must decide on what side of history he wants to be.”

Barrow said on Saturday that Jammeh had no constitutional authority to 
invalidate the vote or to call for a new one. He called for a smooth transfer 
of power in the interest of the country’s peace and stability.

Senegal’s foreign ministry, the UN security council, west Africa’s regional 
bloc and the Gambia’s diaspora community have all called on Jammeh to respect 
the people’s choice and urged security forces and others to exercise restraint, 
remain calm and avoid violence.
 