
Recovering the figure of Fidel Castro from the legacy of the failures of 
communism, his own chequered reputation, the hours-long flights of rhetorical 
bombast and hipster beard is no easy task. One should situate him in the 
political and intellectual setting of 20th-century Latin American 
anti-colonialism rather than seeing him through the eyes of the 21st century.
Castro’s passing sees the departure of one of the giants of the cold war era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-obituary> and a 
revolutionary guerilla leader. He must be judged by the conditions that made 
him possible, but not indulged by them.He emerged victorious in a battle 
against a brutal and corrupt US-friendly regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/jan/08/fidel-castro-cuba-alistair-cooke?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 at a time when democracy had yet to reach most of the Caribbean or indeed what 
we now know of as the developing world. Although his brother Raul assumed 
presidential powers in 2006 before getting the official title in 2008, 
modern-day Cuba was built by Fidel Castro. The early years saw him embrace 
faraway Soviet Union and reject the United States next door, expropriating 
American assets in the name of his revolution. Castro’s alliance with Moscow 
brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962. Yet he survived – and 
thrived on – the brinkmanship, even if the world very nearly did not.

From there came a series of human rights abuses and restrictive policies that 
can never be excused or simply explained away as “a product of their time” or a 
“strategic necessity”. Sham trials saw hundreds of summary executions of 
political opponents. Despite studying law, the Cuban leader defended such 
actions claiming “revolutionary justice is not based on legal precepts, but on 
moral conviction”. Power flowed from the gun and a repressive state pointed 
weapons inward. Perceived cultural subversion was punished. Even in the 1970s 
Cuba was imprisoning homosexuals and long-haired hippies. But there also 
emerged a remarkable system of health care and education,producing life 
expectancies and literacy rates only found in far richer nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/aug/05/cuban-development-model>
. Castro’s international reputation was built partly on a foreign policy of 
supporting other third world struggles that, while not perfect, has certainly 
been far more impressive than most of the west.In 2010 Havana sent 1,200 medics 
to fight cholera in Haiti after an earthquake 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/cuban-medics-in-haiti-put-the-world-to-shame-2169415.html>
when everyone else had left.As Ebola ravaged west Africa, Cuba led aid efforts 
while the west fretted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/12/cuba-leads-fights-against-ebola-africa>
. Cuba gave shelter to those wanted by Washington. He visited Vietnam in 1973 – 
two years before the north drove out the US army. Castro never lost his touch 
for the dramatic: sending an expeditionary force across the Atlantic in 1975 to 
help save the communist regime of newly independent Angola from a South African 
invasion. None of this was forgotten. In Africa Castro’s fight against 
apartheid cast him as aliberation icon 
<http://qz.com/846337/cuban-leader-fidel-castro-was-a-liberation-icon-in-africa-and-remained-committed-to-the-continent/>
. In dealing with US criticism of his relations with Cuba, Nelson Mandela noted 
the counsel came from “people who supported the apartheid regime these last 40 
years. No honourable man or woman could ever accept advice from people who 
never cared for us at the most difficult times.”

Castro resigned before Barack Obama entered the White House. Serious illness, 
not US pressure, forced his departure. His revolution survived the fall of the 
Berlin Wall. When it collapsed so did Cuba’s Soviet economic lifeline. Havana 
sought and got help from ideological soulmates – notably Venezuela. Howeverby 
2008 the economy was in tatters: manufacturing had collapsed. Debt per capita 
was twice the Latin American average. 
<http://www.ascecuba.org/c/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/v17-mesalago.pdf> Waves 
of Cuban refugees, some of which Castro used for political propaganda, turned 
parts ofFlorida into Latin America <>. By the end of the century, more than 20% 
of 14 million Cubans worldwide lived outside the country. In death as in life, 
Castro divided opinion. For some he is a revolutionary hero who stood up to the 
US. Others see a dictator who trampled human rights. Repression lessened when 
he left the stage. Fewer dissidents get long-term jail time.But freedom of 
expression remains limited - only 25% of the Cuban population can get online. 
There is no independent media. Rival political parties are illegal. 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/11/fidel-castro-s-human-rights-legacy-a-tale-of-two-worlds/>
 Will history absolve Castro, as he once defiantly proclaimed? Mr Obama, who 
reopened embassies and facilitated greater trade, said he will be judged by the 
“enormous impact on the people and world around him”. The president elect, 
Donald Trump, wasn’t waiting for posterity’s verdict. The world, Mr Trump said, 
lost a “brutal dictator”. Given that the island’s standard of living will 
depend on the world’s largest market, it seems history may absolve Castro, but 
geography may not.
 