
It’s officially summer, which means that we can now look forward to long 
summer days where we can spend our weekends lazing in hammocks catching up with 
our favourite books (that’s the theory anyway... is anybody listening up there?)

 Summer was our best season: it was sleeping on the back screened porch in 
cots, or trying to sleep in the treehouse; summer was everything good to eat; 
it was a thousand colours in a parched landscape; but most of all, summer was 
Dill.


― Harper Lee, To Kill a Mockingbird  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/to-kill-a-mockingbird-12.html>

‘I do love the beginning of the summer hols,’ said Julian. They always seem to 
stretch out ahead for ages and ages.’

‘They go so nice and slowly at first,’ said Anne, his little sister. ‘Then 
they start to gallop.’

― Enid Blyton, Five Go Off in a Caravan  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-go-off-in-a-caravan-3.html>

Bookish things to do with children this summer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/18/bookish-things-to-do-this-summer-2016-lit-festivals>
 The crickets felt it was their duty to warn everybody that summertime cannot 
last for ever. Even on the most beautiful days in the whole year - the days 
when summer is changing into autumn - the crickets spread the rumour of sadness 
and change.


― EB White, Charlotte’s Web 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlotte-s-web.html> 

Do you remember the Shire, Mr Frodo? It’ll be spring soon. And the orchards 
will be in blossom. And the birds will be nesting in the hazel thicket. And 
they’ll be sowing the summer barley in the lower fields... and eating the first 
of the strawberries with cream. Do you remember the taste of strawberries?

 ― Sam Gamgee via JRR Tolkien, The Return of the King 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/return-of-the-king-8.html>


 Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing and the full, mellow flow of the 
beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear. It was a sweet substitute for 
the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which drowned that music about the 
Grange when the trees were in leaf.


― Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-59.html>

Top 10 dangers of summer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/07/top-10-dangers-of-summer>
 It was June, and the world smelled of roses. The sunshine was like powdered 
gold over the grassy hillside.

― Maud Hart Lovelace, Betsy- Tacy and Tib 

 Everything good, everything magical happens between the months of June and 
August.


― Jenny Han, The Summer I Turned Pretty 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/summer-i-turned-pretty.html>

 The castle grounds were gleaming in the sunlight as though freshly painted; 
the cloudless sky smiled at itself in the smoothly sparkling lake, the 
satin-green lawns rippled occasionally in a gentle breeze: June had arrived.


― JK Rowling, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-order-of-the-phoenix-10.html>

Top 10 long summer reads for children and teens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/21/top-10-long-summer-reads-for-children-and-teens>
Do you have a favourite summery quotation from children’s fiction? Tell us on 
Twitter@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> or by email to 
childrens.books@theguardian.com and we’ll add them to this list.
 