
Miitomo


Games are taking over the world. You might not have noticed because it hasn’t 
been via the usual route of airstrikes, democracy and IMF-administered debt 
slavery, but rather using soft power projected from an increasing multitude of 
digital devices. If it’s not your phone, it’s your smart watch buzzing to let 
you know it’s time to open another chest in Clash Royale, harvest crops in 
Township or submit yourself once again to the all-consuming maw of Candy Crush 
Saga, and that’s before you’ve started fiddling about with virtual reality 
visors. You may never be more than six feet away from a rat, but you’re never 
more than the thickness of your trouser pocket away from a game.

Why only Nintendo understands handheld gaming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/29/nintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita>
After a rough few years of seeing players slip off to buy competitors’ 
consoles,Nintendo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> would 
dearly like a bit of that intimacy for itself and has made the painful decision 
to expand into developing games not just for its own consoles but other 
people’s mobile platforms, too. The friendly Japanese megacorp’s first foray 
into app development arrived this month with Miitomo.

Cooking up a comedy cartoon simulacrum that acts as your online avatar, you 
are asked your opinions and encouraged to share them with your friends, 
harvesting their answers in return. The sorts of thing you’ll be discovering 
are all in the “what’s your favourite food?” grade of questioning, and it’s 
generally so afraid of offending anyone that its banality becomes an affront. 
The Mii characters are pretty funny, though, and will be familiar to anyone who 
owned a Wii, which unlike its big brother sold spectacularly well. It also 
benefits from Nintendo’s signature gentle playfulness and levels of technical 
polish, but it’s all so milquetoast. Added to the slightly cloying free-to-play 
mechanics that try to encourage you to spend real money, it’s as if Mario 
retired from plumbing and started selling timeshares. You’ve got to hope 
Nintendo has a couple more tricks up its sleeve to sustain interest until the 
launch of its new NX console, rumoured to be at the end of the year.

Overwatch

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4536f49fdc445d4e257b600070e284ad93802425%2F0_47_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20Nintendo%20goes%20mobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20Nintendo%20goes%20mobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4536f49fdc445d4e257b600070e284ad93802425%2F0_47_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Overwatch 
Conquering all does come with its downsides, and as playing gets more 
mainstream it inevitably draws levels of idiocy that are normally only 
inflicted on anyone who’s accidentally read a YouTube comment. Upcoming third 
person shooter-meets-MMO Overwatch is from the people who made World Of 
Warcraft, and therefore a) has a marketing budget big enough to make it totally 
unavoidable, and b) is laden with the sort of overbearingly heavy-handed fan 
expectation normally reserved for Star Wars films and football managers. So, in 
a game due out at the end of May that few people have actually played, there is 
already an online furore.

Overwatch preview: can Blizzard take eSports to console gamers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/08/overwatch-preview-blizzard-esports-console-gamers>
It’s been created by a preview video in which the victory pose of one of its 
characters, Tracer, is revealed. The pose shows her turning away from the 
camera in a coy, bum-emphasising gesture that some fans felt was too 
suggestive. When developer Blizzard hastily removed the clip, an equally 
vociferous campaign erupted to demand it reinstate the pose, citing all sorts 
of unswervingly dull ephemera (There are bums in other games! She’s wearing 
clothes! Freedom of speech!), the likes of which you’d scarcely think would be 
worth people’s time and energy. Although lacking the brain-melting 
ridiculousness of Gamergate, the result is still an impasse as loud as it is 
stupid and a storm of publicity that’s exactly the sort of thing enormous 
marketing budgets are supposed to generate. Somewhere, men in suits are 
cautiously upping sales forecasts in multi-page spreadsheets, and when they 
think nobody’s looking, quietly rubbing their hands together.

Now Play This

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67833407a024c4edae60e6ec9b52043afc595434%2F0_81_4501_2701%2F4501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20Nintendo%20goes%20mobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20games%3A%20Nintendo%20goes%20mobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fmiitomo-overwatch-and-the-month-in-games-april-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67833407a024c4edae60e6ec9b52043afc595434%2F0_81_4501_2701%2F4501.jpg>
 Gamers at Now Play This at the London Games Festival, 2016. Photograph: 
Matthew Chattle/Rex 
13 fascinating games from the Now Play This Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/04/13-fascinating-games-from-the-now-play-this-festival>
The London games festival, which ended last week, again featured Now Play 
This, a three-day extravaganza of “outsider” games created by architects, poets 
and theatre folk. Massive Battleships was a team-based version of the hoary old 
game of near-chance, that needed “flags, binoculars, cunning and teamwork” to 
win. Snakebite was a room-scale multiplayer reimagining of Snake, the game 
Nokia made ubiquitous by including it on all its indestructible early mobile 
phones. Snakes were projected on to the floor and steered by stamping on pedals 
rather than poking numbers on a telephone keypad the size of half a brick.

None of this is likely to spark any fresh consumer crazes, but it’s 
fascinating what you can create with imagination, a little technology and a 
group of likeminded people. While some snakes filled rooms, others had more 
modest dimensions. Also shown at the event was Cobra Club, a game of simulated 
phallic photography in which your protagonist stands naked in front of a 
bathroom mirror, digitally recreated mobile in one hand and, ahem, cobra in the 
other. Its wry underlying commentary on mass surveillance was expressed via 
various circumferences of dick pic. Intrepid PC-owners can try it out in the 
privacy of their own homes completely free.

 