
Charlie Kaufman’s stop-motion puppet movie Anomalisa (which he co-directed 
with Duke Johnson) isa satire of the human condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/07/charlie-kaufman-and-puppet-midlife-crisis-movie-anomalisa>
 with the unsettling quality of a lucid dream. It is a masterpiece that 
inhabits its own spectrum of strangeness. Choosing to be amused or scared by it 
is the same as choosing between the blue pill and the red pill in the Matrix.

David Thewlis on Anomalisa: 'The world is enormously dangerous and scary'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/david-thewlis-on-anomalisa-the-world-is-enormously-dangerous-and-scary>
David Thewlis voices Michael, a depressed motivational speaker who has checked 
into a bland hotel in Cincinnati, Ohio, to give a speech to his fans. The hotel 
is called Fregoli’s, named after theFregoli delusion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fregoli_delusion>, a condition in which 
sufferers believe that everyone they see is the same person in some sort of 
disguise.

Michael broods guiltily over an ex-girlfriend in the city whose heart he broke 
many years before, but makes an emotional and sexual connection with a besotted 
admirer staying at the same hotel, there to hear him speak. She could be an 
anomaly in his world of dullness and alienation (“Everything’s boring,” he 
mutters) and her name is Lisa, hence the film’s title.

Jennifer Jason Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/11/jennifer-jason-leigh-five-best-moments>
 is Lisa’s voice. But everyone else’s is that of Tom Noonan – Noonan’s sonorous 
male voice pours out of everyone’s mouth, including that of his wife.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20'The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Kaufman%20on%20Anomalisa%3A%20%27The%20internet%20is%20a%20terrible%20danger%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fcharlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview&media=>
Charlie Kaufman on Anomalisa: ‘The internet is a terrible danger’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/08/charlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
Is Michael having a breakdown? Away from home, in the lab-like conditions of 
an identikit hotel, he embarks on a long spasm of panic; he sees everyone 
surrounding him to be eerily the same, with the same humanoid-puppety faces. 
Like a creepy community in anIra Levin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/nov/15/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
 thriller, all the people around Michael seem – to him – to have the same 
uncanny, unknowable agenda: a secret that he’s not in on.

As for Michael himself, desire – grimly, naggingly unappeasable desire – 
remains at the core of his consciousness: desire for something new, something 
else, something that will bring him happiness at last. He journeys onward, in 
his cramped and miserable way, believing that the terrain will change, and the 
sky will change, and the answer to life’s riddle or equation will be extruded 
from the dull matter of existence.

Charlie Kaufman: 'The world is terrifying and destructive and dehumanising and 
tragic'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/16/charlie-kaufman-anomalisa-interview-donald-trump>
But it never is. Differentness morphs diabolically into the same thing, over 
and over. And yet for all this,Anomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> is a very funny, fascinating, even 
weirdly sensual film. It explores the interesting but little-discussed 
fascination of the faceless corporate hotel – how its anonymity is liberating 
and exciting.

Michael and Lisa have one of the most stunningly real sex scenes I have ever 
seen on film;the fact that they are puppets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/subversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton>
 makes them more uninhibited participants than flesh-and-blood actors could 
have been.

There is a tinge of greatness about Anomalisa, and about Charlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/mar/08/charlie-kaufman-on-anomalisa-the-internet-is-a-terrible-danger-video-interview>
 himself.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 