
The too-early death of the architect Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
 will not obliterate the floating curve from the language of architecture. She 
was not the first to love its beauty – see the work ofEero Saarinen 
<http://www.ultraswank.net/architecture/eero-saarinens-jfk-terminal/>, not to 
mentionOscar Niemeyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2014/jun/12/bend-it-like-niemeyer-10-of-the-best-buildings-in-brazil>
, the first king of the curve. Now, the seemingly impossible aerial curve and 
the twisted-Pringle roof line with which Hadid is identified is too loved a 
form to disappear from the lexicon. They were not her invention, but they are 
now identified with her uncompromising, demanding vision and it shapes the way 
we in our turn see them: seductive, voluptuous, speaking of an uncorseted ease.

The Iraqi-born designer brought her gender and her outsider status – or, as 
she preferred, her on-the-edge perspective – to a profession dominated by 
European men. But she was also both a mathematician and an extraordinary artist 
(as her paintings, like those for one of her first award-winning but unbuilt 
projects,the Peak Leisure Club 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/the-peak-leisure-club/>, demonstrate). 
She had the theory and married it to an extraordinary creativity.

But as much as those qualities, it was her flamboyant personality that 
identified her with the rejection of what in the public imagination seemed to 
be an architectural aesthetic dominated by hard, straight lines and harsh, 
unfriendly materials. Before Hadid, architecture was a story of order and 
control, of spatial dominance guided more by a utilitarian virtue. In the terms 
of William Hogarth’sAnalysis of Beauty 
<http://archiv.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/artdok/1217/1/Davis_Fontes52.pdf>, it had 
fitness and propriety but not that vital quality of intricacy, none of what he 
called the “wanton kind of chase” of the serpentine curve.

That was not, or not only, the failure of the almost entirely male 
architectural imagination. The task of turning Hadid’s ideas into reality 
ultimately depended on exploiting the power of computers to engineer them for 
which her senior partnerPatrik Schumacher 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/people/patrik-schumacher/> should get much of the 
credit. It was finding the algorithms that freed the three-dimensional curve 
from the constraints of gravity – “I can now believe in buildings that can 
float,” she said in one early interview – that made construction possible.

But architecture is also about selling your way of seeing; that was Hadid’s 
strength, in failure as in success. Ruing the failure of Welsh politicians to 
understand her Cardiff opera house scheme, another of the unbuilt projects of 
her early years, she beguilingly explained how she wanted her architecture 
to move through space, and to shape how space makes people move. Her best work 
was never only about the building, but about where and how the building was to 
be.

Although she often rebelled against admirers who wanted to use her gender to 
define her, these early works in particular feel as if they could only be the 
product of a particularly female imagination. She was a trailblazer for her 
gender – the first woman to winthe Pritzker prize 
<http://www.pritzkerprize.com/2004/announcement>, the first woman to win, as an 
individual, Riba’s gold medal. She was rightly irritated to be described as a 
diva, as if leading male architects were entitled to make extreme demands on 
construction techniques or run over budget, while a female architect who did 
the same was behaving irrationally. But by the end, she began to defy sexism 
the way her buildings defied gravity: the appeal of her work lies partly at 
least in the sense that they embody a unique female personality. She will leave 
an extraordinary architectural legacy, and a feminist one too.
 