
Do you remember those advertisements on bus stops featuring a school uniform 
wearing monkey? Although the ads aimed to encourage children to eat a high 
sugar cereal after school, theAdvertising Standards Authority (ASA) has just 
ruled that they are not "socially irresponsible" 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/ukpress/article/ALeqM5hXmQqOgbbKetv4FXDPrBkHGxa09A>
.

Kellogg's is the company behind the ads for the high sugar Coco Pops cereal. 
The cereal, which is 35% sugar, is too unhealthy to be advertised on children's 
TV or be served in schools. However, the bus stop posters mean it was seen by 
plenty of children on their way to and from school.

Many parents and food campaigners contacted the Children's Food Campaign 
<http://www.sustainweb.org/childrensfoodcampaign/> to complain about the ads 
and they generated considerable discussion on social networking sites, twitter 
and netmums.

Objections to the ads fell into three main areas:

• The high sugar content of Coco Pops makes the cereal unsuitable to be 
promoted as an after-school snack. Some parents preferred their children to eat 
tasty, low-fat and low-sugar alternatives such as fruit and did not wish to be 
undermined by the Coco Pops ads.

• There were objections by some to the Coco Pops monkey being in a school 
uniform. It was felt to be a subliminal attempt by Kellogg's to associate their 
high-sugar product with an institution that may have healthy school status.

• Kellogg's are partners in Change4Life 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Change4life/Pages/Default.aspx>, a department of health 
initiative to reduce obesity, including by promoting sugar swaps. This 
encourages children to swap a high-sugar/fat snack with a healthier one. The 
Coco Pops ads conflict with this approach.

Unlike the ASA, the department of health seems to be taking our concerns 
seriously. They have told us they are planning to hold a meeting with Kellogg's 
to discuss our concerns that the ads contradicted messages to eat healthier 
snacks and reduce sugar intake.

Children's Food Campaign supporters were also inspired to come up with their 
own slogans for the bus stop posters 
<http://www.sustainweb.org/childrensfoodcampaign/coco_pops/>. We were so 
impressed with the slogan "Do they give a monkey's for children's health?" that 
we sent the author a genuinely healthy, after-school snack that even the monkey 
would enjoy: a banana, with its own protective carrying case so it won't get 
squashed on its journey to and from school!

Childhood obesity is a serious problem facing children and we all need to play 
our part to encourage a healthier diet. But we're still waiting for Kellogg's 
to show they're willing and able to play a responsible role.

• Follow jackieschneider <http://twitter.com/jackieschneider> on Twitter
 