
In November 2008, when Satoshi Nakamoto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/07/satoshi-nakamoto-denies-inventing-bitcoin>
 first announced his “new electronic cash system” on an out-of-the-way mailing 
list for people with an interest in cryptography, he was pretty much ignored. 
Two days passed before he even got a reply. How attitudes would change. His 
invention wasbitcoin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/09/the-guardian-view-on-bitcoin-the-ghost-behind-the-machine>
 and it would soon catch a collective nerve.

Craig Wright: scepticism surrounds bitcoin inventor's identification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/bitcoin-craig-wright-satoshi-nakamoto-inventor-scepticism>
First to be struck by the bitcoin bug were the computer coders. It solved a 
problem that had stumped them for more than 30 years: how can I send cash 
directly to you over the internet, just as I would hand cash to you if you’re 
standing next to me, without using a middle man? It was known as the problem of 
“double spending <https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Double-spending>”. Here was the 
solution.

Economists were smitten too. Here was an alternative to government currency, 
an open-source money systemwithout the backing of the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/30/bitcoin-beyond-reach-of-government>
, yet freely given value by the market.Activists, libertarians, anarchists and 
others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2013/mar/22/bitcoin-currency-video>
 who believe the reaction of governments to the financial crisis exacerbated 
the inequality we endure today loved it. Here was a money central banks 
couldn’t print or “quantitatively ease”.

Speculators adored this new digital asset class, which could make you rich 
overnight: at its peak, a bitcoin would be worth as much as an ounce of gold. 
Entrepreneurs saw the new opportunities it was creating. And the young loved it 
too: here was a form of wealth beyond the comprehension of the old, who seemed 
to own everything else. And we must add criminals to its devotees. An anonymous 
electronic cash system meant illegal goods,drugs especially, could now be 
bought and sold online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/30/life-after-silk-road-how-the-darknet-drugs-market-is-booming>
.

Behind it all was this anonymous figurehead, Nakamoto. But who the hell was 
he? The bigger bitcoin grew, the more people wanted to know. He has a Japanese 
name, a German email address and writes in almost impeccable British English. 
In the 80,000 words (more than a book’s worth) he wrote online as bitcoin was 
developed, I found just one spelling mistake (ideological was spelt 
“idealogical”).

At one stage he was estimated to have a net worth over a billion dollars. He 
was an immensely talented coder, a skilled mathematician and a meticulous 
writer, with an immense knowledge and ability in a wide range of subjects. He 
was also extremely practical. How could anybody with this much ability not be 
known to the world? He was even nominated for a Nobel prize.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbitcoin-currency-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F3%2F22%2F1363962749664%2FBitcoin-developer-Amir-Ta-005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bitcoin%3A%20the%20fastest%20growing%20currency%20in%20the%20world%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbitcoin-currency-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bitcoin%3A%20the%20fastest%20growing%20currency%20in%20the%20world%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmar%2F22%2Fbitcoin-currency-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F3%2F22%2F1363962749664%2FBitcoin-developer-Amir-Ta-005.jpg>
Bitcoin: the fastest growing currency in the world - wideo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2013/mar/22/bitcoin-currency-video>
I wrote a book on bitcoin <https://unbound.co.uk/books/bitcoin> and became as 
obsessed as anyone. I concluded – wrongly, it now seems – that it was an 
American coder by the name ofNick Szabo 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/17/business/decoding-the-enigma-of-satoshi-nakamoto-and-the-birth-of-bitcoin.html?_r=0>
. There was just too much evidence to ignore. Szabo had developed the immediate
precursor to bitcoin, called bitgold 
<https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/nick-szabo-bitcoin-founder-satoshi-nakamoto-breaks-silence-tweet/>
; his and Nakamoto’s writing styles were very similar; they kept the same 
working hours; the timing was right – Szabo was “between projects”; he had the 
required cultural background among a renegade band of90s coders known as the 
Cypherpunks <http://www.cybersalon.org/cypherpunk/>; and he was the only man 
alive I could find who had the talent and the specificity of knowledge to put 
something like bitcoin together.

Nakamoto had a habit of leaving little Easter eggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/02/12-greatest-video-game-easter-eggs>
. My favourite was the birthdate he left on his registration form at theP2P 
Foundation <http://p2pfoundation.net/> – 5 April 1975. In 1933 that was the 
date President Roosevelt signed executive order 6102, which made itillegal for 
Americans to own gold <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=14611>. 
But Nakamoto gave the year of his birth as1975 – the year it became legal for 
Americans to own gold again 
<http://goldcoin.org/numismatics/the-great-confiscation-gold-ownership-was-illegal-in-the-usa-from-1933-to-1975/165/>
. If that all sounds too tenuous to be credible, you don’t know Nakamoto.

Yesterday Craig Wright, a computer programmer from Australia, confessed to 
being Nakamoto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/bitcoin-craig-wright-satoshi-nakamoto-inventor-scepticism>
. Wright’s was not a name that had been previously had much association with 
bitcoin. But last year emailswere leaked 
<https://www.wired.com/2015/12/bitcoins-creator-satoshi-nakamoto-is-probably-this-unknown-australian-genius/>
 that outed Nakamoto as Wright, working in collaboration withDave Kleiman 
<http://gizmodo.com/this-australian-says-he-and-his-dead-friend-invented-bi-1746958692>
, an American forensic computer investigator who died in 2013.

As soon as I read the story, everything slotted into place – for me at least. 
Neither Wright nor Kleiman could have done it alone, but between them they had 
the knowledge and skills. Wright was the ideas man, Kleiman did the heavy 
lifting.

Is Blockchain the most important IT invention of our age? | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/24/blockchain-bitcoin-technology-most-important-tech-invention-of-our-age-sir-mark-walport>
From my own cursory analysis, Wright’s writing and punctuation do not 
completely tally. Wright is more prone to errors than Nakamoto. But it seems 
the deskbound Kleiman, who’d published numerous books, wrote most of Nakamoto’s 
80,000 words, while his Florida location tallies with the timing of Nakamoto’s 
posts. One way to achieve further confirmation would be to compare Wright’sC++ 
coding style 
<https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/C%2B%2B_Programming/Programming_Languages/C%2B%2B/Code/Style_Conventions>
 to bitcoin’s early development, but this is a skillset that is beyond my own.

Doubts will always remain. My view is that it no longer matters, if it ever did
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/09/bitcoin-creator-satoshi-nakamoto-craig-wright>
. If we had known Nakamoto’s identity from the onset, bitcoin could not have 
taken off to the same extent. But he left the project in 2011, when a bitcoin 
was worth just a few dollars (it is over $440 today), and the identity of those 
who put it together no longer has much bearing on its success. If Nakamoto were 
to dump all his coins on the market at once, there would be liquidity issues, 
but no more likely to happen than Bill Gates selling his Microsoft shares in 
one lump.

In the grand scheme of things, what is perhaps more significant than bitcoin 
is the tech behind it. Theblockchain – a corroboration system – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/24/blockchain-bitcoin-technology-most-important-tech-invention-of-our-age-sir-mark-walport>
 has a myriad of potential applications that go way beyond an alternative cash 
system.

Satoshi Nakamoto – Craig Wright, Dave Kleiman and collaborators (and I include 
Nick Szabo) – you have all given the world something wonderful, something that 
has changed many lives for the better and will go on to change many more. May 
you get the recognition you deserve, but may you also now be left to privately 
pursue your activities in peace.
 