
The Sun spent more than £96,000 publishing a pullout poster backing Brexit, 
forcing its parent company, News GroupNewspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, to register as an official 
leave campaign group with the Electoral Commission.

The poster featuring a union flag and the words “BeLEAVE in Britain”, which had
appeared on an earlier front page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/14/the-suns-brexit-call-is-unsurprising-but-it-has-symbolic-significance>
, was published just a week before the referendum on Britain’s membership of 
the EU.

Editorially the paper was one of the most vocal backers of leaving the EU, but 
the double-page spread fell under the Electoral Commission’s rules regulating 
campaign spending because it was designed to be displayed, even though the 
money was reported as a payment from NGN to itself.

How newspapers covered Brexit – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gallery/2016/jun/24/newspapers-brexit-front-pages-eu>
A spokesman for NGN said: “As part of its campaign for Brexit the Sun ran a 
pullout poster. In accordance with Electoral Commission guidelines it 
registered as a participant and has declared the cost.”

The cost of the poster made NGN one of the largest spenders among 48 groups 
who had their campaign finances revealed by the Electoral Commission on 
Tuesday, all but two of which spent under £250,000. The remaining 28 groups who 
spent more, including the official leave and remain campaigns – Vote Leave and 
Britain Stronger in Europe – will not have their spending published until next 
year.

The only organisations on the list spending more than NGN were the pro-remain 
Global Britain Limited, and leave backers Grassroots Out, Veterans for Britain 
and fashion student Darren Grimes, who ran the youth-focused group BeLeave.

Both BeLeave and Veterans for Britain received donations from Vote Leave 
meaning the money did not count towards the £7m spending limit as long as the 
campaigns did not coordinate their spending.

BeLeave received £625,000 in three payments from Vote Leave on 14, 17 and 23 
June, while Veterans for Britain received £100,000 in May. The bulk of spending 
by both groups went on targeted digital advertising across social media and 
other outlets.

Facebook was also listed as one of the main recipients of spending, with 
direct payments to the social media firm totalling almost £340,000 out of just 
under £3m spent on advertising.
 