
The best way to understand a vast metropolis is to explore it on foot, which 
is why I walked three southbound miles along the gently curving A105 from 
Enfield Town to Palmers Green during the morning travel peak. It is one of a 
matrix of main roads linking a constellation of small town centres in this part 
of suburban north London. Its route passes a weave of residential streets, the 
“set back” frontages of large interwar homes and intermittent parades of shops. 
There is a flow of motor vehicles, sometimes smooth, sometimes fast, sometimes 
slow. The carriageway is broad. It is also a bit of a battleground.

The root of the hostilities can be traced to March 2014, when Labour-run 
Enfield Councilsecured 
<http://www.enfieldindependent.co.uk/news/11065009.Enfield_wins_Mini_Holland_bid/?ref=mr>
 around £30m from Transport for London (TfL) to make the borough more conducive 
to cycling. Itsbid 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Enfield-Mini-Holland-Bid-Document-2-MB.pdf>
 for a big piece of Boris Johnson’s “mini-Holland” fund, created to encourage 
bicycle travel in Outer London, was distinctive for its emphasis on installing 
dedicated bike lanes on those very Enfield roads currently dominated by cars. 
The council’s plans, augmented with further funds, aren’t all about these 
segregated tracks - there will also be investment in quieter cycling routes. 
But, as CouncillorDaniel Anderson <https://twitter.com/cllranderson>, cabinet 
member for environment, puts it: “We don’t want to push cyclists down side 
streets. We need cycling to become a genuine direct alternative for making 
trips across the borough.”

Road space reallocations often trigger strong emotions and for at least two 
years theCycle Enfield <http://cycleenfield.co.uk/> programme has been doing 
just that. The A105 goes by different names at different points, but the most 
prominent is Green Lanes. A pressure group, Save Our Green Lanes (SOGL), has 
fought furiously against the segregation scheme, including (unsuccessfully) 
through the courts. It says it does not oppose cycle lanesper se, but that 
digging one down either side of the A105 will, even after the inevitable 
disruption caused by building them, increase road congestion, worsen air 
quality as a result, lessen road safety and damage local shopkeepers due to new 
parking restrictions.

This directly contradicts all that Anderson contends. “The thing that 
increases congestion is cars,” he says, and reiterates the familiar case that 
cycling is agreen and healthy transport mode 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/about-cycle-enfield/> which, if facilitated, can 
persuade drivers to switch modes 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/about-cycle-enfield/>. He also disputes the argument 
that cycle lanes are bad for local businesses. On the contrary. Citing Enfield 
Town, for which cyclising plans are still evolving, he says that traders are 
losing custom there because of the rise of online shopping and that Cycle 
Enfield should be seen as integral torevitalising the borough’s retail areas 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/about-cycle-enfield/> by making them more pleasant 
places to be. “It’s about more than just cycling,” he says. “The world is 
changing and we need to respond.”

It certainly is about more than cycling – that is, perhaps, the one point on 
which all protagonists in this conflict might agree – and it is also about 
change. Anderson stresses that Enfield’s population, like that of Greater 
London in general, is growing very fast. More people means more pressure on 
transport networks, and he argues that facilitating cycling will help relieve 
it. The SOGL group not only disagrees, it alleges that its concerns have been 
blithely ignored by a council intent on pushing its programme through, 
regardless of the findings of its own consultations.

Dig deeper and other lines of division emerge. A very striking one is age. The 
overall response to the council’s consultation from Enfield residents suggested 
that opinion was finely balanced: 45% of respondents said they supported the 
plans, compared with 44% who said they didn’t, with 9% saying they supported 
them “partially” (see paragraph 1.5 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/A105-Consultation-Report.pdf>
). But an age breakdown of the findings shows that 62% of over-60s said they 
did not support the scheme compared with 56% of under-60s who said they did (
see paragraph 1.8 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/A105-Consultation-Report.pdf>
).

It’s also been suggested, perhaps mischievously, that attitudes to the scheme 
substantially reflect residents’ political views. The part of the A105 affected 
falls within the parliamentary constituency ofEnfield Southgate 
<https://www.walkingclub.org.uk/maps/uk-parliament/E14000692/Enfield-Southgate>
, famous for unseating one time glamour boy Tory Michael Portillo in Tony 
Blair’s landslide Labour general election victory in 1997. This high tide mark 
event demonstrates that the area leans towards the Conservatives, a party that 
tends to woo private motorists. The current MP, David Burrowes, conducted his 
own “referendum” of residents about the cycling plans, whichproduced 
<http://www.davidburrowes.com/content/cycle-enfield-referendum-0> huge “no” 
majorities. I tried this Tory voter theory out on Councillor Anderson, but he 
declined to subscribe. A representative of SOGL rubbished it resoundingly: “We 
are a non-party group, and I have stood in elections for the Liberal Democrats.”

What about the council’s view that promoting more cycling will bring economic 
benefits in Enfield? Cycling activists point to studies from other parts of the 
world that contradict shopkeepers who fear that fewer cars means lower sales, 
but an assessment for the council by consultantsRegeneris 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/A105-Economic-Impact-Assessment.pdf>
 took a cautious view (although it diplomatically dismissed a gloomy survey 
conducted by shopkeepers themselves as likely to be unscientific). An 
independentair quality impact assessment 
<http://cycleenfield.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/A105-Air-quality-assessment.pdf>
 too produced a nuanced outcome. If a 2.5% reduction in traffic was assumed as 
a product of the the Cycle Enfield plans going ahead, concentrations of carbon 
dioxide would be expected to fall on the A105 overall. However, it also 
anticipated “some increases in [traffic] queue length and delay time, leading 
to increases in concentrations at junctions” under this scenario.

The A105 changes are now well advanced. What will the final outcomes be? SOGL 
is gamelyclaiming <http://saveourgreenlanes.co.uk/> that “our local area is 
already suffering”. I asked if members of the group would show me in person 
where individual problems had occurred, such as the loss of roadside parking 
and adjustments to bus stops, but in a sign of how mistrustful the atmosphere 
around the issue has become, they declined. Their usual spokesperson even asked 
not to be named in this article, notwithstanding that individual having 
previously been quoted by name elsewhere, including in the Guardian. The 
reasons given were that SOGL members were convinced I am a “cycling journo” who 
would depict them as a bunch of Nimbys. (No amount of reassurance could 
dissuade them from this view, even though I’m not a “cycling journo” or even a 
cyclist and have been subjected to extraordinary online attacks by cycling 
evangelicals for daring to suggest that elements of Johnson’s cycling strategy 
might be less than perfectly divine).

My long walk to Palmer’s Green took the best part of two hours. During that 
time I saw only three people on bikes, two of them young women who were using 
the pavement rather than the road. Cyclists on pavements can madden pedestrians 
when they are treated as slalom poles on crowded streets, but in these 
instances that problem could not arise as there was only me on foot and the 
cyclists were some distance away. Moreover, I could appreciate why those 
particular cyclists had chosen not to use the road. The motor traffic was 
coming thick and pretty fast. The appeal of a separated lane on such a route 
was easy to see.

But it cannot be assumed from this that the opening of lanes will 
automatically greatly increase the number of cyclists using the A105 or any 
other main roads in Enfield, at any time of day. Much publicity has been 
focussed on the amount of commuter cycling in the mornings on the segregated 
route on Blackfriars Bridge, yet a TfL source informs me that counts being made 
on other parts of Johnson’s superhighway network reveal more tumbleweed than 
cyclists on it, including at busy times of day. Statistics provided by TfL 
indicate that more users of the Underground than buses may be trying out 
cycling as an alternative and the transport body has no data with which to 
measure the robustness of claims that bespoke cycle infrastructure encourages 
switching from cars.

When I reached Palmer’s Green I met Clare Rogers, local resident and mainstay 
of a group calledBetter Streets for Enfield <http://betterstreets.co.uk/>. It 
used to be called We Support Enfield Mini-Holland, but Rogers said that half 
its members weren’t actually cycling campaigners and it decided to embrace 
broader aims: “I think when it becomes cyclists against the rest it becomes 
very fraught, very angry. That’s not what we’re about. For me, the big things 
are children, social justice and public health. Cycling just comes into all 
those things.” She’s a big advocate of play streets - the one she lives in 
becomes one once a month - and argues that car-dominated roads are inherently 
socially divisive, lessening human contact within neighbourhoods. Her advocacy 
of independent “active travel” for children, whether to school or for fun, is 
based on studies showing that it can enhance their overall wellbeing.

Meeting Rogers made a nice change from encountering cycling zealots on social 
media, whose sanctimony, viciousness and weird conspiracy theories - these from 
the core of aprivileged social stratum 
<https://twitter.com/AdamBienkov/status/817028007806246913> - never cease to 
amaze. Daniel Anderson, conscious that London’s cycling demographic isdominated 
by white middle class males 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/12/why-are-london-cyclists-so-white-male-and-middle-class>
, says that Enfield’s policies “are absolutely not about that lobby”, and are 
designed to make Enfield better for all. He also rejects accusations that 
consultation feedback has been ignored, saying that the plans for Enfield Town 
are being radically revised in the light of it. He thinks the majority of 
residents have open minds and will make judgements based on results.

What might those be? Resistance to the mini-Holland scheme in Enfield seems 
different fromthat in Waltham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/nov/07/waltham-forest-mini-holland-row-politics-protests-and-house-prices>
, where, as one Labour politician has put it, long-standing residents see it as 
“a cypher for gentrification”. Each different phase of Enfield’s programme is 
being done separately, and it will be quite a while before it’s all complete. 
The council expects its cycling journey “modal share” to increase from 0.7% to 
5% by 2020. See you in three years.
 