
Everybody happy now? The best part of £100m scattered to the winds 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-12453774>. Government ministers fighting 
among themselves like rats in a sack. To those still inclined, the opportunity 
of genuine voting reform squandered for a generation.

For what? Democracy? The right of people to "have their say"? Across the land, 
happy Britons are settling down, mug of warm tea in hand, grateful for the 
opportunity to confirm through universal franchise what anyone with at least 
half a foot in the real world already knew. That they couldn't give a monkey's 
about thealternative vote <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av>.

Let's just step back for a second. Put down the dead babies 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/steven-baxter/2011/02/voting-system-baby-gets>
 and free the MPs from their chain gang. What did we achieve on Thursday? All 
that bile and bitterness; spilt political blood and squandered public treasure. 
I'll tell you. Sweet AV.

This was, we were told, a process whose primary function was to bring the 
public closer to the politicians. One that would begin to bridge the chasm that 
opened up over theexpenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>. Short of giving every 
member of parliament a £1m raise, a free duck house and life membership of the 
Jedward fan club, it's difficult to think of a better way of embedding the 
impression our political class is on an all-expenses trip to a different planet.

When Gillian Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/28/general-election-2010-gordon-brown>
 unleashed her litany of white working-class betrayal, did no one notice 
Labour's failure to implement voting reform was absent? When demonstrators set 
half of central London aflame in the wake ofNick Clegg's tuition fees U-turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/nov/15/lib-dems-tuition-fees-u-tutn>
, was it not significant they'd remained safely tucked up in bed when Tony 
Blair did the same over PR?

Of course it could be people were desperate for electoral change, yet finally 
baulked at the prospect of their vote being processed by a £150m super computer 
– "count my ballot please Hal"; "I'm sorry, I don't think I can do that Dave". 
With the Olympics beckoning, perhaps the prospect of the sneak who came third 
snatching the gold medal triumphed over their yearning for fair parliamentary 
representation. Or perhaps, just perhaps, the 99% of the public who told the 
last Mori issue survey they weren't interested in electoral reform were 
actually telling the truth.

This was not a referendum. It was a charade. An orgy of constitutional 
self-indulgence. I understand there were people who cared passionately about 
this issue. But now there is no dispute. They were the minority. A pitifully 
small minority, if those who didn't bother to deliver one vote – never mind 
one, two or three – are included.

This was not democracy. Democracy is about accountability and 
self-determination, about real people having a real say about the issues that 
matter to them. It's not about dragging the majority of your fellow citizens 
over the electoral coals just to prove a point. Let's return to the baby and 
the chain gang. Both campaigns will be pilloried: "no" as the knaves, "yes" as 
the fools.

Both are nothing more than patsies. Much better to claim it was the baby on 
the grassy knoll than face the truth. Nobody wanted AV. Nobody asked for AV. Of 
the two governing parties, neither even used the letters "AV" in their 
manifesto. As Clegg admitted in a moment of uncharacteristic candour, "AV is a 
miserable little compromise 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/i-want-to-push-this-all-the-way-declares-clegg-1950668.html>
". A miserable little compromise with one objective. Locking him into a dance 
of death with David Cameron.

And what a dance. As we survey the barren wasteland of the 2011 referendum 
campaign, remember this. What you see before you is the price of Clegg's soul. 
Remember, too, that Cameron was prepared to gamble his entire premiership on 
this withered landscape. And had he lost, his own MPs would have made him pay 
the ultimate price. EvenEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> became captivated by its 
grotesque beauty. He could have sat the whole thing out. Instead, he became 
trapped in no man's land, isolated from his own army, an army that stubbornly 
refused to march in step.

So here we sit. The status quo neither bloodied, nor bowed. With precisely 
nothing to show for our exertions. Except a choice. We can always pretend it 
didn't happen. Pledge to never again let AV intrude upon polite conversation. 
Or we can learn. And make a different pledge. A commitment that next time we 
ask the voters to sit in direct judgment, it will be on an issue that they, not 
their political masters, have decreed. Somebody won theAV referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum> of 2011. And somebody 
lost. When you find out who it was, let me know.
 