
It is drizzling and cold in Salford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/salford>, 
but a class of eight- and nine-year-olds from Lewis Street school in Patricroft 
are buzzing as their teachers lead them down the streets of terraced houses 
between classes. They stride through a park, dodging an abandoned car seat, to 
swipe lanyards against three street sensors before returning to lessons.

 It’s called “going fobbing” in Salford – walking or cycling to sensors on 
lampposts all round the city and swiping them to get points. It’s part of a 
health and community building scheme calledBeat The Street 
<https://www.beatthestreet.me/UserPortal/Default> (BTS) and it’s taken Lewis 
Street by storm. Pupils and parents have travelled 3,288 miles (scoring a 
mighty 66,490 points) on fobbing expeditions over two months to outwalk all 
Salford’s other 23 participating schools and 13 community groups.

 Patricroft is a struggling area, where unemployment is high and the number of 
people describing their health as bad or very bad is well above the national 
average. But there’s a clear sense of purpose here as the warmly wrapped 
youngsters line up to swipe their fobs near the school. “I did all the 50 fobs 
in three days over half term,” says one little girl excitedly. Her teacher 
reveals that this previously inactive child now goes to an after-school sports 
club almost every night of the week.

 The school has undergone a mini revolution. A detailed and constantly 
changing online content plan, social media and incentives such as tickets to 
local amenities, keep the players engaged – not to mention the sense of 
competition.

 Rachael Hall, the school’s sports coach, says: “I’ve never known anything 
like it – children are going out walking every evening and weekend. Teaching 
assistants take the children out at lunchtime three times a week and take whole 
classes out twice a week. I’ve had parents telling me how happy they are to be 
spending time with their children going fobbing rather than sitting in front of 
the TV.”

 She says a little boy with cerebral palsy with walking problems has made big 
progress because of the peer pressure to participate in BTS. Another pupil has 
become so fascinated by the project that he has taken to writing down where he 
has been, which has improved his school work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgame-community-health-beat-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cfcbc0a4cbd5009cfe9d552c6f8e033ae6892e%2F0_86_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20game%20improving%20a%20community%E2%80%99s%20health%20without%20them%20noticing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgame-community-health-beat-the-streets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20game%20improving%20a%20community%E2%80%99s%20health%20without%20them%20noticing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgame-community-health-beat-the-streets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cfcbc0a4cbd5009cfe9d552c6f8e033ae6892e%2F0_86_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 ‘I’ve never known anything like it – children are going out walking every 
evening and weekend.’ Photograph: Beat the Streets 
This is exactly what Beat the Street founder and Reading GP, Dr William Bird 
is after – galvanising whole communities, with the health message almost a side 
issue. He says: “I want to get the whole of the UK walking, starting with the 
cities where it is easiest. Walking creates vibrancy – take it away and you 
create a flat and dying city full of underpasses where no one wants to go.”

Intelligent Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, which Dr Bird 
set up to operate BTS, works by turning a town or community into a game where 
people of all ages earn points by walking, cycling or running between sensors 
placed on lampposts. In the process, no-go areas are opened up to pedestrians, 
people have fun together and develop healthier habits.

 Jennifer Dodd-Power, engagement manager for BTS in Salford, has convinced 
5,500 people to take part so far – (though not a patch on Belfast which boasted 
36,000 players). She says: “People are not seeing BTS as exercise but as a fun 
way of going out with the family. We are not saying to people ‘go and join a 
gym or get yourself to an exercise class’ we are saying ‘go out and meet your 
friends’.”

 Part of her work has been to link fobbing with community events – such as the 
Eccles Makers Market – where BTS participants could gain extra points on the 
day of the event at a temporary sensor set up nearby.

The two-month games are preceded by three months’ community engagement, where 
people such as Dodd work with GPs, local NHS organisations, community groups, 
sports clubs and schools to build up the enthusiasm. Then the activities 
requested by a community are set up, whether that be women-only bike riding 
classes in Asian-dominated Handsworth in Birmingham, or just the incentive to 
walk into town for previously immobile elderly members of Banham Drive, 
Sudbury. There elderly residents walked more than 1,500 miles together and have 
now set up organised walks.

Debt, homelessness, domestic violence: the GP practice acting as a one-stop 
shop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/sep/21/debt-homelessness-domestic-violence-gp-practice-acting-one-stop-shop>
 BTS is proving successful in health terms according to results from 53,000 
participants. During the game phase the proportion of adults meeting the 
physical activity guidelines increased from 46% to 57% and the percentage of 
adults reported walking on five to seven days per week increased from 47% to 
61%.

 Government research shows that those who fulfil the recommendation of 150 
minutes per week of exercise willimprove 23 different long-term conditions 
including diabetes and dementia 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/353384/Everybody_Active__Every_Day_evidence_based_approach_CONSULTATION_VERSION.pdf%20https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/353384/Everybody_Active__Every_Day_evidence_based_approach_CONSULTATION_VERSION.pdf%20https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/353384/Everybody_Active__Every_Day_evidence_based_approach_CONSULTATION_VERSION.pdf>
, reduce the risk of developing several cancers and even stimulate the brain 
chemicals that reverse ageing, says Bird.

 Intelligent Health’s research shows that people are put off by the NHS’s 
health messages, because they feel they are being lectured. So the year-long 
health programmes targeting areas of deprivation put the emphasis on enjoying 
activity with others – and last year 175,198 people travelled more than 1.5m 
miles with BTS in 21 areas.

 The scheme is not working for everyone, though. Head of Lewis Street School, 
Gemma Lavelle, says: “Even though BTS has raised our activity levels we know 
that some parents have not signed up. What do we have to do to get some of the 
really hard-to-reach families involved?”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 