
Last week I met up with Geoff Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoff-dyer>, who’s been called the greatest 
writer of nonfiction of current times. It was a historic juncture that, even by 
England’s dismal summer standards, was perfectly poised in the doldrums. We 
were in the aftermath of the Brexit result, with most of London still walking 
around like extras in a zombie movie, it had been raining for about a year, and 
the England football team was just about to record arguably its most 
embarrassing defeat in our lifetimes.

We’ll be lucky to complete a set before either our time on court runs out or 
our time on Earth

In other words, the conditions could not have been more Dyeresque. As his new 
collection,White Sands: Experiences from the Outside World, 
<http://www.canongate.tv/white-sands-printed-paper-cased.html> once again 
proves, no one does disappointment with quite as much passion as Dyer. He calls 
the Brexit vote “cataclysmic”. “You know in films when a relationship or a bank 
job or something is going wrong and someone utters the line, ‘Well now you’ve 
really gone and done it’? It’s just like that.”

He loathes Cameron, he says, but not nearly as much as he loathes Johnson. As 
for Corbyn, he says he’s always been unelectable. “He’s got that grim quality. 
The grim left. A better leader could have made a greater difference. If the 
other Miliband had won, we wouldn’t be in this pickle.”

He is a poet of deflation, an intrepid explorer of comedowns and comeuppances. 
Inan essay following in the footsteps of Paul Gauguin in Tahiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/apr/27/features.magazine27> – land of 
vast skies and translucent seas – he notes: “We are here to be bored rigid and 
then to wonder how it was possible to be so bored… We are here to go somewhere 
else.” In Tahiti, he’s always on the wrong island at the wrong time. In another 
piece entitledForbidden City 
<http://harpers.org/archive/2014/12/forbidden-city/>, he describes his 
location, Beijing, as a “nightmare city”. And vainly searching for the northern 
lights in Norway’s Arctic Circle, his mood is darker than the unending darkness 
he finds in this “godforsaken hellhole”.

Reading Dyer, you always feel that he wants to go somewhere else, even when he 
arrives at the place he most wants to be. There’s a wonderful restlessness 
about his perspective and a limitless capacity for unearthing new levels of 
discomfiture and dejection, not least for brilliantly comic effect.

But Dyer rejects my reductive take on his “grass is always greener” approach, 
rightly pointing out that he also describes several moments of transcendence in 
the book. And in any case, he says, echoing a point he makes emphatically in
White Sands: “My capacity for disappointment is the reflection of how I still 
have such high hopes – I believe in the promise of the world. The fact that I’m 
disappointed so often means that I’m not resigned.” Or as he writes with 
existentialist urgency: “When I am no longer capable of disappointment the 
romance will be gone: I may as well be dead.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc9eca162f146369cc25675837b05b08adaf650%2F2601_0_2997_3746%2F2997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc9eca162f146369cc25675837b05b08adaf650%2F2601_0_2997_3746%2F2997.jpg>
This is all music to my ears, because I seek nothing less than the 
reaffirmation of Dyer’s high hopes and non-resignation by bringing him another 
life-enhancing dose of disappointment, this time in the less exotic setting of 
the Queens Park tennis courts in north-west London. I’ve been friends with Dyer 
for more than 20 years, but it’s only in the last five or six that we’ve been 
tennis partners. At first, when we began playing, he regularly beat me, but 
then time’s cruel pendulum reversed the momentum and, not to put too fine a 
point on it, thereafter the spoils of victory were all mine.

Our games, it must be said, have been fought in an uncharacteristically 
generous spirit – I say uncharacteristic because, aside from being one of the 
most acerbic literary critics around (not for nothing was he shortlisted forthe 
Hatchet Job of the Year award 
<http://www.theomnivore.com/hatchet-job-of-the-year-previous-years/> in 2012), 
he also proudly boasts the kind of parsimony that had him travelling by student 
rail card long after his legitimate studies came to a close.

Or perhaps that was just one of his jokes. With Dyer you can never quite tell. 
He’s an accomplished ironist, constantly challenging a literal reading of the 
world with an armoury of quips, exaggerations and provocations. It’s not to 
everyone’s taste, especially as he combines the irony with a formidable 
learning, an array of intimidating references (Adorno, Nietzsche, Walter 
Benjamin), and is capable of a witheringly dismissive tone in person every bit 
as much as on the page.

But for me, he is the finest comic writer England has produced since Martin 
Amis in his pomp, particularly when it comes to the extended riff. His failed 
attempt to write a biography of DH Lawrence,Out of Sheer Rage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/18/book-beach-out-of-sheer-rage-geoff-dyer-sam-jordison>
, is a fabulously funny deconstruction of literary ambition and crippling 
lethargy. There are passages within it in which Dyer is reduced to tears of 
frustration and the reader to tears of laughter. And amid his new collection, 
which features some inspired and surprisingly moving art criticism, he twice 
had me laughing so uncontrollably that I had to stop reading.

I wondered, for someone whose subjects have included such potentially 
mirthless material as the dead of the Somme 
<http://geoffdyer.com/2011/08/24/the-missing-of-the-somme-2/> and Stalker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/06/andrei-tarkovsky-stalker-russia-gulags-chernobyl>
, the most solemn work of the solemn Russian film director Andrei Tarkovsky, 
what role humour performed for him?

I would dearly like to read a book by Dyer on tennis, but not nearly as dearly 
as I’d like to beat him on court again

“I’m never happier when writing,” he says, “than when I see gags taking shape 
– ideally gags at my own expense. What I like is the shuttling back and forth, 
serious into comedy and vice-versa, ideally, both in the same sentence, or even 
simultaneously. The best jokes are always ideas in miniature.”

The only child of a sheet-metal worker and a school dinner lady, Dyer grew up 
in a terraced house in Cheltenham and passively took the “exam education 
escalator” up to Oxford. His proud parents were baffled when he then ended up 
living on the dole in Brixton, “not understanding that this meant I had become 
sort of middle-class”. Since then, he’s produced a range of genre-busting 
novels, nonfiction, essays and hybrid works that, as an oeuvre, is close to 
unclassifiable. One theme that does run through his work, however, is the way 
that places affect us. “The thing I love is when I get a sense of history 
manifest in geography,” he says. “Time manifest in place.” He attributes this 
realisation to the effect of visiting the monument commemorating the missing of 
the Somme. “From that moment on I was conscious I was interested in places 
where time has stood its ground.”

But conspicuously not standing its ground among his work is a book on tennis. 
Perhaps because it’s not a team sport and it involves a great deal of thought, 
or at least psychology, tennis is a game that has attracted many writers, but 
not much of a literature.

Amis, once a keen player, used to write about it 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1994/09/05/tennis-personalities>, and the 
late David Foster Wallace, a one-time tennis prodigy, produced several 
memorable essays that have now been collected into a book,String Theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/24/string-theory-david-foster-wallace-tennis-review>
. Dyer, who once named Foster Wallace as his “literary allergy”, had been 
planning to write a book on tennis. “Then I didn’t, for whatever reason,” he 
says innocently, “and wrote the Tarkovsky book [Zona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/05/zona-geoff-dyer-tarkovsky-stalker>
] instead.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06cf862c3013ceccad16b49031997826485467a4%2F0_157_1747_1048%2F1747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06cf862c3013ceccad16b49031997826485467a4%2F0_157_1747_1048%2F1747.jpg>
 Geoff Dyer, far left, during his Brixton dole era in the 1980s. Photograph: 
Courtesy: Geoff Dyer 
For whatever reason? Could that decision have been entirely unrelated to the 
downturn in his on-court tennis fortunes vis-a-vis me? I don’t want to labour 
the point, obviously, but as Dyer admits, at one point he was so dejected with 
his tennis after another spannering at my hands that he accidentally, and all 
too symbolically, left his racket on top of rubbish bin.

So it’s not inconceivable that my gain was literature’s loss. This is a shame, 
in one respect, because I would love to read a book by Dyer on tennis. He says 
that one of his limitations as a novelist is that he doesn’t “notice stuff”. 
Think of Updike, he says: “By the time he’d cycled up here, as I did, he would 
have noted a chapter’s worth of material.”

But, as he says, if he’s specifically addressing a work of art, a photograph 
or a book, he has an acute perception of what he sees. I could imagine him 
turning that critical gaze to the beauty and torment of tennis, its geometric 
choreography and pitiless drama.

Yes, I would dearly like to read such a book, but not nearly as dearly as I’d 
like to beat Dyer again on the court, this time with theObserver photographer 
in attendance. And my, how attendant she is, about four feet behind my serving 
stance. I’d like to see Andy Murray keep his cool under that kind of scrutiny.

Naturally, Dyer arrived with his excuses prepared. He has always been keenly 
aware of the threat of injury or illness, though even he was surprised when he
suffered a mini-stroke <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n07/geoff-dyer/diary> a few 
years ago, a scary but treatable episode he records with typical wit in the 
book. He writes, as an aside, in a fascinating essay called Pilgrimage on 
seeking out Theodor Adorno’s wartime home in Los Angeles: “I’m as strong and 
supple as a pane of thin glass, I’ve got too many ailments – left shoulder, 
left elbow and left wrist, in fact the whole of the left arm.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0bf97593c18ddc3a98c1b08e74ec4d5c9890ef3%2F0_362_5165_3099%2F5165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0bf97593c18ddc3a98c1b08e74ec4d5c9890ef3%2F0_362_5165_3099%2F5165.jpg>
 Andrew Anthony on court with Dyer. 
Dyer now lives with his wife, the art curator Rebecca Wilson, in LA, where he 
teaches English at the University of Southern California. This means that we 
only get to play on visits, but he had sounded boastfully butch in emails from 
the US, crowing about the “excellent shape” of his game.

Now as we sit in the tense atmosphere of the locker room – OK, on a bench 
outside the park cafe – the language has returned to a more familiar mixture of 
hypochondria and backtracking. “That flight from LA kills me,” he complains. “I 
got a cold as soon as I got home. As ever, I have what Trevor Brooking used to 
call ‘little niggles’. The groin is a bit suspect.”

Enough. We stride out, gladiator-style, on to the suddenly sunbaked court and 
go through the tentative warm-ups of two men well-launched, as Amis put it, on 
the bullet train of their 50s. No one wants to risk a snapped achilles or 
pulled hamstring with too active a bout of stretching at this stage. Then 
finally the match – best of three sets – begins. After almost half an hour, the 
score is only 3-1, and it feels to me, drenched in sweat and breathing like I’m 
in need of a respirator, that we’ll be lucky to complete a set before either 
our time on court runs out or our time on Earth. Worse than that, it’s 3-1 to 
him.

“I’m incredibly competitive in all sports,” he tells me, a little 
unnecessarily, “in a way that is so mystifying to my wife because she grew up 
playing the violin and piano. I’ve always been like that. I really like to win 
at sport.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc38a3577aaa281282742b1091f97518a907e03a1%2F0_281_5039_3022%2F5039.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20return%20of%20Geoff%20Dyer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20incredibly%20competitive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fgeoff-dyer-on-tennis-court-white-sands-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc38a3577aaa281282742b1091f97518a907e03a1%2F0_281_5039_3022%2F5039.jpg>
Well, don’t we all, but at the moment I’m doing what none of us much enjoys at 
sport: losing. The problem is Dyer is one of those players who enjoys chasing 
lost causes. He notes about Gauguin that “he never lost the sustaining artistic 
belief that he could turn everything that happened to him to creative 
advantage”.

He could no less accurately have written those words about himself, as a 
writer who often recycles his worst experiences to glorious effect. I was 
realising too that the same could be said about his dogged retrieval of what 
should, by all aesthetic rights, have been my winners. At one point, my spirit 
is almost broken after he just manages to lay his racket on another scorcher 
and up the ball arcs towards my side of the net at the perfect height to be 
dispatched by an easy smash. Except I fluff it off the frame and it disappears 
on to the next court. Dyer lets out a condescending laugh, before adding sotto 
voce: “As they say, always make your opponent play one more shot.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Has he, like some showboating footballer, turned it on for the cameras? All I 
can say is that, perhaps purely by coincidence, when the photographer has 
packed up and gone, his game begins to decline and I nick the set 6-4. The 
second set goes exactly the same way. By its completion we are moving with all 
the swiftness and grace of car accident victims. He is, as ever, a gracious 
loser, merely noting that he’ll have to trust me not to indulge in what he 
indelicately refers to as “auto-fellatio”.

He writes that Gauguin “snivel-boasted” that he was down, but not yet 
defeated. With the indefatigable Dyer, defeat is always a kind of victory, if 
not in life then most certainly and enjoyably in art.

White Sands is published by Canongate (£16.99). Click here to order a copy for 
£15.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409485/s/white-sands/>
 