
For many, Abel Ferrara will forever be the master provocateur, synonymous with 
drugs, booze, and tortured Catholicism, obsessed with documenting man’s 
existential bad faith and tortured quest for redemption, a laBad Lieutenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/05/1>. For certain film scholars 
however, Ferrara is a kind ofVan Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh>, a truly visionary artist 
whose genius is destined to be ignored in his own lifetime. To understand the 
esteem in which he is held, we should begin at the beginning. Helpfully, this 
month Arrow Films presents a rerelease DVD package of The Driller Killer, 
complete with a newly recorded audio commentary by Ferrara, an in-depth 
interview conducted by Brad Stevens (author ofAbel Ferrara: The Moral Vision 
<https://www.fabpress.com/books/abel-ferrara-paperback.html>), and a visual 
essay on Ferrara by Alexandra Heller-Nicholas, author of Cultographies: Ms. 45.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9e2e17aca95480c2ef1096c0e41a202235464cc%2F233_0_1453_1080%2F1453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9e2e17aca95480c2ef1096c0e41a202235464cc%2F233_0_1453_1080%2F1453.jpg>
 Essentially a sweetheart who just wants a little peace and quiet … Reno at 
work. Photograph: Arrow Films 
If Ferrara is indeed a Van Gogh, then The Driller Killer is his Potato Eaters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jan/11/art> – an early work that 
displays, in rudimentary form, all the groundbreaking innovation of the mature 
works. Ferrara’s second feature (the first being the exquisitely titled 9 Lives 
of a Wet Pussy), The Driller Killer found notoriety in the UK as one of the 
original “video nasties”, and cinemas country-wide were urged by certain 
newspapers to “BAN THIS FILTH”. If we leap forward to the films of the last 
decade – Mary,4.44 Last Day on Earth 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/23/movies/444-last-day-on-earth-with-willem-dafoe.html>
 andPasolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/11/abel-ferrara-pier-paolo-pasolini-death-interview>
 in particular – with their open approach to storytelling, layering of factual 
footage and fictional scenes, and profoundly humanist attitude, we can see just 
how misunderstood a film The Driller Killer was on its release.

Ferrara himself has spoken of the film not as an exploitative horror flick but 
as a comedy, and there is certainly a playful attitude towards horror movie 
cliches. On more than one occasion, bloody expectations are built up with 
handheld point-of-view shots set to an ominous soundtrack, to end in a 
“dramatically” anti-climactic fashion. Ferrara’s comedic intention is further 
indicated by the fact that the protagonist, Reno (played by a leonine Ferrara 
himself), is – when not drilling into the skulls of down-and-outs – essentially 
a sweetheart who just wants a little peace and quiet in which to complete his 
painting.

The lack of conventional establishing shots and a disjointed editing style, 
combined with the often outrageous amount of blood, which spurts fountain-like 
from Reno’s victims, suggest that what we are witnessing could be a fantasy, 
that – like Martin Scorsese inTaxi Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/taxi-driver> – Ferrara is walking the line 
between actual narrative events and the protagonist’s perception of them, 
filtering reality through a deranged psyche.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07b0f9a7bd9e76b7c52c5aad7fa4cf7c877aadf6%2F238_0_1455_1080%2F1455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07b0f9a7bd9e76b7c52c5aad7fa4cf7c877aadf6%2F238_0_1455_1080%2F1455.jpg>
 Fantasy levels of blood … The Driller Killer. Photograph: Arrow Films 
In The Driller Killer we can see how the intricate weaving of fact and fiction 
that make Ferrara’s later works so powerful was born of necessity. According to 
legend, the film-maker came up with the film’s story to make use of footage he 
had shot for a documentary on New York winos that never came to pass, and 
incorporated those authentic street scenes into The Driller Killer. This 
technique would evolve over the decades into a new form acknowledging no 
distinction between the fictional scenario of a given film and footage of real 
events and real people, as evidenced in Mary, with it’s testimony from 
real-life religious scholars, and 4.44 Last Day on Earth, with real news 
footage of religious gatherings around the world and TV interviews with 
environmental experts.

No script existed during the shooting, and the performers were simply given a 
scenario and told to improvise

Ferrara’s John Cassavetes-esque insistence on the authenticity of performances 
also had it’s beginnings in The Driller Killer. By all accounts, no script 
existed during the shooting, and the performers – including many non-actors – 
were simply given a scenario and told to improvise. The Reno character was 
based on a painter acquaintance of Ferrara, who made use of the friend’s 
apartment and paintings in the film. In 2014, Willem Dafoe’s performance as 
Pasolini would be similar immersive, with the actor wearing Pasolini’s clothes 
and surrounding himself in the study scenes with the books he owned. In The 
Driller Killer, Ferrara’s distrust of fakery went as far using a real drill-bit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab4d8acaef6281f451659347c6871e5fef72c0d%2F245_0_1447_1080%2F1447.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Driller%20Killer%20and%20the%20humanist%20behind%20the%20blood%20and%20sickening%20crunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fthe-driller-killer-humanist-abel-ferrara-moral-choices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab4d8acaef6281f451659347c6871e5fef72c0d%2F245_0_1447_1080%2F1447.jpg>
 Walking the line between actual events and the protagonist’s perception … Reno 
claims a victim. Photograph: Arrow Films 
Perhaps to properly grasp Ferrara’s worth, we need to suspend our usual 
expectations of the medium – to takewhat Brad Stevens calls the “perceptual 
challenge” that the film-maker offers us 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/comment/bradlands/self-made-men>
, and entertain the possibility that the apparently chaotic fragmentation of 
storytelling and character is an intentional aesthetic choice, designed to deny 
us our usual complacent attitude. Ferrara’s refusal to spoonfeed his audience 
can then be understood as part of a deeply humanist moral sensibility. The very 
form of the films is expressive of existential freedom, the idea that – Stevens 
again – “our ‘self’ exists only to the extent that it is revealed in the course 
of performative interactions with other individuals … we are actually creative 
beings capable of inventing and reinventing ourselves from moment to moment”.

 * The Driller Killer Steelbook and DVD 
<http://www.arrowfilms.co.uk/shop/index.php?route=product/product&keyword=driller%20killer&product_id=864>
 is now available.  