
It’s a bright Thursday morning in Oxford, and the Thirsty Meeples 
<http://www.thirstymeeples.co.uk/contact> cafe on Gloucester Green market is 
thrumming with activity. As we sit at a sun-warmed window table, the maitre d’, 
Gareth, introduces himself and presents a list of recommendations.

First, he suggests Forbidden Desert 
<http://boardgaming.com/games/board-games/forbidden-desert>. It is not a 
cocktail. “You have all crash-landed in a desert where you are searching for a 
lost civilisation,” explains Gareth, who sports a purple Thirsty Meeples “Game 
Guru” T-shirt. “A sandstorm hits, and you have to find all the pieces of a 
mythical flying ship to escape.” Next he offers upEscape: The Curse of the 
Temple <http://boardgaming.com/games/board-games/escape-the-curse-of-the-temple>
, in which we’ll become “Indiana Jones-type people” who have to flee a 
crumbling ancient tomb. “Or,” Gareth says, “how about fighting fires?”. Last, 
he recommendsFlash Point 
<https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/100901/flash-point-fire-rescue>, in which 
I, my wife and two sons would rescue people from a burning building. Pull 
enough of them from the flames and we all win. But if a certain number are lost 
to the inferno, we lose. We choose Flash Point.

As we battle the conflagration, a 30-something couple next to us race against 
each other to construct railway routes in the Netherlands. Elsewhere, a young 
woman and two children play foxes raiding a farmyard. A pair of millennials 
create cartoon sushi meals depicted on playing cards. And a lone man from 
Bournemouth sits before an elaborate board, racing against the clock to defend 
a 1920s city from Lovecraftian horrors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f51e91c61ec247d975b90675bcc8b157ca7fc1a%2F0_0_4829_3484%2F4829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f51e91c61ec247d975b90675bcc8b157ca7fc1a%2F0_0_4829_3484%2F4829.jpg>
 Owners John and Zuzi at Thirsty Meeples in Oxford: ‘Everybody’s busy and you 
want to bring people back together in a way that’s not just staring at 
screens.’ Photograph: Suki Dhanda 
It’s barely lunchtime and the place is close to full. Thirsty Meeples 
describes itself as “Oxford’s first and only board-game cafe,” and is one of a 
growing number of such establishments popping up all over the UK inspired by 
their growing popularity in the US. What has drawn these people here, from 
serious gamers to families? Eveline, a Dutch-born academic who is playing the 
railway gameTicket to Ride 
<https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/9209/ticket-ride> with her Belgian 
husband, Roger, thinks she has the answer. She looks around at her fellow 
patrons and the library of games that pack the shelves. “I would say it’s the 
original social network.”

We are seeing a much bigger crossover audience. The level of interest is much 
higher
Peter Wooding 
We may now live in a world of Facebook, Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-review-it-may-not-be-a-good-game-but-its-a-great-experience>
, Netflix and iPads, butboard-gaming is booming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/dont-worry-board-games-video-games-cant-steal-what-makes-you-great>
. Even the early 20th-century games explosion, which gave us such hardy 
perennials as Monopoly, Cluedo and Scrabble, has nothing on the current surge. 
Market research group NPD, which claims to measure around 70% of the UK toy 
trade, has recorded a 20% rise during the past year in the sales of tabletop 
games (including card and dice games, war games played with miniature figures 
and role-play titles such as Dungeons & Dragons, in which players imagine 
themselves as heroic warriors and wizards in imaginary, fantasy worlds).

Ben Hogg, marketing manager at UK distributor Esdevium Games 
<http://www.esdeviumgames.com/> (which imports the US-produced railway 
adventure Ticket to Ride, among many other titles) estimates that growth at 
closer to 35%. In 2012, he says, the full range of Ticket to Ride games (there 
are variants set in different countries) achieved 16,000 sales in the UK. This 
year, it has already sold 21,000. When he started at Esdevium, Hogg says the 
gamers they supplied were primarily interested in “geekier titles”, such as 
fantasy war game Warhammer. Today, he says, “we are seeing a much bigger 
crossover audience. The level of interest is much higher than ever before.”

Board games' golden age: sociable, brilliant and driven by the internet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/25/board-games-internet-playstation-xbox>
Few have been better positioned to witness this phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/dec/09/board-games-comeback-freeman>
 first-hand than Peter Wooding. A former punk rocker – he played guitar in 70s 
band The Jerks (who broke into the Top 100 in 1977 with Get Your Woofing Dog 
Off Me) – he opened the gaming storeOrc’s Nest 
<http://www.orcsnest.com/shop.htm> in Covent Garden, London, in 1987. He and 
Jerks lead singer Simon Ellis were hooked onDungeons & Dragons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/13/from-game-of-thrones-to-michael-gove-the-legacy-of-dungeons-dragons>
 and tabletop war games. But specialist retailers were rare, so they put in an 
offer on a small, semi-constructed shop space. “There wasn’t even a floor,” 
Wooding says. “It was all just rubble.” They raided skips to decorate the 
shop’s interior in medieval dungeon style and scattered straw over the 
unfinished floor. They mostly stocked Dungeons & Dragons books and historical 
war games, but their best sellers were lead war-gaming miniatures, which 
dangled from boards lining the store’s ground-floor walls.

“The first few years we were absolutely skint,” says Wooding (Ellis has 
retired) as we chat behind the counter at Orc’s Nest. Wearing a straw hat and 
decorated with facial piercings, the garrulous, imperially bearded 50-something 
is proud of his punk heritage. “We got investigated by the tax office. They 
said, ‘Why are you doing this? You’re only making 50 quid a week!’ They thought 
we must have been embezzling the money or something…”

Today, almost 30 years on, the Orc’s Nest logo of a skinhead-ish orc poking 
its tongue up its left nostril hasn’t changed, but the floor straw and ye olde 
joinery have been replaced with brushed aluminium and black-and-yellow 
chevrons, giving it the look of aPeter Saville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/08/peter-saville-uks-famous-graphic-designer>
-designed 80s sci-fi space-station. And the stock and clientele are remarkably 
different.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdccea58f869c65117b4cde69f5fd9f46ec3bbb0c%2F0_1010_3746_3322%2F3746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdccea58f869c65117b4cde69f5fd9f46ec3bbb0c%2F0_1010_3746_3322%2F3746.jpg>
 Peter Wooding of Orc’s Nest game shop, Covent Garden: ‘You get a lot more 
couples now.’ Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer 
“About five years ago, I noticed we were selling fewer miniatures,” says 
Wooding, “so I started putting shelves of board games down here” – he gestures 
to rows of colourful game boxes with snappy titles, Small World, Agricola, 
Carcassonne, Pandemic – “and every time we did that the takings went up.” He 
also noted a decline in what he tactfully describes as the “stereotypical 
gamer” – dyed-in-the-wool hobbyists who would typically be lone, white men.

“You get a lot more couples now – young, professional, just bought somewhere. 
They still want to meet up with mates but they don’t want to go out and get 
pissed any more. They like the idea of getting a game out, having a few drinks, 
bit of fun for two or three hours around the table.”

Once, he admits, this more casual, “mainstream” gamer, certainly the women, 
would have blanched at walking into his establishment. He points out the cover 
of Pandemic, a key title in the board-gaming resurgence, whose players must 
collaborate to fight global disease outbreaks. Front and centre on the box art 
is its Scientist character, a woman. “Much more inclusive,” says Wooding. “Much 
wider appeal. More friendly.”

The awful thing about Monopoly is the first person to go bankrupt is left in a 
corner and everyone else plays on

Catherine Howell, curator of toys and games at the V&A Museum of Childhood in 
east London, describes Pandemic as “the game of the moment”. She chose it as 
one of four focus games, alongside chess,Game of the Goose 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_of_the_Goose> and Monopoly, in her 
exhibitionGame Plan: Board Games Rediscovered 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/exhibitions/gameplan/>. Howell describes herself as 
more of a traditional gamer, whose strongest memories of childhood are playing
Scrabble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/shortcuts/2016/sep/05/braconid-brett-smitheram-2016-world-scrabble-championship-quixoty-felty>
 andCluedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/cluedo-dr-orchid-sexy-scientist>
 with her family. She confesses that, until she began thinking about the 
exhibition around five years ago, she wasn’t familiar with the new wave of 
board games that populate the shelves of Orc’s Nest and Thirsty Meeples, part 
of what she calls a “designer-led resurgence” that originated in Germany, then 
spread across Europe and North America. But she was struck by advances in game 
design that made the experience of playing these games far less fractious (and 
more enjoyable) than those family Monopoly sessions.

“Eurogames”, as they are known, are notable for their relatively gentle themes 
(farming, landscape-building, dock-working), the fact that they reduce the 
element of luck and – most importantly – the way they ensure no player is 
eliminated before the end. The game zero for this revolution isThe Settlers of 
Catan (now rebranded Catan) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catan>, created by a 
German designer, Klaus Teuber. Since its publication in 1995, it’s sold more 
than 22m copies in 30 languages. Players competitively establish settlements on 
an island and trade resources with the other players, deeping participants 
fully engaged and sustaining the drama of the narrative right to the 
conclusion. “That’s very important,” says Howell, “because nobody feels left 
out. That’s the awful thing if you’re playing Monopoly: the first person to 
become bankrupt is left in the corner while everyone else plays on.”

20 awesome board games you may never have heard of
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/28/20-awesome-board-games-you-may-never-have-heard-of>
That crucial development finds its ultimate refinement in the most recent 
tabletop trend, the “co-operative game”, whereby every player wins or loses as 
a team member, whether fighting fires (Flash Point) or saving the world from 
infection (Pandemic). “It provokes a lot more social interaction,” says Howell.

Pandemic was created by a 43-year-old Californian, Matt Leacock, who is one of 
tabletop gaming’s most successful designers. He was inspired byReiner Knizia’s 
2000 Eurogame title Lord of the Rings 
<https://www.boardgamegeek.com/boardgamedesigner/2/reiner-knizia>, which 
requires players to cooperate as one of the four questing hobbits from 
Tolkien’s fantasy epic. “When I played that with friends we got scared,” 
recalls Leacock. “There was self-sacrifice. There were all sorts of highs and 
lows. At the end, everybody felt good, whether they won or lost. I wanted to 
see if I could do something like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F065db9791696b4138f57f9db570bd1ecf29ac1de%2F0_0_1200_900%2Fmaster%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F065db9791696b4138f57f9db570bd1ecf29ac1de%2F0_0_1200_900%2Fmaster%2F1200.jpg>
 The Ticket to Ride board. 
Leacock’s passion for board games goes back to his experience of frustration 
with them as a child. “Games were my favourite birthday gift,” he says, “but 
I’d get very excited, open up the box, then we’d play andthere would just be 
crushing disappointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/02/are-these-the-10-worst-board-games-of-all-time>
. The games never seemed good enough to me.” So, with the help of a 
game-enthusiast uncle, young Leacock would flip over the boards and try to 
design something better using the same components.

Decades later, while leading the design team at a communications start-up, he 
concocted Pandemic, curious to see if he could create a game “where there was a 
lot of really frightening non-linear growth” – in other words, sudden surprises 
and twists. At the time, he recalls, pandemics were “in the news”, with 
outbreaks of bird flu andSars <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sars>, “so 
that was very much in the back of my mind”.

Pandemic has been a runaway success, and the latest version, Pandemic Legacy: 
Season One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/25/pandemic-legacy-review-emotional-highs-agonising-lows>
, represents another leap forward in game design. Co-created with rising 
board-game star Rob Daviau, it incoprorates, Leacock explains “a tremendous 
amount of storytelling. It’s similar to an electronic game in that you develop 
your characters, you get new rules and the state of the world changes. 
Irrevocably, in fact. It is an unveiling story. We named it Season One because 
it has an arc, so it’s akin to watching a season of one of your HBO favourites.”

Don't worry, board games: video games can't steal what makes you great
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/dont-worry-board-games-video-games-cant-steal-what-makes-you-great>
The growth of the video games industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/uk-video-game-industry-gets-4m-funding-boost>
 has, perhaps counterintuitively, been one of the biggest factors in the 
proliferation of these modern, innovatively designedboard games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/board-games> – largely because the 
presence of games consoles under so many millions of TVs and the rise of mobile 
gaming have normalised game-playing.

“[Video games and board games have] learned an awful lot from each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/22/what-video-games-can-learn-from-board-games>
,” says Esdevium’s Ben Hogg. “Everyone’s a mobile gamer now. Speak to anyone 
who’s got a smartphone, they’ve got at least one game they like to play on it. 
Now there are more people who are open to the idea of playing a game than ever 
before.” (It’s also not uncommon to find app versions of board games, such as 
the popular map-building game Carcassonne, which works very well on a tablet.

At the same time, crowdfunding sites such as Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/14/how-kickstarter-became-one-of-the-biggest-powers-in-publishing-crowdfunding>
 have lowered the barrier to entry for people trying to break into the 
board-games industry. Tabletop games can raise more money on Kickstarter than 
their digital counterparts. The designers of the forthcoming 
video-to-board-game adaptationDark Souls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2014/feb/25/peter-serafinowicz-dark-souls-ii-game-video>
, for example, sought £50,000 on Kickstarter. They hit that in three minutes, 
and ended up with £4.2m.

The internet has also vastly accelerated the word-of-mouth on which the 
tabletop industry relies. Sites such as BoardGameGeek provide a valuable 
archive of reviews and YouTube shows such asShut Up & Sit Down 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCyRhIGDUKdIOw07Pd8pHxCw> or TableTop 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL4F80C7D2DC8D9B6C> - presented by 
American actor Wil Wheaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/04/star-trek-board-games-wil-wheaton-kind-of-nerds-tabletop>
, star of Stand By Me and Star Trek: The Next Generation) - have flung open the 
window of interest. There is now something known as the TableTop effect: if 
Wheaton features a title on his show, in which he and other celebrities play a 
game while commentating on their decisions, its sales will spike. “The TableTop 
effect is massive,” says Peter Wooding. “If Wil features a game, it immediately 
becomes unavailable!”

You connect with people across the table. It’s a very human thing
Matt Leacock, creator of Pandemic 
Wheaton’s zeal for board games borders on the evangelical. “The mission of 
TableTop is to share the joy of gaming with the world,” he says. “I think we 
live in a time where our entire world is so divided, it’s almost balkanised. If 
we’re to emerge from the goddamn dumpster fire that is 2016 intact, we’re gonna 
need to see our shared humanity, and I [hope to] show by example that tabletop 
gaming can be about the journey you go on together when you’re playing a game. 
It can be about the friendships and relationships that form. So when I hear 
games are selling out all over the place, that thrills me. It means that people 
who are not already gamers, or maybe not as insane about it as I am, they’re 
going out and buying them. It’s like Muggles are buying tickets to Hogwarts.”

Back at Thirsty Meeples in Oxford, I talk to owners John and Zuzi Morgan. In 
2012 they decided to sell tickets to Wheaton’s Muggles, quitting their jobs as 
social workers to try and turn their love for tabletop games into a full-time 
business.

They already had an extensive game collection, and John had heard about a cafe 
in Toronto named Snakes & Lattes – the menu listed games rather than meals – 
that had sparked the spread of board-game cafes across North America. After a 
visit to sample its appeal, the Morgans opened Thirsty Meeples (a “meeple” is a 
game component that represents the player, typically in Eurogames a plump, 
triangular wooden figure), and it’s certainly paid off. “The trend is upwards,” 
John tells me when I ask how business is doing.

Why does Zuzi think the love of tabletop games grew to such a point that she 
and John could turn their hobby into their livelihood? “There’s so much 
technology,” she says. “Everybody’s busy and you want to bring people back 
together in a way that’s not just staring at screens. It’s a natural thing in 
people. We are supposed to be together and communicating with each other.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7da7774b4c38aa09fd2d9fdbc095575ab0ddf0%2F0_647_7360_4137%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7da7774b4c38aa09fd2d9fdbc095575ab0ddf0%2F0_647_7360_4137%2F7360.jpg>
 Fourteen-year-old friends Maddy Sawbridge, left, and Alex Foley, right, at 
Thirsty Meeples with their friends and family. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the 
Observer 
For a time, video-gaming offered a level of physical social interaction, at 
the arcade or through multi-player sofa games that friends or family members 
could play at the same time, in the same room. Then multi-player video games 
moved online, and fellow players became physically removed from one another, if 
not completely anonymous. In some digital gaming arenas, that anonymity brewed 
a poisonous atmosphere.

“Multi-player video-gaming was fun,” says Wil Wheaton. “And then dickheads 
ruined it. It just became this cesspool of toxic aggression and unpleasant 
behaviour. I wonder if people who had enjoyed all that at first started looking 
for another way to play games where you could see the person you were playing 
with.”

Direct interaction is important to Matt Leacock, too. “You connect with people 
across the table,” he says. “It’s a very human thing.” And it’s tactile: “You 
need to handle the physical components, to get the feel for the texture on the 
cards and see the wood grain on your components.”

Gaming has always had a social function. Fernand Gobet, Professor of 
Psychological Sciences at the University of Liverpool and co-author ofMoves In 
Mind — The Psychology Of Board Games, says that in some countries “playing a 
board game is part of the culture — such as mancala games in some African 
countries — and can be seen as a soft kind of initiation ritual. But in most 
countries, the benefit of board games is to offer the opportunity for families 
to play. In a sense what matters is having such a common activity, and not the 
detail of the game being played.”

These points are echoed by Thirsty Meeples’ patrons. “It’s the more social 
thing to do these days,” says Mark, a 35-year-old information modeller from 
Portsmouth.

Roger and Eveline, the couple playing Ticket to Ride, explain that they are in 
the middle of packing up all their worldly possessions to return to the 
Netherlands because, says Roger, “we can no longer afford to live in Oxford.” 
As cafe regulars, they couldn’t depart without enjoying one final session. “We 
seem to be living in an age where we’ve become scared of our sophistication,” 
he says. “We crave things that feel authentic. Or which remind us of the 
simpler time of our childhood.” Board gaming is “innocence regained in a world 
that…” He looks at me with a small smile. “Who’d have thought David Bowie was 
indeed the mystical force holding us all together?”

For Roger and Eveline, as for Wil Wheaton, tabletop gaming has become more 
than entertainment. “A game is not a puzzle to be solved,” Wheaton believes, 
“but a narrative to be told.” And, in our increasingly online society, to be 
shared, too – directly and physically, in the real world.

Game Plan: Board Games Rediscovered 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/exhibitions/gameplan/> is at the V&A Museum of 
Childhood, London E2, from 8 October to 23 April

The gateway game: Ticket To Ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2014/oct/27/all-aboard-how-ticket-to-ride-helped-save-table-top-gaming>
 (2004)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F359fee8430bbc4d0f027e972a4cdce807b25bd2c%2F0_0_2000_1218%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F359fee8430bbc4d0f027e972a4cdce807b25bd2c%2F0_0_2000_1218%2F2000.jpg>
Designed by Southampton-born Alan R Moon and published by US company Days of 
Wonder, this hugely-popular railway-construction game for two-to-five players 
is a great starting point for anyone intrigued by the new wave of gentle 
“Euro”-inspired games, which offer a friendlier, less-fractious experience than 
traditional titles like Monopoly. With its numerous variants, you can play on 
your choice of country around the world.

See also: Carcassonne <http://riograndegames.com/games.html?id=48> (2000), 
Catan <http://www.catan.com/> (1995)

The warm-up game: Sushi Go! 
<http://www.gamewright.com/gamewright/index.php?section=games&page=game&show=291>
 (2013)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57565ed4c36a0409f0d200f34d5dbfa422d4c106%2F51_0_1510_906%2F1510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57565ed4c36a0409f0d200f34d5dbfa422d4c106%2F51_0_1510_906%2F1510.jpg>
A warm-up game is a quick, simple game - a kind of aperitif to the board-game 
main course. And Phil Walker-Harding’s card game Sushi Go! is one of the most 
popular, lasting no longer than 20 minutes and requiring its players to 
frantically construct sushi dishes in a restaurant.

See also: Citadels <https://www.asmodee.us/en/games/citadels/> (2000), Love 
Letter <https://www.alderac.com/loveletter/> (2012)

The cooperative game: Pandemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/25/pandemic-legacy-review-emotional-highs-agonising-lows>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55deb3252ab51233778d590cf38e2a751ae02b59%2F129_0_3870_2322%2F3870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55deb3252ab51233778d590cf38e2a751ae02b59%2F129_0_3870_2322%2F3870.jpg>
Matt Leacock’s game-changing phenomenon, in which players team up to combat 
worldwide disease outbreaks before they spread beyond control. Intense and 
dramatic; if anybody pre-judges the idea of the cooperative gaming experience 
as easy, this will prove them wrong.

See also: Mysterium <http://en.libellud.com/games/mysterium> (2015), Robinson 
Crusoe: Adventures On The Cursed Island 
<http://portalgames.pl/new_en/all-game-list/robinson/> (2012)

The party games: Codenames 
<https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/178900/codenames> (2015)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54411cb61aa87a4fafe4eab390dfeae5b073faf5%2F32_0_1137_682%2F1137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54411cb61aa87a4fafe4eab390dfeae5b073faf5%2F32_0_1137_682%2F1137.jpg>
This espionage-based word game designed by Czech designer Vlaada Chvátil is 
best played with six to eight people. It sets two teams against each other, as 
they use one-word clues to try and guess the identities of all their own secret 
agents before the other team. The winner of this year’s Spiel des Jahres award 
(gaming’s best picture Oscar).

See also: Camel Up <https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/153938/camel> (2014), 
One Night Ultimate Werewolf 
<http://beziergames.com/products/one-night-ultimate-werewolf> (2014)

The strategy game: Agricola <https://www.mayfairgames.com/products/agricola> 
(2007)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68b721477d8cc6feaf14cc2c64bc901890c1f60%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20tabletop%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fboard-games-back-tabletop-gaming-boom-pandemic-flash-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68b721477d8cc6feaf14cc2c64bc901890c1f60%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Top choice for strategy fiends. Players must build and run a 17th-century 
farm, maximising their crop and livestock yields and protecting their families 
from starvation.

See also: Le Havre <https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/35677/le-havre> (2008),
Five Tribes <https://www.daysofwonder.com/five-tribes/en/> (2014)
 