
When the smoke cleared, Jimmy Butler had scored 52 points, 17 of them in the 
game’s final four minutes. On Monday night, the now-unquestionable leader of 
the Chicago Bulls had thebiggest game 
<https://theringer.com/jimmy-butler-chicago-bulls-alpha-8ff05cf7ea7#.9a0m0anjy> 
of his NBA career, practically willing his team to a 118-113 win over the 
Charlotte Hornets. It was a remarkable individual performance, yet it might not 
have been the most impressive game a player has had this NBA season, or even in 
the last week.


Kobe returns and Tebow thrives: our bold sports predictions for 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/bold-sports-predictions-for-2017>
On Friday, the Boston Celtics’ Isaiah Thomas scored 52 points 
<http://www.bostonherald.com/sports/celtics/2016/12/celtics_notebook_isaiah_thomas_goes_fourth_into_history>
 in a 117-114 win over the Miami Heat. Like Butler, Thomas was even deadlier 
come crunch time, scoring a ridiculous 29 points in the game’s final quarter. 
Unfortunately for Thomas, his performance was almost immediately eclipsed by 
the Houston Rockets’ James Harden who put upa line for the ages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/james-harden-triple-double-houston-rockets-new-york-knicks>
 in Saturday’s 129-122 win over the New York Knicks: 53 points, 16 rebounds, 17 
assists. “He didn’t even let me get 24 hours of shine,” Thomas noted, in 
half-joking awe.


If it feels like there’s some inflation going on in the NBA right now, you 
might not be wrong. On Monday, Butler becamethe eighth different player 
<https://realsport101.com/news/sports/nba/jimmy-butler-becomes-8th-player-to-score-50-points-this-season>
 to score at least 50 in a game this season, equalling a NBA record. Heading 
into Friday, the New Orleans Pelicans’ Anthony Davis, the Oklahoma City 
Thunder’s Russell Westbrook, the Washington Wizards’ John Wall, the Sacramento 
Kings’ DeMarcus Cousins and the Golden State Warriors’ Klay Thompson all had 
50+ point games. With the season not even halfway over, it’s almost certain 
that this record will be broken soon.

Why are 50+ point games becoming not just common, but practically everyday 
occurrences? It starts with the players. There’s an argument the talent level 
in the league has never been greater. Nearly every team has at least one player 
capable of torching the opponent’s defense on any given night. If you wanted to 
argue that the level of competition in theNBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> has never been higher, you could point 
to the individual performances over the last few days as evidence.

You wouldn’t, however, be telling the whole story. Yes, the current crop of 
NBA players could be, as a whole, better athletes than those from previous 
generations, but it’s certainly true they’re playing in an era that encourages 
high scoring. For one, the game is played at a much higher pace than it was in 
the past, and more attempts mean more made attempts. Then there’s the Steph 
Curry effect, where players and teams have followed the Warriors’ lead by 
exploiting the three-point line to an unprecedented degree.

A major reason long distance shooting has become so big in the modern NBA is 
that changes in how the game is called have made the game far less physical. 
This is particularly notable on the defensive end. Sports Illustrated’s Jeremy 
Woodpoints out 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2017/01/02/nba-power-rankings-russell-westbrook-james-harden-rockets-thunder>
 that this year “no team has a defensive rating below 100 points per 100 
possessions, which means every team in the league scores a point for every 
other trip down the court.” It becomes more difficult to stop opposing players 
from scoring when your efforts are more likely to result in free throws, 
something which new-school players like Harden have learned to exploit.


In other words, there’s a certain amount of inflation at work here. 2015-16 was
the highest scoring season 
<http://thecomeback.com/nba/nba-scoring-reached-its-highest-level-in-23-years-during-2015-16-season.html>
 in league history and this year could very well eclipse it. Not that everyone 
is happy with the current state of the league. Player-turned-analysis Charles 
Barkley madenews last week 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/charles-barkley-claims-nba-worst-213201256.html> by 
bemoaning the current state of the league by claiming the NBA is “the worst 
it’s ever been” and that “there are two, three or four good teams, and the rest 
of these teams stink.”

As usual when it comes to his commentary, Barkley was being deliberately 
contrarian in a way that only fleetingly resembled the truth. By nearly any 
objective standpoint, the game is as popular now as it has been at any point 
since the Michael Jordan era. It’s almost embarrassing how many memorable NBA 
games we’ve gotten in the last few seasons. He isn’t wrong, however, in 
pointing out that there are only a few genuinely great teams out there, which 
also could help explain why we’re seeing so many impressive individual 
performances.


With the exception of Thompson, the players who have had 50+ point games this 
season were those most often tasked with carrying the majority of their team’s 
offense. Butler put up 52 points, 12 rebounds, six assists, three steals and a 
block on Monday because he basically had to have that kind of game in order to 
give his increasingly dysfunctional Bulls team a chance to win. Harden plays a 
similar role with the Rockets. On his 52-point night, Thomas didn’t rack up a 
single assist, because there wasn’t really any situation where he had the ball 
and wasn’t the Celtics’ best scoring option.


Meanwhile the league’s last three MVPs, Steph Curry, Kevin Durant and LeBron 
James, are conspicuously absent from that list. Obviously that’s not because 
they aren’t capable of taking over a game in the same way that Wall or Cousins 
were able to, it’s more that their teams haven’t really required them to do so. 
There is some truth that we’re seeing phenomenal individual games at the 
expense of memorable team wins, and that might not be ideal.


Where Barkley goes wrong is when he turns this criticism into a blanket 
condemnation of the league. Just because the current NBA situation isn’t 
perfect – and when has it ever been? – doesn’t mean that it hasn’t also been 
highly enjoyable. For now, we should appreciate this unprecedented stretch of 
individual performances for what they are, and not be too hung up on what they 
might mean.

 