
If there’s a single taboo in contemporary US comedy, it’s politeness. Ever 
since Bad Santa kicked off an industry-wide arms race to spin every emblem of 
civic responsibility – from teachers to neighbours to grandpas – into something 
“Bad”, misanthropy has been the order of the day in American entertainment.

Nowadays, every comic hero is an antihero, although few are quite so hateful 
as retired gymnast Hope Annabelle Greggory, the emotional black hole at the 
centre ofThe Bronze, a sporting comedy which premiered last year at Sundance 
and this week goes straight-to-VOD just in time for the Rio games. Having 
garnered national attention with a dramatic third-place finish at the 2004 
Olympics, Hope now clings to her status as the pride and joy of Amherst, Ohio, 
the small midwestern town in which her former glory still entitles her to free 
pizza at the mall and gratis weed from a local dealer. Lest she miss a single 
opportunity to exploit her fading celebrity, she wears an Olympic warmup jacket 
day and night, making it less of a conscious sartorial choice and more an 
innate facet of her being, like Mickey Mouse’s shorts, or Fred Flintstone’s tie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6B7JH30oCME&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6B7JH30oCME>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6B7JH30oCME&media=>
Perpetually bitter and entitled, she recalls a decade’s worth of Danny McBride 
characters, not least the egotistical Taekwondo instructor he played in 2006’s 
The Foot Fist Way, which also mined suburban sporting endeavour for its innate 
despair. And, like McBride’s crudely vindictive creations, Hope’s relentless 
malice sometimes feels motivated less by circumstance and more by The Bronze’s 
desire to prove its own “edgy” credentials.

At its best, though, the film provides Hope with just enough emotional 
interiority to reframe her obnoxiousness as the inevitable result of a 
childhood dedicated to the pursuit of athletic supremacy. Thanks largely to a 
ferocious lead performance by co-writer Melissa Rauch (of Big Bang Theory 
fame), the film persuasively argues that humanity’s worst qualities are still – 
by definition – humanising, and that we need not like a character, or even 
empathise with them, to understand their plight.

Also helping to pull The Bronze back from the misanthropic brink is a visual 
kineticism absent from the vast majority of US comedies, which imbues even 
Hope’s most hopeless moments with a strange comic dynamism. Most lively of all 
is a spectacular sex scene between she and a former rival gymnast, impressive 
not just for its carnal athleticism, but its all-too-rare acknowledgement that 
consenting adults tend to have sex fully undressed.
 