
Over the past five decades, Diana Kennedy has received countless accolades for 
her pioneering food writing, but being called the Mick Jagger of Mexican 
cooking is the one that tickled her most.


“It was after I’d given a rousing talk at the Texas book festival in my 
leather trousers and fur-lined leather jacket … it was wonderful,” said 
Kennedy, putting the final touches to vegetarian stuffed peppers and spicy 
courgettes as the lunch plates warm on a solar panel.

Kennedy – a razor-sharp 93-year-old Englishwoman who takes afternoon tea in a 
china cup – is an unlikely pinup for Mexican cuisine, but her nine bestselling 
cookery books have cemented her reputation as a culinary authority in the 
United States – and anational treasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/oct/12/foodanddrink.features6> 
in Mexico.

Kennedy was awarded Mexico’s highest honour for foreigners – the Order of the 
Aztec Eagle – in 1981 and an MBE in 2002, but she remains virtually unknown in 
the country of her birth.

A forthcoming documentary about her culinary adventures will, she hopes, reach 
new audiences. The film, which is yet to be named, is to premiere toward the 
end of 2017.

“It’s about selling books, getting my message across, it’s about legacy,” said 
Kennedy, whose fiery zeal keeps her working full-time.

Born in Loughton, Essex, in 1923, Diana Southwood worked as a housing officer 
after the war, before leaving for Canada in 1954 with “no ambitions, but a 
sense of adventure”.

Three years later, during an impromptu visit to Haiti, she met her future 
husband, Paul Kennedy, the regional correspondent for the New York Times, who 
was based inMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fdiana-kennedy-mexican-cooking-englishwoman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fb3cf77323588f4744174787099cdeed926ace1%2F0_116_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2093-year-old%20Englishwoman%20who%20is%20the%20rock%20star%20of%20Mexican%20cooking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fdiana-kennedy-mexican-cooking-englishwoman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2093-year-old%20Englishwoman%20who%20is%20the%20rock%20star%20of%20Mexican%20cooking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fdiana-kennedy-mexican-cooking-englishwoman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fb3cf77323588f4744174787099cdeed926ace1%2F0_116_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Diana Kennedy’s cookbook is displayed on a kitchen table at her house in San 
Pablo. She takes afternoon tea in a china cup. Photograph: Tomás Bravo/Reuters 
Kennedy was captivated by Mexico City’s colourful markets full of exotic 
ingredients, and started learning to cook dishes from friends and their 
domestic workers. The couple’s maid from Guerrero taught her to make her first 
tamale – a pre-Hispanic stuffed steamed doughy dish – the recipe for which 
appears in one of her cookbooks.

Kennedy’s fascination was fuelled by the diverse flavours and ingredients she 
encountered while accompanying her husband on assignment and exploring 
far-flung villages alone on rickety chicken buses. Her first trip to Oaxaca – 
the southern state which later became the subject for one of her books – was 
made with the poet Irene Nicholson in the Times’ Triumph sports car. “These 
were wonderful adventures, I would visit markets, I tried everything and wrote 
it all down.”

During their eight years in Mexico City, the couple’s penthouse became a 
social hub for visiting dignitaries, and Diana’s burgeoning knowledge of 
Mexican cuisine started to gain recognition.It caught the eye of the Times’ 
food writer Craig Claiborne 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1970/09/08/archives/cooking-classes-should-please-armchair-travelers.html>
, whom Kennedy credits with changing her life.

In 1969 – by this time a widow living in New York – Kennedy started giving 
cookery classes at home to make ends meet, teaching unusual dishes like
papadzules – egg-stuffed enchiladas from the Yucatán – and shrimps in a pumpkin 
seed sauce from Tamaulipas.

A subsequent article by Claiborne landed Kennedy her first book deal with 
Harpers Row. She spent much of the next two years travelling to remote corners 
of Mexico talking to humble cooks, documenting old family recipes, and learning 
traditional preparation and cooking techniques. The Cuisines of Mexico 
published in 1972 was an instant classic, and introduced the English-speaking 
world to authentic Mexican cuisine.

Each subsequent book was similarly fastidiously researched by Kennedy, and 
together they read like a collection of anthropological essays on regional 
cultures explained through native plants, rituals and recipes.

“These are culinary adventures that nobody will ever have. The cooks don’t 
exist any more, the ambience is not there any more … I learned my trade 
travelling the length and breadth of Mexico, sleeping in my Nissan truck. Every 
book is a different phase of my life and learning,” she said.

Forty years ago Kennedy bought land on the edge of the pretty village of San 
Pancho in Michoacán, nestled at the foothills of the Sierra Madre Occidental 
mountains and thepine-oak forests where monarch butterflies descend each winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/monarch-butterflies-migration-mexico-declines>
.

An exquisitely tiled open-plan kitchen is the heart of the eco-adobe home she 
built, where Kennedy still holds boot camps for budding chefs and diehard fans. 
Prince Charles has dined here; the Rockefellers and Glenn Close have visited. 
Bottles of homemade banana, pineapple and red wine vinegars are lined up on the 
windowsill; her eclectic pottery collection would not be out of place in a 
museum.

The market stall in Mexico where ‘Frida Kahlo’ will cook you an enchilada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/31/frida-kahlo-market-food-stall-oaxaca>
Kennedy’s curiosity has not diminished with age. She is interested in new 
techniques and trends, but passionately believes that cooking great food is 
about understanding ingredients and respecting traditions. Tamales must be made 
with lard; tortillas with native corn; salsa verde with small green tomatoes; 
and bread raised without sugar. She’s infuriated by celebrity chefs who wear 
their hair down in the kitchen, as well as by plagiarism of her work, waste, 
fusion food andsous vide cooking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/feb/20/sous-vide-cooking>
.

“I don’t criticise for the sake of it, only if something is fundamentally 
wrong and the frivolous recipe is misleading the public. It’s based on my 
experiences … bad work being passed off as good drives me mad.”

Kennedy’s legacy is guaranteed by her writings, but she hopes her organic 
gardens filled with a rich mix of edible, aromatic, medicinal and decorative 
plants will also be studied and preserved.

The documentary has given her occasion to reflect upon an extraordinary life, 
but Kennedy has no plans for slowing down or lowering her standards. She walks 
40 minutes each afternoon with small weights strapped to her arms, and still 
drives her double cabin Nissan truck, something she intends to do for at least 
a few more years.

“I think I can hit 100 – that’s when my driving licence expires.”

 * This article was amended on 3 January 2017 to correct the original title of 
Diana Kennedy’s first book.  