
Aslı Erdoğan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asl%C4%B1_Erdo%C4%9Fan> is a 
prize-winning Turkish writer, a newspaper columnist and human rights activist 
who has been in jail since August this year.

Recep Tayyip Erdoğan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recep_Tayyip_Erdo%C4%9Fan> 
is a Turkish politician who has been responsible for the jailing of 140 
journalists and countless human rights activists.

As far as I know, the imprisoned novelist and the president of Turkey are not 
related. Their very different experiences over the past four months are 
explored in a powerful essay in the New Yorker by Elif Şafak, “The silencing of 
writers in Turkey 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-silencing-of-writers-in-turkey?>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-corrosive-effects-of-jailing-novelists-and-journalists-in-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890c6283391636a08380c53e89880479cf2a85d%2F1344_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20corrosive%20effect%20of%20jailing%20novelists%20and%20journalists%20in%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-corrosive-effects-of-jailing-novelists-and-journalists-in-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20corrosive%20effect%20of%20jailing%20novelists%20and%20journalists%20in%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-corrosive-effects-of-jailing-novelists-and-journalists-in-turkey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890c6283391636a08380c53e89880479cf2a85d%2F1344_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
 Elif Şafak: ‘humour is a dangerous business in Turkey’. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
She points out that “one of the endless ironies of Turkey” was that the 
liberals and democrats who opposedthe failed July coup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara>
aimed at overthrowing Erdoğan’s AKP government were “the first to be punished 
and silenced by that very same government.”

She lists Aslı Erdoğan, who was detained for being a member of the advisory 
board of the newspaper Özgür Gündem, as one of her friends and colleagues who 
have been jailed, exiled and blacklisted.

Erdoğan, who is diabetic, was reported to have suffered in prison because her 
medicine was withheld. Through her lawyer, she told a paper: “They are treating 
me in a way that will leave permanent damage to my body 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/arrested-turkish-novelist-asli-erdogan-mistreated-in-prison-during-arrest.aspx?PageID=238&NID=103227&NewsCatID=509>
.” She has been charged with “membership of a terrorist organisation” and 
“undermining national unity.”

Şafak, a Turkish writer who lives in London, also mentions others behind bars: 
linguist Necmiye Alpay, who celebrated her 70th birthday in jail; novelist 
Ahmet Altan; scholar Mehmet Altan; liberal columnist Şahin Alpay; the 
editor-in-chief of the secularist Cumhuriyet newspaper, Murat Sabuncu; and its 
literary editor, Turhan Günay.

Erdoğan’s AKP, she writes, “has refused to acknowledge that free elections are 
not enough to sustain a democracy. There are other necessary constituents: 
separation of powers, rule of law, freedom of speech, women’s rights and 
minority rights, and a diverse, independent media.

“Without these bulwarks, the ballot box alone only paves the way for 
‘majoritarianism’ at best and authoritarianism at worst.”


Şafak’s central point is the corrosive effect of silencing writers, especially 
women, in an authoritarian society. It leads to the emergence of opportunistic 
“journalists” and “writers” who “publicly call for the arrest of their 
colleagues and celebrate when their wishes come true.”

She argues that there have been “four basic responses among Turkish writers to 
the loss of intellectual and artistic freedom.” First, depoliticisation — 
voluntary self-censorship. Second, over-intellectualisation — a use of 
abstraction “so that they won’t have to call an autocrat an autocrat.”

Third, the catapulting of certain writers into a public role for which they 
are unprepared, in order to combat injustice, which can affect their artistic 
output with varying outcomes.

And the fourth is satire. Şafak writes: “What better response to the situation 
than to make fun of authority, and to make fun of a society that so fears its 
baba — and also to make fun of ourselves?”

But, she counsels, “humour is a dangerous business in Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>... it’s no wonder that among those 
arrested is one of the country’s leading cartoonists, Musa Kart.”

She concludes with a depressing picture of life for writers in Erdoğan’s 
Turkey: “While these four paths extend before us, we find ourselves divided 
into little cells, with glass walls.

“Even old friendships are fractured. Writers from wobbly geographies are being 
compelled to write and talk about politics like never before. Every day we face 
the challenge of how to balance the mundane and the momentous, the banal and 
the sublime, the ‘inside’ and the ‘outside.’

“Every day, we face the challenge of how to defend nuances in a culture of 
gross generalisations, how to build bridges of empathy where pitting one side 
of the society against the other plays into the hands of populist demagogues.”

Her full article is here in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-silencing-of-writers-in-turkey?>
 