
The internet, international phone calls and demonstrations have been banned in 
the Gambia as voters go to the polls for an election that poses the first real 
threat to President Yahya Jammeh after more than two decades in power.

'Fear has faded': Gambian election could finally end dictator's grip on power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/gambia-election-voters-polls-adama-barrow-yahya-jammeh>
Jammeh faces unprecedented opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/gambia-election-voters-polls-adama-barrow-yahya-jammeh>
 after a coalition of parties agreed to unite behind a single opposition 
candidate. Businessman Adama Barrow fired up voters in the past two weeks, the 
only period allowed for campaigning before the poll.

But the controls on communications and pre-emptive ban on protests are 
fuelling fears of voting day fraud and worries that there could be violence in 
its aftermath.

Gambia’s unique election method involves voters placing a marble in a coloured 
drum representing their chosen candidate. Nearly 900,000 people are eligible to 
vote at 1,400 polling stations across the small west African country.

The Gambian leader, who has vowed to rule for a billion years and won the 
previous election with nearly three-quarters of votes, says another victory is 
all but assured with divine intervention. He refused to answer questions about 
whether he would concede if he lost.


“We will win the biggest landslide this country has ever seen. If I wasn’t 
confident we would win, I wouldn’t have voted,” he told journalists as he 
headed back to an armoured vehicle after casting his vote at a cricket ground 
in the capital, Banjul.

Local observers said they had been unable to track polling stations because of 
the internet outage, as they were planning to get results by WhatsApp. Activist 
Jeggan Grey-Johnson called the outages a “deliberate attempt by the incumbent 
to control any sort of information sharing”.

There are a few African Union observers at the election, but none from the 
European Union or the west African regional bloc, Ecowas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce896b556713d3b809e79f2b560411840283d6fa%2F0_0_3056_2037%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce896b556713d3b809e79f2b560411840283d6fa%2F0_0_3056_2037%2F3056.jpg>
 Yahya Jammeh gets back into his armoured car after casting his marble at a 
polling station in Banjul. Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty 
Connections may not be restored until Sunday, a security source told Reuters, 
although results are expected early on Friday morning. That could thwart any 
opposition attempts to contest the outcome or organise challenges.

Governments in Chad, Congo-Brazzaville and Uganda have previously severed 
internet connections around election day in order to boost control. Through a 
nationwide shutdown of the internet and text messaging, the government slowed 
down the momentum that had built during the campaign, culminating in rallies on 
Tuesday night that attracted thousands of people.

The military was out in full force in central Banjul on Thursday and the 
streets of tumbledown colonial-era buildings were empty.

“This election comes at a very tense moment,” said Momodou Bah, president of 
ProGambia, a team of local volunteer observers. “There’s a strong atmosphere 
and demonstrations.”

The Gambia is dependent on tourism and mostly subsistence agriculture, with 
nearly half the population below the poverty line. Thousands of young people 
risk the dangerous journey across the Sahara and over the Mediterranean to 
Europe each year, with thegoalkeeper of the national women’s football team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/gambian-national-goalkeeper-drowned-crossing-mediterranean>
 the most recent casualty.

Barrow has promised to revive the economy, end human rights abuses and even 
step down three years into an official five-year term, to boost democracy.

Young Gambians ready to vote out dictatorial Yahya Jammeh regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/30/young-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime>
The country’s youth, desperate for jobs, largely literate and armed with 
information from apps such as WhatsApp and Facebook, have been galvanised by 
his message and the possibility of change.

Many voters were reluctant to speak out against the president in the same way 
they had during the campaigns and would only say that they hoped the elections 
would be peaceful.

“Peace is the most important thing,” Maimouna Jarrah said, her baby on her 
back and clutching her little girl’s hand outside a polling station. “I’m 
voting for the president. May he rule for a long time. I genuinely like the 
president from the bottom of my heart; it’s not that he’s done anything for me.”

Ibrahim Garba Cham, the secretary general of the Gambian workers’ union, said 
the president was “doing his best” and that any failures were just due to lack 
of funds.


“We’d like to see the leader address socio-economic issues – increase 
employment and create better living conditions. I didn’t hear any of them [the 
candidates] address those things.”

Jammeh came to power in a coup in 1994 and has won every election since after 
changing the constitution to remove term limits. He has skilfully exploited 
tribal and other divisions among multiple opposition parties in past elections 
and this is the first time he will face a single main challenger.


He still has some real support and the green flags of his party flutter on 
many houses along the main road through the country, but it is hard to gauge 
how much of this is because of his autocratic rule.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F007dc6094be2143a06bc5d6a5faf70d3dfe57be8%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F007dc6094be2143a06bc5d6a5faf70d3dfe57be8%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Three ballot drums at a polling station in Serekunda. Photograph: Jerome 
Delay/AP 
Journalists and political opponents are regularly detained, tortured and 
killed, most recently after protests n the spring calling for reforms.


Two main opposition party members died in detention and 15 others have been 
jailed for three years, but opposition leader Omar Amadou Jallow, of the 
People’s Progressive party, said this was the year for change despite that 
clampdown.

 “For 22 years, we have realised that Gambia has been turned into a prison,” 
he told Associated Press. “We are going to give people their freedoms, their 
liberties. That is more important than anything else.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932f654da0ee5a09c39302bd3b631cce6e395b47%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%20bans%20international%20calls%20and%20internet%20as%20voters%20go%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-gambia-bans-international-calls-and-internet-as-voters-go-to-polls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F932f654da0ee5a09c39302bd3b631cce6e395b47%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
 Teenage girls campaigning for President Jammeh, who is seeking a fifth term. 
Photograph: Ruth Maclean for the Guardian 
Jammeh has made no secret of his desire to hold on to power, vowing to govern 
“for a billion years if Allah decrees it”, declaring himself “proud to be a 
dictator” and threatening to bury the “evil vermins called opposition … nine 
feet deep”.

Isatu Touray: ‘Who is going to change Gambia, if not us?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/isatu-touray-who-is-going-to-change-gambia-elections-yahya-jammeh>
He barred demonstrations before the vote “because those are the loopholes that 
are used to destabilise African governments”, he said, but opposition 
supporters have already warned they will not accept a stolen election.


“The government has been failing for 10 years, but this year, things are 
getting worse,” opposition supporter Alagie Blajo, 27, said on the eve of the 
vote. “We’ll send him out without violence but, if necessary, we will be ready 
to die. There’s no way he can win.”

Human rights activists have also raised fears that a Jammeh victory would lead 
to later reprisals for the opposition when the world was not watching.
 