
Sir Philip Green could be forced to pay hundreds of millions of pounds into 
the BHS pension scheme after the Pensions Regulatorbegan formal proceedings 
against the billionaire tycoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
. However, the regulator faces a long and arduous battle to erase the pension 
scheme’s £571m deficit.

What action has the regulator taken this week on BHS?

The regulator has issued a warning notice to Sir Philip Green and the most 
recent owner of BHS,Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell>, and their companies. 
These warning notices run to more than 300 pages and explain why the regulator 
believes them liable for providing financial support to the BHS pension scheme, 
through a one-off contribution and ongoing support. Green and Chappell have 
been sent different notices. The regulator will not disclose the difference 
between the notices, but it is understood Green faces far larger financial 
demands than Chappell, a serial bankrupt.

Why has the regulator done this now?

It launched an anti-avoidance investigation into BHS in March 2015 after Green 
sold the department store chain to Chappell. The regulator, led by chief 
executive Lesley Titcomb, has gathered more than 100,000 documents and now 
believes it has a case against Green and Chappell. At the same time, the 
regulator and the Pension Protection Fund have been in talks with Green about a 
bailout for the pension scheme, but the talks have broken down without a deal 
despite the tycoon pledging to“sort” the problems facing BHS pensioners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/mps-sir-philip-greens-reputation-and-knighthood-depend-on-pension-offer>
. With no deal in place, the regulator has activated its legal powers instead.

Pensions Regulator begins legal proceedings against Sir Philip Green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
What happens next?

Green and Chappell now have several months to formally respond. Once those 
responses have been sent, the regulator’s determinations panel will meet to 
consider the case and make a ruling. The panel is independent from other parts 
of the regulator and the team that has investigatedBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, but it has the power to demand cash 
payments or that parties provide ongoing support to the pension scheme.

Can the regulator legally force Green to make a payment?

Yes, if the determinations panel rules that he should. The regulator was given 
extensive legal powers through a series of pensions laws. However, Green can 
appeal against the decision through the legal system, starting with the upper 
tribunal, then the court of appeal, and finally the supreme court.

What are the chances of winning a legal battle?

The regulator is heading into unknown territory. It was founded in 2005 but 
has issued warning notices in just 16 cases. Some of these cases were about 
establishing pensioners as creditors for a company which has gone bust, such as 
Lehman Brothers, rather than seeking cash from a third party. A similar case 
involving Coats Group plc, the thread-making business, has yet to develop 
beyond the warning notice issued three years ago.

What does this mean for Green’s knighthood?

The latest development is not positive for the honour. After MPs voted 
unanimously to strip the tycoon of his title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/philip-green-labelled-billionaire-spiv-in-commons-debate-on-knighthood>
, probably his final hope would be agreeing a rescue deal for the BHS pension 
scheme. The regulator is still open to agreeing a deal with Green, but the 
start of enforcement action shows it is not confident about agreeing anything. 
Ultimately, the forfeiture committee will make a recommendation to the prime 
minister about the knighthood, but the regulator’s announcement will not count 
in Green’s favour.
 