
Just after 1.30pm next Tuesday the listening devices in GCHQ may twitch a 
little, picking up the sound of a bellicose, 60,000-strong army roaring with 
delight as the cavalry starts to charge. TheCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> spooks won’t have to listen that 
hard – just open a window perhaps – because the noise will be coming from up 
the road.

This is the Cheltenham Festival 
<http://www.thefestival2016.co.uk/#7G6AhT2swOdJDZke.97>, the annual celebration 
of National Hunt, or jumping – an obscure and parochial variant of horse racing 
that hardly exists outside Britain and Ireland. Yet it is Britain’s biggest 
annual betting event, surpassed in terms of bookmaking turnover only by the two 
quadrennial football championships: the World Cup and, as in 2016, the European 
Championships.

Aidan Coleman has Cheltenham Festival winner’s enclosure in his sights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/11/aidan-coleman-cheltenham-festival-winner-enclosure>
The origins of most of Britain’s great racing venues are almost lost in the 
mists of time. Ascot goes back to Queen Anne; Newmarket to James I; Chester to 
Henry VIII. Cheltenham is an upstart: its great meetingonly settled there in 
1911 <http://www.keithprowse.co.uk/racing_cheltenham_history.aspx>, when it was 
known as the National Hunt Festival – emphasis very much on the middle word, 
something the present management prefer to skirt round. And it is no 
coincidence that it all happens in the heart of the Cotswolds’ ducal hunting 
country.

Horse racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> is a troubled 
sport. Football is expected to eclipse it soon, even in terms of betting 
turnover, and it has already happened on the web. But somehow Cheltenham has 
managed to finesse all that.

March was always a big month in the racing calendar. It marked the start of 
the flat season, which was until recently far more popular than mere jumping. 
The back pages of the tabloids used to have regular pictures of their racing 
correspondents in their trilbies, binoculars up, above captions reading: 
“THEY’RE OFF!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3cfa1ea84cc36d0bd4d37fffed61f49b22ba1ee%2F0_0_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing's%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing%27s%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3cfa1ea84cc36d0bd4d37fffed61f49b22ba1ee%2F0_0_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
 ‘THEY’RE OFF!’ … Cheltenham festival punters in 2014. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
for the Guardian 
But now there is rubbish flat racing on artificial surfaces all winter, and 
Cheltenham has become the dominant rite of spring, not just for racing but 
arguably for all sport: the FA Cup final is much diminished, and the 
traditional start of the English cricket season, MCC v Champion County, has 
been moved to Abu Dhabi, for heaven’s sake.

Indeed, there may be nothing that touches Cheltenham for marking the end of 
winter, even beyond sport. Easter moves around too much for post-Christian 
Britain’s taste, and hardly anyone is entirely sure what to do on Good Friday; 
no one dances round maypoles unless they are in the care of a particularly 
zestful primary school teacher; and the first cuckoo is usually inaudible, 
cuckoos having been banished to the most distant rural corners, possibly by 
social workers disgusted by their unacceptable approach to child-rearing. What 
else is there left? Well, there’s another George Osborne budget next Wednesday. 
I rest my case.

The racing pages have been focusing on Cheltenham features for weeks now, and 
the sport’s in-house journal,the Racing Post <http://www.racingpost.com/>, has 
been at it like the Daily Mail on a royal wedding. Indeed, every big 
steeplechase and hurdle since November has been analysed primarily in terms of 
what it means for Cheltenham. For the past week or two, there have even been 
roadshows of pundits going round clubs and village halls discussing the 
prospects for the punters.

In spectator terms, Cheltenham’s success was founded in forming a more 
inclusive peacetime coalition than Westminster has ever managed. The festival 
always had the support of rural Gloucestershire, and the county’s farmers are 
still very noticeable in their raceday finery of contrasting checks. In the 
1950s, when Ireland’s greatest-ever trainer, Vincent O’Brien, started to farm 
the races seriously, the Irish began to turn up in, numbers giving it a 
carefree flavour that the British admire but can never emulate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a9e8e25c4894b33b71130651694e9788271ab2%2F0_0_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing's%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing%27s%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a9e8e25c4894b33b71130651694e9788271ab2%2F0_0_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
 Lots of Cheltenham attendees might never go racing from one March to the next, 
or watch it even when they are there, but absolutely love the buzz. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
And finally it spread to a new class of people, who might never go racing from 
one March to the next, or watch it even when they are at Cheltenham, but 
absolutely love the buzz. They pour down the M4 and the fragile railway link 
that connects Cheltenham to the main line, heading either for the comfort of a 
sponsored box or the insanely crowded bars.

Before the war, jump racing was seen as the black sheep of the Turf, as 
suspect as greyhound racing, and dangerous with it. Its popularity grew, thanks 
in part to the exploits (mainly heroic failures) of the aristocratic daredevil 
Lord Mildmay, who in turn, before he was drowned off Devon in 1950, was said to 
be responsiblefor roping the Queen Mother into the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/mar/31/queenmother.monarchy4>. She seemed 
to enjoy the raffishness of it all.

Heavy rain set to turn Cheltenham ground soft a week before Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/08/heavy-rain-expected-to-turn-cheltenham-ground-soft-a-week-before-festival>
Then came the equine stars: Mill House and Arkle in the 1960s; Red Rum (in the 
Grand National rather than at Cheltenham) in the 1970s; the grey Desert Orchid 
in the 1980s. There was another golden era of equine celebrity towards the end 
of the last decade with the duels between the stablemates Kauto Star and 
Denman, skilfully milked by their PR-savvy trainer, Paul Nicholls.

Flat racing could never match this. Between 2010 and 2012, Frankel, probably 
the greatest racehorse ever seen in Britain,won 14 races out of 14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/21/ascot-crowds-cheer-frankel> in a 
style that was almost insultingly brilliant.

And in the winners’ enclosure there would be his dying trainer, Sir Henry 
Cecil, looking ever more gaunt, ever more beatific. Yet somehow even this story 
did not grab the wider public.

For a modern British colt, 14 races is a lot; many champions are deemed to 
have earned their lifelong reward of high-class sex after two or three decent 
wins. Flat racing is an adjunct to the bloodstock industry, and quite soon the 
potential financial gain from victory is outweighed by the risk of damaging the 
stud value. Even Derby winners no longer get remembered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670f537a68ea43c483dde342d7dd21f6a88d96f4%2F0_0_5094_3372%2F5094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing's%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing%27s%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670f537a68ea43c483dde342d7dd21f6a88d96f4%2F0_0_5094_3372%2F5094.jpg>
 A more inclusive peacetime coalition than Westminster has ever managed … 
ladies day at Cheltenham Festival in 2015. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the 
Guardian 
For reasons too unpleasant to dwell on, this problem does not affect most of 
the four-legged male competitors in jump racing (though some of the jockeys 
manage to over-compensate), and they come back to Cheltenham year after year, 
sometimes with their own fan club. “People get used to the horses at the
Cheltenham Festival <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>,” 
says Jon Ivan-Duke of the bookmakers William Hill. “And I think that’s been a 
real help in getting the younger generation involved in the sport. This is 
something flat racing can learn from. Take Cue Card, for instance – he won at 
Cheltenham in 2010 and this year he’s going for the Gold Cup.”

Perhaps jumping got the final imprimatur in 2003 when the Queen Mum’s 
well-known daughter, primarily a flat fan herself, referred to the “National 
Hunt Service” when forced to read something about the NHS during her speech 
from the throne. And increasingly the sport is epitomised not by the Grand 
National – still popular, still the most famous race, but now an April 
afterthought – but by Cheltenham.

“People love going to Cheltenham,” says the racing writer Sean Magee. “People 
love being there. I don’t know how you define atmosphere, but everyone feels 
there’s something special about it. And anyone can be part of it. There’s no 
formality. All you have to do is pay through the nose.”

Cheltenham ladies day - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/11/cheltenham-ladies-day-in-pictures>
Brough Scott, jockey-turned-journalist-turned-not-quite-grey-eminence, thinks 
the setting itself should get much of the credit, nestling wondrously beneath 
Cleeve Hill, one of the gems of the Cotswolds. “It’s the most natural arena in 
sport, and it’s got one of the best backdrops.” It is a meeting that offers a 
sense of the springtime, no matter what the weather actually throws at it, in a 
way that could never happen at urban Aintree. And the magic works even for the 
most hardened old pros. “Every year, you drive over Cleeve Hill and the hairs 
still stand up on the back of the neck,” the trainer Jonjo O’Neill said in 
Friday’s Racing Post. “You want to do it forever, only with better horses.”

Both Magee and Scott give credit to Cheltenham’s long-time managing director, 
Edward Gillespie, the man who kept raising the prices without discovering a 
downside. “I saw Edward once walking round at the Open Golf,” recalls Scott. 
“He wasn’t so much interested in golf, he was there to see how they did it. 
Racing’s normally a very inward-looking sport and most racecourses only compare 
themselves to other racecourses.” Adverts for Cheltenham meetings are 
ubiquitous on tube escalators, a very rare instance of racing reaching out to 
the urban bourgeoisie.

The enthusiasm is not quite unanimous. In 1993 one of the young smartarses 
then employed by the Guardian wrote: “The stands are full of drunks, though it 
is not easy to see how they got that way, since it is virtually impossible to 
reach the bars … By the fifth race each day, the place stinks of fried onions 
and puke. The idea of Cheltenham is glorious; the reality is always vile.”

OK, so it was me. Maybe that explains why, some years later, an elderly 
gateman tried to strongarm me out of the press box (the only fight I have ever 
won). I am now partially repentant: the smell of onions was an exaggeration. 
And I have mastered the back routes to avoid a repeat of the year I spent 
listening to both the first and second race on the Tannoy while queuing for the 
car park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90d1003f9726c58fc2329d3545ac46f1db580e67%2F0_313_4928_2961%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing's%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20weird%20world%20of%20Cheltenham%20festival%3A%20horse%20racing%27s%20great%20rite%20of%20spring&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fthe-weird-world-of-cheltenham-festival-horse-racing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90d1003f9726c58fc2329d3545ac46f1db580e67%2F0_313_4928_2961%2F4928.jpg>
 Flat racing could never match this … Josh Halley and Outlaw Pete jump the 
water ditch at Cheltenham Festival in 2013. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the 
Guardian 
Perhaps I might have loved it more had I been there in the old days, when the 
jockeys were still in the Mildmay mould: Battle of Britain pilots manqué, for 
whom actually staying alive was a bonus rather than the object of the exercise. 
(That was long before the teetotaller Sir Anthony McCoy made professionalism 
among jump jockeys an ideal rather than an eccentricity.) The days when the 
all-night poker sessions were in full cry at the Queen’s. When the room 
bookings were so haphazard there was said to be an Irishman sleeping in every 
bath. And when one Gold Cup-winning jockey got roaring drunk afterwards, yet 
somehow managed to transport himself to Uttoxeter to win the first race the 
following afternoon, before being stood down by the course doctor for “illness” 
– ie he was still pissed.

But maybe it was better in the imagination than reality. I now still think 
that anyone without a freebie entrée into a posh box is insane to go there. 
Maybe I like the racing too much. Natural amphitheatre or not, the view for 
most spectators has always been wretched. (The latest development is said to 
have improved things somewhat.)

There is also a far more serious existential problem: the meeting’s success is 
unbalancing the structure of the sport. Every owner wants to have a runner 
there, even if there is little chance of winning: the very phrase “Cheltenham 
horse” gives everyone involved a certain cachet. And the huge betting turnover 
in the big week may have been partially sucked from the other weeks of winter 
when the racing is often very dreary, especially since 2005, when the meeting 
switched from three days to four, giving more chances to the less-than-best 
horses. “Cheltenham has certainly sucked the lifeblood from the period after 
Christmas,” says Magee.

Victoria Pendleton to ride on Gold Cup day at the Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/victori-pendleton-ride-gold-cup-day-cheltenham-festival-pacha-du-polder>
But while it lasts, I too will revel in it, if from a distance. With McCoy now 
safely retired, this year’s renewal will revolve round theIrish trainer Willie 
Mullins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/cheltenham-festival-2016-willie-mullins-guide-to-his-team-of-runners>
, whose rustic face appears as if it might just conceal a brain capable of 
being quite shrewd in the bidding at a County Carlow cattle market. He runs the 
strongest and most professional operation in the sport. He is still expected to 
dominate the week, even though his hotpot for the Champion Hurdle, Faugheen, is 
injured. He still had another, Annie Power, in reserve and plenty more for just 
about every other race.

Colin Tizzard <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colin-tizzard>, who trains 
both Cue Card, a strong candidate for the Gold Cup, and the beautifully named 
favourite for the World Hurdle, Thistlecrack, has the best Dorset accent still 
in captivity, and sounds as if he has just wandered in from milking the dairy 
herd. This is not quite true: someone else now does that for him.

One of the glories of Cheltenham is that the gifted amateur is even now not 
excluded. The likely presence of the Olympic cyclistVictoria Pendleton as a 
jockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/07/victoria-pendleton-cheltenham-festival-pr-genius-disaster>
 next Friday may look three-parts publicity stunt, but at Cheltenham one can 
never rule out anything. In 1990 the Gold Cup went to a 100-to-1 outsider 
trained by a west Wales farmer called Sirrell Griffiths. And he really did do 
the milking before he set out.
 