
No film this year sounded worse on paper than The Angry Birds Movie (Sony, U): 
the mobile game, an irritation-based fad already past its pop-culture peak, has 
no obvious narrative framework, and kamikaze canaries are surely more fun when 
you’re the one controlling them. Against all conceivable odds, however, Clay 
Kaytis and Fergal Reilly’s suitably crazed, Crayola-splattered cartoon is a 
pleasure: a disposable one, low on nutrition and high on noise, but a romp that 
adds just enough character-based warmth to the game’s dumb, knockabout anarchy 
to justify the leap to a screen larger than six inches. I’ll be surprised anew 
if theforthcoming Emoji movie 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/james-corden-ilana-glazer-emojimovie-cast-sony-animation-1201833926/>
 has anything like its spirit.

More chiaroscuro-toned thrills are on offer in The Clan (Curzon Artificial 
Eye, 15), Argentinian director Pablo Trapero’s muscular, muskily atmospheric 
underworld drama, based on the true story of the Puccio family and their 
profitable, government-enabled kidnapping schemes. It’s a riveting, luridly 
horrifying tale with nary a sympathetic face in sight, treated with oak-smoked 
solemnity by Trapero, whose brooding direction borrows liberally from the 
Scorsese playbook. It’s a film with one eye on Hollywood, yet the facts and 
political context of the case lend it bitter distinction.

It’s been too long since Susan Sarandon’s peppery charms were given as 
sympathetic a vehicle asThe Meddler (Sony, 12), a light, humane mother-daughter 
comedy that is at once as soft and as sensibly solid as a woollen blanket. 
Sarandon stars as a recent widow who, after being ordered out of the affairs of 
her workaholic daughter (Rose Byrne), turns her slightly invasive generosity to 
the world around her. You could carp about the more sitcom-shaped constructs of 
Lorene Scafaria’s film, but that’s not to deny the honest compassion of its 
writing and performances. Comfort food of a beefier variety is on offer inThe 
Take(StudioCanal, 15) – released in cinemas as Bastille Day, but understandably 
retitled after this year’s 14 July tragedy – in which Idris Elba, as a 
rule-busting CIA agent chasing down terrorists in Paris, continues to hone his 
James Bond audition. Narratively, it has few distinguishing features, but 
director James Watkins has a lean, keen way with an action sequence, and it 
dashes along most briskly.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXbN58_kYZrU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXbN58_kYZrU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXbN58_kYZrU&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Meddler. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XbN58_kYZrU>
Two epidemic-themed horror films land on DVD this week, but despite the 
Stephen King imprint, you can skip right pastCell (Signature, 15), a mangy, 
low-energy adaptation of his techno-paranoid novel in which mobile phones turn 
humans to zombies; if you must, watch it on your phone in defiance. 
Significantly better, and working more inventively around its budgetary 
constraints, isViral (Lionsgate, 15), which finds teenage sisters negotiating a 
host of personal conflicts beside the parasitic virus eating away at their 
suburban town; directors Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman,best known for the 
frightening social-media docCatfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138629/catfish>, smartly locate nervy 
adolescent tensions within established genre parameters.

Thrillingly demented Polish auteur Andrzej Zulawski died in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/21/andrzej-zulawski-obituary>; that 
he’s not around to offer any further context to his final film,Cosmos (Arrow, 
15), makes it all the more fascinatingly evasive. It was his first film in 16 
years, and it’s fair to say the rust shows in corners of this mapcap 
contraption about — inasmuch as it’s “about” anything — a law student 
encountering a world of insanity in a Lisbon boarding house. Some of the whimsy 
is strained, some genuinely disorienting, while stray ribbons of wild beauty 
run through the whole. Fusing arthouse and genre tropes to sporadically 
arresting but unsteady effect is The Keeping Room (Lionsgate, 15), a civil 
war-era home-invasion thriller that presumes a feminist stance in its setup – 
three women at tortured odds with two Union soldiers – but doesn’t have much 
subtext beneath its stylish swaggering.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_LQoM8hJS6c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_LQoM8hJS6c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_LQoM8hJS6c&media=>
Watch Netflix’s trailer for Justin Timberlake and the Tennessee Kids. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_LQoM8hJS6c> 
Finally, Netflix continues its recent spate of high-profile premieres 
<https://www.netflix.com/title/80127559> with Justin Timberlake and the 
Tennessee Kids, still hot from its unveiling at last month’s Toronto festival. 
It’s a concert film, yes, but rather more special than that – with director 
Jonathan Demme at the helm, you’re getting a lot more than a standard 
stadium-to-screen transfer. More than 30 years after his landmark Talking Heads 
docStop Making Sense, Demme still has a dazzling eye for the staging mechanics 
and less tangible performance qualities that go into a great pop concert. 
Iridescently shot (by the great Declan Quinn) in 2015 at Las Vegas’s MGM Grand, 
the film showcases Timberlake, in all his glassy-voiced glory, as a master 
showman, but also as a product of a vast, stunningly assembled pop machine.
 