
The winner: The Girl on the Train

Resisting the challenge of Tom Hanks’s globetrotting symbologist in Inferno, 
The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
 hangs on to the top spot, with a gentle decline from the previous weekend of 
34%. After 12 days, the murder mystery has grossed an impressive £13.7m, which 
compares with £9.8m forGone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> 
at the same stage of its run. Gone Girl enjoyed a lot of staying power, ending 
up with £22.4m in the UK – more than double the number it had reached after two 
weekends.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20'The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20%27The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&media=>
Emily Blunt on The Girl on the Train: ‘The vomit was not my own’ – video 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/29/emily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
The runner-up: Inferno


The film franchise adapted from Dan Brown’s novels continues its downward 
trajectory with the release ofInferno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/10/inferno-review-tom-hanks-felicity-jones-dan-brown>
.The Da Vinci Code <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/may/19/2> kicked 
off the series in 2006 with a debut of £9.50m, on its way to £30.51m.Angels & 
Demons <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/angels-and-demons> 
followed three years later, opening with £6.05m including £939,000 in previews, 
and ending up with £18.79m. Now Inferno begins with £2.97m – a significant drop 
from the Angels & Demons number. Based on the performance of the previous film, 
Inferno looks to be heading for a total of about £11m.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRH2BD49sEZI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRH2BD49sEZI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRH2BD49sEZI&media=>
The family film: Storks

When The Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/13/the-lego-movie-review> delivered 
UK box office of £34.3m (and $469m worldwide) in 2014, Warner Bros announced 
itself as a power player in animation, up there with Disney, Pixar, DreamWorks 
and Universal Illumination. Now the pressure is on the studio to deliver again, 
this time without the benefit of the Lego brand.

Despite the tagline “From the studio that delivered The Lego Movie” and the 
involvement of Chris Miller and Phil Lord – executive producers here –Storks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/storks-review-baby-carriers-deliver-a-bundle-of-wacky-fun>
 is struggling to position itself in that lineage. The film has opened with 
£2.25m, including previews of £974,000. Strip out the previews, and Storks 
would have debuted in sixth place. The number compares with a debut of £8.05m 
including previews of £2.16m for The Lego Movie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZENmkJk9fBM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZENmkJk9fBM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZENmkJk9fBM&media=>
One problem Storks faced was DreamWorks Animation’s Trolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/11/trolls-review-anna-kendrick-a-candy-coloured-return-for-the-famed-ugly-lovable-creatures>
, which enjoyed previews on Saturday and Sunday, grossing more than £2m. There 
is every sign that Trolls is going to prove stiff competition for Storks when 
it opens on Friday.

The arthouse battle: American Honey v My Scientology Movie
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&media=>
When Universal picked October 14 as its release date for Andrea Arnold’s 
American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
, it may have been concerned that Ken Loach’sI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
 would be arriving a week later. But the distributor probably wasn’t paying 
much attention to a film slated for one week before American Honey: Louis 
Theroux’s documentaryMy Scientology Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/my-scientology-movie-review-louis-theroux-gets-smart-with-the-cult-church>
.

American Honey debuted with £175,000 from 101 cinemas, including previews of 
£30,000. This compares with an opening of £161,000 from 82 cinemas including 
£9,000 in previews for Arnold’s previous featureWuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/10/wuthering-heights-film-review> 
(2011), and £103,000 from 47 cinemas for the earlierFish Tank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/10/fish-tank-review>. Strip out the 
previews and American Honey opened lower than Wuthering Heights. When Universal 
acquired international rights to American Honey, a commercial breakthrough 
looked on the cards – but it has not transpired so far.

In its second weekend of release, My Scientology Movie delivered £122,000 from 
49 cinemas, taking the 10-day tally to £770,000. It seems the film is reaching 
a younger audience than typically seen for big-screen documentaries, thanks to 
the popularity of Theroux, who has conquered a new demographic viaNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>. Many cinemas are offering encore 
showings of the Adam Buxton-hosted Q&A, which went out live to cinemas last 
Monday from Royal Festival Hall, London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmy-scientology-movie-trailer-for-louis-therouxs-documentary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20Scientology%20Movie%3A%20trailer%20for%20Louis%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmy-scientology-movie-trailer-for-louis-therouxs-documentary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20Scientology%20Movie%3A%20trailer%20for%20Louis%20Theroux%E2%80%99s%20documentary%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fmy-scientology-movie-trailer-for-louis-therouxs-documentary-video&media=>
My Scientology Movie: trailer for Louis Theroux’s documentary – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/sep/30/my-scientology-movie-trailer-for-louis-therouxs-documentary-video>
Recent weeks have seen three documentaries crack £500,000 at the UK box 
office, boosted by a live event.The Beatles: Eight Days a Week – The Touring 
Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/the-beatles-eight-days-a-week-review-ron-howard-documentary>
 has reached £1.02m after five weeks; Oasis docSupersonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/supersonic-review-oasis-documentary-noel-gallagher-liam-gallagher-mat-whitecross>
 is at £668,000 after three weeks. And now we also have My Scientology Movie, 
which, with £1m, has every chance of matching the Beatles film.

The special event: Miss Saigon

Universal will be congratulating itself for the result achieved by Miss 
Saigon: 25th Anniversary Performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/miss-saigon-25th-anniversary-performance-review>
 on Sunday, with a gross of £2.03m. This compares with £551,000 for The Phantom 
of the Opera: 25th Anniversary Concert in October 2011. That time, the concert 
played in 255 cinemas against 593 this time, reflecting how much event cinema 
has expanded in five years.

The record breaker: Bridget Jones’s Baby
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bridget%20Jones's%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bridget%20Jones%27s%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&media=>
Bridget Jones’s Baby: watch Renée Zellweger return in new trailer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/mar/23/bridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
On Monday, Bridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/bridget-joness-baby-review-reborn-renee-zellweger-excels-in-fun-romp-heavy-with-expectation>
 overtook Bridget Jones’s Diary total of £42m to become the biggest film in the 
series and the UK’s biggest romcom of all time. Including Monday, Baby has 
grossed £42.24m, which puts it in sniffing distance ofFinding Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/28/finding-dory-review-pixar-nemo-ellen-degeneres>
, currently the second biggest grossing film of the year, with £42.25m. (The 
Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review> is the 
top title, with £46.1m.) Bridget Jones’s Baby is happily coexisting with the 
female-skewing The Girl on the Train, and does not appear to be facing much 
competition in the next few weeks.

Spreading the wealth

For only the fifth time this year, six titles posted weekend grosses above 
£1m: The Girl on the Train, Inferno, Storks, Miss Saigon, Bridget Jones’s Baby 
andMiss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/miss-peregrines-home-for-peculiar-children-review-tim-burton-ransom-riggs>
. In fact, with Trolls, it’s seven films grossing £1m-plus. That’s the greatest 
spread of wealth since the first weekend of January 2015, when eight films 
managed box office above £1m.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach's%20Palme%20d'Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%2C%20Daniel%20Blake%3A%20the%20trailer%20for%20Ken%20Loach%27s%20Palme%20d%27Or-winner%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fi-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video&media=>
I, Daniel Blake: the trailer for Ken Loach’s Palme d’Or-winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/15/i-daniel-blake-trailer-ken-loach-palme-dor-winner-video>
The arrival of mid-level movies such as Inferno and Storks saw box office rise 
2% on the previous frame, but takings were 16% down on the equivalent session 
from a year ago, whenHotel Transylvania 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/hotel-transylvania-2-review-adam-sandler>
,Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/suffragette-review-votes-women-carey-mulligan-abi-morgan-bonham-carter>
 andPan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/pan-review-joe-wright-hugh-jackman>
 all landed in cinemas. So ends a four-week run during which weekend box office 
was consistently up on last year. The exhibition sector now has its hoped 
pinned on Trolls and Paramount’s Jack Reacher: Never Go Back, starring Tom 
Cruise. There’s also horror sequelOuija: Origin of Evil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/18/ouija-origin-of-evil-review>. 
Targeting less mainstream audiences are I, Daniel Blake and Mira Nair’s 
inspirational, Africa-set true story,The Queen of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/queen-of-katwe-review-ugandan-chess-movie-could-be-new-slumdog>
.

Top 10 films October 14-16

1. The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-girl-on-the-train>, £3,412,472 from 630 
sites. Total: £13,654,644

2. Inferno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/10/inferno-review-tom-hanks-felicity-jones-dan-brown>
, £2,970,027 from 555 sites (new)

3. Storks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/storks-review-baby-carriers-deliver-a-bundle-of-wacky-fun>
, £2,247,038 from 528 sites (new)

4. Miss Saigon: 25th Anniversary Performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/miss-saigon-25th-anniversary-performance-review>
, £2,033,031 from 593 sites (new)

5. Bridget Jones’s Baby <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridget-jones-s-baby>
, £1,888,986 from 575 sites. Total: £41,991,553

6. Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/miss-peregrines-home-for-peculiar-children>, 
£1,313,861 from 524 sites. Total: £8,763,435

7. Deepwater Horizon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/deepwater-horizon>, 
£456,456 from 399 sites. Total: £4,852,229

8. The Magnificent Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-magnificent-seven>, £212,000 from 309 
sites. Total: £5,895,017

9. Finding Dory <https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-dory>, £187,951 from 
394 sites. Total: £42,251,361

10. American Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-honey>, £175,383 
from 101 sites (new)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlLTT8ogRf50&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlLTT8ogRf50>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlLTT8ogRf50&media=>
Other openers

The Golden Age – Bolshoi Ballet, £86,854 from 201 sites

Kochaj!, £29,037 from 50 sites

Gautas Iskvietimas 3, £22,999 from 11 sites

Lock, £9,522 from 11 sites

The Flag, £9,222 from 24 sites (Ireland only)

Tutak Tutak Tutak, £6,972 from six sites

Oru Muthassi Gadha, £2,100 from 15 sites

Kate Plays Christine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/kate-plays-christine-review-atmospheric-drama-doc-chubbuck>
, £1,477 from seven sites

MSG The Warrior: Lion Heart, £1,475 from five sites

Aatishbaazi Ishq, £579 from two sites

Kavi Ucheshichathu, £530 from two sites

Rekka, £232 from five sites

Sky Ladder: The Art of Cai Guo-Qiang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/sky-ladder-the-art-of-cai-guo-qiang-review-kevin-macdonald>
, £180 from one site

• Thanks to comScore <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK>. All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.
 