
Architects seldom make the front pages of newspapers. Patrik Schumacher 
recently managed it, though, getting himself on to the cover of the Evening 
Standard after a speech in which headvocated privatising all social housing and 
all public space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/24/zaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing>
 – including Hyde Park – and espoused intensified gentrification of inner city 
areas. His advocacy on behalf of plutocrats reached hilariously villainous 
levels when he said of second home owners in London: “even if they’re only here 
for a few weeks and throw some key parties, these are amazing multiplying 
events”.

This is “neoliberal” rhetoric at its purest. Neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 – a form of free market fundamentalism that effectively came to power at the 
turn of the 1980s with the election of such enthusiasts forFriedrich Hayek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2012/feb/20/keynes-hayek-economics-nicholas-wapshott-video>
 andMilton Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/nov/17/guardianobituaries.politics> as 
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> and 
Ronald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jun/07/guardianobituaries.past> – is an 
unusual concept, largely because it extends out of economics and into 
philosophy and the way people see the world. As Thatcher once said, “economics 
is the method, the aim is to change the soul”. According to Douglas Spencer, 
one of the best places to see this is architecture.

Schumacher now heads Zaha Hadid Architects, after the early death of his 
long-term creative partner in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/the-guardian-view-on-zaha-hadid-reluctant-queen-of-the-3d-curve>
. He is a figurehead of a digital architecture described as“parametricism” 
<http://www.patrikschumacher.com/Texts/Parametricism%20-%20A%20New%20Global%20Style%20for%20Architecture%20and%20Urban%20Design.html>
, which he has tried to popularise through a series of densely theoretical, 
admirably pugnacious texts in the architectural press over the last 10 years. 
The speech that got him into the national news is a somewhat blunter expression 
of the political ideas that go with the seemingly apolitical language he used 
to describe parametricism, an architecture which, in his words, 
“interarticulates, morphs, deterritorialises, deforms, iterates, uses splines, 
nurbs, generative components, scripts rather than models”. This is a little bit 
more complex than “build on Hyde Park”.

For Spencer, this is only the vulgar statement of something that has 
previously been expressed in architectural-philosophical jargon. For him, 
Schumacher’s buildings with Zaha Hadid, characterised by “pliant envelopes and 
organic contours”, carefully hide the structures of support, not to mention the 
human labour and political power that actually builds; their “workings are 
beyond our ken”. The buildings described in this book include a college in 
Greenwich, aBMW factory in Leipzig 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BMW_Central_Building>, the China Central 
Television headquarters 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CCTV_Headquarters#/media/File:Beijingskyscraperpic5_crop_rotate_lighten.jpg>
 in Beijing,New Street station in Birmingham 
<http://www.mappa-mercia.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/New-St-2.jpg> and a 
John Lewis store in Leicester. The “neoliberal eye”, Spencer argues, “does not 
apprehend, calculate or gauge”. Instead, it “surfs the field of vision, 
revelling in the sensuous freedoms offered up to it”.
 An artist’s impression of the design for Rem Koolhaas’s CCTV building in 
Beijing, China. Photograph: OMA/Corbis 
Architects such as Schumacher, Greg Lynn and the team of Alejandro Zaera-Polo 
and Farshid Moussavi (formerlyForeign Office Architects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/nov/17/architecture>, designers 
of New Street station and the Leicester John Lewis) arrived at this point via a 
circuitous route through continental philosophy and architectural theory, only 
later coming to the neoliberal classics (by Hayek and Friedman). Resistance is 
not only futile, it’s misunderstanding; there is no alternative. Hayek argued 
that in the social democratic era human systems were so complex that to try and 
manage or plan them could only lead to totalitarianism. With Schumacher, this 
idea is translated into a “radical free-market urbanism”, where all controls on 
flows must be removed, and “the market will discover the most productive mix 
and arrangement of land uses, a distribution that garners synergies and 
maximises overall value” (an excitable jargon is a constant in these circles). 
This belief in “the market” left to its own devices, despite the evidence of 
the 2008 financial crisis that an unregulated, complex, computerised financial 
system leads both to endemic corruption and to disastrous economic collapses, 
has a touching, eschatological certainty to it. It is no surprise to learn that 
Schumacher is a former member of a Marxist sect.

Like many architectural theorists, Spencer is better on buildings as theorems 
than as things

But what does it mean for design? Zaera-Polo’s new facade and station hall for 
Birmingham New Street was downgraded so relentlessly in its construction – via 
impeccably neoliberal methods such as design and build contracts, 
public-private partnerships and “value engineering”, which take power out of 
the hands of architects and leave it with businesses – that the smooth surfaces 
and seamless flows are constantly interrupted by cheesy adverts and cheap 
materials. Schumacher and Hadid’sRiverside Transport Museum 
<http://mesch-project.eu/an-interview-with-the-riverside-transport-museum-in-glasgow-on-their-design-approach-to-interactive-installations/>
 in Glasgow, or theirGuangzhou Opera House 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/guangzhou-opera-house/>, went through a 
similar process of cost-cutting vulgarisation. Like many architectural 
theorists, Spencer is better on buildings as theorems than as things, which 
runs contrary to his laudable emphasis on politics and labour. In the process, 
he inadvertently presents this architecture as seductively as it exists in the 
computer visuals, rather than in its usually tawdry reality.
 Nottingham Contemporary art gallery, designed by Caruso St John. Photograph: 
David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
These buildings are beginning to date. In architecture today, Schumacher often 
resembles a futurist relic, keeping the pure flame of pre-crisis “irrational 
exuberance” burning in a chastened era. The architecture that wins awards and 
contracts after the financial crisis is different. It is exemplified at its 
best in the discipline and craftsmanship of the art galleries Caruso St John 
architects have designed inNottingham 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/nottingham-contemporary/> and Vauxhall 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/newport-street-gallery/>, south London – 
and at its worst in the brick grids of luxury flats that increasingly dominate 
the skylines of London and Manchester. The social processes these latter 
buildings enforce – displacement of the poor, privatisation of public space, 
the decimation of social housing – are exactly those which Schumacher argues 
for in wilfully offensive terms.

Certainly, there are neoliberal architects, and their vertiginous designs 
represent their attempt to embody the dominant political and economic ideas of 
our time. But neoliberalism can easily do without them, and structures of power 
may prefer to cover their ongoing project in much more homely, reassuring 
architectural forms. This book is about the architecture of Tony Blair’s vision 
of society – ruthless for those who can’t go with the flow, rewarding for those 
who “aim high”.Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s 
architecture will be dull and disciplinarian.

• The Architecture of Neoliberalism: How Contemporary Architecture Became an 
Instrument of Control and Compliance is published by Bloomsbury Academic. To 
order a copy for £19.99go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/architecture-of-neoliberalism.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 