
Back story

The invention that aims to make periods less of a pain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/02/menstruation-flo-periods-less-of-a-pain-for-girls-asia-africa>
Menstrual Hygiene Day <http://menstrualhygieneday.org/> (28 May) is often met 
with squeamish disgust. Visibly shocked, people ask: “There’s actually a day 
for that?!”


At WaterAid, we asked why menstruation provokes such a response? And I asked 
myself why, as a woman in my early 30s, do I still hide my tampon up my sleeve 
when I go to the office toilet?


More than one billion women don’t have access to somewhere safe to go to the 
toilet when they’re on their period. Often forced to find somewhere after dark, 
this is both undignified and dangerous. A lack of toilets in schools means that 
young girls often drop out of education when they reach puberty, limiting their 
life chances. Without access to proper sanitary products, many women and girls 
use rags, newspaper and even mud, which can lead to infections. In rural Nepal 
and northern India the outlawed practice ofchhaupadi 
<http://www.wateraid.org/uk/news/news/rose-george-reports-on-her-visit-to-wateraid-nepal>
 – being ostracised from your family during your monthly cycle – still prevails.


In the UK, we use extraordinarily inventive euphemisms for menstruation – 
phrases like “I’m on”, “It’s that time of the month”, “the painters and 
decorators are in” are common, but starting your period should be a celebrated 
rite of passage, not an invisible act.


Development issues can be tough to translate to a UK audience, but periods are 
a relatable experience and we decided to use that to our advantage.


Aims
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzOMPS2zkE1M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzOMPS2zkE1M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzOMPS2zkE1M&media=>
 If men had periods: manpons. 
We wanted to invite people to imagine what the world might look like if 
menstruation wasn’t a “women’s issue”. Would access to sanitation and sanitary 
products be given greater priority on the development agenda? And would the 
subject of periods be treated in a different, more open way?


Last year, Menstrual Hygiene Day fell four months before the agreement of the 
sustainable development goals (SDGs). OurMake it Happen petition 
<http://www.wateraid.org/uk/makeithappen> called on world leaders to make sure 
that the goals included a target on safe water and sanitation, so that every 
woman and girl has access to water, sanitation and hygiene by 2030. We wanted 
to raise awareness about the importance of menstrual hygiene and increase the 
number of signatories to the petition, which was to be delivered to the British 
government ahead of the UN summit.


We need to talk about periods: why is menstruation still holding girls back?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/28/we-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back>
Strategy

We decided to reframe the issue and question why menstrual hygiene remains 
shrouded in taboo. Gloria Steinem’s 1978 essayIf Men Could Menstruate 
<http://ww3.haverford.edu/psychology/ddavis/p109g/steinem.menstruate.html> 
still resonates some 38 years on so we asked what the world would look like if 
men had periods in a modern remake.

In this alternate (and tongue in cheek) reality, we conjectured that periods 
would be celebrated and considered a sign of virility, that #imonmyperiod would 
be trending daily on Twitter and that manpons, chocolate oranges at half-time 
and office banter about periods would all be the norm.

Execution

We wanted to find out what the British public thought the world would be like 
if men had periods, so we commissioned a survey to ask about stigma, the 
workplace, sanitary products and sport. The results showed that nearly a third 
of interviewees thought that men would brag about being on their period. A 
third of people also thought TV sports commentators would openly discuss how 
player’s menstrual cycles affect their performance, while half of all 
respondents imagined that a specialist sports range of sanitary products would 
be developed. We used these responses to create three short satirical films: a 
football commentary, a water cooler moment and a TV advert for manpons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg0RWdxpsev4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg0RWdxpsev4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dg0RWdxpsev4&media=>
 If men had periods: in the office. 
We even imagined “an extra-strength sports tampon, engineered to give you a 
super-charged performance during your period, based on a formula designed by 
Nasa scientists”. (I found myself asking: actually, why don’t we have this?)


The survey results and videos were released to the media just before Menstrual 
Hygiene <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hygiene> Day, and we focused on 
journalists who were already writing about issues around menstruation, such as 
the tampon tax.


The process from idea generation to execution took just three weeks and I 
think that the campaign really benefited from this quick turnaround – it kept 
the idea fresh and simple. With no agency support and using our in-house film 
team, we were able to deliver this campaign at low cost.


Challenges
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUuvulOzttQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUuvulOzttQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUuvulOzttQ&media=>
 If men had periods: football match. 
If Men Had Periods (the formal title of the campaign) saw us step outside our 
comfort zone. We did wonder if people would appreciate our cheeky approach to 
such an important issue. One survey company actually refused to take on the 
project because of the subject matter, which only further proved that we need 
to challenge this outdated stigma head on.


Results

Menstrual Hygiene Day: the world celebrates periods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2015/may/28/menstrual-hygiene-day-the-world-celebrates-periods>
The manpon spoof TV advert went viral with over 1.4m views, recently won the 
Drum Content award for Best Not-for-Profit campaign 
<http://www.thedrumcontentawards.com/results/163>, and was also nominated for 
the prestigiousGolden Radiator award 
<http://www.rustyradiator.com/golden-radiator-award-2015/>. If Men Had Periods 
achieved global media coverage in 15 different countries, from Time magazine in 
the US to El Mundo in Spain. The Metro asked“Is this the best campaign ever?” 
<http://metro.co.uk/2015/05/27/is-ifmenhadperiods-the-best-campaign-ever-5217830/>
 andBuzzFeed’s article 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/abagg/this-video-imagines-what-it-would-look-like-if-men-had-perio>
 had more than 400,000 page views.

Most importantly, though, our Make it Happen petition reached 115,056 
signatures and the final text of the SDGs included a dedicated goal to clean 
water and sanitation. For the first time world leaders acknowledged the 
critical role that water and sanitation plays in eradicating poverty. We came 
one step closer to a world where no woman or girl has to manage her period 
without access to proper sanitation.

Hannah Wilkinson is a media officer at WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk>. 
Follow@H_Wilki <https://twitter.com/h_wilki> on Twitter


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 