
I wasn’t aware of the term “bibliomemoir” 
<http://storyacious.com/books-read-lives-lead-bibliomemoirs-1/> until the 
novelist Joyce Carol Oates used it – or perhaps coined it? – in reviewing my 
book, The Road to Middlemarch, earlier this year. But it’s a fitting enough 
label for the extended family my book belongs to: books that explicitly 
consider reading as a crucial dimension of living, or that explore the 
post-publication life that a significant book has led.

As I was writing my book my husband, George Prochnik, was the other end of our 
house writing his own, The Impossible Exile: Stefan Zweig at the End of the 
World, about the mid-century Austrian writer. It was not until both books were 
published that we realised they were, in a sense, twins: his concerned with the 
disorientating anguish of exile, and mine with the melancholy joy of homecoming.

My favorite books about books, or about reading, are those in which the writer 
has not felt it necessary to hide his or her own personal involvement in the 
subject – or to limit its disclosure to a preface or afterword – but instead 
has taken his or her own investment as a starting point. Reading isn’t a 
terribly dramatic activity to write about, admittedly. But since all real 
writers are also readers, it is, for some of us at least, a compelling, indeed 
unavoidable, subject. I bet if skydivers could skydive about skydiving, they 
would.

1. U and I by Nicholson Baker 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/01/04/15/specials/baker-u.html> 




Baker got there first – or at least early – with U and I, published in 1992. 
This short, startlingly original book marvelously meditates upon, and conveys, 
one writer’s compulsive obsession with another: in Baker’s case, John Updike.

2. To the River by Olivia Laing 
<http://olivialaing.co.uk/#/to-the-river/4542502489>

Laing’s book about a trip taken along the Ouse, the river in which Virginia 
Woolf ended her life, is a gorgeous, exquisitely written genre mash-up. In it, 
travel writing, biography, essay and personal memoir are woven together, to 
symphonic effect.

3. Portrait of A Novel by Michael Gorra 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v34/n19/james-wood/perfuming-the-money-issue>

Gorra’s book does two things at once, brilliantly: it delivers a satisfying 
Life of Henry James, and gives a fascinating account of the origins and 
afterlife of The Portrait of a Lady. A third thing— it happily betrays a 
scholar’s love for his subject.

4. The Possessed by Elif Batuman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/30/elif-batuman-the-possessed-review>



Batuman tackles a syllabus-full of Russian heavyweights – Babel, Tolstoy, 
Dostoyevsky – and in so doing provides a winning, comic memoir of graduate 
student life and its discontents.

5. How to Live by Sarah Bakewell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/08/life-montaigne-bakewell-lezard-review>

How to Live revisits the essays of Montaigne, linking their themes with the 
course of Montaigne’s own life, and delightfully explicating their enduring 
applicability to everyone else’s.

6. How Proust Can Change Your Life by Alain de Botton 
<http://alaindebotton.com/literature/>

This was another early entrant into the field of books about reading books. 
Published in 1997, it is a beguiling tour through the works, letters, and life 
of Marcel Proust, executed in the genre of self-help with subversive irony.

7. Out of Sheer Rage by Geoff Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/18/book-beach-out-of-sheer-rage-geoff-dyer-sam-jordison>

Wonderfully titled, Out of Sheer Rage is a virtuoso example of the books about 
readers genre: in the guise of a study of the life and work of DH Lawrence, it 
is a gripping account of the life and work ofGeoff Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoff-dyer>.

8. Parallel Lives by Phyllis Rose 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/10/26/books/books-of-the-times-254157.html>

One of my favorite critical books: a study of Victorian marriage refracted 
through the lives of five famous literary couples. In her more recent work, The 
Shelf, Rose is excellent company as she works her way along a single shelf of 
the New York Society Library, discovering gems and dreck as she goes.

9. The Magician’s Book by Laura Miller <http://www.magiciansbook.com/>

Miller is a book critic for Salon magazine; someone who’s had the good fortune 
to turn her love of reading into a career. In The Magician’s Book she tells 
where that love began, in the world of Narnia, and shows how literature can 
work its spell on a young reader.

10. A Jane Austen Education: How Six Novels Taught Me About Love, Friendship, 
and the Things that Really Matter by William Deresiewicz 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/12/books/review/book-review-a-jane-austen-education-and-why-jane-austen.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>

Deresiewicz uses the works of Austen to tells of his maturation as a reader 
and as a man. And along the way provides astute, accessible analyses of her 
novels.

• The Road to Middlemarch by Rebecca Mead is published by Granta. Buy it here 
for £7.99 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/road-to-middlemarch-2.html>
 