
The announcement of the shortlist for the Arthur C Clarke award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarkeaward> for science fiction has 
left me at something of a loss for words. Not because it isn't interesting, but 
because it defies the narrow categorisations that make life easier for 
journalists.

The six contenders for the 2009 prize, worth £2009, are:

Song of Time by Ian R MacLeod 
The Quiet War by Paul McAuley 
House of Suns by Alastair Reynolds 
Anathem by Neal Stephenson 
The Margarets by Sheri S Tepper 
Martin Martin's on the Other Side by Mark Wernham 

Is there significance in the fact that no authors whose names begin with 
letters before "M" have got a look in? Is that why Paul Auster'sMan In The Dark 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/man-in-the-dark-by-paul-auster-934871.html>
 didn't make it past the longlist stage, thus cutting off a potential 
is-it-or-isn't-it SF debate? Is that whyIain M Banks's Matter 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/books/book_reviews/article3288401.ece>
 didn't get through either? Is it possible to read anything into the fact that 
while there are three books here published by the SF imprint Gollancz, there 
are none from the other industry big-hitter Orbit? Or the fact that Orbit's 
other big author this year, alongside Banks, is another Scot, Ken MacLeod? Did 
the Edinburgh connections of Charlie Stross (who is now aHugo contender 
<http://www.thehugoawards.org/?p=260>) also disqualify him?

Clearly, I'm clutching at straws. All the shortlist really shows is the broad 
stretch of the SF multi-verse and the catholic tastes of the judges in this
enthusiastically run award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/may/01/mynightinthenewworldofs>
. It's only fair, then, to run through the books one at a time.

Song Of Time by Ian R McLeod

According to the Guardian's own Eric Brown, McLeod is "one of the country's 
very best literary SF writers" and this book has drawn comparisons ranging from 
Stendhal to Moorcock. It's about an ageing musician of the future looking back 
on her long life against the backdrop of a nuclear war between India and 
Pakistan, and is supposed to contain lots of superb writing about music and a 
few less impressive passages about willies: "I stroked his resolutely flaccid 
penis"; "I can't remember if I ever noticed before that penises could float".

Don't let the latter put you off though, because this is an outside contender. 

Quiet War by Paul McAuley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/sciencefictionfantasyandhorror>

As might be expected from a professional scientist (he's a former botany 
lecturer from St Andrews University) Paul McAuley's prose is more sparse and 
functional than McLeod's. The appeal of this space opera comes instead from its 
ideas and broad scope – especially in relation to the terra-forming that allows 
earth citizens, despairing of their own planet, to colonise other worlds. It's 
also hard not to feel a twinge at the biting contemporary commentary arising 
from the portrayal of a war started by the extremists in power on both sides 
who defy the will of their people.


House of Suns by Alastair Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/10/sciencefictionfantasyandhorror>

Featuring multiple narratives crossing millions of years of space-time, 
starships, laser guns, mind-warping physics and characters with names such as 
Campion and Purslane, House of Suns is the kind of book most people think of as 
science fiction. The critical consensus seems to be thatthis is no bad thing 
<http://www.sfx.co.uk/page/sfx?entry=book_review_house_of_suns>. 


Anathem by Neal Stephenson (odds-on favourite…)

Neal Stephenson is less easy to categorise than Reynolds. He's been called 
maximalist <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximalism>, cyberpunk 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyberpunk>, postcyberpunk 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postcyberpunk#Postcyberpunk> and even (albeit 
jokingly)clockpunk 
<http://bigdumbobject.co.uk/2008/12/anathem-neal-stephenson.html>. Really the 
only thing that can be said with confidence about this boundary-pushing writer 
is that he's verbose. Anathem clocks in at a mighty 932 pages, complete with a 
glossary, appendix, chronology (not to mention detailedfurther reading 
suggestions <http://www.nealstephenson.com/anathem/acknow.htm> on Stephenson's 
website).

Those who have managed to finish this story of an imminent alien threat to a 
world quite like ours (but for a bit of different history and spelling – 
monasteries still preserve theoretical knowledge, "bullshit" is rendered 
"bulshytt") generally say it's excellent. Others say it's too slow and 
self-indulgent. Either way, it's the favourite.

The Margarets by Sheri S Tepper

The one woman to get through (out of only six on the 46-book longlist) is 
Sheri Tepper, a writer with awell-loved back catalogue 
<http://www.bookslut.com/specfic_floozy/2007_07_011343.php>, but whose recent 
books have been criticised as approaching self-parody. The Margarets, wherein a 
girl with seven different personalities (the "Margarets" of the title) does 
battle with the aliens who plan to sell all humans into bondage because they 
can't be trusted to look after their own planet, maintains her eco-feminist 
stance, but is said to be a strong return to form.

Martin Martin's On The Other Side by Mark Wernham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/19/1> 

Wernham's debut is one of a new breed book that features satires of modern 
culture blended with magical and SF elements, which has been amusingly – but 
perhaps unfairly – categorised asbarleypunk 
<http://www.sfdiplomat.net/sf_diplomat/defining-barleypunk.html> (combining 
Charlie Brooker'smost brilliant creation <http://www.tvgohome.com/> with SF 
fans' predilection for suffixing everything with "punk"). There are weak jokes 
about a high street sex-chain called Starfucks, but a fun premise about a cult 
(the Martin Martinists) led by a former TV psychic determined to save the world 
from its idiotic self.

The winner will be announced on 29 April. I'm all agog.
 