
Long gone but not forgotten are those carefree student days of shared showers, 
derelict rental properties and parties where the booze always ran out before 
midnight. Being a student was quite a privilege in the good old days when local 
authorities and the government footed the bill and there was almost certainly a 
job at the end of it.

In the early 1960s, only 4% of school leavers went to university, rising to 
around 14% by the end of the 1970s. Nowadays, more than 40% of young people 
start undergraduate degrees – but it comes at a cost. Today’s students leave 
with debts of £40,000 and upwards to pay back over their working lives.

So how has the student experience changed over the years? Parents looking back 
on their university lives are amazed at the luxuries their sons and daughters 
enjoy, such as ensuite bathrooms, flatscreen TVs and leather sofas. Student 
accommodation has improved but rents have soared and take up a bigger whack of 
the living cost loans, leaving today’s undergraduates little better off than 
their parents.

Local authorities and the government footed the bill and there was almost 
certainly a job at the end of it

They still party and have a good time, but students are working harder and 
more consistently, their parents believe. Partly, it is the move away from “big 
bang” finals to continuous assessment, they say, but also the pressure to get 
that all-important 2:1 or above degree classification. One-third of students 
were awarded firsts or 2:1s in 1970. Last year it was over two-thirds: 70%.

Today’s students are more career-orientated and under pressure to take on 
extracurricular activities, more responsibilities and work experience to 
compete in the graduate jobs market.

Meeting people, making friends for life and discovering new interests: these 
are the things that have not changed for students who are following the same 
route to independence as their parents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhas-university-life-changed-student-experience-past-present-parents-vox-pops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ae49efd31a89b11b5c7ddd13cc0f39b8cf6eec4%2F0_357_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20student%20experience%20%E2%80%94%20then%20and%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhas-university-life-changed-student-experience-past-present-parents-vox-pops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20student%20experience%20%E2%80%94%20then%20and%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhas-university-life-changed-student-experience-past-present-parents-vox-pops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ae49efd31a89b11b5c7ddd13cc0f39b8cf6eec4%2F0_357_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Some things haven’t changed: students are following the same route to 
independence as their parents. Photograph: Svetikd/Getty Images 
Carol Fletcher, senior financial planner, Richmond, Surrey

I had three fantastic years embracing university life. I was heavily involved 
in student politics and was the news editor of the student newspaper. It was 
very social with lots of parties and concerts. It all seems a lot duller for my 
daughter, who is studying English language and linguistics. There doesn’t seem 
to be the same level of activities going on. Most students seem to be there to 
get their heads down and work. I get the impression that student life is no 
longer the rite of passage it used to be. I graduated in 1980 with an economics 
degree from Newcastle Polytechnic, now Northumbria University, and joined the 
Ford Motor Company graduate training scheme. My choice of degree was an 
important factor in getting my first job, but my extracurricular activities 
were just as important. I think this should be taken into account when choosing 
a university.

Andrew Jones, scientist working in industry, Chester

I was at the University of Bristol in 1982‑88, studying for a chemistry BSc 
and PhD. We had to work hard, but I enjoyed it and was involved in a lot of 
other activities: sport, music and Christian groups. Bristol was a great place 
to be a student. I got a lot from university: good qualifications, friends from 
different places and backgrounds, a wider view of the world — and a wife. My 
daughter is in her final year at Oxford studying English and my son is doing 
his A-levels and hopes to study chemistry. They are under much more pressure 
than we were – we worked hard but worried less. My daughter is having a 
wonderful time at Oxford, and the standard of living seems much higher than in 
our time. The financial situation is very different: we had grants and free 
tuition. Now students leave with significant debts and under pressure to get 
well-paid jobs.

Student life was a lot less stressful and competitive. I don’t remember 
worrying about what I would do when I graduated

Gill Grinyer, solicitor, Bristol

It’s all much more serious today. I studied history in 1973-76 before 
qualifying as a solicitor, and chose the University of Exeter pretty much on a 
whim. It sounded like a nice place but I’d never actually been there before 
arriving with my trunk at the start of the first term. It’s been very different 
with our children: we’ve trawled up and down the country for countless open 
days. There seems to be much more choice and it puts increased pressure on them 
to make the right choices. There were no mixed halls and none of the ensuites 
and mod cons that are the norm nowadays. We had grants and didn’t worry about 
funding. Student life was a lot less stressful and competitive. I don’t 
remember worrying about what I would do when I graduated. Today’s students are 
more focused on careers.

Andrew Gray, founder and director, Conscious Solutions, Somerset

I studied engineering at Cambridge, but a lot of my time was spent rowing. The 
terms were short, just eight weeks, and, though I did the necessary labs, my 
priority was the rowing team. You could do that in the late 70s because there 
wasn’t continuous assessment. My eldest son has graduated with an engineering 
degree from Birmingham and my youngest is just about to study engineering at 
Durham. My daughter is studying science at Edinburgh. They are working more 
consistently because they are examined more regularly, and the grades count 
towards the final degree. Apart from the money side – they are graduating with 
much bigger debts than I did – the university experience seems to be much the 
same. They are meeting lots of people and forming friendships that will 
probably last a lifetime.


Fiona Ward, research consultant, Barnardo’s Training and Learning Consultancy, 
Chester

I studied social sciences at Lanchester Polytechnic then did a master’s in 
public administration at Brunel University in 1985. Both my sons are studying 
chemistry, one at Sheffield, the other at Liverpool. They get 20-25 hours of 
tuition a week, whereas I had half that, but made up for it with time in the 
library. The essentials of university life are very similar, though. It’s a 
fairly comfortable road to independence: they experience leaving home and 
looking after themselves in a relatively safe environment. What’s different is 
the money side. I was on a full grant and thought I was rich - I bought things 
I couldn’t afford before, such as branded trainers and chocolate. I went home 
in the summer and got a job or claimed benefit. Now they are more conscious 
about money – one of my sons developed a spreadsheet in his first term to track 
his expenditure.
 