
What do we call this time? It’s not the information age: the collapse of 
popular education movements left a void filled by marketing andconspiracy 
theories <http://www.autodidactproject.org/other/hj1.html>. Like the stone age, 
iron age and space age, the digital age says plenty about our artefacts but 
little about society. The anthropocene, in which humans exert a major impact on 
the biosphere, fails to distinguish this century from the previous 20. What 
clear social change marks out our time from those that precede it? To me it’s 
obvious. This is the Age of Loneliness.

When Thomas Hobbes claimed that in the state of nature, before authority arose 
to keep us in check, we were engaged in a war “of every man against every man 
<http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/phl302/texts/hobbes/leviathan-contents.html>”, 
he could not have been more wrong. We were social creatures from the start, 
mammalian bees, who depended entirely on each other. The hominins of east 
Africa could not have survived one night alone. We are shaped, to a greater 
extent than almost any other species, by contact with others. The age we are 
entering, in which we exist apart, is unlike any that has gone before.

Three months ago we read that loneliness has become an epidemic among young 
adults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>
. Now we learn that it is just as great an affliction of older people. A study 
by Independent Age shows that severe loneliness in England blights the lives of
700,000 men and 1.1m women over 50 
<http://www.independentage.org/isolation-a-growing-issue-among-older-men/>, and 
is rising with astonishing speed.

Ebola is unlikely ever to kill as many people as this disease strikes down. 
Social isolation is as potent a cause of early deathas smoking 15 cigarettes 
a day <http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/threat-to-health/>; loneliness, 
research suggests, istwice as deadly as obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/feb/16/loneliness-twice-as-unhealthy-as-obesity-older-people>
. Dementia, high blood pressure, alcoholism and accidents – all these, like 
depression, paranoia, anxiety and suicide, becomemore prevalent when 
connections are cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/20/loneliness-britains-silent-plague-hurts-young-people-most>
. We cannot cope alone.

Yes, factories have closed, people travel by car instead of buses, use YouTube 
rather than the cinema. But these shifts alone fail to explain the speed of our 
social collapse. These structural changes have been accompanied by a 
life-denying ideology, which enforces and celebrates our social isolation. The 
war of every man against every man – competition and individualism, in other 
words – is the religion of our time, justified by a mythology of lone rangers, 
sole traders, self-starters, self-made men and women, going it alone. For the 
most social of creatures, who cannot prosper without love, there is no such 
thing as society, only heroic individualism. What counts is to win. The rest is 
collateral damage.

British children no longer aspire to be train drivers or nurses – more than a 
fifth say they “just want to be rich”: wealth and fame are the sole ambitions 
of 40% of those surveyed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/11014591/One-in-five-children-just-want-to-be-rich-when-they-grow-up.html>
. A government study in June revealed thatBritain is the loneliness capital of 
Europe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10909524/Britain-the-loneliness-capital-of-Europe.html>
. We are less likely than other Europeans to have close friends or to know our 
neighbours. Who can be surprised, when everywhere we are urged to fight like 
stray dogs over a dustbin?

We have changed our language to reflect this shift. Our most cutting insult is 
loser. We no longer talk about people. Now we call them individuals. So 
pervasive has this alienating, atomising term become that even the charities 
fighting loneliness use it to describe thebipedal entities formerly known as 
human beings 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2014/05/FINAL-Age-UK-PR-response-02.05.14.pdf>
. We can scarcely complete a sentence without getting personal. Personally 
speaking (to distinguish myself from a ventriloquist’s dummy), I prefer 
personal friends to the impersonal variety and personal belongings to the kind 
that don’t belong to me. Though that’s just my personal preference, otherwise 
known as my preference.

One of the tragic outcomes of loneliness is that people turn to their 
televisions for consolation: two-fifths of older people report thatthe one-eyed 
god is their principal company 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/loneliness-research/>. This 
self-medication aggravates the disease. Research by economists at the 
University of Milan suggests thattelevision helps to drive competitive 
aspiration 
<http://boa.unimib.it/bitstream/10281/23044/2/Income_Aspirations_Television_and_Happiness.pdf>
. It strongly reinforces the income-happiness paradox: the fact that, as 
national incomes rise, happiness does not rise with them.

Aspiration, which increases with income, ensures that the point of arrival, of 
sustained satisfaction, retreats before us. The researchers found that those 
who watch a lot of TV derive less satisfaction from a given level of income 
than those who watch only a little. TV speeds up the hedonic treadmill, forcing 
us to strive even harder to sustain the same level of satisfaction. You have 
only to think of the wall-to-wall auctions on daytime TV, Dragon’s Den, the 
Apprentice and the myriad forms of career-making competition the medium 
celebrates, the generalised obsession with fame and wealth, the pervasive 
sense, in watching it, that life is somewhere other than where you are, to see 
why this might be.

So what’s the point? What do we gain from this war of all against all? 
Competition drives growth, but growth no longer makes us wealthier. Figures 
published this week show that, while the income of company directors has risen 
by more than a fifth, wages for the workforce as a whole have fallen in real 
terms over the past year. The bosses earn – sorry, I mean take – 120 times more 
than the average full-time worker. (In 2000, it was 47 times). And even if 
competition did make us richer, it would make us no happier, as the 
satisfaction derived from a rise in income would be undermined by the 
aspirational impacts of competition.

The top 1% own 48% of global wealth, but even they aren’t happy. A survey by 
Boston College 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2011/04/secret-fears-of-the-super-rich/308419/>
 of people with an average net worth of $78m found that they too were assailed 
by anxiety, dissatisfaction and loneliness. Many of them reported feeling 
financially insecure: to reach safe ground, they believed, they would need, on 
average, about 25% more money. (And if they got it? They’d doubtless need 
another 25%). One respondent said he wouldn’t get there until he had $1bn in 
the bank.

For this, we have ripped the natural world apart, degraded our conditions of 
life, surrendered our freedoms and prospects of contentment to a compulsive, 
atomising, joyless hedonism, in which, having consumed all else, we start to 
prey upon ourselves. For this, we have destroyed the essence of humanity: our 
connectedness.

Yes, there are palliatives, clever and delightful schemes like Men in Sheds 
and Walking Football developed by charities for isolated older people. But if 
we are to break this cycle and come together once more, we must confront the 
world-eating, flesh-eating system into which we have been forced.

Hobbes’s pre-social condition was a myth. But we are entering a post-social 
condition our ancestors would have believed impossible. Our lives are becoming 
nasty, brutish and long.
 