
There are certainly some strange creatures in the universe, and anyone who 
ever went to the movies wants to see them. Movie-makers have found over the 
years that there are two basic ways to turn the cinema into a zoo: send a 
spaceship out there to bring ‘em back alive, or send the bug-eyed monsters down 
here to be gawked at.

Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/from-the-archive-blog/2015/dec/16/star-wars-review-1977-derek-malcolm->
 and Close Encounters Of The Third Kind are the prototypes for today’s wave of 
creature features. For a couple of years, half the special effects teams in Los 
Angeles and London seemed to be making spaceships to take us to the monsters’ 
planets, and the other half were making flying saucers for the monsters to ride 
earthwards.


Lately, the studios’ fancies have veered toward terrestrial settings for 
creature features. Perhaps it was too expensive to build all those other 
worlds. Perhaps location scouts were better at finding strange places than set 
designers were at building them. In any case, with the apparent end of George 
Lucas’ Star Wars cycle, theSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> brand of whimsy is now in 
the ascendant, and small town America the likely target for aliens, such as 
Jeff Bridges’ Star Man (though The Brother From Space turns up in Harlem).


In contrast to movies like Ridley Scott’s Alien, in which the plot is 
invariably “How we all escaped being eaten,” the Spielbergian proto-plot is: 
“If we’re nice to them, they’ll be nice to us.” As Spielberg cabled Scott after
Alien <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> came out: “Gee whiz, fella – I 
spent three years trying to say that the little guys up there are sweet and 
wonderful, and now you’ve wiped all that out in one movie.”


There has always been a sharp dividing line between hard and soft science 
fiction. Hard sci-fi is about gadgets. It’s old-fashioned stuff that dates back 
to Buck Rogers and survives in theStar Trek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/star-trek> movies – which might actually 
play better if they were silent.


Soft sci-fi, edging toward out-and-out fantasy, is about man and the resources 
of even the weakest among us – especially the weakest, if the slight, 
thin-wristed Spielberg is to be believed. In soft sci-fi, if spaceships appear, 
they are objects of fear and wonder. Henry Thomas could never hop into a 
cockpit and blast right off, as Mark Hamill did. Human technology tends to be 
irrelevant or is played for laughs, as in the “E.T. phone home” sequence.


In Ghostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters>, this summer’s 
comedy hit in America, technology is a joke. The ectoplasmic repellers that 
Bill Murray and his fellow spook-fighters strap on look like insecticide 
sprayers and the creature, a 100-foot marshmallow man, is a glorious 
illustration of the tendency in soft sci-fi for the aliens to be less than 
monstrous.


In Gremlins, now running Ghostbusters a close second at the American box 
office, the creatures take on varying forms. Unlike the monster in Alien, which 
metamorphosed because of his own malevolence, the gremlins grow nastier because 
of man’s carelessness, and even then they remain basically fun-loving.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffilms-aliens-creature-features-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c754f17aef83b783331c5fa51819ea3645b2f8a%2F0_35_2524_1678%2F2524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20aliens%20have%20landed%20in%20Hollywood%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%209%20August%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffilms-aliens-creature-features-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20aliens%20have%20landed%20in%20Hollywood%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%209%20August%201984&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffilms-aliens-creature-features-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c754f17aef83b783331c5fa51819ea3645b2f8a%2F0_35_2524_1678%2F2524.jpg>
 Guardian 9 August 1984. 
But there is also a dark side to today’s soft sci-fi. The shift from gadgets 
to creatures corresponds with a shift from active, zestful exploration to 
passive, paranoid waiting for the worst.


One reason for this change of mood may be the decline of America’s real-life 
space exploration programme into a boring cargo-ship run.


No rocket movie has so disappointed its backers as The Right Stuff. Another 
may be the Reagan-era rise in our fears for the planet’s survival.


Hollywood avoids confronting our real problems, instead it uses allegorical 
creature features cleverly to tap fears the audience doesn’t want to think 
about directly.


Ever since Hal sang “Daisy, Daisy” in 2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001-a-space-odyssey>, wonky computers have 
ranked as creatures. War Games’ WOPR developed an itchy trigger finger. 
Electric Dreams’ Edgar wrote a love song and stole his owner’s girlfriend. The 
video game in Tron could suck in its players for deadly encounters. A car had a 
mind of her own in Christine, one of the films like Cujo or Alligator where 
sci-fi and horror genres merge.


In these cross-over films the things from beyond stand on for the things from 
within that we fear we may unleash to our destruction, like the tiny aliens who 
killed the heroine’s lovers at the point of orgasm in Liquid Sky. As Pogo said 
of LBJ: “We have met the enemy and he is us.”


Two popular recent TV mini-series, V and V: The Final Battle, entertained the 
nation with the soft sci-fi story of a lizard race that landed on earth, 
assumed man’s form, and enslaved us. Not many viewers knew or cared that V was 
an allegory of Nazis v. the Resistance.


V and its sequel were the most widely seen examples of the alternative forms 
of man creature feature. Such stories express our uncertainty about man’s true 
nature. That was an early theme at the time of the dawn of modern science, when 
science fiction was being invented by Robert Louis Stevenson in Dr Jekyll and 
Mr Hyde, and it has re-emerged in what we fear is the late nuclear age with a 
string of ape-men, panther-men, snake-men, even a block-of-flats woman, in 
Ghostbusters. Equally bizarre are the hand-man in The Hand, the chameleon-man 
in Zelig, the elf-boy in The Dark Crystal, and, of course, the Muppets’ 
frog-man and pig-woman.


Does sci-fi have a future? Certainly there are plenty in the making, including 
David Lynch’s Dune, based on a space adventure which includes such “soft” 
themes as clairvoyance and ecological preservation. The creatures are mile-long 
worms.


Another possible cross-over movie will be 2010, the sequel to 2001. We are 
assured that 2010 will explain the mystery of who placed that slab on the moon. 
Will the answer be a bug-eyed monster or something more subtle in the Solaris 
vein? In the case of 2010, we’ll have to go see it to find out if it’s a 
creature feature.
 