
Growing old isn’t what it used to be. Workers no longer collect their gold 
carriage clock at 65 and spend their final years running down their pension 
savings in modest obscurity.

The older generation refuses to shuffle quietly into retirement, but is 
playing an increasingly active and enthusiastic role in this Third Age Economy. 
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) saysaround 1.4 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jun/13/number-working-pensioners-up-ons>
 now continue to work beyond 65 – often in “higher status jobs”, according to 
the Intergenerational Foundation (IF).

Pass it on: how to leave your pension to someone else
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/23/how-to-leave-pension-to-someone-else>
What’s more, the over-65s are sitting on a lifetime’s accumulation of wealth, 
even if much of it is either spread unevenly or locked up in their homes. What 
they do with their money can have a big impact on the wider economy.

Some have seized on recent pension freedoms to set up new businesses or become 
buy-to-let landlords. Others are using their good fortune to offer a leg-up to 
the hard-pressed younger generation, helping children or grandchildren through 
university and on to the property ladder, passing on a “living inheritance”.

Some are finding that they finally have the means and opportunity to splash 
some cash on themselves. Whether that means cruising the world’s oceans on a 
luxury liner,riding around country lanes on a motorbike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/28/motorcycles-older-riders-insurance-increase-retirement>
 or bungee-jumping off a bridge in a far-flung land is, of course, a matter of 
individual choice – but the economic power of those who were once considered 
“past it” can now be felt everywhere. New industries are springing up and 
existing ones expanding to meet demand from these wealthy and discerning older 
consumers, and woe betide those who underestimate the financial impact they can 
have.

Vicky Redwood, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, says the ageing UK 
population will transform the jobs market, as more people work into their late 
60s or even early 70s. And they will have a growing influence on consumer 
spending as pension reforms allow them to cash in their lifetime savings and 
spend the money as they wish.

“The over-65s currently account for less than £1 in every £5 spent, but within 
two decades that could rise to £1 in every £4,” Redwood says. “Spending on 
items like cars, holidays and DIY clearly stand to receive a boost.”

Here, we take a closer look at this Third Age Economy to find out how, 
exactly, its members spend their money.

Pensioner wealth

As young people stagger under the combined weight of student debt, squeezed 
wages and soaring housing costs, the grey pound is helping to keep the UK 
economy moving. At £320bn a year, the over-50s now account for around 47% of 
all UK consumer spending, up from 41% in 2003, according to research from Saga 
and the Centre for Economic and Business Research. Without that input, UK 
economic growth would have been reduced by 4.2%.

What’s more, ONS figures show that the average pensioner income increased by 
an estimated 50% in real terms 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/pensions/pension-trends/chapter-11--pensioner-income-and-expenditure--2012-edition-/index.html>
 between 1995 and 2011, and more than one in 10 pensioners havetotal wealth of 
£1m or more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/18/pensioner-households-one-million-rise-property-prices>
, helped by spiralling property prices.

Yet this conceals considerable variations between rich and poor, with the 
richest quarter of pensioners earning three to four times more than the bottom 
quartile. More than one in seven will retire with no pension other than what 
they get from the state. Women are particularly hard-hit, retiring on 47% less 
on average than men, according to research from pension firm LV=.

Life expectancy at age 65 has increased by 40% for men and 23% for women in 
the 30 years from 1980-1982 to 2010-2012, with the average male and female 
expected to live until 83.2 and 85.7 respectively. That means finding the means 
to fund 5.2 and 3.9 more years in retirement than the typical pensioner 
expected between 1980 and 1982.

On the other hand, many people can look forward to enjoying much better health 
in their 60s, 70s and even their 80s than the previous generations have done – 
and they can use their economic muscle to make the most of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Feconomics-of-retirement-power-pensioner-spending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434644364714%2F39785b57-8b3b-4c1f-b5ac-cef9a6a782c6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20economics%20of%20retirement%3A%20the%20power%20of%20pensioner%20spending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Feconomics-of-retirement-power-pensioner-spending%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20economics%20of%20retirement%3A%20the%20power%20of%20pensioner%20spending&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Feconomics-of-retirement-power-pensioner-spending%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434644364714%2F39785b57-8b3b-4c1f-b5ac-cef9a6a782c6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The grey pound is helping to keep the economy moving. Photograph: Getty Images 
The age of travel

Travel and tourism is a major beneficiary of the Third Age Economy, with 
spending by those aged 65-74 rising by 51% in real terms between 2002 and 2012, 
against just 17% for all UK households. The over-50s now account for the 
majority of the nation’s spending on travel and tourism.

This is a big boost for the domestic travel industry, as older people enjoy 
frequent numbers of “staycations” such as weekend breaks, and of course the 
booming cruise industry.

The hotel and travel sector benefited from the grey pound to the tune of £37bn 
last year, according to Barclays Corporate Banking, yet are still to wake up to 
the opportunities. It missed out on a further £16bn by failing to properly 
target older consumers, Barclays says. Three-quarters of the sector had no 
plans to offer products and services targeting the over-65s, with too many 
prioritising the 34-44 bracket instead.

 This looks short-sighted, given that older people have seen their spending 
power surge, leaving the young trailing in their wake. The amount the under-30s 
spent on consumer activities fell dramatically in the first 10 years of this 
century, while the over-65s spent significantly more, according to the IF. The 
under-35s now spend £922m a year less on overseas travel than a decade earlier, 
for example, while the over-65s spend £1.3bn more.

There is a similar pattern across cinema and theatre trips, eating out, 
driving and buying petrol. IF co-founder Liz Emerson says: “The popular 
misconception of an impoverished older generation and a spendthrift younger 
generation no longer rings true. The young are the new poor.”

Housing authority

Older people are also the main beneficiaries of the great leap in housing 
wealth over the past couple of decades.

Pensioner property wealth now totals £861bn, according to figures from 
financial firm Key Retirement. That number has leapt by £33bn in the past six 
months alone, making pensioners who own their homes outright £7,117 richer on 
average, purely from property.

First-time buyers are already competing with older property buyers, and coming 
off second best. The total number of mortgages advanced to first-time buyers 
fell by 5% in the year to March 2015 to 23,000, according to latest figures 
from the Council of Mortgage Lenders, while the number of buy-to-let loans rose 
21% over the same period to 18,200.

Chancellor George Osborne’s “pension freedom” reforms, introduced in April, 
which allow the over-55s to cash in their savings, could worsen the imbalance. 
Mark Harris, chief executive of mortgage broker SPF Private Clients, says: “The 
reforms will give buy-to-let yet another boost as more elderly people take 
advantage of cheap mortgage rates to invest in property.”

Passing on wealth

So will the younger generation benefit in the end, by inheriting their 
parents’ and grandparents’ good fortune? Here, at least, there is some good 
news for them. Some 68% of UK adults expect to leave property in their wills, 
worth an average £182,000, according to research from find-an-adviser site 
Unbiased.co.uk. And three-quarters intend to leave cash to their loved ones, 
with the average total sum set to be £51,000 this year.

Karen Barrett, chief executive of Unbiased, says: “More than half expect to 
leave tangible assets such as paintings, jewellery and antiques, with an 
average value of £22,000.”

The cost of living

Like the rest of the UK economy, the Third Age Economy suffers from massive 
divisions between the well-off and the poor. Many over-65s have financial 
worries, as 4.3 million retirees have some form of debt, typically a mortgage 
or outstanding credit card balances, according to LV=.

And although they may be spending more on travel and leisure, those aged 65-74 
spend one-third of their £365 weekly income on essentials such as food and 
non-alcoholic drink, domestic energy bills, housing and council tax.

The bank of gran and grandad

Many are also raiding their savings to help out the struggling younger 
generation, with one in three giving financial help and support to family 
members, according to pension firm Prudential. This year’s retirees who support 
their family will pay out nearly £250 a month, or £3,000 a year, on average.

Around 364,000 grandparents have already contributed towards university fees, 
according to the International Longevity Centre UK, while 1.7 million expect to 
do so in future.

Others are helping out so-called boomerang kids who can’t afford to flee the 
family nest, with 3.3 million 20-34-year-olds now living with their parents, 
according to official figures.

Four out of 10 parents said that they still have to do a big “family shop” at 
the supermarket at a time when they had expected to be reducing their 
outgoings, according to research from Shelter. Others have been cut to forced 
to cut spending on holidays, and couldn’t downsize because their children were 
still living at home. Increasingly, it seems, the young are a burden on the old.

Rod McKie, head of retirement propositions at insurer Zurich UK Life, says 
this may eventually feed through to lower inheritances. “Many older people 
underestimate how much they need in retirement, and could end up depleting 
their savings with nothing to leave for their family. Younger generations are 
unlikely to benefit from a cascade of wealth as many over-50s.”

The Third Age Economy may be roaring into life, but the danger is that, as in 
other parts of the UK economy, too many people are being left behind.
 