
I have been lucky enough to have a career as an actor for more than 20 years, 
much of that time in the United States. As a Canadian, this has given me a 
perspective on the relationship between our two countries. We share at least 
one language and the largest unprotected border on Earth. We are both Britain’s 
offspring. And,1812 notwithstanding 
<https://www.rpsc.org/Library/1812/warof1812.htm>, we have lived peacefully 
side by side for the lion’s share of our histories. We are siblings, with 
everything that entails: we are allies, we have each other’s backs when the 
going gets tough. We are also rivals – and nobody annoys you more than your own 
family.

There’s a lot I love about the US. A lot of my favourite people were born and 
live in Los Angeles, New York, Dallas, Seattle, Kansas City and elsewhere, and 
they are some of the kindest, humblest, most selfless folk I’ve ever met. These 
people are my family – by blood or by choice. (“By Blood Or By Choice” is a 
cool name for something.) I also really love American food. I basically eat 
like Macaulay Culkin in Home Alone, so getting to spend time in the country 
where Pop-Tarts come from is always wicked. Most of my favourite flicks are 
American. The US gave the world punk, hip-hop and jazz. (I don’t like jazz but 
people seem to.) And, hoodies are probably American.

But, like any good sibling, there’s a lot of stuff that does my head in. The 
US is our big brother. He’s older and more assertive. He showed us which bands 
were cool, how to do our hair, and gave us cologne or whatever. (I don’t 
actually have an older brother, but I assume these are the types of things we 
would bond over. “Listen to this cool music, Jay! Your hair is good. You smell 
lovely. We are brothers.” I’d reply, “Thanks, man!” Then we’d wrestle and wear 
ski masks and garbage bags.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b5c4ede687ef7e2f76f591f5b8330f9590e4b1%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20US%20is%20Canada's%20cool%20older%20brother.%20He's%20also%20a%20roid-head%20with%20a%20gun%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20US%20is%20Canada%27s%20cool%20older%20brother.%20He%27s%20also%20a%20roid-head%20with%20a%20gun%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8b5c4ede687ef7e2f76f591f5b8330f9590e4b1%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 Jay Baruchel and Seann William Scott in Baruchel’s maple-tinged 2011 filmGoon 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/goon-sequel-jay-baruchel/> 
Our older brother is also a hawkish roid-head with a gun fetish who’s 
constantly getting into shit. Watching news stories about the US is like 
constantly waking up to “LOL Ur bro got turnt & bottled a bouncer smh” on your 
phone – just constant frustration. Yes, he’s a bit misunderstood and people 
constantly judge him. Is it always all his fault? Probably not. Does that 
matter? Probably not. Because this stuff just keeps happening, and at a certain 
point you throw up your hands and go: “Fine. Do your thing. I give up.”

The word Canada garners slow nods of vague noun-recognition, usually reserved 
for words like Denmark or escrow

Our brother is also kind of distant. For all his grandstanding, he’s quite 
aloof when it comes to stuff outside of his day-to-day life. Growing up 
speaking English inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, you are 
raised in your own culture but also very much exposed to American culture. You 
are well versed in the great heroic deeds of the founding fathers. You can name 
the past three decades’ worth of presidents. But when I first went down to the 
States, it quickly became apparent that this was not a symbiotic cultural 
exchange.

Aside from those who’ve spent time up here, most Americans don’t really know 
much about Canada. They know it’s colder than most parts of their country. They 
know we like hockey. Most of them know we are located directly above them. For 
some Americans, we are more abstract: the word Canada garners slow nods of 
vague noun-recognition usually reserved for words like Denmark or escrow.

Most of what Americans know about us is filtered through jokes from South Park 
or the intrinsically American assumption that Canada is probably just an 
aspartame version of the US: harmless; provincial; quaint; small potatoes; 
unworthy of mention. To quote famous rich guy Steve Martin on30 Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/feb/07/30rockisthebestshowonte>
: “Toronto is just like New York, without all the stuff.” One American friend 
and colleague, after hearing another Canadian wax nostalgic with me over 
vintage hoser TV like The Raccoons and Rocket Robin Hood, opined: “Wow. You 
guys really have like, all your own shows and stuff.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6b5ba2c45e0ec93f84fa9a5b19e885e64e0001%2F0_0_1984_1794%2F1984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20US%20is%20Canada's%20cool%20older%20brother.%20He's%20also%20a%20roid-head%20with%20a%20gun%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20US%20is%20Canada%27s%20cool%20older%20brother.%20He%27s%20also%20a%20roid-head%20with%20a%20gun%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fus-canada-cool-older-brother-roid-head-gun-fetish-jay-baruchel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6b5ba2c45e0ec93f84fa9a5b19e885e64e0001%2F0_0_1984_1794%2F1984.jpg>
 Definitely knows where Canada is ... Barack Obama pictured with Justin Trudeau 
Photograph: Planet Pix via Rex/Shutterstock 
America is a planet and we just don’t blip on their radar. Most countries 
don’t blip on their radar. And, in all fairness, Canada probably doesn’t blip 
on the radars of most countries. Nobody knows what Regina is. (By the way, if 
you get the chance, be the first person to tell someone who isn’t Canadian 
about Regina. It’s a great ice-breaker.) It just stings more because few 
countries outside of North Korea are as US-obsessed as we are. We are desperate 
for their approval, and like many an older brother they have no idea any of 
this is even happening. This is the double-edged sword that is being Canadian 
in North America.

Elsewhere in the world, things are different, though not much. Canada has a 
benign, if not harmless, reputation. In Britain there’s a lot of “Oi. Are you 
lot American?” followed by me sighing and saying, “No. I’m Canadian,” either 
followed by an apology: “Fucking hell, sorry mate,” or boredom-tinged apathy: 
“Oh, right.” Most of the time, the mention of Canada garners a pleasant smile 
and a kind word. People seem to like us, which is nice. They know we have lots 
of pretty stuff in our country, which is also nice. And that’s more or less it. 
Justin Trudeau temporarily notwithstanding, our prime ministers are not 
household names. Our head of state is, but then most people aren’t usually 
aware that HM Queen Elizabeth II is also the Queen of Canada anyway. The world 
likes us but probably has no idea who we are.

Maybe it’s because our idea of ourselves isn’t fixed. There is nothing more 
Canadian than self-consciousness. A cursory glance at the films ofAtom Egoyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atom-egoyan> or David Cronenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidcronenberg> will confirm this. We 
tolerate failures more than we suffer show-offs. We pride humility over 
ambition. We rate “peace, order, and good government” higher than “life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness”. We are proud of our accomplishments, 
but are also somehow embarrassed by them. Hugh MacLennan endsTwo Solitudes 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Two-Solitudes-Canadian-Library-Paperback/dp/0771093586>
, his epic meditation on Canada’s DNA (and probably my favourite book), with 
this most Canadian description of Canada: “And almost grudgingly, out of the 
instinct to do what was necessary, the country took the first irrevocable steps 
towards becoming herself, knowing against her will that she was not unique but 
like all the others, alone with history, with science, with the future.”

So, maybe the not knowing is a form of knowing in its own right. Or maybe 
we’re just timid, and encrypt our fears in the snobbery of thinking we’re above 
vulgar displays of pride.

Game off! Why the decline of street hockey is a crisis for Canada's cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/05/decline-street-hockey-canada-cities-game-children>
Precious few Americans have ever given me crap for being patriotic. Whatever 
crap I’ve taken for my patriotism has been from a select group of painfully 
postmodern Canadians, who seem to find my drum-banging, maple-tinted view of 
the world less than palatable, out of date or “too American”. Most Americans 
I’ve spent time with seem to respect my patriotism. Even if they don’t know 
what Canada is like, they get it, because they love their country the way I 
love mine.

I once worked on a TV show in the US where the showrunner – an American – had 
production fly a Canadian flag outside the office for the duration of our 
shoot. This was a simple display of respect, expressed in the language of 
American sentiment. And it still means a great to deal to me.

Thus, as we reach both our and our big brother’s birthdays, I can’t help but 
reflect on this strange, loving, apathetic relationship of ours. I am equally 
proud, hopeful and jaded. I am proud to be Canadian, and proud to know and love 
the Americans in my life. I am hopeful Canada might assert itself without 
losing itself, and hopeful that America might chill out and see merit in the 
histories and culture of its neighbours. I am jaded because … well, because I 
watch the news.

Happy birthday America, from your self-righteous little brother. Happy 
birthday Canada, from the depths of your self-analytical soul. Happy birthday 
person whose actual birthday it is while reading this, from me.

Guardian Cities is devoting a week to exploring all things Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/04/guardian-canada-week-what-how-involved>
. Get involved onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities/> and share your thoughts with 
#GuardianCanada
 