
This week Edgar Wright <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/edgar-wright> and Simon 
Pegg <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/simonpegg> are crowned our reigning 
kings of bathos, that most British of pastimes. As writers (and in Wright's 
case, director) ofShaun of the Dead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/99960/shaun.of.the.dead>, Hot Fuzz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116979/hot.fuzz> and now The World's End 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154514/world-s-end>, the stock-in trade 
of their "Cornetto trilogy" has been undercutting Hollywood bombast, mug of tea 
in hand. At their best, these send-ups of zombie apocalypse, buddy cop actioner 
and 70s paranoia thrillers are powered by a higher form of parody: 
simultaneously full of love for Hollywood and affirming the supremacy of 
humdrum Brit realities. In The World's End, I liked the idea of the piece of 
crap Blairite public art in Newton Haven (the town to which Pegg and his gang 
return for their nostalgic pub-crawl) that turns out to have a secret sci-fi 
purpose.

Because the British film industry has grown up in Hollywood's shadow, and 
because the UK was America's key film export market for so long, our bathetic 
instincts are honed to a fine point. If you're not sated by The World's End – 
which channels The Matrix, The Stepford Wives and Invasion of the Body 
Snatchers – then here comes Alan Partridge, wrapping up the hostage-siege film 
in an East Anglian cardigan in next month'sAlpha Papa 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151441/alan-partridge>.

And they are just the latest in Brit bathos: 2011's Attack the Block 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140925/attack-the-block> took the 
alien-invasion spectacular down to a council estate and "kicked its head in".
Ali G's raison d'etre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/91536/ali.g.in.da.house> was partly to 
put 1990s ghetto fabulous nonsense in perspective, while Rowan Atkinson'sJohnny 
English <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95182/johnny.english> took an 
even easier target to bring down a peg or two: Anglo-Hollywood double agent, 
James Bond. In fact, a lot of commercial British films, likeThe Full Monty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/69487/full.monty> and its 
anti-Chippendales stripper troupe, seem to be set up as a bluff riposte to 
all-American values. Maybe they must be to survive.

Perhaps Hollywood was always going to catch us in this mood. It isn't an 
original observation that part of the British national psyche, Magna Carta 
onwards, has delighted in pricking pomposity and cocking a snook at higher 
authority; Ben Wheatley was flying that flag when he had Peter Ferninando squat 
over the nettles at the start ofA Field in England 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155966/field-in-england>, metaphorically 
taking a dump on the genteel period drama. Such strains of underdog humour were 
arguably what survived when Britain's world power started declining after the 
first world war – and when, according to Peter Mandler's recent book,The 
English National Character <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/feb/03/society>
, the country's self-image dwindled from doughty John Bull stereotypes to 
something more modest.

It's interesting that where the French postwar tendency toward Hollywood was 
to refine, aestheticise and intellectually deconstruct – asJean-Luc Godard <> or
Jean-Pierre Melville 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2003/jun/27/artsfeatures2?INTCMP=SRCH>did – 
ours has been to mock, pillory and subvert. That caustic approach is exactly 
what is absent in an American culture driven by a demotic spirit, on the 
(surprisingly frequent) occasions when Joe Public becomes the hero (often in 
opposition to government forces). Even in the most jaded cases, like a 
trash-talking John McClane holding out for the working man in Die Hard, there's 
still a kind of American triumphalism and self-righteousness at play. There's 
little of the true defeatism of, say,Withnail's climactic speech to London 
zoo's wolves <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zEVZGuU3BU>: not only a bathetic 
counterpart to Oscar-chasing moments, but also a self-lacerating use of our 
greatest cultural hero, Shakespeare, that underscores the rotten state of 1970s 
England.

So 2013, and here we are: world-beaters in bathos. And our USP actually goes 
down quite well abroad – especially when shored up with star power.Both Johnny 
English films were highly successful 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=johnnyenglish.htm>, thanks to Rowan 
Atkinson's global profile through Mr Bean – another iconic Brit-chump. Shaun of 
the Dead turned a healthy profit and became an influential noughties film.Hot 
Fuzz did even better internationally 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=hotfuzz.htm>, and The World's End 
should continue that trend, with Pegg ever more recognisable after appearances 
in Mission: Impossible and Star Trek.

But as their films get more expensive, and their own careers more entwined 
with Hollywood, Pegg and Wright might find their bathos antennae harder to tune 
in properly. In The World's End, before they raise their game for the finale, 
the gag hit-rate and the intimate observational humour are more stuttering than 
in the two earlier Cornetto films. An awful lot of action feels 
straight-down-the-line Hollywood. Now I hate to cast aspersions … but then 
isn't aspersion-casting about our newly suntanned, transatlantic successes 
another noble British tradition?

The World's End is out on Friday; Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa is out on 7 
August.

Next week's After Hollywood will look at the reaction to Saudi Arabian success 
Wadjda. Which global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.
 