
The publisher behind titles including pro-remain newspaper the New European 
and the Eastern Daily Press has launched a radical digital restructure that 
puts almost 60 roles at risk.

Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, the Norwich-based 
publisher of more than 130 newspapers and magazines and owner of local channel 
Mustard TV, is also looking to create dozens of new digitally focused positions 
as part of the restructure.


Matt Kelly, Archant’s chief content officer, informed staff of the plans in a 
lengthy strategy document explaining that the regional publisher needed to 
“reclaim relevance” in the digital age.


The New European wins serial rights to Alastair Campbell's new book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/30/the-new-european-wins-serial-rights-to-alastair-campbells-new-book>
“It is a matter of public record that our print circulations are in steady 
decline,” he said, in an email to staff. “At the same time, we have not yet 
been able to recreate the same highly engaged, large loyal local audiences in 
digital that we have enjoyed in print.”


Under the proposals, which have been developed since Kelly joined from Local 
World last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/15/local-world-digital-chief-matt-kelly-joins-rival-archant>
 but become more urgent as Brexit fears have exacerbated an already tough 
advertising market, 40 new roles will be created, with the net loss of about 17 
positions.


The plans include creating a centralised newspaper production unit so that the 
business can focus on being “audience-first”.


“Our strategy begins and ends with our audience,” said Kelly. “Editing the 
newspaper will be done with a very light touch from editors. I do not want our 
editors spending hours deciding between page 9 and 15 leads.”


He added that there would be less of a “hierarchical” approach with senior 
reporters and specialists encouraged to publish direct to digital, “liberated 
from the domineering task of filling the newspaper”.


“In a nutshell, I am asking us to stop editing a newspaper, and instead edit 
the community we serve.”


Kelly said that big monthly unique user numbers for web visitors were 
meaningless if they did not translate into meaningful revenue.


“If we box clever we can outperform even Facebook in our communities,” he 
said. “Nobody knows our communities better than we do. Over time I expect we 
will, as a content team, consider digital to be a natural part of our 
day-to-day routines, of equal importance to print.”


Archant, which publishes four daily newspapers, about 50 weeklies and 80 
magazines, employs about 460 people across the group.


The New European, launched as a “pop-up” title launched in nine days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
 to capitalise on the pro-remain market is profitable with a paid-circulation 
of about 25,000, fuelled by scoops from Alistair Campbell and Tony Blair.
 