
The slow economic strangulation of millions of Britons started long before the 
vote to leave the European Union this year. It was first felt when austerity 
wrapped its long fingers around public spending. But it all began with the 
Great Crash in 2008. Cataclysmic events have contributed to desolate times for 
workers for many years ahead. The Institute for Fiscal Studies’ finding that 
after this week’s autumn statementreal wages in the country will still be lower 
by 2021 than they were in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
, as the workforce suffers the worst decade for pay in at least seven decades, 
should ring alarm bells. The reasons are now well known: lower business 
investment, scared off by Brexit uncertainty, will result in lower productivity 
and sink wage growth. The drop in sterling, sparked by the fears of Britain’s 
departure from the continent, has pushed up inflation. Real wages will flatline 
next year and looming benefit cuts will squeeze living standards. The thinktank 
pointed out that by 2021 real GDP per household will be £1,000 lower than 
expected only months ago, back in March.

This points to a dark time ahead for a country already split over attitudes to 
Europe and polarised by political forces once considered on the fringe, but now 
firmly in the mainstream.The IFS revealed a nation divided since 2007 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/as2016/as2016_ah.pdf>: 
while the over-60s saw their incomes rise 11% until 2014, British workers aged 
between 22 and 30 saw median wages fall 7%. The tax and benefit changes, 
modelled by the IFS, reveal that over the next five years the top 30% of 
earners will benefit; the bottom 70% will lose out. The government’s plan to 
raise the new minimum wage for over 25s – to £9 an hour by 2020 – has been
derailed by lower growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/12/brexit-will-stunt-national-living-wage-growth-by-10p-an-hour>
.

The Conservative party has changed its attitude to borrowing. It is now 
content to saddle the countrywith debt levels not seen since the 1960s 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/as2016/as2016_ce.pdf>. 
What Conservatives have not done is think again about redistribution. They need 
to. Rising living standards are a necessary, if not sufficient, condition for a 
happier society. When there’s less to go round, more anxious and fractious 
voices are raised. But if the rich just get richer while the poor keep getting 
poorer, society can retreat into rigidity and intolerance. Once enough voters 
lose the sense they are getting ahead and wealth is being sucked up by a tiny 
elite, trouble lies ahead. Populists will trade on such fears. Mainstream 
politicians must understand they have a chance to stop them – but only by 
sharing wealth and opportunity.
 