
Mutter the phrase “slave Leia” and unless you’ve been living under a rock 
since 1983, you’ll probably get a mental image of Carrie Fisher in a golden 
bikini chained to a giant slug.

It’s one of the most memorable, weird, gross and resonant moments from The 
Return of the Jedi, and from Star Wars in general – and Disney is working to 
disavow it. The company is rumored to be retiring theirslave Leia figurine <> – 
a move which has prompted commenters on social media to declare “good 
riddance”. WriterMariah Heuhner <http://mariah_mccourt.squarespace.com/> tweeted
 <https://twitter.com/TiredFairy/status/661952049211305984>: “Even before I 
knew what sexual objectification was, the Leia/bikini thing made me really 
uncomfortable as a kid.” Carrie Fisher herselfcriticized 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/10/30/carrie-fisher-daisy-ridley-slave-leia> 
the outfit, warning new Star Wars actor Daisy Ridley: “Don’t be a slave like I 
was … You keep fighting against that slave outfit.”

Luke Skywalker still missing from latest Star Wars: The Force Awakens posters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/luke-skywalker-still-missing-from-latest-star-wars-the-force-awakens-posters>
It’s easy to see why Fisher isn’t fond of the get-up. The sequence with the 
giant bloated Jabba the Hut is a not-even-concealed Orientalist harem fantasy, 
complete with desert, chuckling dissipated bloated pasha and hapless princess 
decked out in fetishwear and chains. The sequence is a bit of soft-core porn 
dropped in the middle of a kids’ adventure story. Through the rest of the 
series (with the possible exception of A New Hope’s torture sequence) Leia is 
irascible, tough, empowered and, notably, completely covered. Then, all of a 
sudden, she’s a vulnerable, objectified sex toy. The dissonance is startling 
and stomach-churning.

Obviously, a good part of the motivation for the slave Leia costume had to 
have been fan-service. The outfit caters both to hormonal pubescents, for whom 
Princess Leia was already a sex symbol, and to Lucas’s love affair with all 
those old adventure serials, with Leia playing Dale Arden, and Jabba as Ming 
the Merciless.

But the slave sequence also fits oddly, but definitively, into Leia’s 
character arc. Remember thatat the end 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E-AmHZ17gWM> of the Empire Strikes Back, 
before he’s placed in cold storage, Leia kisses Han and says, “I love you.” To 
which Harrison Ford famously ad libs, “I know.”

This is the moment when, as Tricia Barr 
<http://fangirlblog.com/2011/07/slave-leia-empower-women/> writes, Leia changes 
“from devoted champion of the Rebellion, to a woman on a mission to save her 
man”. But it’s also, and not coincidentally, the moment when Leia acknowledges 
her own sexuality and her own desires – desires which were visible to that 
worldly-wise, not-nice Han, but not to her.

But Star Wars isn’t a romance, and true love leads not to marriage but to a 
manically gendered mess

In a romance, the declaration of love would lead directly to bliss and the 
conclusion of the narrative. ButStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> isn’t a romance, and true love 
leads not to marriage and happily ever after, but to a manically gendered mess. 
At the beginning of Return of the Jedi, Leia, who up to this point has mostly 
been dressed in utilitarian but recognizably female attire, suddenly starts 
switching wardrobes. First she disguises herself as the male bounty hunter 
Boushh. Then she switches to the sexed-up slave bikini.

According to the narrative, Leia dresses as a man to fool Jabba and rescue 
Han, and then dresses in the bikini because she’s forced to by Jabba. But you 
could also see the story as a sublimated reaction to Leia’s emotional and 
sexual awakening. Having suddenly discovered her own desires, she has to fit 
them into her own conception of her own gender.

And so she tries on different outfits. To love Han, should she be a man like 
Han: brave, dashing, reckless? Or should she be a gratuitous, over-the-top male 
fantasy? Does Han want a comrade? Does he want a slave? She knew who she was 
before she loved him, but who she is now is less clear. Leia may want to be the 
person Han knows, whoever that is, but she may also want to be someone else.

Leia rejects the slave identity emphatically; as critic Vom Marlowe puts it 
<http://www.hoodedutilitarian.com/2012/05/vom-marlowe-on-wonder-woman-bondage-and-princess-leia/>
, she “strangles Jabba the Hutt with the literal chains of the patriarchy”. 
Those patriarchal chains aren’t just patriarchal chains, though; they’re also a 
BDSM fever dream. The specter of adult relationships and adult sexuality causes 
Lucas, and his film, to freak out, erupting in a cacophony of fetishes: 
bondage, submission, Orientalism, tentacle sex and rape fantasy. Leia is 
objectified – but as the woman seeking to free her man, and as the fascinating 
protagonist running through different outfits and different identities, she’s 
also the driving subject of the narrative, in a way she almost never is for the 
rest of the Han-and-Luke focused series.

Slave Leia fascinates the fandom because of sex. But I don’t think it’s just 
sex. Luke may be leaping around with his lightsaber in the foreground, but the 
backdrop of the Jabba arc is the Han and Leia romance. What would you do for 
love? What do you want to do, and who do you want to be, for love? The 
slave-Leia approach to these issues is clumsy and sexist, but the questions 
themselves are neither of those things. Almost by accident, Star Wars stumbled 
briefly into material with some consequence. Which is perhaps why Disney has 
decided to back away.
 