
Chess history may well decide that Anatoly Karpov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anatoly-karpov> was an underrated champion. 
Karpov's reputation as one of the all-time great strategistswas diminished by 
various misfortunes, not all of his doing.

He never got the chance for a series with his predecessor Bobby Fischer; 
Soviet politics made him seem the villain of his matches with Viktor Korchnoi; 
and, unluckiest of all, he lacked the physical strength to transform his 5-0 
lead against Garry Kasparov in 1984 into the memorable 6-0 victory which would 
have cemented his stature.

Later, he failed to win any of his title contests with Kasparov, and stayed in 
top tournaments too long past his sell-by date in the mid-1990s. Karpov was 
unfortunate, too, that he was too old to make full use of the advent of 
databases, yet active enough to be a target for younger computer-literate 
rivals. He still has many fans, especially in Russia, and this month Poikovsky, 
Siberia, home to the Karpov chess school, staged its sixth annual Karpov 
tournament.

Despite a clash with Linares, the event attracted a strong field with the 
result Bacrot and Bologan 6/9, Dreev and Grischuk 5.5, Svidler 5.

France's Etienne Bacrot, 22, is currently world No9 and the young pretender 
who wants to usurp Michael Adams' position as No1 in western Europe. Bacrot 
beat his co-winner Viorel Bologan in the technical style which many top GMs 
like, nursing a small edge into the endgame. It's not pretty, but here it 
proves very effective.

E Bacrot v V Bologan 1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 e6 3 Nf3 d5 4 Nc3 Be7 5 Qc2 O-O 6 cxd5 exd5 
7 Bg5 c5 8 dxc5 Qa5 9 e3 Nc6 10 Bb5 Nb4 11 Qa4 Qxa4 12 Bxa4 Nd3+ 13 Ke2 Nxc5 14 
Bc2 Be6?! b6 and Ba6 gives activity to offset the IQP. 15 Nd4 Rac8 16 Rac1 g6 
17 Rhd1 Rfd8 18 Bb1 a6 19 a3 Kg7 20 Ba2 h6 21 Bh4 g5 22 Bg3 Nce4 23 Nxe4 Nxe4 
24 Bc7 Re8 25 Rc2 Bf6 26 Nxe6+ White converts the IQP into equally weak hanging 
pawns. fxe6 27 Rdc1 g4 28 f3 gxf3+ 29 gxf3 Ng5 30 f4 Nf7 31 f5! White converts 
again, this time to two bishops on an open board. exf5 32 Bxd5 Bg5 33 Bb6 Rxc2+ 
34 Rxc2 Nd6 35 Kf3 Bf6 36 Bc5 Ne4 37 Bb4 Ng5+ 38 Kf2 b6 39 Rc7+ Kg6 40 h4 Ne6? 
Ne4+ 41 Kf3 Re5 42 Bf7+ Kg7 43 Bc4+ Kg6 gives drawing chances. 41 Rc6! a5 42 
Bc3! Thebishop pair corral the king. Bxh4+ 43 Kf3 Kf7 44 e4! 1-0 If fxe4+ 45 
Kxe4 and Kf5 wins the knight.
 