
Champions of Asia. It’s got a nice ring to it, doesn’t it? Nine years after 
joining the Asian Football Confederation, this was Australia’s coming out 
party. And now the Socceroos have finally won something of note; coach Ange 
Postecoglou reckons this is “only the beginning”.


This is uncharted territory for Australian football fans. Before the 
tournament began, many pundits tipped the Socceroos to go all the way. SBS 
pundit Craig Foster suggested “Australia can, and really should, win this 
tournament”. Postecoglou – a man with the Midas touch in the domestic league –
waxed lyrical 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/socceroos-coach-ange-postecoglou-wants-to-win-asian-cup-in-style-20141228-12eonu.html>
 about “winning with style”. Style, of course, was his essential point, and to 
emphasise it at all illustrated that winning had already, at least 
subconsciously, been assumed.

All this talk of winning – never mind the style – shatters our comfortable 
perception of ourselves as the valiant losers. The grab-bag of readily 
available cliches, symbols and rhetoric may not be there, but a new narrative 
might need to be written.

“Australian popular mythology,” wrote historian Ann Curthoys, “stresses 
struggle, courage and survival amid pain, tragedy and loss.” The sense of 
Australians as the battler struggling in the face of adversity, she notes, has 
a long and established tradition. From the convict settlers to Gallipoli, Don 
Bradman to Crocodile Dundee, Australians are happiest starting from a place of 
assumed disadvantage. If we fail, the loss is readily excused by a range of 
mitigating factors beyond our control; if we win, it’s a win for the national 
character.

Socceroos lift Asian Cup after extra-time win over South Korea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/31/socceroos-lift-asian-cup-after-dramatic-extra-time-win-over-south-korea>
Perhaps no other national team personifies this better than the Socceroos. 
When they travelled to Germany for their first World Cup in 1974, they were the 
archetypal underdogs. Ray Richards, a tough-tackling midfielder from the squad, 
still remembers his team as “the full monty”. Losing two games against East and 
West Germany respectively and drawing 0-0 with Chile – no goals scored and just 
one point achieved – the Australians were roundly applauded for not getting 
belted. Nobody blamed them for not winning.

“The boys from the bush,” commented The Australian immediately after the 
tournament, “plumbers, milkmen, carpenters and others, as they have been 
patronisingly called by overseas experts, have turned their matches into great 
moral victories.”

This 1974 Socceroos side became a kind of creation-myth for Australian 
football fans. The captain, Peter Wilson, said “we Socceroos can do the 
impossible”, and those words haveliterally been woven into the fabric of the 
Socceroos shirt 
<http://www.footballaustralia.com.au/news-display/2014-socceroos-team-kit-revealed/86266>
. The Socceroos Twitter account now has Wilson’s quote as its bio – twisting a 
comment from a part-time footballer leading his team of semi-professional 
players to the biggest sporting tournament in the world into a catch-all motto 
for a very different era.

The sense of inevitable defeat has been reinforced by the 32 years of exile 
between 1974 and 2006 – the lost years of the Socceroos. As Patrick Mangan 
wrote in his book, So Close: The Bravest, Craziest, Unluckiest Defeats in 
Aussie Sport, “since 1974 the Australian team had found a multitude of unusual 
ways to be dumped from the World Cup in the final stage.” Loss has been passed 
down and internalised by several generations of Socceroos fans. The fact that 
football was the leper of Australian sport made the pain even more acute, and 
the nation’s entire football culture became inseparable from struggle.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fsocceroos-win-asian-cup-highlights-extra-time-win-south-korea-final&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F31%2F1422717355913%2Fcrop_KP_82943_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Socceroos%20lift%20Asian%20Cup%20after%20dramatic%20extra-time%20win%20over%20South%20Korea%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fsocceroos-win-asian-cup-highlights-extra-time-win-south-korea-final>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Socceroos%20lift%20Asian%20Cup%20after%20dramatic%20extra-time%20win%20over%20South%20Korea%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fsocceroos-win-asian-cup-highlights-extra-time-win-south-korea-final&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F31%2F1422717355913%2Fcrop_KP_82943_640x360.jpeg>
Link to video: Socceroos lift Asian Cup after dramatic extra-time win over 
South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/jan/31/socceroos-win-asian-cup-highlights-extra-time-win-south-korea-final>
Under Frank Arok the national team were “mad dogs”: an aggressive, defensive 
team of triers plucked from their semi-professional gigs in the National Soccer 
League. In 1985 they scrapped their way to the final stages of qualifying, only 
to be knocked out by Alex Ferguson’s Scotland. Even Ferguson admitted the 
Socceroos deserved better.

Iran 1997, of course, remains the deepest wound. What other nation can claim 
to have gone undefeated in the qualifying stages and yet still failed to make 
the World Cup? In front of a packed MCG, the Socceroos were eliminated on the 
away goals rule after sacrificing two late goals to draw 2-2 with Iran. Johnny 
Warren, a heroic, missionary figure from the 1974 Socceroos, cried on national 
television.

“I’m really sorry,” conceded Iran’s coach Valdeir Vieira immediately after the 
match. “I know Johnny Warren, I met last night another fabulous guy Adrian 
[Alston]. I know that team from ‘74 have been together yesterday and I know how 
these people are now suffering. I know how Australian kids who love football 
are now suffering. I tell you the truth, if we had a winner here, it should 
have beenAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>.”

But it wasn’t, and until now, the Socceroos have never been able to feel like 
winners. Yes, there have been victories in Oceania and the 1967 Friendly 
Nations Tournament in Vietnam, but this is the first major international trophy.

Asian Cup final: Australia v South Korea – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jan/31/asian-cup-final-action-from-the-socceroos-v-south-korea-in-pictures>
As a football nation Australia previously lived a divided existence between 
the pithy confederation of Oceania and the great unknown that is The Rest Of 
The World. Oscillating uncomfortably between acting as the whale and the 
tadpole in the various ponds of football, Australia turned in thumping 
victories over micro-nations in the Pacific and heartbreaking failures to even 
qualify for major tournaments with equal measure.

Moving to the Asian Football Confederation has been a gradual process of 
reorientation. It’s brought stability and familiarity, and it’s also brought 
success. The Matildas won the women’s Asian Cup in 2010, and the Western Sydney 
Wanderers won the Asian Champions League late last year. But winning this Asian 
Cup as hosts has the potential to change the way Australians relate to the 
Socceroos.

So what now for the national team? At World Cups, of course, claiming the 
underdog tag will still be excusable for many years to come. But will that be 
Postecoglou’s style? Saturday night’s victory, for example, could easily be 
cast as a victory for the battler. There were a few questionable refereeing 
decisions, and a heroic late winner in extra-time. As Robbie Kruse limped onto 
the winners stage to collect his medal, there was even a war-wounded figure to 
complete the picture. But after lifting the trophy, Postecoglou was already 
talking about the future.

“This is not where it ends for us,” he said, “it’s the beginning, and we go 
into a four year cycle of World Cup qualification. I’ve said consistently that 
I want to go to the next World Cup to make an impact and not just to be there. 
I’m not going to put any limits on this group of players.”

Postecoglou is a confident man who will not suffer small-nation syndrome or 
bask in the comfort of claiming to be the underdog. He believes deeply in 
Australia. He never left these shores to play overseas, his coaching career – 
apart from a season in Greece – has all been in the domestic league and 
national team set-up. His was a challenge to make panel-beaters believe they 
are aristocrats, and while his sense of self-belief almost borders on reckless, 
you sense he’s talking big on behalf of the nation and not just himself.

'No limits' for Socceroos after Australian triumph, says Ange Postecoglou
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/01/asian-cup-final-press-conference-postecoglou>
“I really believed this was important from the moment I took the job that we 
shed ourselves of this inferiority complex that Australian footballers can only 
do certain things and play a certain way,” he said.

“I’ve never believed that, and even for Australian coaches. We’ve done this 
with myself as an Australian coach, all the backroom staff are Australian 
coaches, Australian staff, and Australian players. You know, I said from day 
one, we won’t take a backward step to anyone.

“Our role now in this confederation is to keep challenging ourselves and 
hopefully keep challenging all the other nations. The goal should be for this 
confederation to break the European, South American monopoly on a World Cup. It 
may sound far-fetched now, but that’s got to be the goal, and we can only help 
that by making sure we don’t rest on our laurels just because we’ve won the 
tournament here.”
 