
One of the great joys of YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> is unearthing a video of 
entirely indeterminate origin and purpose. Who made this, you wonder, and who 
the hell did they make it for? The sensation is not entirely a new one, but it 
was rarer in the days before the internet, when almost everything that made its 
way to broadcast had a calculated position within the schedule and a clearly 
defined target demographic.

I say almost everything because, between 1983 and 1994, the instructional PBS 
art showThe Joy Of Painting was the ultimate in “who-is-this-for?” 
broadcasting. So many different audiences found something to love in 
bushy-haired host Bob Ross and his stream-of-consciousness art classes 
(housebound pensioners, carefree stoners, irony-hungry Generation X-ers, and 
presumably at least a couple of aspiring painters) that it’s unclear who 
exactly he intended them to target.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpw5ETGiiBRg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpw5ETGiiBRg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpw5ETGiiBRg&media=>
Some insist that Ross was alive to the camp value of his snow-tipped 
mountains, “happy little trees” and phthalo blue skies, citing a series of 
early-90s MTV spots in which he lightly mocked his own presentational style. 
But on The Joy Of Painting, at least, he never broke character. For more than a 
decade he addressed his audience in a register of unwavering sincerity – even 
claiming his signature perm was a way to save on haircuts rather than an arch 
gimmick.

In the UK, The Joy Of Painting was a mainstay of various ropey satellite 
channels, allowing generation after generation of baffled but appreciative 
viewers to discover Ross’s be-permed presence anew. Away from its country of 
origin, the show took on an even stranger resonance, becoming an emblem not 
just of public-service television but a wider strain of folksy, quasi-religious 
American broadcasting. In the first series of Peep Show, Mark and Jeremy were 
avid fans, though they knew its charismatic host only as “God”.

Ross retired the show shortly before he died of cancer in 1995, but for a 
little over a year now, a new archival episode of The Joy Of Painting has been 
uploaded to his official YouTube channel each and every day. In what is 
undoubtedly the show’s natural 21st-century habitat, it’s sure to find a whole 
new raft of viewers. Indeed, the view counts of the more than 300 episodes 
already available speak to the ongoing appeal of Ross’s singular body of work. 
At the time of writing, YouTube users seem especially keen on an hour-long 
special entitled The Grandeur Of Summer; more than 2.5 million of them have 
watched it.
 