
“I have long dreamed of a football event this big coming to Australian 
shores.” Thus spake the man dubbed by Frank Lowy as “the face of the Asian 
Cup”, and while there may have been no sign of the Captain Ambassador Lucas 
Neill come tournament’s start, by anyone’s measure the 2015 Asian Cup has been 
a phenomenal success.

With 500 days to go to the tournament, the CEO of the Local Organising 
Committee, Michael Brown, spoke effusively of the high hopes for ticket sales, 
and of the rising interest among the broader public. With twinkling eyes, 
showing glimpses of both snake oil peddler and barely-concealed terror, he 
spoke of a dream of selling half a million tickets. Half a million tickets – 
for North Korea v Uzbekistan; for Qatar v Bahrain; for Oman v Kuwait? In 
Newcastle?

As a sports-obsessed nation continued to seem nonplussed, organisers rolled 
out Socceroos icon Rale Rasic, press-ganged a grimacing HG Nelson for its ads, 
and threw good money after bad at Alessandro Del Piero. A man who spent two 
decades plying his trade in one of Europe’s top leagues was always a bizarre 
choice of figurehead for Asia’s pre-eminent tournament – but one that betrayed 
a fear of failure and a desire to seduce the ‘swinging voter’ of the 
notoriously fickle Sydney sports market.

And whilst the gimmicks rang hollow, the football rang true. 649,705 people 
flooded through the turnstiles – at an average of 20,303 per game. Refer to the 
census and officially only 69 North Korean nationals callAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> home. But amid torrential rain 
more than 12,000 came to watch the reclusive nation’s debut against Uzbekistan. 
Newcastle discovered a hidden Palestinian community, and from Brisbane to 
Melbourne the fans of Iran’s Team Melli set a tremendous bar for noise, colour 
and pageantry.

The Socceroos: champions of Asia and plucky Australian underdogs no more | Joe 
Gorman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/02/asian-cup-socceroos-joe-gorman-analysis>
Not only did diverse ethnic communities wholeheartedly embrace the tournament, 
but seemingly dispassionate “neutrals” flocked to the stands.

Then there was the football. Fierce rivals Iran and Iraq played one of the 
all-time great finals matches, steeped in drama, goals and passion; all of this 
then topped withYounus Mahmood’s brazen panenka 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JMYwZaJ8Z4Y>. Palestine scored their first 
ever goal at a major tournament, Tim Cahill’s spectacular bicycle kick broke 
the hearts of the world’s most populous nation, and then of course – there was 
that final.

Such is the commercial pressure in world sport these days, major tournaments 
often come with a sickening sales effort, manufacturing and spreading a maudlin 
sentimentality.

But for every “China adopts Aussie ballboy” media sensation, there were 
countless tales of genuine inspiration –the football federation boss and the 
remarkable trip for fifty Iraqi women 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/iraqi-women-enjoy-asian-cup-quarterfinal-thanks-to-capitals-generosity-20150123-12vm9n.html>
,the stories of Palestinian fans Mohammad Othman and Zaid Jubran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/asian-cup-palestine-fans-preview>
, andthe Iranian women who defied the Islamic Revolution with their message of 
protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/23/asian-cup-iran-fans-protest>
. For one month, the stories and cultures of West and East Asia flooded the 
Australian consciousness.

For Aussie kids raised on the “blood and thunder” version of sporting hero, 
there is now a new household name. With English Premier League idols and Serie 
A greats on display, who would have ever expected that the star of the 
tournament and name on everybody’s lips would be that of the slightly-framed 
Emirate genius, Omar Abdulrahman?

For a nation that too often buys into clichés of West Asian players as divers 
and time-wasters, to recognise such a gifted player for the talents he 
possesses is a telling shift in the collective psyche.

As I walked into my local pub to watch Japan v Palestine, I pass two men, both 
“anglo” and in their 50s, poring over a map on a mobile phone. For half a 
century it wasn’t a question that had stirred them, but now they were as eager 
as schoolboys to find out exactly where Uzbekistan was.

ABC scores ratings goals with Asian Cup final and Queensland election coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/abc-kicks-ratings-goals-with-asian-cup-final-and-queensland-election-coverage>
For so long “the arse end of the world 
<http://aussie.tribe.net/thread/bb881120-15f0-4bdb-8368-c1ec7487212b>”, in an 
era of such increasing globalisation it is no longer possible to deny 
Australia’s geographical location. If, as Paul Keating alleges, the Menzies era 
“sunk a generation of Australians in Anglophilia and torpor” than through 
events such as this, many are beginning to accept that our nation’s future does 
in fact lie with the 4.4 billion souls of this expansive and diverse continent.

Yes, the machinations and even prejudices of some (now fallen) state 
governments may have meant that many, especially in the key cultural hub of 
Melbourne, had only limited exposure to the magic of the cup; while the tyranny 
of distance robbed fans from Adelaide or Perth of the opportunity to share in 
the spectacle first hand.

But in Sydney, home to the corridors of power of Football Federation Australia 
and its apparatchiks, one senses strongly that irrevocable and durable ties 
have been forged between a once distant island continent and it’s northern 
neighbours. Not only have Australians learned more about the continent of Asia, 
but conversely Asia has learned more about us.

Whilst hundreds of millions of Chinese viewers may not have been treated to 
the dulcet stylings of Andy Harper, they were exposed to some quality football, 
seamless organisation, and impressive facilities. Let’s all just agree to 
forget the Brisbane pitch.

In 1994, hosting the World Cup put football (or soccer) on the map in the 
United States.An average attendance of 68,626 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/264441/number-of-spectators-at-football-world-cups-since-1930/>
 witnessed the heroics of Hristo Stoichkov, the mercurial Gheorghe Hagi, and of 
course, the Divine Ponytail’s infamous penalty miss. Not bad for a country that 
didn’t even have a professional league. Today,30 per cent of households in 
America boast at least one soccer player 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/relegation-zone/71/post/1851517/soccers-big-takeover>
 – a rate only bested by baseball – as the round ball game continues to grow.

'No limits' for Socceroos after Australian triumph, says Ange Postecoglou
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/01/asian-cup-final-press-conference-postecoglou>
Co-hosting the 2002 World Cup saw Japan and Korea invest over $7.6 billion 
into new stadia and infrastructure, with one report citing an economic return 
of $33 billion for the two countries. If these figures are debatable, less so 
is the 15% increase in attendance that followed over the next two seasons of 
the J-League. (Data from Baade R. A. and Matheson V. A. (2004) The quest for 
the cup: assessing the economic impact of the World Cup)

The economic and geo-political benefits of the Asian Cup may be hard to 
quantify; but for millions of casual viewers, the Asian Cup has entrenched a 
new image not just of Australia, but also of football in this country.

This win validates the footballing philosophy of coach Ange Postecoglou, his 
mandate for renewal, and his policy of selecting technically gifted, 
possession-seeking players.

It shows the Asian continent that football is Australia is only increasing in 
quality, that our league deserves respect, our players are worth courting, and 
that far from being a peripheral nation, our quest to improve as a footballing 
power is inextricably bound with Asia’s own.

FFA may have missed an opportunity yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/a-league-u-turn-proposed-reduced-foreign-quota>
 to bring our league into closer alignment with those of Asia, through a “4+1” 
foreign visa spot initiative, but already through signings such as Yusuke 
Tanaka, Yojiro Takahagi, and Lee Ki-je clubs are showing a willingness to turn 
to Asia.

The legacy of the Asian Cup may not always be directly palpable, but in the 
minds and hearts of many a profound shift has occurred. Ten years after our 
entry into the Asian Confederation, Australia has finally held its housewarming 
party.
 