
When Nelson Mandela died in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/05/nelson-mandela-dies-aged-95-south-africa>
, a whole nation wondered how it would fare without the man who had led it 
peacefully out of apartheid. Although this week’slocal election results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc>
 in South Africa may not carry the same emotional and symbolic weight, they are 
another watershed for the party Mandela brought to power in 1994, the African 
National Congress. The local election results reveal the degree to which its 
electoral base in the cities has been eroded, and a warning that, after a 
generation in power, voters are losing confidence in its capacity to deliver.

Not that the ANC’s showing in Wednesday’s municipal polls was a defeat by any 
normal definition. Securing more than 50% of the vote is a result beyond most 
political parties’ wildest ambitions, all the more so after over two decades in 
power. But in South African politics, the ANC that has rested for so long on 
its glory days as the heroic lone defender of the black majority in the face of 
crushing injustice is now confronting its first serious challenge. In the 
run-up to the vote, the benchmark for success was agreed to be whether the ANC 
would get more or less than 60% in the national count. It got much less. It has 
done worst in the key cities where it was previously ruled unopposed. In the 
administrative capital, Pretoria, in the key metropolitan area ofNelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> Bay, and in the economic hub 
of Johannesburg, it looks as if the opposition Democratic Alliance may get the 
chance to prove it can govern more fairly and effectively.

One explanation for this erosion in ANC support is the mounting frustration 
with unemployment and persistent inequality. Another isthe tarnished image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/this-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads>
 of President Jacob Zuma after seven years in power. However hard Mr Zuma has 
tried to exploit the Mandela legacy and to bask in his reflected glory, rumours 
of sexual scandals dog him. To no small degree, these local elections were a 
referendum on his presidency. The results are likely to encourage his opponents 
to pursue their battle against him in the run-up to the 2019 general election. 
But there is a deeper trend that points to some of the paradoxes of South 
Africa’s transition. The failure to spread access to the good life – to schools 
and healthcare and work – is obvious. People look around after more than 20 
years of one-person, one-vote and see that opportunities have gone to some, 
while many others are still on the sidelines. Mandela’s post-apartheid policies 
of reconciliation and forgiveness, critical as they were for the peaceful 
transformation, led to a situation where the economic dominance of white South 
Africa was not so much dismantled as lightly diluted by the rise of a new black 
elite, of which the ANC establishment became a key component. Most of the 
country’s vast assets remained in the hands of the white minority.

This week’s results illustrate how the great impoverished majority of black 
South Africa has started to look beyond the ANC’s credentials in the liberation 
struggle, to focus on why daily problems linked to slow growth and questionable 
governance have not been tackled. That South Africa’s economy has suffered from 
the fallout of the 2008 global financial crisis does little to allay their 
disgruntlement. The Democratic Alliance has capitalised on this, just as it has 
worked hard to break out of its image as a party mainly serving white interests 
– not least by choosing a black leader, Mmusi Maimane, last year. The Economic 
Freedom Fighters, a new, radical leftist group led byANC dissident Julius Malema
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14718226> has also nibbled away 
at the ANC’s traditional electorate.

But in a continent where democracy often struggles to take root, what is bad 
news for the ANC is good news for South Africa. The ANC’s belief that its 
mandatewas somehow God-given 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/2016/07/18/God-chose-ANC-to-lead> needed 
challenging. Now the voters have said that they will hold it to account as they 
would any other ruling party in a free country. That is a sign of a democracy 
coming of age, something Mandela would surely have welcomed.
 