
You’re two-thirds of the way through your degree, ready for the final push, so 
what do you do? Go and work for a year, of course. Sandwich courses, a year in 
industry, or a placement year come under different names and guises but are 
basically the same thing: a chance to gain valuable, practical and often paid 
experience with the opportunity to make contacts that could lead to full-time 
employment. The vast majority of placements start immediately after the second 
year.

Such courses are proving popular, and universities have now broadened their 
offering to include time in work not just for business degrees but engineering, 
science subjects, languages and some humanities. They are made all the more 
attractive as employers will pay up to around £17,000 for the right person.

A placement year shows you have a work ethos and makes you far more employable
Mike Hill, chief executive, Prospects 
Being proactive is essential for every student approaching a placement year. 
Competition is fierce for the major players and students are advised to use all 
their resources, including personal contacts, websites and university services. 
An up-to-date CV helps, as does thinking hard about the reasons why you’ll fit 
into the company. Better to do fewer, more targeted applications than a mass 
trawl with a generic application. Key strategies include applying early, doing 
your research, staying flexible and open-minded.

Mike Hill, chief executive of Prospects, the official career website for the 
university sector, believes students all benefit from placement years. “I can’t 
think of a downside.Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> 
take the theoretical practice into the workplace and see things through. Some 
then use that year in their dissertation and others get invited back to the 
organisation. It gives the student a chance to see if they enjoy the job, and 
the employer a chance to assess the student and take them on full-time if they 
fit in with the culture and they feel they can trust them.

“Other students travel abroad, and that can be of huge benefit, especially for 
language students. A placement year shows you have a work ethos and makes you 
far more employable.”

Last year, the multinational conglomerate GE in the UK had 320 interns in 26 
locations. It advertises placements online from September, and streamlines the 
process by connecting new recruits with old hands and answering all those 
niggling questions, such as: Where will I live? How will I support myself?

A spokesperson said: “We run a Facebook group that all new GE interns are 
invited to join, to connect and build relationships with their peers. Once the 
internship begins, interns are partnered with a buddy to help bring the new 
employee up to speed quickly.”

As with many of the big companies, figures for GE show 20% of interns are 
invited back to a permanent role after completing their degrees.

Case study: Josh Hampton, University of Hull
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwork-placement-year-job-experience-better-career-prospects-on-graduation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faffbb689c46cbc0e533324f6c8bf9e3949564a56%2F257_1042_4648_2789%2F4648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20plus%20points%20of%20work%20placements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwork-placement-year-job-experience-better-career-prospects-on-graduation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20plus%20points%20of%20work%20placements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwork-placement-year-job-experience-better-career-prospects-on-graduation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faffbb689c46cbc0e533324f6c8bf9e3949564a56%2F257_1042_4648_2789%2F4648.jpg>
 Josh Hampton researched the company and did mock interviews to prepare for his 
application. Photograph: Andy Lord for the Guardian 
Josh Hampton, 22, from Doncaster, is completing his fourth year of an 
accountancy degree at the University of Hull.

“During my second year I applied to quite a few companies, including Jaguar 
Landrover, Citybank, and KPMG. For inspiration I just looked around my room, to 
see what things I had, and applied to that company, asking if they did 
placements. I was once in a bar and spotted a bottle of Moët champagne, so I 
emailed Moët. Although they came back and said they didn’t do placement years, 
they did offer to talk to me when I graduated because they liked my initiative. 
It’s probably not the most ordered method, but it seems to work.

I’ve changed a lot. I’ve always been ambitious, but now I’ve become much more 
driven as the result of my placement
Josh Hampton, accountancy student, University of Hull 
“Before applying, I always research the company as much as possible, and my CV 
is reasonably impressive. I’ve had short placements and a part-time job at Toby 
Carvery, which gave me more confidence, as I was having to deal with people – 
that helped develop my communication skills. I also went through a series of 
mock interviews at my university to get myself ready.

“After a telephone interview, then a face-to-face interview at an assessment 
centre, I got a placement with GE, in Manchester. I was offered a couple of 
roles, and took the one in finance.

“I really enjoyed the responsibility, but the uncertainty was difficult, and 
my first day was probably the toughest. My initial contract ran from June to 
June, but that got extended to August and then September. That kept me in role 
after the other interns had finished and I couldn’t afford to pay for a 
three-bedroom house on my own. At first it looked as though I was going to be 
promoted and sent to a different office, so GE offered to fund my 
accommodation. However, I ended up in a different role, and was still based out 
of Manchester, and GE paid for a house.

“I got a lot of feedback, and afterwards they provided a 15-page report on my 
performance and development. So if I ever go for a job with them, I can bring 
that up.

“As a result, I’ve changed a lot. I’ve always been ambitious, but now I’m more 
effective with my time. I’ve become much more driven as the result of my 
placement and exposed to high-flyers from the US.

“My advice is don’t be put off by a rejection: you learn so much more from 
rejection than you do from success and it makes you try things differently the 
next time. And you can maintain friendships during the year by keeping in touch 
and seeing them for birthdays and so on.

“Ultimately I hope to get a job with PWC – that would be my dream accountancy 
job – and to get a first, of course.”
 