
As we head into end-of-year honours, no official award is handed out for Film 
Better Than It Had Any Right To Be. If one were,The Shallows (Sony, 15) would 
be well nigh unbeatable. Narratively stripped to the bone, but stylistically 
played to the hilt, Jaume Collet-Serra’s lithe, lurid surfer-versus-shark 
face-off was the giddiest shot of fun I had at the multiplex in 2016. The 
Blu-ray cover even brags that it’s the best shark film sinceJaws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/jaws-40-years-on-truly-great-lasting-classics-of-america-cinema>
, which isn’t the most prestigious praise when you consider what’s come in 
between, but might just be true.

Though its kinetic technical assembly is diminished somewhat, it still 
splashes and thrashes well enough on the small screen, largely because Blake 
Lively, as the bloodied boarder stranded agonisingly close to land with a great 
white circling, gives it some unexpected human nerve. The once stiff Lively has 
been gradually living up to her surname over her last few films; now you 
actually want her to defeat the shark, which feels like a watershed.

Also a pleasant surprise, recovered from the bad ideas file: Pete’s Dragon 
(Disney, PG), a widely unrequested remake of an inoffensive enough Disney 
outing from 1977. In the improbable hands of indie mood merchant David Lowery, 
the remake emerges as an entirely superior creation, a boy and his beast fable 
kissed with a genuine sense of compassion and community to go with its 
expensive digital spectacle. And even that has warmth to it: the eponymous 
dragon, friend and protector to feral orphan Pete in the woods in the Pacific 
Northwest, has a sturdy plush-toy quality to him, making their relationship, 
threatened when the boy is reintroduced to society, all the more sweetly 
elemental.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F613e24337267c65da6a35c9a6e5c29361272e34d%2F0_96_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Shallows%3B%20Pete%E2%80%99s%20Dragon%3B%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%3B%20Suicide%20Squad%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Shallows%3B%20Pete%E2%80%99s%20Dragon%3B%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%3B%20Suicide%20Squad%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F613e24337267c65da6a35c9a6e5c29361272e34d%2F0_96_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Jennifer Saunders and Joanna Lumley in Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie: 
‘half-cut couch fodder’. Photograph: Allstar/Fox Searchlight 
A significantly less wholesome friendship is at the heart of Absolutely 
Fabulous: The Movie (Fox, 15), which arrives on DVD shelves at the perfect 
time. Grandly enjoyable as it was in cinemas, Jennifer Saunders and Joanna 
Lumley’s most extended episode to date of irresponsible japery, hit-and-miss 
gags and A-to-Z-list star cameos will play best as half-cut couch fodder at 
Christmas, accompanied by further fizz in your preferred price bracket. You 
could try the same approach toSuicide Squad (Warner, 15), though I’m not sure 
how many bottles you’d need to go through before this grim superhero 
congregation – a joyless blend of silliness andChristopher Nolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/13/features.culture6>-inspired 
severity – seems even a little lighter on its leaden feet.

There are more satisfyingly nasty neon pleasures to be found in Nerve 
(Lionsgate, 15), a gleaming millennial update of the kind of techno paranoia 
thriller we saw so much of in the internet’s earlier days. Directors Henry 
Joost and Ariel Schulman, who made the canny social media exposéCatfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/19/catfish-review-documentary-schulman-joost>
, have taken the rise of competitive apps such asPokémon Go – in this case a 
kind of dare-driven chase with financial rewards – as the starting point for a 
tense little date thriller that surfs the adolescent insecurities of the 
Snapchat age. It may someday seem as quaint a period piece asThe Net, but 
should remain a fast ride.

Naff as Nerve is in many senses, I got a greater cyber-high from it than I did 
fromLo and Behold: Reveries of the Connected World (Dogwoof, 12), Werner Herzog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/24/werner-herzog-collection-dvd-classic-philip-french-essential-boxset>
correct’s earnest, intelligently argued but overreaching luddite’s view of 
internet culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1401177ce48a374d33bfd2026d98d1e686c5c406%2F0_41_1198_719%2F1198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Shallows%3B%20Pete%E2%80%99s%20Dragon%3B%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%3B%20Suicide%20Squad%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Shallows%3B%20Pete%E2%80%99s%20Dragon%3B%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie%3B%20Suicide%20Squad%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fthe-shallows-absolutely-fabulous-lumley-saunders-werner-herzog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1401177ce48a374d33bfd2026d98d1e686c5c406%2F0_41_1198_719%2F1198.jpg>
 ‘Hot-blooded and tenderhearted’: Theo & Hugo. 
An ultimately beguiling boy meets boy romance, Olivier Ducastel and Jacques 
Martineau’sTheo & Hugo (Peccadillo, 15) begins with an unusual choice of meet 
cute: an 18-minute orgy in a Paris sex club. Having got to know one other in 
the biblical sense upfront, the eponymous couple make each other’s fully 
clothed acquaintance over a long night’s amble into day: it’s both hot blooded 
and tenderhearted.

I was slow to realise that April and the Extraordinary World was streaming in 
plain sight 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/April-Extraordinary-World-Marion-Cotillard/dp/B01HU0ZABG>
 on Amazon Prime. Having heard critical hosannas from Europe and the US, I was 
waiting for a cinema release. No matter, since this loopily inventive, 
fragrantly French sci-fi animation fills the small screen with ideas and charm. 
Marion Cotillard voices the title role, a young, inquisitive woman in restless 
pursuit of her missing scientist parents. Her search takes her down swirling, 
steampunk-inspired avenues of exploration, complete with talking cats and 
various Gallic sideshows. It’s sophisticated enough to boggle adult brains yet 
happily imbued with child-friendly wonder.
 