
Sarah Waters’s novel Fingersmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/02/fiction.sarahwaters> has had a 
lavish and almost operatically spectacular adaptation bythe Korean auteur Park 
Chan-wook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/park-chan-wook-on-relocating-sarah-waters-fingersmith-to-korea>
, which isolates and intensifies the keynote of eroticism. The sexuality 
drenches the superbly designed fixtures, fittings and fabrics of this film and 
perfumes the intoxicating air that all the characters breathe.

This is, arguably, disproportionate to the more nuanced effect intended and 
achieved bySarah Waters <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sarahwaters>, but it 
makes for a luxurious movie, and Park handles with aplomb the story’s whiplash 
narrative twist and resulting POV shift.

The Handmaiden review – Park Chan-wook's lurid lesbian potboiler simmers with 
sexual tension
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
The novel’s setting of Victorian London is transplanted to Korea of the 1930s. 
A confidence trickster and predatory seducer who styles himself as “Count” 
Fujiwara takes over the life of a young thief named Sook-hee, and gets her to 
inveigle herself into the house of a lonely young heiress, named Lady Hideko, 
getting a job as her handmaiden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-9-the-handmaiden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f45ae685fb3d3b1511d54914f3afca87ea23f09%2F40_0_1217_730%2F1217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20US%20films%20of%202016%3A%20No%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0The%20Handmaiden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-9-the-handmaiden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20US%20films%20of%202016%3A%20No%209%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0The%20Handmaiden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-9-the-handmaiden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f45ae685fb3d3b1511d54914f3afca87ea23f09%2F40_0_1217_730%2F1217.jpg>
The point of this is, of course, to get this pampered young woman to fall for 
the spurious Count, but as the two women become close it seems to be they who 
are falling in love. The tension between them is all but unbearable, especially 
as Hideko is being abused by her uncle and guardian: a grotesque satyr of 
perverse indulgence and porn connoisseurship.

The twists and turns of the story are dazzling, and the film sometimes feels 
like an intricately jewelled and mirrored prop that might be used by a stage 
magician of a distant age. It is a glitteringly strange and sexy film.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/50-best-us-film-of-2016-the-full-list> 