
How to Be Single
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWnkNyuud0g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWnkNyuud0g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWnkNyuud0g&media=>
The post-Sex and the City surge in films and TV shows based around the dating 
habits of singletons was largely a conveyor belt of deceptively packaged 
romantic comedies still based around the idea that marriage should remain a 
woman’s ultimate ambition. Attempting to cover up a repetitive conservative 
agenda with cocktails and frank sex chat was a temporary solution to actual 
progress. But even, as noted in How to Be Single, the independence of Carrie 
Bradshaw and her pals was something of a fallacy as they spent the majority of 
their time talking about men.

That casual aside hints at a refreshing agenda for a film that, yes, still 
falls into formula mode at times (prime real estate for characters on average 
salaries – tick!), but makes a somewhat groundbreaking statement for a film of 
its ilk: it’s OK, and often preferable, to be single. Dakota Johnson’s 
incredibly nuanced performance anchors an often rambling ensemble piece that 
offers up a glossy yet surprisingly sharp view of relationships. Like a more 
multiplex-friendly take on 2014’s underrated drama Wild, we have a film that 
praises the importance of being alone and not falling into a vortex of 
co-dependency. It’s also a warm and funny comedy with a pitched-just-right 
comic performance from Rebel Wilson and a damn fine genre-defying ending that 
comes as a breath of fresh air after years of stuffy rom-coms.BL

Kubo and the Two Strings

For sheer movie theater spectacle you just can’t beat Kubo and the Two 
Strings, an unspeakably beautiful stop-motion animated yarn about a one-eyed 
boy named Kubo (Art Parkinson) who must find his father’s armor with the help 
of a silent knight made out of origami paper, a samurai-beetle with amnesia 
(Matthew McConaughey), and an irascible monkey (Charlize Theron).

The movie vanished without a trace after its opening but it is well worth 
remembering. Its various set pieces stand alongside the most inventive in 
contemporary filmmaking: There’s a battle with a huge red skeleton monster – 
the skeleton itself being the largest stop-motion puppet ever assembled – and 
there’s the duel with Kubo’s evil aunts on a ship made out of leaves, as well 
as a stunning climactic sequence in which the evil Moon King is destroyed in 
the most unexpected, touching way.

Kubo and the Two Strings stuffs its 102 minutes with action and humor, but the 
film’s deep well of sadness makes it memorable beyond the sheer adrenaline of 
its flamboyant visuals. As Kubo wanders through the movie’s notionally 
medieval-Japanese setting, director Travis Knight and the Laika staff offer up 
image upon image of ruin, the little boy stark against empty buildings and 
abandoned temples.

The screenplay’s beats stay refreshingly unpredictable all the way to the 
movie’s end, and its open-hearted hero has more to offer the children of the 
film’s intended audience than the unbearable “believe in yourself” or “growing 
up is hard” of its kid-movie competitors. The film-makers carefully build a 
desolated world with the care of the best stop-motion craftspeople, and within 
it, they still make hope plausible.

Swiss Army Man
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyrK1f4TsQfM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyrK1f4TsQfM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyrK1f4TsQfM&media=>
Seeing a film that most people referred to as the “farting corpse film” on the 
final day of a festival after watching more than 30 films at altitude wasn’t 
ever that appealing of a prospect. Ten minutes into Daniel Kwan and Daniel 
Scheinert’s “gay necrophilia movie 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2016/09/30/swiss-army-man-directors-how-we-accidentally-made-a-gay-necrophi/>
”, there was an almost irresistible urge to walk out – just after the scene 
where Daniel Radcliffe’s corpse had ridden over the waves, propelled by that 
most eco-friendly of fuels: flatulence.

You can’t really get around the fact that this is a feature about a farting 
corpse, but the directors know that and reveled in it: “What if we took that 
really stupid idea and poured our hearts into it?” was the question they asked 
themselves when making it. Swiss Army Man is the result of that questionable 
approach. After the initial 10 minutes of head shaking, eye rolling and prudish 
giggles – the plot begins to emerge and what Kwan and Scheinert manage, 
incredibly, is to create a film that is strangely uplifting as it is ridiculous.

Paul Dano’s hopeless, deluded loner is brilliantly wrought and perhaps a 
comment on the kind of characters he usually gets cast as. While Radcliffe does 
as well as anyone could expect of an actor whose main motivation is post-death 
bowel movement. It might have been the altitude, it might have been the farts, 
but by the end the film had gone from perhaps the worst thing I’d ever 
experienced to something that I couldn’t stop telling people about.

Hunt for the Wilderpeople
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fsam-neill-on-hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-co-star-im-grumpy-hes-annoying-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Neill%20on%20Hunt%20for%20the%20Wilderpeople%20co-star%3A%20'I'm%20grumpy%2C%20he's%20annoying'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fsam-neill-on-hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-co-star-im-grumpy-hes-annoying-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Neill%20on%20Hunt%20for%20the%20Wilderpeople%20co-star%3A%20%27I%27m%20grumpy%2C%20he%27s%20annoying%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fsam-neill-on-hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-co-star-im-grumpy-hes-annoying-video-interview&media=>
Sam Neill on Hunt for the Wilderpeople co-star: ‘I’m grumpy, he’s annoying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/16/sam-neill-on-hunt-for-the-wilderpeople-co-star-im-grumpy-hes-annoying-video-interview>
Taika Waititi isn’t exactly the film world’s biggest secret: he was tapped up 
by Marvel to direct Thor: Ragnarok some time ago, having impressed everyone 
with the vampire comedy What We Do in the Shadows (which itself was an 
extension of his work on Flight of the Conchords).

However, before embarking on Thor, Waititi managed to get this long-nurtured 
film off the ground, an adaptation of Wild Pork and Watercress by Barry Crump, 
long a legend in Waititi’s native New Zealand. And what he produced is a 
terrifically charming film, a fish-out-of-water comedy that manages to be both 
a family-type tale about a miserable teenager and a sly tribute to New 
Zealand’s rugged outdoors.

Julian Dennison plays said miserable teenager Ricky who worships Tupac, but is 
a blight on the local family services department: he is eventually fostered on 
a rough-hewn middle-aged couple called Bella and Hec (played by Rima Te Wiata 
and Sam Neill). For a variety of reasons too complicated to go into here, Ricky 
and Hec end up stranded out in the bush, with the cops convinced the oldster 
has kidnapped the kid with dark intentions. But actually the two are developing 
a father and son bond, a novel experience for both of them.

What marks Hunt for the Wilderpeople out is primarily its dry-as-dust sense of 
humour; tonally very closely related, not surprisingly, to Conchords and 
Shadows. Waititi also seems to have learned a thing or two from Tim Burton as 
to how to set up a nicely framed and calibrated sequence – or perhaps that 
comes naturally after making a vampire movie. Whatever’s behind it, he gets a 
great performance, both funny and natural, out of Dennison; and basically 
doesn’t get in the way of Neill, who has been one cinema’s most reliably 
likable performers for almost three decades. It’s a little baffling why this 
didn’t do better at the US box office: it’s just so easy to like. But it’s 
ideal if you want something to watch over the holidays, so look it up.AP

The Valley of Love
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWZzM1X5v7a0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWZzM1X5v7a0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWZzM1X5v7a0&media=>
There is one true queen of cinema this year. One woman whose poise and 
froideur have all bowing before her. The whole of Elle – Paul Verhoeven’s 
brilliant rape revenge comedy – is basically a homage toIsabelle Huppert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/isabelle-huppert>. Every moment ripe for a 
gif; the whole construction reliant on its leading lady’s epic, aspirational 
oddness.


It’s easy to love Elle; likewise it’s easy to admire Huppert’s other hit this 
year: Things to Come, by Mia Hansen-Løve, in which she stars as a philosophy 
professor abruptly left by her husband. Here we saw cracks in Huppert’s 
composure; the scene in which she weeps on the bus is extraordinary, ditto the 
one in which she begs a cat to return. What a year, crow her fans. What range! 
What exquisite agonies!

But they have forgotten something. For the goddess Huppert has in fact 
delivered us a holy trinity of hits; it’s just that one got oddly ignored. The 
Valley of Love, which premiered at Cannes in 2015 and which enjoyed a muted 
release this summer, ought not, even on paper, to be a movie that met with 
shrugs. It reunites Huppert with Gerard Depardieu, 26 years on from the last 
time they made a film together, Loulou. Here, they go by their own names; they 
are both film stars – the movie imagines they were once married and had a son 
together, who has recently killed himself. In a letter written before his 
death, he instructs them to reunite in Death Valley, on the promise they will 
see him again.

There is complete joy to be had in simply watching these two back at work 
together. She so tiny; otherworldly beneath goggle sunglasses and unlikely 
sunhats. He so vulnerable and enormous; for much of the run time stumbling 
about in his underwear, disbelieving the heat. Their relationship is funny and 
compassionate and complicated in a way alien to anyone who isn’t French. The 
film itself is half social-realist divorcee-romance, half supernatural sci-fi, 
set against this strange bleached landscape, beautiful and remorseless.

There is a twist, late on, for which the audience must patiently wait. Yet 
ultimately it remains as unresolved as life itself: a film full of truth and 
strangeness and uncertainty. Not perhaps what everyone wants from the movies, 
but well worth seeking out.CS

Green Room
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8XSARX3DQg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8XSARX3DQg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8XSARX3DQg&media=>
Jeremy Saulnier’s horror film came and went in the space of a few weeks in 
May, taking just £160,000 in the UK and $3.2m in the US. A month after its 
release, it became a footnote to a sad story when its star, Anton Yelchin,was 
killed in a bizarre car accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/anton-yelchin-death-officially-ruled-as-accident>
. Yelchin, best known for his role as Pavel Chekov in the rebooted Star Trek 
films, plays Pat, the bassist of DC-area punk band the Ain’t Rights. When the 
final show of their tour falls through, the promoter sets them up with a show 
in backwoods Oregon at what turns out to be a neo-Nazi skinhead bar.

The Ain’t Rights need the money and take the gig, where they antagonise the 
crowd by playing a cover ofthe Dead Kennedys’ Nazi Punks Fuck Off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hxd8ml-n5NE>. Later, Pat accidentally 
witnesses the aftermath of a murder. As the killers try to cover up their 
crime, the band members become trapped in the green room of the venue.


Saulnier showed his mastery of suspense in his previous film, Blue Ruin, and 
the tension in Green Room reaches new heights. In his hands, the siege story is 
inventive and fresh and the exposition is never didactic – never has a shot of 
a pair of red shoelaces been so terrifying. It’s unremittingly gory, but the 
violence is never sadistic or gratuitous; it’s necessary – the inevitable, 
inescapable result of the two sides’ conflicting goals. I realized at the end 
of the film that I’d been gripping the seatrests for an hour. It’s the scariest 
film I’ve seen this year, but it also manages to be tremendous fun. If one tiny 
positive comes out of the untimely death of a talented young actor, it might be 
that this thriller ends up being seen by a wider audience.AE

Gods of Egypt
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIJBnK2wNQSo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIJBnK2wNQSo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIJBnK2wNQSo&media=>
More than forgotten foreign imports (like Romania’s Aferim! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/20/aferim-review-a-brutal-manhunt-loaded-with-laughs>
) or minuscule arthouse documentaries (likeA Space Program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/a-space-program-review-tom-sachs-artist-mars>
) the most unfairly dismissed movie of 2016 was Alex Proyas’ Gods of Egypt. A 
box-office stinker in the US (it did better overseas, but not good enough) 
Proyas, an Australian withEgyptiotic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greeks_in_Egypt> roots, rightly caught hell for 
this picture’s whitewashed casting. It is hard to argue against that, but if 
you take the movie for what it is – a modernized version of mid-century 
musclemen silliness – the exercise makes a little more sense.

Gods of Egypt’s storyline is impossible to predict, zooming from ancient times 
to outer space to the afterlife and back again. Our immortal heroes bleed gold, 
transform into enormous winged beasts and have regular-sized humans massage 
their enormous aching ligaments in gigantic indoor swimming pools. Plus two 
scrappy twentysomethings (Brenton Thwaites and Courtney Eaton) prance around in 
very little clothing. (What? It’s hot in Egypt!)

So many of our big-budget fantasy and sci-fi projects feel a little safe. Even 
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story is more about snapping like a jigsaw piece into a 
preexisting mythos than being its own thing. Gods of Egypt and its whacked-out 
(OK, borderline-incoherent) storyline is bursting with creativity and risk. If 
you canwatch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RCyfpH52wOs> a bald Geoffrey Rush 
shoot fireballs from a sword on his crystal spaceship at a giant worm of chaos 
and not be moved, you may as well stop going to movies.JH
 