
When I started reading this book I did not know that Sergeant Colin Taylor, 
stationed on the Isles of Scilly until last year, was something of a star. 
(Under his management, the Isles of Scilly police force’sFacebook page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/02/does-the-isles-of-scilly-police-have-the-best-facebook-page-ever>
 has achieved more than 50,000 followers (now including me).) I was just mildly 
surprised that his memoir had drawn me in. I am, surely, above books with 
pictures of a policeman on a child’s bike on the front cover, a gull standing 
on a police helmet on the spine, and a stupid pun in the title. But then I 
remembered something about not judging a book by its cover; and besides, I was 
in the mood for lightness.

I read on, amused by life on the archipelago; and then, on page 42, this: “My 
journey to work takes 25 seconds and the return journey, uphill, is longer, at 
35 seconds. I walk, as it is a good way to keep fit.” “Hang on,” I thought. 
“This is a trueWodehousian <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse> 
note.” And look, too, at the way the second half of the first sentence is 
broken up by commas, as if pausing for breath. I don’t think that was 
deliberate, but often what a real writer does has not been consciously 
deliberated on.

The police are not noted for their writing skills. On the one occasion I have 
been arrested, half a lifetime ago, I was so dismayed at the style in which 
they typed up my statement, I begged them to rewrite it under my guidance. 
(Amazingly, they agreed.) And when Taylor describes his arrival at the scene of 
a disturbance, we occasionally hear the faint clump of police prose: “I made my 
way on foot to ... ” But most often when he aims for a touch of comedy he hits 
it, sometimes very sweetly. Of course, some incidents he describes are comedic 
gifts already, such as the time he locked himself in the station’s cells while 
rescuing a fledgling thrush from a cat (this particular cat is not to be 
confused with Mowgli, the official station cat, who was promoted, above 
Taylor’s head, to deputy chief constable). Then there was the time the MV Cita, 
a 3,000-tonne cargo ship, was wrecked off the main island, St Mary’s, in March 
1997. The events took place before his watch, but this is how he describes the
Whisky Galore! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/26/whisky-galore-review-remake-postwar-ealing-comedy-alexander-mackendrick-gillies-mackinnon>
-style response to the incident:

It is on record that no prosecutions were brought under the Merchant Act of 
1894 for looting, so clearly everything was above board, and I applaud that. I 
mention this because, interestingly, the date of this event coincided with an 
unusual phenomenon, in which almost all the vehicles on the islands got new 
tyres.

There are also times when he can make the tear ducts prickle. Perhaps I was 
feeling emotionally labile when I went gooey at his description of the magic of 
the Isles beginning to work on new visitors (who are looked on benignly; the 
word “tourists” isn’t used). Then again, the Isles are, like all islands, 
magical (take a map of them, reimagine the scale, and you could be looking at
Ursula K Le Guin’s Earthsea <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ursulakleguin>).

In Taylor, the islanders found a chronicler who keeps their problems in 
perspective

This is one clue to the success of this book and the Facebook page that 
preceded it: it is a return to an imaginary past, a fantasy of Britain, the 
kind of ideal situation that, dare I say it, many people in this country voted 
for on 23 June. It is monocultural; it is white; it is reactionary – but then 
again, it is idyllic, and children born here can sail virtually before they can 
walk.

However, it is microcosmic, and while the problems here can be small ones, 
they are nevertheless real. Luckily, in Taylor, the islanders found a 
chronicler who keeps them in perspective, and fishes out the comedy when it’s 
appropriate – which is most of the time. The only problem is that everyone who 
reads this book will want to go there.

• The Life of a Scilly Sergeant is published by Arrow. To order a copy for 
£7.64 (RRP £8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-of-a-scilly-sergeant-460879.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 