
Nate Parker: director with a back story | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/20/nate-parker-director-the-birth-of-a-nation-rape-case>
As with its notorious, KKK-celebrating 1915 namesake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/birth-of-a-nation-100-year-anniversary-racism-cinema>
, the history of Nate Parker’s The Birth Of A Nation is almost more interesting 
than the movie itself. Written and directed by Parker, and starring him as the 
1831 slave-rebellion leader Nat Turner, it was feted at Sundance, and subject 
of an intense bidding-war. A movie many felt was needed in the post-Ferguson 
Black Lives Matter cultural moment, it was consequently overrated by a hungry 
audience, reflecting the hopes and desires of the viewer more than the real 
qualities of the movie.

On the eve of its release, however, with high expectations for its 
profitability, the details of a long-forgotten rape case against Parker 
re-emerged. He had been acquitted, but the accuser took her own life many years 
later. It was ugly. And there in the movie was a critical moment based on a 
rape that had been invented for dramatic purposes. This time round, the movie 
was underrated and scorned for completely different reasons, and on release it 
was considered a box office bomb. Parker went from hero to villain in less than 
nine months.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg&media=>
New York first-night moviegoers shrug off The Birth of a Nation controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/08/birth-of-a-nation-movie-opening-night-nate-parker-controversy>
Artists take on Nat Turner and his rebellion at their peril. Sophie’s Choice 
author William Styron found himself pilloried by black intellectuals for his 
bestselling 1967 novel The Confessions Of Nat Turner; the white author was 
accused of rejecting historical evidence and trespassing on aspects of the 
African-American experience. And Turner’s story is strong stuff, not uplifting 
at all, and so incendiary that it’s rarely taught in schools. Turner and his 
band killed around 60 white people – mainly with hatchets and hammers – before 
being annihilated themselves, amid maximum bloodshed.

Parker’s Turner is a saintly figure driven to his limits by murders, rapes, 
whippings and omnipresent cruelty. When his childhood companion, assuringly 
played by Armie Hammer, inherits Nat from his father, he learns that lifelong 
friendship cannot survive one man’s ownership of another.

Away from the controversies surrounding it, The Birth Of A Nation is an often 
impressive rendering, resting on solid performances and painterly 
cinematography, if a little plodding and prone to kitschy adornments (Strange 
Fruit plays over hanging corpses; there’s a duff moment with an angel). But in 
the final moments the screaming, vengeful, twisted white faces that rain down 
blows on the captive Turner en route to the scaffold speak almost directly to 
the vile historical moment we now find ourselves in. I wasn’t completely 
convinced by the movie, but that moment chilled my blood.

The Birth Of A Nation is in cinemas from Friday 9 December
 