
I’m in my 20s and I can’t pee at night without thinking about Haley Joel 
Osment.

There is always a moment, mid-urination, where my mind adjusts and suddenly I 
am all too aware that I managed not to die while walking from bedroom to 
bathroom in the dark. But, with all the logical dread my bleary mind can 
muster, I know I am definitely going to be murdered on the journey back.

In an act of adolescent bravado, I bluffed my way into renting The Sixth Sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80112/sixth.sense-review> on VHS when I 
was 10 years old, backed up by a friend who was blessed with both a cavalier 
attitude to movies and an invite to stay the night at my house. My mother, 
knowing I was a wuss even for a 10-year-old, stood observing as we watched – 
rather, I endured – the opening scene, with Donnie Wahlberg beating the door 
with his tortured, emaciated body and screaming at Bruce Willis. “You sure 
you’re going to be OK?” Mum said, hovering near the door. “Course,” I scoffed 
and resigned myself to two hours of what I already knew was The Most Horrific 
Thing Ever Made.
 The Sixth Sense Photograph: PR 
The Sixth Sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,99731,00.html>
 isn’t a bloodfest or a whodunnit thriller: some may make the case it isn’t 
even a horror movie. But the quiet dialogue, the doe-eyed Osment and the 
sporadic yelp of violins create a tangible sense of dread that makes watching 
it an overwhelmingly freaky experience.

There is a scene in The Sixth Sense where tiny Cole, played by Osment, is 
squirming on the precipice of his bedroom. Cole a) desperately needs a wee, but 
b) sees ghosts, so he is understandably scared about crossing over the 
invisible line of safety of his bedroom door. He eventually waddles to the loo 
and lets loose, as the thermostat ominously lowers and something starts 
crinkling packets in the kitchen …

The stereotype is of horror film audiences being loudmouths hollering “look 
behind the daaaw”: well, as a small child, I knew exactly how this urge feels. 
“Get back in your goddamn tent, Cole,” I would have shouted, “Stay out of the 
bloody kitchen.”

To be honest, I don’t think I saw even half of The Sixth Sense: I heard it all 
though, through my duvet. I never even saw anemic little Mischa Barton spewing, 
because I was too busy hiding my eyes. “Are you even watching this?” my friend 
asked speculatively; the resounding thump as I jumped at the sound of her voice 
was probably answer enough.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG9AGf66tXM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG9AGf66tXM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVG9AGf66tXM&media=>
When the film mercifully finished, I crawled into bed and stared wide-eyed at 
my door for most of the night while my friend snuffled peacefully, completely 
oblivious to my terror. I had that sense of reasoning that most kids have: once 
you’ve seen it in a film, it’s definitely going to happen to you. No matter 
that just 24 hours before I was plodding quite merrily and unmurdered down the 
dark hallway to go to the loo; now I had seen The Sixth Sense, there would 
definitely be a suicidal, beaten woman waiting to shout at me.

The day after, I wandered around in a haze until I burst into tears, my sorrow 
compounded by sheer exhaustion and the frustration that I would never be able 
to sleep happily again. My parents comforted me, with a combination of genuine 
concern and resignation that their daughter was, indeed, a bit of a wuss.


Or was I? In an act of truly selfless investigative journalism, I watched The 
Sixth Sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/26/sixth-sense-film-twists> again 
for this piece. Gratifyingly, it is still scary. It was odd watching a film 
that has haunted me for so long, which also seemed alien at the same time. It 
was even odder watching the suicidal woman scene on YouTube and realising other 
peoples’s night habits had been messed up too. “This scene made me not piss 
with my back to the doorway for like a month” – too right, YouTuber.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fthe-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413978528487%2F34031159-5632-46b0-8f71-2a95388077b0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Sixth%20Sense%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fthe-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Sixth%20Sense%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F22%2Fthe-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F22%2F1413978528487%2F34031159-5632-46b0-8f71-2a95388077b0-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Sixth Sense Photograph: PR 
As I grew older, my taste in films matured quickly: I developed a taste for 
zombie flicks and I guffaw at most slasher movies. But when I get up at night I 
don’t worry about Krueger or Sadako; I think about that goddamn woman following 
me down the hallway.


Show business is not a kind world, but I am frankly delighted that M Night 
Shyamalan’s career has died: it is resounding payback for my future bladder 
infection.


• Peter Bradshaw on Threads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/20/threads-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-halloween>
 andStuart Heritage on Ring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/21/ring-ringu-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-halloween>
 