
“Only the little people pay taxes,” Leona Helmsley, New York’s “Queen of mean” 
once famously opined. The statement, delivered in court by one of her “little 
people” helped send the late billionaire real estate mogulto jail for 19 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/aug/21/usnews> for failing to pay 
her dues.

It’s hard not to think of the late Leona amid the revelations still pouring 
out from thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>. The massive treasure 
trove of 11.5m documents from the Panamanian law firm of Mossack Fonseca leaked 
to the media has disclosed a staggering amount of detail about how the rich and 
powerful have used shell companies to hide their wealth from the taxman and 
others around the world.


Done right – the way that the lawyers at Mossack Fonseca promised their 
super-wealthy clients they would be done – shell companies are almost 
untraceable. And that enabled those clients to use them to stash money made 
from illegal weapons, human trafficking or drugs, or shelter cash from the 
taxman or other kinds of regulatory scrutiny.

What are the Panama Papers? A guide to history's biggest data leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
It’s just another way that the rich can take advantage of breaks that would 
elude us even if we wanted them. Sure, you or I could set up a shell company of 
sorts, by establishing a limited liability company. But our names, and our 
social security numbers, are attached to it. And it’s domiciled here in the US. 
While there areways to use US shell companies fraudulently 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/portland/print-edition/2015/10/02/cover-storythe-shell-game.html>
, most of us would have a hard time doing it without paying big bucks for the 
assistance of high-priced attorneys.

 Not so for all those whose names are becoming public. If you’re the king of 
Saudi Arabia 
<http://www.ijreview.com/2016/04/576599-5-people-who-are-named-as-tax-dodgers-in-the-leaked-panama-papers/?utm_source=facebook&utm_medium=owned&utm_campaign=ods&utm_term=ijamerica&utm_content=celebrities>
, the president of the Ukraine or Argentina, or the former interim prime 
minister of Iraq, you’re wealthy enough to do whatever it takes to set up a 
string of holding companies that, without the Panama Papers leaks, probably 
would have prevented anyone from ever knowing just what you own or control.

In India, some 500 of the country’s richest and most famous citizens have been 
linked to the list, from Bollywood stars to property developers. Members of the 
inner circle of Vladimir Putin are part of this, withtransactions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/panama-papers-money-hidden-offshore>
 including what appear to be fake share deals and extravagant fees for 
unspecified “consulting” services helping to smooth the transfer of huge sums.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&media=>
 Particularly disheartening – that’s the most diplomatic word I can find at 
the moment – isDavid Cameron’s situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/04/panama-papers-david-cameron-father-tax-bahamas>
. As British prime minister, he is responsible for shaping his own country’s 
fiscal policy and determining just how to apply taxes, how to collect them and 
how severely to punish those who he deems don’t comply. In the past, he has 
pledged to crack down onthose responsible for fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/aug/10/david-cameron-benefit-fraud-clampdown>
 and error in welfare benefits. Now come revelations that his late father 
established an offshore fund that never paid tax in Britain; Cameron hasdodged 
questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/06/panama-papers-labour-says-cameron-seen-as-shady-following-unanswered-questions-politics-live>
 about whether he stands to benefit in any way from that trust.

 There are several names of US citizens on the list, too, if few of those you 
might imagine to be logical suspects – politicians and hedge fund managers, 
say. Some of thoseidentified so far 
<http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2016-04-05/here-are-some-americans-panama-papers>
 tend to already have had run-ins with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) or other law enforcement agencies.

 The good news – and there is some good news – is that these revelations come 
when the subject of taxes is finally on the political agenda in the US. Barack 
Obama has promised reforms and even implemented some. This week US drug company 
Pfizer’s mega merger with Ireland’s Allergancollapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/pfizer-allergan-merger-tax-avoidance-rules>
 thanks to Obama’s tightening of the rules around US companies doing such deals 
in order to escape US taxes.

Obama had railed against “inversions”, the name given for these tax-inspired 
changes of corporate citizenship, “one of the most insidious tax loopholes out 
there”.

It’s a sad world where the wealthy go shopping for passports while refugees 
drown in the Mediterranean

Corporations are people too, at least according to the supreme court, so let’s 
hope Washington will decide their flesh and blood counterparts need a clampdown 
too. And there are signs it is happening.

Already, trying to find a safe place to hide your money is a lot more 
complicated than it used to be. Forget about hopping on a plane to Zurich or 
Geneva and just walking into a Swiss bank. That’s why these high-priced 
specialists, creating layers of shell companies, exist in the first place.

What can we do?

 If you’re an ordinary citizen, you’re stuck with your citizenship of birth – 
and its tax policies. If you’re wealthy, you’ve got options, as Atossa Araxia 
Abrahamian pointed out in a new book, The Cosmopolites. Buying and selling 
second or even third passports is just as lucrative as flogging shell companies 
has been for Mossack Fonseca. The cheapest deal is a $100,000 Dominican 
passport. Malta wasoffering citizenship for €1.15m 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-25858025> ($1.3m) and required only a 
year’s residency (increased after howls of outrage from fellow EU members 
followed the island nation’s initial proposal to sell off its passports for 
about half that price and have no residency requirement).

It’s a sad world where the wealthy go shopping for passports while refugees 
drown in the Mediterranean.

These dodges have real-world impact. Less money for schools, roads, more money 
for drug barons and worse. Want to knowwho is buying up those apartments 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/business/real-estate-news/article54450795.html>
 for cash and driving up property values? People with shell companies.

If we want to stop this, there are some steps that we can take. 

The Panama Papers: leaktivism's coming of age | Micah White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/panama-papers-leak-activism-leaktivism>
In the wake of the Panama Papers revelations, the obvious one is to increase 
transparency with respect to shell companies, and not take comfort in the fact 
that (so far) there seem to have been relatively few high-profile US 
celebrities like film director Pedro Almodóvar or footballer Lionel Messi whose 
names have popped up on the documents. US citizens may use other law firms, or
other options <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-35966612>. 

Congress has demonstrated it wants to crack down on average individual 
taxpayers.New rules 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2016/01/04/2016-brings-irs-power-over-passports-use-of-private-debt-collectors/#46488f6d19d9>
 mean that anyone owing the IRS more than $50,000 won’t be able to renew their 
passports and could have their passports revoked. Congress could go a step 
further, passing legislation that would require states to insist that real 
owners of shell companies disclose their names.

The Incorporation Transparency and Law Enforcement Assistance Act 
<http://thehill.com/policy/finance/275134-panama-papers-could-boost-prospects-for-corporate-transparency-legislation>
, which would require states to collect information about the true owners and 
controllers of shell companies, is just sitting there, waiting for someone to 
act. Delaware, Nevada and other states that aremaking it so easy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/06/panama-papers-us-tax-havens-delaware>
to set up shell company shops may object. But the Panama Papers have thrown the 
shell game into disarray and now is the time to act. Then, perhaps, we could 
move forward in creating a global registry of companies – another step in 
insisting that ultra-wealthy global citizens live in the same kind of 
transparent world that most of the rest of us already do.
 