
Seldom in media history have so many worked so hard – to wallow in angst. “I 
think it’s time for all journalists to turn our back on polls …” tweeted ITV’s 
anchor-of-the-night Tom Bradby, as he might well have done after June 2016 or 
May 2015 too. Yes: the polls were all over the placeagain, predictions based on 
them similarly frail. Again. Plentiful egg splattered innumerable august faces.

But if every debacle has one inevitable following mantra – the one about 
“lessons to be learned” – what are the lessons for journalists here? Before it 
happens. Again.

Jim Rutenberg of the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/business/media/media-trump-clinton.html?_r=0>
 saw the faultline OK: “It was a failure to capture the boiling anger of a 
large portion of the American electorate that feels left behind by a selective 
recovery, betrayed by trade deals that they see as threats to their jobs and 
disrespected by establishment Washington, Wall Street and the mainstream media.”

Politico turned that “boiling” stuff into a “primal scream”. Cue Margaret 
Sullivan 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/the-media-didnt-want-to-believe-trump-could-win-so-they-looked-the-other-way/2016/11/09/d2ea1436-a623-11e6-8042-f4d111c862d1_story.html>
, latelyNY Times ombudsperson: “Although these voters shouted and screamed it, 
most journalists just weren’t listening … They couldn’t believe that the 
America they knew could embrace someone who mocked a disabled man, bragged 
about sexually assaulting women, and spouted misogyny, racism and antisemitism. 
It would be too horrible. So, therefore, according to some kind of magical 
thinking, it couldn’t happen.”

Enter the Daily Mail with its own pat lectures about “liberal elites” while 
chastened commentators on America’s biggest liberal dailies (and broadcast 
channels) vowed to get out of the Manhattan/DC bubble and listen to Joe Sixpack 
again. But is this, in turn, any more than a kneejerk reaction?

If you spend your life sitting in front of terminals in New York – or WC1 – 
you may feel out of touch and wallow in self-reproach. But no fewer than 229 
American daily papers and 131 weeklies endorsed Clinton, as opposed to nine 
dailies and three weeklies for Trump. Those are papers, often little papers, 
spread across the length and breadth of the nation. Their editors survive by 
representing their communities. And they missed the big story too.

You didn’t, in short, have to be sitting on your bottom, far away, to be 
shocked. Indeed, maybe sitting on your bottom might have been the best vantage 
point for truth: set Trump’s Facebook page last week, with its 11.9m likes and 
his 12.9m Twitter followers, against Clinton’s 7.8m and 10.1m. Or, with 
Professor Pablo Boczkowski at Northwestern University, compare one Trump 
campaign post on Facebook with 92,000 likes, 40,000 loves, and 29,000 shares, 
plus 2.1m video views, against a similar Clinton post with 14,000 likes, 1,300 
loves, 1,965 shares, and just 218,000 video views.

Was this election lost, under the radar, on social media? Joshua Benton of the 
Nieman Journalism Lab 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2016/11/the-forces-that-drove-this-elections-media-failure-are-likely-to-get-worse/>
 railed against the “sewer” of Facebook that doesn’t “care about the 
truthfulness of the news it posts”. Or was a Republican victory always likely 
anyway? Here’s Professor Larry Bartels of Vanderbilt University, one of 
America’s best political scientists, concludingin a Washington Post piece 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/11/10/2016-was-an-ordinary-election-not-a-realignment/>
 that “an extraordinary campaign has produced a remarkably ordinary election 
outcome, primarily reflecting partisan patterns familiar from previous election 
cycles”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-media-didnt-see-trump-coming-doesnt-know-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd166637456a98e99aaaa720d647c1a37c9ff44e6%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20media%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20Trump%20coming.%20And%20even%20now%2C%20it%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20know%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-media-didnt-see-trump-coming-doesnt-know-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20media%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20Trump%20coming.%20And%20even%20now%2C%20it%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20know%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fus-media-didnt-see-trump-coming-doesnt-know-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd166637456a98e99aaaa720d647c1a37c9ff44e6%2F0_0_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 A selection of British front pages responding to the result. Photograph: 
Benjamin Fathers/AFP/Getty Images 
Just look at state election results during 2016, he argues, and they’re much 
like those national exit polls, which showed Clinton winning 89% of the vote 
among Democratic identifiers and Trump winning 90% among Republicans. “These 
percentages precisely match those in 2008, the last time there was no incumbent 
president on the ballot … To a good approximation, Trump won because the 
overwhelming majority of Republicans voted for the Republican candidate, 
undeterred by the qualms of party leaders and conservative intellectuals.”

In short it was either an earthquake, or it wasn’t. In sum, the primal screams 
may only have been familiar grumps. Data – and data journalism – still provides 
questions, not answers. And there’s no logical reason why those questions have 
ended now.

Look at the exit polls. Only a single percentage-point more of American female 
voters went for Clinton than for Obama in 2012. Some 53% of white women went 
for Trump. Twenty-nine per cent of Hispanics – 8% more than last time around – 
voted Republican. A majority of voters earning under $50,000 a year still voted 
Democrat. And if you want broader popular vote comparisons with 2012, then 
Trump, with 60,037,301 votes (47.7% of the total) was only on or around Mitt 
Romney’s 60,933,504 (47.2%).

There wasn’t a primal scream or a Trump surge: there was simply a slide in 
Clinton’s performance. She lost more than he won. And there are any number of 
explanations for that – from hatred to indifference toward a “remote and 
robotic candidate” (theFT). Which doesn’t, naturally, mean turning those 
explanations into apparent fact by choosing places and interviewees who 
exemplify the thesis. Find a dodgy poll and make it flesh. Back to the Rust 
Beltway: back to the future.

The plain fact, when you looked in on America and the world’s newsrooms last 
Tuesday evening, is that you saw assumptions shredded, maps suddenly redrawn, 
wise men gasping for breath. “We’ve not been having a reality-based 
conversation,” said the admirable John King on CNN, swimming in an ocean of 
imponderables.

Did the media fail to warn America about Trump, or did America register his 
flakiness (see numerous polls) but take no notice? (Jack Shafer on Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/11/donald-trump-wins-2016-media-214442>
.) Is Trump a triumph for Brexit, as Farage would have it; “a reminder to those 
in Britain who defy the will of the people”, as Richard Littlejohninevitably 
puts it 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3922210/Why-Trump-s-victory-timely-reminder-Britain-defy-people-RICHARD-LITTLEJOHN.html>
? Or are “Brexit and Trumpism very different beasts”, as Tim Montgomerie, 
apostle of Brexit, says in theTimes? There are no pat lessons in this “bonfire 
of the certainties” (theFT again 
<https://www.ft.com/content/89757a34-a5e2-11e6-8898-79a99e2a4de6>). Any thesis, 
or combination of theses, can play.

Still, I wish that my old friend and former White House correspondent Pat 
Sloyan hadn’t just sent me the oldest, most chilling thesis of the lot – from 
America’s greatest journalist, HL Mencken, in 1920. “As democracy is perfected, 
the office of president represents, more and more closely, the inner soul of 
the people. On some great and glorious day the plain folks of the land will 
reach their heart’s desire at last and the White House will be adorned by a 
downright moron.”

 * This article was amended on 17 November 2016 to correct Mitt Romney’s total 
number of votes received in the 2012 election from 69,933,504 to 60,933,504.
 