
It may have been a tumultuous year, but at least there was no shortage of 
brilliant writing – and we’re commemorating the end of 2016 with a selection of 
our 20 favourite stories.

There’s a bit of Brexit, a smidgeon of Trump, and plenty of rumination on the 
trouble with truth and the revolt against elites – not to mention a killer 
policeman in India, human traffickers in East Anglia, and a shocking murder in 
Spain. But it’s not all doom and gloom: there are a few spoonfuls of sugar, 
some ludicrously expensive bottled water and a large helping of hygge. It’s the 
perfect reading list for your holiday week.


Therapy wars: the revenge of Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/therapy-wars-revenge-of-freud-cognitive-behavioural-therapy>
 – Oliver Burkeman

Cheap and effective, CBT has become the dominant form of therapy, consigning 
Freud to psychology’s dingy basement. But new studies have cast doubt on its 
supremacy – and shown dramatic results for psychoanalysis. Is it time to get 
back on the couch?

Why did two parents murder their adopted child? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/02/why-did-two-parents-murder-their-adopted-child-asunta-fong-yang>
 – Giles Tremlett

Asunta Fong Yang was adopted as a baby by a wealthy Spanish couple. Aged 12, 
she was found dead beside a country road. Not long after, her mother and father 
were arrested.

The gangsters on England’s doorstep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/11/gangsters-on-our-doorstep> – 
Felicity Lawrence

In the bleak flatlands of East Anglia, migrant workers are controlled by 
criminal gangs, and some are forced to commit crimes to pay off their debts. 
This is what happens when cheap labour is our only priority.

Liquid assets: how the business of bottled water went mad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/liquid-assets-how--business-bottled-water-went-mad>
 – Sophie Elmhirst

How did a substance that falls from the air, springs from the earth and comes 
out of your tap become a hyperactive multibillion-dollar business?

How Boots went rogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue> – Aditya 
Chakrabortty

Britain’s biggest pharmacy used to be a family business, dedicated to serving 
society. Now, many of the company’s own staff believe that its relentless drive 
for profit is putting the public at risk.

The sugar conspiracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
 – Ian Leslie

In 1972, a British scientist sounded the alarm that sugar – and not fat – was 
the greatest danger to our health. But his findings were ridiculed and his 
reputation ruined. How did the world’s top nutrition scientists get it so wrong 
for so long?

Trident: the British question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/11/trident-the-british-question> 
– Ian Jack

The debate is not simply about submarines and missiles. It touches almost 
every anxiety about the identity of the United Kingdom. The decision may tell 
us what kind of country – or countries – we will become.

The fatal hike that became a Nazi propaganda coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/fatal-hike-became-nazi-propaganda-coup>
 – Kate Connolly

In 1936, a school group from south London went on a hike in the Black Forest. 
Despite the heroic rescue attempts of German villagers, five boys died. Eighty 
years on, locals are still asking how it happened.


How remain failed: the inside story of a doomed campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/how-remain-failed-inside-story-doomed-campaign>
 – Rafael Behr

They promised it would be an easy victory. But they had no idea what was about 
to hit them.

How technology disrupted the truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
 – Kath Viner

Social media has swallowed the news – threatening the funding of 
public-interest reporting and ushering in an era when everyone has their own 
facts. But the consequences go far beyond journalism.

The Very Quiet Foreign Girls poetry group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/14/very-quiet-foreign-girls-poetry-foyle-young-poets-kate-clanchy>
 – Kate Clanchy

When Kate Clanchy began teaching the children of refugees, she sought out 
those silenced by trauma and loss. Their weekly sessions released a torrent of 
untold stories.

The big gamble: the dangerous world of British betting shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/big-gamble-dangerous-british-betting-shops>
 – Tom Lamont

Bookmakers have become a fixture of the British high street. But the savage 
murder of a lone employee at a London betting shop has revealed the risks that 
their workers face.

Confessions of a killer policeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/confessions-of-a-killer-policeman-india-manipur>
 – Raghu Karnad and Grace Jajo

In a state bloodied by decades of armed rebellion, Thounaojam Herojit became 
one of India’s most deadly policemen – killing more than a hundred people. This 
year, he became something rarer still: an executioner who wanted to tell the 
world about his crimes.

Man v rat: could the long war soon be over? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/20/man-v-rat-war-could-the-long-war-soon-be-over>
 – Jordan Kisner

Rats spread disease, decimate crops and very occasionally eat people alive. 
For centuries, we have struggled to find an effective way of controlling their 
numbers. Until now …

The man who brought you Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/daniel-hannan-the-man-who-brought-you-brexit>
 – Sam Knight

Britain’s vote to leave the EU was the grand finale of a 25-year campaign by a 
lonely sect of true believers. Daniel Hannan wrote the script.

Remembrance of tastes past: Syria’s disappearing food culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/syria-refugees-disappearing-food-culture-kibbeh>
 – Wendell Steavenson

For Syrians in exile, food is more than a means of sustenance. It is a 
reminder of the rich and diverse culture being destroyed by civil war.

How the education gap is tearing politics apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/trump-brexit-education-gap-tearing-politics-apart>
 – David Runciman

In the year of Trump and Brexit, education has become the greatest divide of 
all – splitting voters into two increasingly hostile camps. But don’t assume 
this is simply a clash between the ignorant and the enlightened.

How Trump took middle America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/16/how-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election>
 – Gary Younge

After a month in a midwestern town, the story of this election is clear — when 
people feel the system is broken, they vote for whoever promises to smash it.


Political correctness: how the right invented a phantom enemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump>
 – Moira Weigel

For 25 years, invoking this vague and ever-shifting nemesis has been a 
favourite tactic of the right – and Donald Trump’s victory is its greatest 
triumph.

The hygge conspiracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
 – Charlotte Higgins

This year’s most overhyped trend is a wholesome Danish concept of cosiness, 
used to sell everything from fluffy socks to vegan shepherd’s pie. But the 
version we’re buying is a British invention – and the real thing is less cuddly 
than it seems.


• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 