
Napoleon famously said: “Four hostile newspapers are more to be feared than a 
thousand bayonets.”

I don’t think he had the Daily Mail, Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, Daily Express and the Sun 
in mind, but three senior British judges may well share Bonaparte’s opinion 
today.

They were castigated by the Brexit-loving newspaper quartet because of their 
ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
 that parliament should trigger article 50 to start the UK’s resignation from 
the European Union and not the prime minister, Theresa May, using royal 
prerogative powers.

These judges are “the enemies of the people”, says the Mail. They stand 
accused of frustrating the will of the people, says the Telegraph. And the 
Express’s front-page comment indulges in hyperbole to register its disgust:

Today this country faces a crisis as grave as anything since the dark days 
when Churchill vowed we would fight them on the beaches.

The Sun is more exercised by the “motley handful of EU-based campaigners” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2114460/theresa-may-and-all-politicians-must-not-let-down-the-17million-brexit-voters/>
 who launched the legal action. It is particularly upset about the action being 
“led by a foreign-born multi-millionaire”. (This is a newspaper, incidentally, 
published by a foreign-born multi-millionaire.)

The Telegraph, owned by multi-millionaires living outside of mainland Britain, 
sticks to the constitutional drama, arguing that the high court should never 
have treated it as “a justiciable question”.

It argues that Lord Thomas, the lord chief justice, Sir Terence Etherton, the 
Master of the Rolls, and Lord Justice Sales “should have dismissed the case as 
an abuse of the legal process”.

Oddly, the Telegraph then states: “This is a political dispute to be settled 
in parliament, not by judges.” Sorry? Isn’t that the very point of the ruling?

Labour condemns newspaper attacks on judges after Brexit ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/04/labour-condemns-newspaper-attacks-on-judges-after-brexit-ruling>
Parliament is the sovereign body and will settle it. The royal prerogative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/oct/21/uk.freedomofinformation> is, 
as its name suggests, an ancient, anachronistic, arcane political instrument 
that is, fundamentally, anti-democratic.

Given the lack of a written constitution, it was always the case that the 
referendum was advisory rather than binding. It was the will of the people to 
leave the EU, but the complex manner of the exit is parliament’s, not the prime 
minister’s, responsibility.

But the Telegraph views it as “a bad day for the British constitution”, 
adding: “Whatever their protestations of legalistic propriety, the courts will 
be perceived to be helping to frustrate Brexit.” Perceived by whom? Newspaper 
editors?

The Mail sees it as “a betrayal of common sense, the people and democracy 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3903732/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-decision-betrayal-common-sense-people-democracy.html>
.” And it puts the judges in the dock, calling them “three members of an 
out-of-touch clique”. (The Mail’s editor, Paul Dacre, a multi-millionaire
multiple homeowner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/30/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-received-88000-eu-subsidies-2014>
, is, of course, a member of an in-touch clique.)

In his paper’s opinion, “judges have time and again backed Europe against the 
interests of the British people” and, this time around, have delivered a 
decision based on “a blinkered reading of statutes”.

Laughably, it cites the late Lord Denning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/mar/06/claredyer1> as a judge likely to 
have “picked a way through the dust-encrusted legal textbooks to see the wood 
for the trees and come down on the side of reason”. (For those who might have 
forgotten, it was Lord Denning who produced a report on the 1963 Profumo affair 
that was widely regarded as a meretricious piece of work.)

The Mail argues that “at no stage in the long campaign ... did any serious 
figure suggest the outcome would be merely advisory”. Who, one might ask, is a 
serious figure? Plenty of people made just that point, includingthe Financial 
Times’s legal commentator David Allen Green 
<https://www.ft.com/content/5b82031e-1056-31e1-8e0e-4e91774e27f1> and Haroon 
Siddique in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-legally-binding-brexit-lisbon-cameron-sovereign-parliament>
.

Even if the Mail didn’t notice those, does it not remember the piece it ran 15 
days before the referendum in which it quoted David Cameron’s father-in-law, 
Lord Astor, as saying: “The EU referendum is merely advisory; it has no legal 
standing to force an exit. Parliament is still sovereign 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3629775/Brexit-won-t-happen-vote-leave-EU-referendum-says-David-Cameron-s-father-law.html>
.”

Let facts not spoil a good argument though. Anyway, back to those evil judges. 
According to the Mail, the judiciary is “infested with Europhiles” and “there 
is a strong risk that even supreme court judges may allow subliminal prejudice 
in favour of the EU to influence their decision”.

The paper is worried about “remainer MPs” and “the overwhelmingly Europhile, 
unelected Lords” frustrating the will of the people.


And then comes a momentous threat:

The Mail says very calmly that if the Lords defy the will of the people, then 
maybe the people should question whether we need such a second chamber.

Gosh. I need to sit down. The Mail being calm. That is truly frightening. By 
contrast, the Express is in its usual hysterical form. It is worried less by 
peers than MPs, especially those from north of the border.

Imagine what poison will be spread by the 54 Scottish nationalist MPs. Imagine 
the wholly disproportionate power that can be wielded by the eight 
Euro-fanatical Lib Dems.

And imagine how the four million people who voted Ukip at the general election 
will feel as they see their beliefs trampled in the dust.

Revenge of the tabloids | Andy Beckett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/27/revenge-of-the-tabloids-brexit-dacre-murdoch>
It was somewhat surprising that the Sun seems reluctant to scream at the 
judges. Instead it blames Cameron because his “glib promises about the 
government smoothly enacting the referendum verdict have proved worthless”.

And it too falls into the trap of arguing that remainers want “to keep our 
parliament subservient to Brussels” while contending that parliament should not 
have the power to deal with the Brexit negotiations.

Politicians, it says, must ask themselves whether they will “honour the 
biggest ballot box mandate in British history ... or sniffily decide the little 
people cannot be trusted”.

So parliamentary sovereignty must be upheld ... but not always.
 