
When was the last time we readily believed in the words of a politician? 
Simple –listening to Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/teary-barack-obama-thanks-michelle-in-farewell-speech-video>
 give a tribute to the sheer brilliance of his wife, Michelle, at his farewell 
speech. Call it schmaltzy or sentimental, their love, even from this distance, 
seems real. At work, colleagues huddled around tiny phone screens to watch 
Obama tell the world that he was proud of his wife and the grace and dignity 
with which she made the office of first lady her own. We cooed and aahed as 
though over a baby.

Related: Meeting the Obamas: 'It helped me become a better citizen of the 
world' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/meeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories>

Inauguration day draws ever nearer, and as it does my wish to escape the 
inevitable intensifies. This feeling is unquestionably about a president who 
has brazenlylied his way to the top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check>. It 
is about the unsuitability of a petty man full of bluster and bile accustomed 
to getting everything he wants because he has always had the means to do so. 
But the injustice of it feels more naked and insulting, as in exchange for 
Trump we lose the Obamas – all of them: plural not singular.

I say we, because the Obamas have never been a family that belonged solely to 
Americans. Obama’s African ancestry and the family’s cool aesthetic make them 
relatable to those beyond American shores. Africans, in particular, some of the 
best placed people to view Obama’s legacy as stained by his deployment of 
drones and alack of investment in the region 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/138241/obamas-disappointing-legacy-africa>, 
still share in the brilliance of Obama story.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Teary Barack Obama thanks Michelle in farewell speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/teary-barack-obama-thanks-michelle-in-farewell-speech-video>
Before their eight years in the White House, the idea in the popular 
imagination of black family life involved embattlement or dysfunction, or both. 
To remember how debased the narrative was, think back to nearly four months 
before Obama was elected president, when theNew Yorker magazine’s July edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jun/13/television.barackobama> showed a 
now infamous cartoon under the headline “the politics of fear”. In the 
illustration Obama, dressed as Osama bin Laden, is engaging Michelle in a 
fist-pump.
 The New Yorker’s offensive cover of July 2008. Photograph: Reuters 
The soon-to-be first lady is sporting an afro (that potent symbol of radical 
black politics, though this is what our hair, if left to grow naturally, looks 
like), combat boots and an AK-47. The editor, David Remnick, had intended a 
sketch that would satirise those who had indulged in “rumours, innuendo [and] 
lies about the Obamas”. Irrespective of its intent, it was offensive precisely 
because it gave voice to the highly prevalent and very toxic sentiments held 
about them as a couple.

Blackness, for many, meant that the family could be seen as part of a fifth 
column intent on undermining the nation. Which is to say that being black has 
consistently been viewed as threatening, a sign of an everlasting separateness. 
It is the subtext of commands to “go back to Africa/home/wherever you came 
from” many of us living in majority-white nations have, no doubt, encountered. 
Because however “integrated” we may be, our skin forever marks us as mere 
interlopers destined to disrupt and contaminate the purity of the nation.

Michelle, Sasha, Malia and Barack Obama will be missed sorely. Among the 
myriad reasons, not least is the vision of black familial love they have graced 
upon us. It has been the most powerful antidote to corrosive, hate-filled 
politics. Over the past eight years, in the manner of putting on a beloved, 
comfy oversized jumper, I have Googled “the Obamas” and scrolled throughimages 
of a loving, successful black family <http://time.com/the-obamas-family-album/> 
as though I were basking in the warmth and glow of a wood burner. In that time 
their beauty and resilience seemed only enhanced, rather than tarnished, by the 
unwavering gaze that comes with the role.
 Malia, left, and Sasha at the White House Christmas tree lighting in 2015 
Photograph: Olivier Douliery/EPA 
One can trace slavery and colonialism, migration and the wonderful ability of 
black people to remain hopeful, making life anew despite the devastation heaped 
upon them. Frominsurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/millions-britons-pay-ethnic-penalty-car-insurance-report-claims>
, tohealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/10/black-patients-bias-prescriptions-pain-management-medicine-opioids>
, tohousing 
<https://mediadiversified.org/2016/11/30/do-we-still-need-bme-specific-housing-associations-in-britain/>
 and, of course,employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/12/ethnic-minorities-social-mobility-employment>
, being black means being awarded crisscrossing disadvantages that will augment 
over the course of a life. The story of the Obamas, though, is more than this 
familiar one of black victimhood or its corollary, black super-strength.

Something about them, existing as they do in a separate stratosphere, has the 
suggestion of daily life that all can relate to. You can find images of them 
barefoot, in lounging attire, food strewn across a footrest while watching the 
World Cup, or snow-fighting on the White House lawn. Numerous others show them 
sharing laughter or playfully teasing each other. Their closeness seems true 
and profound, and is a picture of wholesome family life that has, for once, 
been given a black face.
 Michelle and Barack and their daughters Malia and Sasha board Air Force One. 
Photograph: Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images 
Better yet, they have done all of the above not by resorting to a dignified 
distance characterised by the stolid gentility of many heads of state. With 
their meaningful fist-pumps and love of hip-hop, they have eschewed
“respectability politics” 
<https://mediadiversified.org/2015/01/08/what-are-respectability-politics-and-why-do-we-subscribe-to-them/>
 and chosen toembrace 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/04/AR2008060404521.html>
, rather than disavow, their black cultural identity.

The Obamas are not like you and I. Their experience is far removed and, when 
you think about it, fantastical. All that said, they have humanised the 
presidential office and principally done so by holding on to the primacy of 
family.

Both parents have continuously publicly shown affection to each other and 
their children. This is radical in itself because there are not enough 
representations of such black familial love to understand it is this very thing 
that sustains us and allows us to navigate a world structured against our every 
endeavour.
 The Obamas with Michelle’s Portuguese water dog Bo in 2009 Photograph: Saul 
Loeb/AFP/Getty Images  