
The loneliness in this short story belongs to those who instead of running to 
win a race, run just for the hell of it.Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-sillitoe> illustrates this difference 
with the figures of the director of a young offenders' institution, "our 
doddering bastard of a governor, our half-dead gangrened gaffer", and an 
inmate, Smith, who is encouraged to run both as self-improvement and for the 
glory of the institution. He will eventually stop short of the finishing line, 
forcing the hated governor to watch him throw victory away.

The same question – race to win or just run senselessly? – gave rise to Cake's 
1996 pop song The Distance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pSlu2okpqM> ("No 
trophy, no flashbulbs, no flowers, no wine"). And while we're about it, 
Sillitoe's story has the rare merit of being referenced by both Iron Maiden (
The Loneliness of the Long-Distance Runner 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l3L-TOjazwg>) and Belle and Sebastian (The 
Loneliness of the Middle-Distance Runner 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cONGUQsTQaQ>).

For Smith, "running had always been made much of in our family, especially 
running away from the police". We learn about a life of poverty and crime in 
postwar austerity Britain, where clothes are threadbare but the rare successful 
"job" allows a few months of living like kings. Smith is a reactionary outcast, 
refusing to internalise liberal narratives of rehabilitation. Indeed, even 
prison is too soft for him: "I'd stick them up against a wall and let them have 
it." All this translates into a narrating voice that is part Northern, part 
working-class, and – for us – part plain old-fashioned ("I can go my five miles 
round better than anybody else I know").

It is difficult to resist the pleasure this voice takes in rounding out its 
sentences, describing the pain of running ("something's happening inside the 
shell-case of my guts […], a grinding near me ticker as though a bag of rusty 
screws is loose inside me"), or the euphoria ("it's the only risk I take and 
the only excitement I ever get, flying flat out […], crazy like a cut-balled 
cockerel").

But the most notable thing about this voice is how it sees itself as the 
creation of a runner's consciousness, of "my barmy runner-brain". The story 
doubles as a manifesto for thinking deeply – if he had been writing a decade or 
two later, Sillitoe would probably have called this "meditation". Witness what 
he says here: "By God, to say that last sentence has needed a few hundred miles 
of long-distance running. I could no more have said that at first than I could 
have took a million-pound note from my back-pocket." If we are going to take 
Sillitoe at his word here, perhaps this is less of a bookabout running than one 
writtenby running, by that trusty, painful feeling of "grinding near me ticker".

What do you think? Does Smith's distinctive voice capture the agony and 
ecstacy of running for you? Which other running books would you like to see 
covered in the running blog book club?

John McKeane blogs at ofthelongdistancerunner.blogspot.co.uk 
<http://ofthelongdistancerunner.blogspot.co.uk/>
 