
Gunnin' For That #1 Spot is a feature-length documentary following eight 
teenage basketball stars from across America, on the cusp of the NBA draft that 
will make or break their careers, as they come together to play a one-off game 
at Harlem's Rucker Park. It is fast, funny and stylish enough to be well worth 
seeing even before you know it was directed by Adam Yauch, also known as MCA 
from pioneering hip-hop trio theBeastie Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beastie-boys>.

How did the film happen?

In the summer of '06 a friend of mine was organising this game and I thought 
it would make a cool documentary - to look at that very specific subculture of 
high-school basketball. I hoped it could work for people who were really 
knowledgeable about it and also those who didn't know anything. I think it 
succeeded.

Were you surprised by the amount of pressure those young players are under?

Yeah, it's definitely something I found out in the process. On some level 
they're excited about it, but there's a lot of hopes and dreams being placed on 
their shoulders. Their families have high expectations, especially some of the 
kids from poorer backgrounds; then there are the different coaches, the sneaker 
companies, and even the NBA. Some of these guys are being clocked from when 
they're in junior high - that's, like, 12 years old.

So who got that number-one spot in the draft?

None of the guys in the film, actually - it was someone named Derrick Rose I 
think. But four of them were first-round draft picks. Michael Beasley was the 
number-two pick. People said probably the main reason he didn't get it was 
because of his antics [he spends most of the film pulling down team-mates' 
shorts and trash-talking his opponents]; the teams were afraid that he might 
cause trouble.

Do you play basketball yourself?

Yeah, I play ball. I started when I was 20 or 21, and I have a pick-up game a 
few nights a week with friends. I played a little bit with the guys in the film 
which was fun - I'm sure they could have abused me if they'd wanted, but they 
didn't play too nasty.

Do you play with the other Beasties?

We actually sometimes bring a backboard on tour and set it up in the parking 
lot. Sometimes we play two-on-two games for hours before we go on stage. Mark 
Nishita, our keyboard player [aka Money Mark], is pretty good; Adam ['Ad-Rock' 
Horovitz] and I are quite evenly matched. Mike ['Mike D' Diamond] doesn't play 
so much these days. He got poked in the eye playing ball 10 years ago. It was 
pretty ugly. He had an eye patch.

We had you down as the skateboarding type.

I was pretty into skateboarding, and I still do a little to get where I'm 
going, but not much beyond that. There was also a period of time when I got to 
be friends with a lot of pro-snowboarders and I'd go and ride with them in 
Utah, but I don't get up there that much now.

Aren't you a character in a Tony Hawk game?

You know, somehow I got talked into doing it. They took my picture and put it 
in there [Tony Hawk's Proving Ground]; I don't think I did a voice, but 
actually I haven't even seen it.

Do you follow any British sports?

Not too much, but I do appreciate that cricket has tea time. American sports 
stop all the time but they don't stop for tea. Tea and sandwiches - I just like 
the idea of that.

Â· 'Gunnin' For That #1 Spot' is out on 10 October
 