
The Sundance film festival in Park City, Utah, showcases more than 150 feature 
films each year, among them everything from soporific character studies to 
gross-out comedy vehicles. Yet to many, Sundance is most closely associated 
with a particular strain of indie dramedy that came to dominate the festival in 
the mid-2000s, when the likes of Garden State and Little Miss Sunshine made 
their debuts. This subgenre has clung on for dear life ever since, even as its 
box-office clout has waned severely (more people appeared in the title of last 
year’s Me And Earl And The Dying Girl than showed up to watch it on opening 
weekend).

These glib, self-conscious films have turned the very word “Sundance” into 
something of a pejorative, but still they command industry attention: this 
year’s prime example,The Fundamentals Of Caring, sold to Netflix for an 
estimated $7m. In the film, which is now available to stream, Craig Roberts 
plays a teenage boy with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, an absent father, a 
bucket list of idiosyncratic life ambitions, and an imaginary best friend named 
Quigley. OK, so I made that last one up, but only to complete the full house of 
quirky US indie tropes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdeyFwHxo2Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdeyFwHxo2Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKdeyFwHxo2Q&media=>
Enter Paul Rudd’s rookie caregiver, who’s eager to show Roberts that there’s 
more to life than sitting around spewing the kind of softly sardonic musings 
that cut neatly into a 30-second TV spot. The pair set out on a road trip, in 
search of experiences both mundane and transcendent, and as they learn more 
about one another they realise that professional care is a two-way street – and 
so on and so forth.

Along the way, Rudd and Roberts are joined by a pair of spunky female 
characters who coax these two broken men out of their shells – and may or may 
not have thoughts, feelings and dreams of their own. It’s easy to mock films 
that subscribe so unthinkingly to the cliches of American indie cinema, so 
let’s continue: this is a movie in which an expositional montage plays out to 
music by a former member of the band Of Montreal.

If The Fundamentals Of Caring seems to sail by in half an hour – even though 
the laws of time, physics and IMDb put its running time at 93 minutes – that’s 
down to the chemistry between its leads, not to mention our overwhelming 
familiarity with the conventions of its genre. Despite a pretence of weighty 
introspection, the film is an easy watch because we’re learning its lessons for 
the thousandth time over, on the way to a conclusion that’s already been 
repeatedly validated.
 