
Â· View the work online 
<http://www.legacy-project.org/arts/pics/g/gorkyartistmother01_lg.jpg>

 Artist: Arshile Gorky <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/arshile-gorky>
 (1904-48), one of the greatest American painters, was so uncertain about how 
to make sense of his Armenian origins that he adopted a Russian name, telling 
people he was the nephew of the writer Maxim Gorky - implausibly, since this 
was a pen name. Arshile Gorky's real name was Vostanig Adoian. Born in Khorkom, 
on the shores of Lake Van in eastern Turkey, he had a childhood dominated by 
nature, folklore and religion, marred only by the departure of his father for 
America. In 1915 Turkey decided to get rid of its Armenian minority. Throughout 
eastern Turkey, Armenian men were taken out of their villages and murdered, 
women and children driven on forced marches causing mass starvation. An 
estimated million people died. Gorky's family fled to Yerevan, now capital of 
Armenia.

After his mother died of starvation in 1918, Gorky made it to Ellis Island. 
With a habit of making up stories about his meetings with famous artists, he 
became an art teacher and avant-garde painter in New York. He was connected 
with artists who would, with him, become known as the Abstract Expressionists - 
including his pupil Mark Rothko and close friend Willem de Kooning. Gorky hit 
his stride when he returned imaginatively to the landscape of Lake Van, 
resurrecting it in dream paintings such as The Waterfall (1943) in Tate Modern. 
In 1948 Gorky - who had jokingly given himself a first name that in Armenian 
means "accursed" - hanged himself.

Subject: Shushan der Marderosian was widowed with two daughters when she 
married Gorky's father at the age of 16 - both had lost spouses in a Turkish 
massacre of Armenians in 1896. Shushan was a pious woman with a deep feeling 
for the Van landscape. When they fled she became malnourished, and although 
Gorky and his sister desperately tried to get food, she made them eat it. On 
the morning she died in March 1918 she was dictating a letter in which she said 
she wanted to go back to Van.

 Distinguishing features: This is one of the most distressing and powerful of 
portraits. Even without knowing the story you know it is about loss. Gorky has 
given his mother a mask-like face, as if hewn in stone, and perhaps it is this, 
or the ghost-white fall of her dress, or the flatness of her body on the 
canvas, that tells us this is an image of someone dead. There is a monumental 
distance between us and her - she is remote as a statue. The boy standing by 
her is distant too, in his formal coat, clutching a pink flower. He has signs 
of life. Dressed as if he cares about himself, he is future-bound. But his face 
is so sad.

The wall behind them is strange, its location indiscernible. The painting is a 
meditation on a photograph of them taken at a studio in Van before the first 
world war, to send to Gorky's father in America. Gorky found the photograph in 
his father's US home in the 1920s. This painting is testimony to how much it 
anguished him. The transfiguration of the image into cubistic planes of colour 
emphasises Gorky's complex reaction to the photograph, as he remade it in his 
mind. He gives it colour, animation, but cannot bring his mother back. While 
the boy moves in three dimensions, she remains fixed, a flat ghost. Armenia 
itself is a no-place. Gorky paints a brown square behind his mother's head 
resembling a window. But it is opaque, no view. Her landscape is gone.

 Inspirations and influences: Picasso was one of Gorky's heroes, and the 
mask-like face of Gorky's mother evokes Picasso's Portrait of Gertrude Stein.

 Where is it? Whitney Museum of American Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, New York.
 