
On Friday 2 December, the small west African nation of the Gambia gave the 
world some hope which, in 2016, has often been in short supply. Election 
results announced that day revealed a shock win forAdama Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
, bringing to an end the 22-year rule of president Yahya Jammeh, a man who once 
said he wasprepared to rule for a billion years 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-16148458>.

History-making aside, what seems to fascinate the UK press most is the fact 
that the president-elect once worked as a security guard at Argos, a British 
retailer. On the surface this interesting titbit further heightens the sense of 
Barrow’s rise from obscurity. But because what was essentially a student job 
(Barrow worked at Argos while studying) has dominated headlines from theDaily 
Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> to the Independent, an 
underlying condescension has become more apparent to me.

The Gambia’s poll shock offers rare hope on the continent | Ruth Maclean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/gambia-poll-shock-change-africa-yahya-jammeh-electoral-democracy>
In a country that spouts all the rhetoric about social mobility and 
meritocracy, the incredulous headlines of the media elite (80% of the UK’s 
editors were privately educated) belies just how little they think it possible 
for people to actually move beyond their station. It reveals how much we judge 
competence based on status, and how much status is defined purely by what job 
one has. The Mail might as well have put an “astonished face” emoji at the end 
of its headline: “Former Argos security guard from London estate defeats 
African dictator to become PRESIDENT of Gambia”.

In a society like ours that seems to live by the dictum “I have more, 
therefore I am more”, Barrow’s job as a security guard suggests to us, if we’re 
honest, that he didn’t have much so we never expected him to become much. But 
something else that these headlines reveal is just how little the UK press – 
and by extension, the British public – understand immigrants to this country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambians%20celebrate%20shock%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambians%20celebrate%20shock%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video&media=>
Gambians celebrate shock election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/02/gambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video>
As the Syrian refugee crisis grows, we occasionally hear stories of engineers 
working as mechanics in their host countries, but this mismatch of 
qualifications and opportunity is also true for many migrants arriving from 
acrossAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

Many come in search of opportunities to better themselves and provide for 
their families, but arrive to discover that for a host of reasons (not least 
the colour of their skin or their accent) they cannot find work that reflects 
their skillset. So they take whatever work they can get and begin to slowly but 
steadily set up better lives for themselves back home.

As well as paying school fees and medical bills, African remittances are 
opening businesses and investing in small infrastructure projects. But as the 
conversation about immigration in the UK and elsewhere becomes increasingly 
toxic, what is almost never acknowledged is that, for many, if the immigration 
system acted less like a holding pen (once you’re in, you can’t get out) and 
more like a revolving door, many more migrants would leave.

The Gambia’s President Jammeh concedes defeat in election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
At the moment for those who spend sometimes up to a decade waiting for their 
status to be confirmed or clarified, leaving the UK would mean risk losing 
everything you’ve built here, as re-entry would almost certainly be refused.

Little understood is also the ambition of many African migrants, particularly 
those who come to the UK to study. Visit any university campus that has African 
students and ask them what they want to do after graduation. Many will speak of 
hitching their wagon to the corporate gravy train (nothing pleases an African 
parent more than the words lawyer, banker, doctor or accountant), but others 
harbour political ambition. They might clean offices while the rest of us sleep 
or stack shelves in Tesco, but they dream of being defined by more than what 
they are currently doing.

Barrow’s presidency might not live up to the hope of its infancy, but what is 
clear is that it’s a hope that feels foreign in Britain in 2016. Our shock at 
his appointment says little about what is happening in Gambia and so much about 
what is happening here: we have built a system where all the resources and 
networks reside with a few, and they speak to us of aspiration and hard work; 
of buying our way into the illusion of being just like them, while disparaging 
and dismissing the places where people have to start to sometimes get to the 
top.
 