
In the main parties’ election manifestos published this week, public spending 
is still public enemy number one. The Conservatives insist that afurther £12bn 
in cuts to the welfare budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/27/potential-conservative-welfare-cuts-revealed-in-leaked-emails>
 must be found over the course of the next parliament. If it isn’t, they warn, 
then the hordes of so-called skivers who receive unemployment benefit, child 
support, or disability benefits will keep draining Britain dry.

Which are the best countries in the world to live in if you are unemployed or 
disabled?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/15/which-best-countries-live-unemployed-disabled-benefits>
When Rachel Reeves, the shadow work and pensions secretary, told the Guardian 
thatLabour “is not the party of people on benefits” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/17/labour-vows-to-reduce-reliance-on-food-banks-if-it-comes-to-power>
 it was a potent illustration of how ingrained the idea of social security 
being synonymous with sponging off the state has become. The welfare state was 
once the insurance you got out for what you put in.

There is a lot at stake if the public spending cuts proposed by the coalition 
for the next parliament are introduced – and not just for poorer and 
marginalised groups. According to the latestInternational Monetary Fund 
estimates 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1428935507646/European-league-table-cuts-.pdf>, 
proposed UK cuts to public spending between 2015 and 2019 amount to 3% of GDP. 
If fully implemented, these would have profound repercussions. One of the less 
discussed of these is that the UK would join a tiny group of advanced economies 
– including Estonia, the Slovak Republic, and Ireland – that have shrunk the 
size of their states dramatically following the 2008 crash and which are all 
now seen as economic losers.

The IMF publishes annual forecasts 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/02/weodata/index.aspx#http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/02/weodata/index.aspx>
 for what it defines as “advanced economies” and it is from these that the 3% 
figure comes. Some of the economies it includes are more advanced than others. 
According to the IMF, by the end of 2015 France and Finland will have spent 
some 56% of their annual GDP on public, collective provision.

Those, and many other, advanced countries raise this money mostly through 
progressive taxes and they spend it on projects designed to have wider social 
benefits. As a result, Finland has the best schools inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the French some of the 
shortest working weeks and the most generous holidays. Why work too many hours 
if you are properly, progressively, taxed?

European countries fall into one of four leagues when arranged by public 
spending. The first of these contains Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Italy and 
Sweden as well as France and Finland. These countries are spending at least 
half of their GDP on public services. The figures also include the servicing of 
government debts. There is of course no guarantee that publicly spent money 
will be spent well.

For instance, spending in Italy is high partly because it has to allocate so 
much in interest payments on its debts. However, in general these countries are 
doing well. In all of themlife expectancy is higher than in the UK  
<http://www.dannydorling.org/?page_id=4350#http://www.dannydorling.org/?page_id=4350>
and in all but Italy,levels of numeracy are higher than in the UK 
<http://www.dannydorling.org/books/onepercent/Material.html#http://www.dannydorling.org/books/onepercent/Material.html%234>
. And let’s not forget that the median family in France and Germany has ahigher 
disposable income than the median in the UK, even before housing costs are 
taken into account 
<http://leftfootforward.org/2014/06/poor-people-in-britain-poorer-than-those-in-similar-sized-economies/#http://leftfootforward.org/2014/06/poor-people-in-britain-poorer-than-those-in-similar-sized-economies/>
.

The UK could become a place in which people live shorter, more brutal and less 
valued lives

If you become unemployed in this first league of countries you are still 
treated as if you are human. There is no equivalent to the UK’s now punitive 
benefit sanctions regime and benefits are not simply designed for subsistence 
or below. In contrast, the poorest fifth in the UK are the poorest people in 
all of north-western Europe,according to a recent report by the High Pay Centre 
 
<http://highpaycentre.org/pubs/what-would-the-neighbours-say-how-inequality-means-the-uk-is-poorer-than-we>
thinktank, primarily because benefits are so low and pay for those who can find 
work is also low for the majority of people in the UK.

The second European league by public spending is made up of those countries 
currently spending between 40% and 50% of their GDP on public services. This is 
the largest group. It comprises Norway, Slovenia, Portugal, Iceland, the 
Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg, Greece, Cyprus, Malta, the Czech Republic and 
Spain. Some countries such as Norway and Portugal are even planning to increase 
public spending between now and 2019. All of these countries are what could be 
termed “normal” European countries in that they spend higher proportions of 
their incomes collectively than the UK. They are a diverse group including 
countries that have done very badly out of the crisis, such as Greece, Spain 
and Portugal, but which nevertheless are still spending this proportion of 
their much reduced GDPs to try to maintain some semblance of all being in it 
together. This league also includes Germany, Norway and the Netherlands, often 
considered economic winners.

The UK is still in this group, just. Although it was never really normal in 
that, like the USA, it spent a disproportionately large amount of its public 
money on the military, it was nevertheless also the country with the first 
welfare state in Europe. However, even in the US, where welfare has 
historically compared extremely poorly with other rich nations, in recent 
months progressives inWashington have been mooting increasing social security 
benefits 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/04/can-elizabeth-warren-expand-social-security#http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/04/can-elizabeth-warren-expand-social-security>
– something that would have been inconceivable even a year ago.

But, the government’s plans to rapidly reduce the proportion of GDP spent on 
public services to 38% by 2019 mean that after 2015, the UK would leave the 
second division of European countries by public spending and enter the third 
division alongside Ireland,Estonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/estonia> 
and the Slovak Republic. A UK in this league would become more similar to these 
countries. It could become a place from which the young try to emigrate and in 
which the old are not well cared for, in which people on average live shorter, 
more brutal and less valued lives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Ftories-reduce-uk-public-spending-estonia-imf-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428941324355%2F405369e9-a430-4cd0-b2c8-47432df098e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Tories%20will%20reduce%20UK%20public%20spending%20to%20Estonian%20levels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Ftories-reduce-uk-public-spending-estonia-imf-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Tories%20will%20reduce%20UK%20public%20spending%20to%20Estonian%20levels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Ftories-reduce-uk-public-spending-estonia-imf-figures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428941324355%2F405369e9-a430-4cd0-b2c8-47432df098e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Disabled people protest against Atos’s handling of incapacity benefit 
claimants during the London Olympics. Photograph: AFP/AFP/Getty Images 
However, the UK still has a choice. If Greece, Portugal and Iceland can stay 
in the second division, the UK can too – albeit near the bottom of it. Yet the 
UK could become an outlier and fall out of the mainstream altogether – although 
those who advocate a perpetually smaller state rarely spell this out.

There is an even lower division that the Conservative party and Ukip appear 
intent on joining. In the IMF data it is only represented by San Marino, a tiny 
country that is forecast to spend just 22% of its GDP on public services by 
2019. (Other small states such as Monaco and Lichtenstein are likely to be 
similar, but they are more secretive about their data).

George Osborne’s publicly declared wish to cut further could involve far 
deeper cuts than are shown here for 2019. Given the trajectory that the 
chancellor has already chosen, and the head of steam built up by the coalition, 
it is possible to envisage more of the NHS being privatised, more selling off 
of what remains of state housing, more redundancies in the civil service, and 
for social workers and nurses. There are ever-deeper cuts to make if your 
mantra is that a smaller state is always good.

The IMF’s 2019 prediction is based on the coalition’s plans. Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has pledged to cut the deficit 
every year of the next parliament if it is elected, but it could achieve its 
big manifesto promise by raising taxes thereby reducing public spending. Yet 
there is a broader need to reshape the national conversation on future public 
spending and social security provision.

Government will still spend, of course. If the Tories are part of the next 
government, they will spend – but at a much lower level – while much more of 
the money that most individuals earn will flow into private landlords’ pockets, 
hedge fund managers’ villas and to the estates of the rich.

This is already happening. A small state and depleted social security spending 
does not mean a more equitable society. Someone steps in to provide the 
services that are taken away and in the UK they always insist on making a hefty 
profit out of providing what was once delivered so much more cheaply, 
collectively. The UK is not a country of runaway welfare spending. It already 
lags behind equivalent “advanced” nations. The question now is just how far 
will it go?

Danny Dorling will be appearing at the Hay Festival  
<https://www.hayfestival.com/p-9667-danny-dorling-and-mary-ohara.aspx>talking 
about austerity and inequality with Mary O’Hara, whose book,Austerity Bites is 
out in paperback <http://www.policypress.co.uk/display.asp?K=9781447315704> 
 