
Headline of the year…

… in a special 12 months for Fifa.com: a report 
<http://www.fifa.com/aboutfifa/organisation/bodies/congress/news/newsid=2368340/>
 on Sepp Blatter’s keynote speech at Fifa’s Congress in June – an address 
listened to by 750 Fifa delegates all wearing free luxury watches: “Football as 
a catalyst for social change: no football without ethics and integrity”.

Best resurrection 

Alan Pardew: still in the game after surviving a series of unsurvivable lows – 
includingnuzzling Hull’s David Meyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/alan-pardew-seven-games-ban-head-butt>
; being called “dead, finished, over” by Mike Ashley; and seeing #PardewOut 
trending above #HappyBirthdayNiall and #21ReasonsWhyWeLoveNiall. He held his 
nerve, telling the press he would spend his evenings polishing his 2012 manager 
of the year trophy until things improved. Runner-up:Sam Allardyce.

Most entertaining cameo 

Felix Magath’s seven months at Fulham. “I’m the right man for this,” he told 
fans in August. “No one else, I am the only one. Not the special one, I am the 
only one.” It ended with fans chanting “Get the cheese out for his leg” after 
Scott Parker went down – a reference toMagath’s faith in applying Tesco dairy 
products direct to muscle injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/20/fulham-farewell-magath-felix-madcap>
. His confidence wasn’t knocked, though. “I still believe in my methods,” he 
said in September, after he was sacked. “I certainly don’t doubt myself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711801691%2F7c062261-19ff-4570-b951-de01152a6a85-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711801691%2F7c062261-19ff-4570-b951-de01152a6a85-680x1020.jpeg>
 Joe Kinnear: judged on his signings. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 
Saddest departure

Joe “JFK” Kinnear – who told Newcastle fans to “judge me on my signings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/feb/04/joe-kinnear-newcastle-rants-resignations-signings>
”, then resigned eight months later without making any. He left days after the 
club sold Yohan “Kebab” Cabaye to PSG for £23m without buying a replacement. 
“We didn’t want to do it,” he said. “Make no bones about that.”

Leakiest defence

The League Managers Association stepped up in August to comment on Malky 
Mackay’s “gay snake”, “fkn chinky” and “fat Jew” texts, issuing the year’s 
defining press release phrase: “These were two text messages sent in private at 
a time Malky felt under great pressure and when he was letting off steam to a 
friend, during some friendly text message banter.” It was the year’s 
second-least wise piece of PR, just behindDave Whelan revealing he used to call 
the Chinese “chingalings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/05/dave-whelan-wigan-chinese-chingalings>
 … And they weren’t offended either.”

Best off-pitch performances

Keeping the sports press busy between matches this year: England all-rounder 
Ben Stokes launched an assault on a locker in March after his first-ball 
dismissal in the final match of their Caribbean tour, breaking his wrist; 
Cardiff defenderSteven Caulker was mistakenly arrested for stealing a tub of 
Philadelphia from Tesco in September – then reports of a Christmas party 
dust-up had to be denied; and England rugby league hookerJosh Hodgson 
apologised after being filmed in November trashing a Dunedin student flat by
running through a closed door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/09/josh-hodgson-trashes-flat-after-england-defeat-to-new-zealand>
.

Best penalty miss

Palace’s Jason Puncheon strolled up to the spot at Spurs in January, 48 hours 
after tempting/goading fate with some Twitter banter aimed at Norwich’s Bradley 
Johnson: “Do you want me to give you some penalty lessons??”He sliced, skied and
 shanked it <https://vine.co/v/h3EhW9nmV3V>.

World Cup personality of the year

Mexico’s Miguel “The Louse” Herrera <https://twitter.com/miguelherreradt> – 
the World Cup’s lowest-paid coach, spent the summer posting photos of himself 
and writing inspirational tweets: “Today we arrived in Fortaleza. We are 
prepared for great things. Who is ready to live the moment?” Enrique Krauze, 
Mexican historian and polemicist, told the press: “He is so authentic, so 
expressive. And that is why he is so seductive.”

Meme of the summer

Jonathan Pearce was once best known for Robot Wars and his classic radio 
commentary intro to 1993’s England v San Marino game (“Welcome to Bologna on 
Capital Gold Sport for England versus San Marino with Tennent’s Pilsner brewed 
with Czechoslovakian yeast for that extra Pilsner taste and England are one 
down.”) Since the summer, he’s best known for shouting at goalline technology.
. (@MarkSalkeld) 
Jonathan Pearce at half time today pic.twitter.com/YrcTIe0NwB 
<http://t.co/YrcTIe0NwB>
 <https://twitter.com/MarkSalkeld/status/478273984057073664> June 15, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MarkSalkeld/status/478273984057073664> 
Best politician

Uruguay’s president José Mujica rallied round Luis Suárez in June when the 
peckish striker needed him most. Mujica went to the airport to meet Suárez, and 
revealed Fifa’s “fascist” ban was an “assault on the poor … because he never 
went to university, he isn’t educated, he grew up on the field”. Asked who was 
to blame, Mujica told reporters: “Fifa’s bunch of old sons of bitches.” Asked 
if he wanted to retract that, he said: “Broadcast it, for me.”

Least likely souvenir 

A Dorset company’s botched quest to find royalty-free images of the England 
World Cup squad for use on merchandise led toBarack Obama, the leader of the 
free world,appearing instead of Chris Smalling 
<http://i.guim.co.uk/static/w-620/h--/q-95/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/6/23/1403527993757/d181d489-f99f-4a66-a161-69caa8768e01-620x372.jpeg>
 on 2,000 mugs – a snip at £11.99 each.

Most confused by it all

@philneville, a 60-year-old radiator salesman from Suffolk, sustained “heavy” 
Twitter abuse in June for his disappointing World Cup co-commentary debut; and
@marcello – a London-based male model – was in the gym when tweeters worldwide 
started abusing him for the own goal he had just scored against Croatia. One 
asked him: “why did u scor own goal? Ur not soppsed to scor in dat one. idiot.”

Neatest clarification

Showing trademark contrition in September: Nick Faldo, who was widely 
criticised for telling NBC that Sergio Garcia had been “useless” at the 2008 
Ryder Cup. “In semi-jest, I used a word which, maybe … I could have chosen a 
better word. If I had gone for lousy, that might have captured it better.”

Social media stars

Among the year’s big Twitter moments: Rio Ferdinand picked up a three-game ban 
and a £25,000 fine for adding the word “sket” to his bantz; Sky’s rugby expert
Scott Quinnelltweeted his mobile number to 61,000 followers by mistake after 
November’s England v Australia game; and the Lyon presidentJean-Michel Aulas, 
65, tried engaging with his critics calmly, then lost his poise. He told one: 
“Your number of idiotic tweets, 55,778, and your number of followers, 1,308, 
gives a good idea of your reputation”; then urged another to shut up and go to 
bed. The boy, aged eight, hit back: “You’re not my father, you don’t set my 
bedtime.”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711981477%2Ff7db6b82-e373-4736-9a69-61f54fa0b3ad-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711981477%2Ff7db6b82-e373-4736-9a69-61f54fa0b3ad-680x1020.jpeg>
 Massimo Cellino: own-brand stability. Photograph: Adam Holt/Action Images 
Most entertaining owners

Vincent Tan, Karl Oyston and Assam Allam all helped fill the vacuum left after 
Blackburn’s owners Venky’s went quiet – Allam looking to change “Hull City” to 
“Hull Tigers” because “it’s shorter”. But none of them kept pace withMassimo 
Cellino.

The former Cagliari owner set out his core vision in January – telling local 
press: “Leeds fans have had enough of eating shit and shutting their mouths … 
They’ve had to put up with 10 shitty years, and I want to make them proud 
again.” Then he instilled some own-brand stability: sacking and unsacking Brian 
McDermott inside 24 hours; pledging not to sack Dave Hockaday (“It’s too simple 
to sack him. If I fire anyone, I should fire myself, or else I’m a coward. I 
have to control my ego”), then sacking him four days later; axing keeper Paddy 
Kenny for being born on 17 May – 17 being Cellino’s unlucky number; hiring 
Darko Milanic (“I don’t know why I’ve chosen him. Coaches are like watermelons. 
You find out about them when you open them. His qualities? He’s good-looking, 
what can I tell you?”) then sacking him after six games; and ultimately failing 
the fit and proper test. His appeal will be heard next month.

Among other top boardroom performers in 2014: Gigi Becali, who continued to 
run Romania’s Steaua Bucharest from prison while writing a religious trilogy; 
Brazilian club Atlético-MG’s presidentAlexandre Kalil, who took responsibility 
for the bad press that followed his decision to invade a pitch and call a 
referee a “thieving son of a bitch gangster” in April by sacking coach Paulo 
Autuori for “poor performance”; and Atlético Madrid’sEnrique Cerezo, who issued 
a neat rebuttal in September to suggestions that his players lacked class: 
“These pundits are fools, hypocrites and shits. I’m speaking figuratively, of 
course.”

Culture awards: film of the year …

United Passions: Fifa’s fast-paced story of football administration. In 
October, global takings since its world premiere were estimated at £120,000.Fifa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> said the £16.8m they invested – 
the same as their total spend on football development in 2013 – was well worth 
it, as a way to “raise awareness of Fifa’s work”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJCjeD-Jqd2s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJCjeD-Jqd2s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJCjeD-Jqd2s&media=>
… and best breakthrough act

Ronaldinho – accused by former Atlético Mineiro coach Levir Culpi of “lacking 
professionalism” – starred in a new music video for Brazilian band Trio Temura. 
The new track followed his collaboration in March with DJ Dennis, called Let’s 
Drink – with its chorus: “Boot the glass up high, let’s drink/We will enjoy 
life, we drink/I’m full of money, let’s drink.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSRApksa-3RQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSRApksa-3RQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSRApksa-3RQ&media=>
Least festive press conference

Toulon prop Martin Castrogiovanni, asked this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/martin-castrogiovanni-leicester-richard-cockerill-toulon>
 about the views of Leicester coach Richard Cockerill, who said he left the 
club chasing money. “I never want to speak with Cockers any more. I am the kind 
of guy that if I hate you, if you are not clear with me or if you have been a 
cunt, how you say in English, I never want to speak to you any more. That’s it. 
That’s how I am. I am not fake. If I hate you, I say in your face and I will 
never speak to you again. Love me or hate me. I don’t hate anyone. Peace and 
love. I just don’t like cunts.”

Most over-excited 

1) Wigan prop Ben Flower spoke of an “unbelievable” chance to realise his 
boyhood dream before October’s Grand Final, but lasted just two minutes before
the urge to punch Lance Hohaia in the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/11/st-helens-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
 got the better of him.2) And Bristol City captain Wade Elliott headed into the 
League One M4 derby against Swindon in November with a Braveheart rallying cry 
– “whatever they do, we will be ready for it” – and was also sent off after two 
minutes for fighting.

Best banners

Liverpool fans paraphrased an old Kop song in November to make a point about 
ticket prices: “Let me tell you a story of a poor boy … 1990 £4; 2000 £24; 2010 
£43; 2020 ?”Palace fans greeted Chelsea with a banner reading: “Roman’s dirty 
money is a disease that has plagued our game.” Roman’s money won. AndLegia 
Warsaw fans displayed an anti-Uefa banner in August featuring a pig, the Uefa 
badge and the slogan “Football Doesn’t Matter, Money Does.” Uefa fined them 
£63,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711570959%2F7e4a96b9-9d49-4a69-88a3-058d202712f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711570959%2F7e4a96b9-9d49-4a69-88a3-058d202712f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Liverpool’s ticket price banner at Anfield. Photograph: Andrew Boyers/Action 
Images 
Best antidote to modern football

Non-League Day in September. Among the top innovators were Bungay Town, who 
offered a free punnet of mushrooms to anyone who turned up, and drew a crowd of 
100 – double their average.

Classiest tribute

The extended pause before the classified results on Radio 5 Live in August – 
the first broadcast since the death ofJames Alexander Gordon. JAG would have 
enjoyed one especially fitting scoreline that day: Stenhousemuir 4 Stirling 5.

Biggest surprise

Tue 16 Dec: English cricket’s managing director Paul Downton: “I will be very 
surprised if Alastair Cook’s not captain for the World Cup. In September, the 
selectors got together and spent nearly a week working out we were best to 
stick with Alastair. These decisions aren’t taken lightly. You’ve got some very 
good cricket brains involved in them.”Sat 20 Dec: Cook dropped. Downton: “I 
have complete confidence in the decision made by the selectors.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419712138190%2Fed1abbe8-0b4c-46b8-952c-91f963cf1b2b-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419712138190%2Fed1abbe8-0b4c-46b8-952c-91f963cf1b2b-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton. Photograph: Mark Thompson/Getty Images 
Best team-mates

The year’s key moments of togetherness for Mercedes team-mates Lewis Hamilton 
andNico Rosberg: • Bahrain: Hamilton overtakes Rosberg, who isn’t having it. 
“Someone needs to tell Lewis that move was NOT ON!”• Spain: Hamilton reveals a 
plan to break his team-mate’s mental strength. Rosberg: “Break me down 
mentally? He will struggle with that one.”• Monaco: in qualifying Rosberg, who 
has clocked the fastest lap, goes off at the Mirabeau corner and the caution 
flags deny Hamilton the chance to challenge for pole. Hamilton: “People are 
always talking about friends. I can count my friends on one hand. I am sure 
Nico can do the same. I am not in his five and he is not in my five.”• Hungary: 
Hamilton refuses team orders to let Rosberg pass. Hamilton: “I’m not slowing 
down for Nico. If he gets close enough, he can overtake me.”• Belgium: Rosberg 
punctures Hamilton’s left rear tyre when they collide on the second lap. 
Hamilton: “We had a meeting about it. He basically said he did it on purpose.”

Most awkward press conference

In the wake of Europe’s Ryder Cup win, tensions ran high between Phil Mickelson
 and the US captainTom Watson, who was sitting a few feet away as Mickelson 
recalled the strengths of 2008 winning captain Paul Azinger: “[He] got 
everybody invested in the process,” said Mickelson. “He got everybody invested 
in who they were going to play with, who the picks were going to be, who was 
going to be in their pod.” Was he consulted in any of the decision-making this 
time? “Uh – no. No, nobody here was.” Watson: “I had a different philosophy as 
far as being a captain. You know, it takes 12 players to win. It’s not pods. 
It’s 12 players.”

Limpest press conference

When Usain Bolt arrived in Glasgow in July to run in Jamaica’s Commonwealth 
Games 4x100m relay team, questions quickly drifted off-topic. He was asked 
about his hopes of playing for Manchester United one day, whether he had ever 
worn a kilt, would he like to be given a kilt, what he thought about the 
troubles in Gaza and what did he make of the referendum on Scottish 
independence. Then an Australian TV crew asked for a group selfie.

Most shameless photo-bomb

Australian hockey player Jayde Taylor had her Commonwealth Games selfie ruined 
bythe Queen in July. “Ahhh The Queen photo-bombed our selfie!! #sheevensmiled 
#amazing”
Jayde Taylor (@_JaydeTaylor) 
Ahhh The Queen photo-bombed our selfie!! 😄 👑 #royalty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/royalty?src=hash> #sheevensmiled 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sheevensmiled?src=hash> #amazing 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/amazing?src=hash> #Glasgow2014 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Glasgow2014?src=hash> @Hockeyroos 
<https://twitter.com/Hockeyroos> @AusComGames <https://twitter.com/AusComGames> 
pic.twitter.com/ZMtHYFUqHk <http://t.co/ZMtHYFUqHk>
 <https://twitter.com/_JaydeTaylor/status/492269017215012864> July 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/_JaydeTaylor/status/492269017215012864> 
Worst spoiler

“It’s a very competitive division. Scott Fitzgerald has also won his way 
through to the semis, a magnificent performance against a New Zealander,” raved
Barry McGuiganin the BBC studio during the Commonwealth Games boxing 
highlights. An amused Gary Lineker paused, then delivered his scripted intro to 
the next bout: “Same division now, and England’s Scott Fitzgerald was up 
against Bowyn Morgan of New Zealand. The Preston puncher was troubled by a cut 
above his left eye in his previous fight, could he be a cut above today?”

Best teenage interviewee 

England’s teenage under-63kg judoka Katie Jemima Yeats-Brown, a last-minute 
call-up, secured Commonwealth Games bronze by beating Beatrice Valois Fortier 
of Canada. “I got the call on Tuesday morning at seven,” she said. “I was 
actually quite annoyed because my mum said I could have a lie-in, then shook me 
awake and asked if I would like to fight at the Commonwealth Games. I was meant 
to be doing Laser Quest.”

Denial of the year

Came in October, as Shanghai TV anchor Zhou Liang was dismissed for calling 
visiting Jiangsu Sainty players “dogs” before their game against Shanghai 
Shenhua. Zhou denied using the term until a clip emerged of him reading out the 
team lineup: “No1 is north Jiangsu dog, No2 a north Jiangsu dog, No3 is a north 
Jiangsu dog from Brazil, No6 is a north Jiangsu dog from Lebanon … No24 is the 
last north Jiangsu dog.” PPTV: “We sincerely apologise.”

Groundsman of the year 

An unnamed official in Romania went viral in March after sport.ro revealed 
what happened when helaid out pitch markings for a lower league game in Timis 
after returning from a village festival 
<http://www.sport.ro/liga-1/foto-cel-mai-tare-marcaj-din-istoria-fotbalului-explicatia-pentru-care-la-un-meci-din-romania-liniile.html>
: “Such chaotic streaks as would bedevil any goalline technology.”

Most passionate rethink

Greece, September: OFI Crete’s Italian manager Gennaro Gattuso shouting at the 
Greek press in English: “No leave. Leave what? Leave what? It’s too easy for me 
leave. No, me stay here.”26 Oct: Leaves. 27 Oct: Comes back. “I’m loved here. 
How can I leave?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7clSlIXxBZo&media=>
Most thoughtful

Sampdoria coach Sinisa Mihajlovic continued his run of literary allusions in 
pre-match press conferences, previewing their game against Verona in March with 
a pledge to “chuck Juliet from her balcony.” Earlier he set out a broader 
strategy: “I brought a book today. In it Dante writes of how Ulysses urged his 
men to push into the unknown, past the Pillars of Hercules. I do the same. We 
don’t know where our Pillars of Hercules are but if the boys follow me, I 
promise them, it will not be a ‘witless flight’.”

Worst dressed 

March: England’s rugby team had just thrashed Italy in the early kick-off in 
Rome, and to become Six Nations champions needed France to beat Ireland in 
Paris, which the French had failed to do only twice in 42 years. So Chris 
Robshaw and co donned dinner jackets and headed to a spot near St Peter’s 
Square to watch the game on TV – as Ireland won 22-20 in Paris.

Animal magic
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711683395%2F6edcc8b5-ca68-41a7-a21b-96c311582bbd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%202014%20sports%20awards%3A%20the%20year%E2%80%99s%20best%20gaffes%2C%20rows%20and%20grasshoppers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fdec%2F27%2Falternative-review-sport-2014-gaffes-rows-grasshoppers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F27%2F1419711683395%2F6edcc8b5-ca68-41a7-a21b-96c311582bbd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 James Rodriguez and his Tropidacris violaceus. Photograph: Fabrice 
Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 
The key players in a busy 12 months for animal cameos: a giant grasshopper 
(Tropidacris violaceus) celebrated James Rodríguez’s penalty for Colombia 
against Brazil in July by taking a ride on his shoulder; an unnamed but 
well-turned-outHusky invaded Crewe’s pitch in February; a baboon chased Luke 
Donald at the Gary Player Country Club, Sun City, this month; Bromley’s 6-1 win 
over Maidenhead in March was interrupted bya cat, days after a woman told the 
local paper she wasgoddess of the Cat People and had been engaged to Arsène 
Wenger in a previous life “when I was Joan of Arc and he was the Dauphine of 
France”; anunseen bird relieved itself into Ashley Young’s mouth at Old 
Trafford, producing the year’s most squirmed-about Vine; theGleneagles’ deer 
kept the tourist board content during the Ryder Cup in September; aspider went 
viral by crawling up Martin Allen’s technicolour cardigan during ITV’s FA Cup 
show in January (above); Brazil’s Atlético Paranaense fought an ongoing battle 
against “a well-known local rabbit called Ozir” who “tried to set up home in a 
goalmouth” during a televised match; Police in Thessaloniki arrested a PAOK fan 
for draping hundreds ofanchovies over the Olympiakos bench in April (left); and 
prosecutors in Spain fined a fan €200 in February forthrowing a dog at a 
referee during a Comarca del Mármol match. The press reported: “Goofy is 
recovering at home.”

Spiciest analysis

Viewers of the MCC v Rest of the World match on Fox Sports in Australia in 
July heardAndrew Strauss airily use the c-bomb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/andrew-strauss-kevin-pietersen> 
to describe Kevin Pietersen. Strauss did not realise the feed was being 
broadcast abroad while Sky Sports viewers in the UK were at a commercial break. 
“I don’t think that was my proudest moment,” he said later.

Lowest moral high ground

The ECB thought they had the moral high ground over Kevin Pietersen. Then, in 
May, Paul Downton told Test Match Special: “I watched every ball of the Sydney 
Test live, and I’ve never seen anyone as disinterested or distracted. It looked 
very strange. I talked to every person on the management team and quite a few 
players, and I could not find one supporter who wanted Kevin to stay in the 
side.” One week later, an ECB statement: “Some comments were made in breach of 
a settlement agreement ... we apologise to Kevin Pietersen.”

Best genes

Rugby siblings Richie and Jonny Gray marked their first Test together by 
scoring a try each in November – the first by brothers in a Scotland game since 
Gavin and Scott Hastings in 1995. And twinsLars and Sven Bender synchronised 
disturbingly in the Bundesliga in January – Lars scoring for Bayer Leverkusen 
in the fourth minute and Sven for Borussia Dortmund in the fifth.

Most professional interviewer

Brooke Graham, a reporter for the American station KUTV, fainted on air in 
January during a live interview about cross-country skiing in Utah. When she 
came round she completed her questioning while sitting in the snow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ravZzYKR34&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ravZzYKR34>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6ravZzYKR34&media=>
Least necessary apology 

Came from the BBC in February as they reacted too hastily after snowboarder 
Billy Morgan used some misheard boarding slang to describe how he approached 
his runs: “I just thought ‘huck it’.”

Flakiest flake 

At the Winter Olympics opening ceremony in February one of five giant 
expanding snowflakesfailed to open – but Russian TV covered for it by cutting 
to rehearsal footage instead. Executives denied censorship. “It’s no scandal, 
it was an open secret to use back-up footage. It’s ridiculous to focus on one 
flake.”

Boldest selection

The USA men’s ice hockey team for the Winter Olympics had to backtrack after 
calling up a 67-year-old Canadian non-skater by mistake. Players were told of 
their selection for Sochi via text – and the Vancouver man had a phone number 
formerly used by Canucks player Ryan Kesler. “I’d be happy to play for you,” he 
told them. “And I think Canada would be even happier.”

Name of the year

55-year-old Mexican skier Prince Hubertus of Hohenlohe-Langenburg: the 
second-oldest Winter Olympian ever. His ski suit was designed around a 
traditional bolero jacket, cummerbund and red bow-tie. He crashed on his first 
run.

Most creative technology

The BBC subtitles machine took a brave run at Man United’s line-up in 
February, butcame unstuck 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-2556700/Adnan-Jazz-Adnan-Jam-BBC-subtitles-struggle-to-grips-Uniteds-young-star-Januzaj-defenders.html>
 when it got to Adnan Januzaj: “Rooney, Juan Mata, Janet jazz jazz jam…” And a 
few months later, as Wales lock Jake Ball prepared to take on Australia, the 
BBC website listed him as “Jake Ballsack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2014/nov/10/bbc-says-sorry-for-calling-welsh-rugby-player-jake-ballsack>
”.

And finally: saddest URL tweak

2013: manutd.com/welcomedavidmoyes. 2014: sorry.manutd.com/errorRedirector.html
 <http://sorry.manutd.com/errorRedirector.html>
 