
The winner: The Girl on the Train

The Girl on the Train: twists, booze and relocation – discuss the film with 
spoilers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/05/the-girl-on-the-train-twists-discuss-the-fim-with-spoilers>
After three weeks at the top spot, Bridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/bridget-joness-baby-review-reborn-renee-zellweger-excels-in-fun-romp-heavy-with-expectation>
 finally makes way, knocked aside by the big-screen adaptation of Paula 
Hawkins’ bestseller, The Girl on the Train. The murder mystery begins in the UK 
with a sturdy £5.18m, with Wednesday and Thursday previews boosting the total 
to £6.96m.

The obvious comparison title is Gone Girl, which began in October 2014 with 
£3.59m plus £517,000 in previews. Ignoring previews,The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/09/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
 has opened 44% bigger thanGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/05/gone-girl-review-two-different-readings-modern-marriage>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20'The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Blunt%20on%20The%20Girl%20on%20the%20Train%3A%20%27The%20vomit%20was%20not%20my%20own%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Femily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview&media=>
Emily Blunt on The Girl on the Train: ‘The vomit was not my own’ – video 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/29/emily-blunt-the-girl-on-the-train-video-interview>
Local distributor eOne has reason to be particularly pleased with the outcome. 
In the US, The Girl on the Train kicked off with $24.5m (£19.5m), which – by 
rule of thumb – suggests a UK debut at about the £2.5m mark. The achieved 
result is more than double that. A factor may be the local popularity of the 
book, whose author moved from Zimbabwe to London in 1989.The transposition of 
the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/10/the-girl-on-the-train-relocating-movies>
 to upstate New York does not seem to have dented the film’s appeal in Hawkins’ 
adopted home market.

The sustained success of Bridget Jones’s Baby this past month may have given 
eOne some concern, given the female skew on both titles. The flipside is that 
the distributor could hardly have hoped for a better trailering platform for 
its film. It’s also the case that success can breed success: a big title can 
bring the audience back, and reignite enthusiasm for the cinema.

The other winner: My Scientology Movie

When My Scientology Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/my-scientology-movie-review-louis-theroux-gets-smart-with-the-cult-church>
, starring and co-written by Louis Theroux, was beaten to the punch byAlex 
Gibney’s documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/alex-gibney-going-clear-scientology-and-the-prison-of-belief-interview-documentary-film>
 Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief, film-makers John Dower and 
Simon Chinn had reason to be despondent. Gibney’s film premiered to acclaim at 
Sundance in January 2015 while My Scientology Movie was still in the cutting 
room, making it a tougher sell to A-list festivals and top distributors. 
Despite premiering at the London film festival last October, key international 
sales were not confirmed until May this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds-9qUjE40wM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds-9qUjE40wM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds-9qUjE40wM&media=>
UK distributor Altitude opted to release the film on the first full weekend of 
October, 51 weeks after its LFF debut. Any concerns about the fate of the 
documentary evaporated as soon as tickets went on sale, with key indie venues 
such as Bristol Watershed, Glasgow film theatre, Manchester Home and London ICA 
reporting rapid sellouts. My Scientology Movie has opened with a very 
encouraging £93,000 from 26 cinemas, with previews taking the total up to 
£107,000.

In addition, a special event screening with a Theroux Q&A was beamed from 
London’s Royal Festival Hall into 240 cinemas on Monday evening. Altitude 
reports more than £330,000 for this, including the host venue, taking the 
four-day total to £438,000. Gibney’s Scientology film grossed £76,000 in the UK 
over the course of its lifetime.

The survivor: Bridget Jones’s Baby

Adding another £6.52m in the past seven days, Bridget Jones’s Baby continues 
its phenomenal run, with a cumulative total of £37.87m after 24 days. That puts 
it ahead of the lifetime total of 2004’s Bridget Jones: The Edge of Reason 
(£36.m), behind only 2001’s Bridget Jones’s Diary (£42.1m) in the all-time 
league table of romantic comedies at the UK box office. Baby saw its steepest 
weekly decline to date – 38% – at the weekend, but any drop under 40% is 
generally considered a decent hold, and the film faced formidable new 
competition with the arrival of The Girl on the Train. Including Monday’s 
takings, Baby has now overtaken Deadpool (£37.9m) to become the third biggest 
hit of 2016, behind only The Jungle Book (£46.1m) and Finding Dory (£42m)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bridget%20Jones's%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bridget%20Jones%27s%20Baby%3A%20watch%20Ren%C3%A9e%20Zellweger%20return%20in%20new%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fbridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video&media=>
Bridget Jones’s Baby: watch Renée Zellweger return in new trailer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/mar/23/bridget-joness-baby-watch-renee-zellweger-return-new-trailer-video>
Of course, adjusted for inflation, Baby is still behind the Bridget 
franchise’s previous entries. Average cinema ticket prices rose by 74% since 
2001, and by 61% since 2004. Adjusted for inflation to current prices, the 
lifetime grosses of the earlier Bridget movies would be £73.1m and £57.8m.

The disappointments

Landing in seventh place, John Michael McDonagh’s War on Everyone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/war-on-everyone-review-john-michael-mcdonagh-skarsgard-pena-bad-cops>
 delivered £188,000 from 203 cinemas, including previews of £40,000 – yielding 
a screen average of just £924, or £725 if previews are left out of the weekend 
total. McDonagh’s previous film Calvary began its run in April 2014 with 
£571,000 from 150 venues, including previews of £6,500. It’s worth noting that 
£295,000 of that total came from Ireland, which is always included in the UK 
box office totals. Although McDonagh remains popular in Ireland, his new film’s 
New Mexico setting means that it doesn’t have the same particular local appeal 
there as his previous films.

Bridget Jones's Baby continues growth spurt at UK box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/bridget-joness-baby-miss-peregrine-supersonic-free-state-of-jones-uk-box-office>
In July 2011, McDonagh’s The Guard opened first in Ireland, debuting with 
£474,000 from 71 cinemas, including £72,000 in previews. Six weeks later, it 
kicked off in the UK with £164,000 from 60 venues. Lifetime total was a 
combined £4.61m.

With its US setting and international cast led by Alexander Skarsgård, War on 
Everyone is notionally a more commercial film from McDonagh. The UK and Ireland 
grosses, at least, suggest otherwise.

War on Everyone’s result looks positively muscular next to Blood Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/blood-father-review-cannes-mel-gibson>
, the latest action thriller starring Mel Gibson. That one landed in 17th place 
with £69,000 from 117 cinemas, yielding a £588 average.

The single-screen showcase: 13th

Fans of watching documentaries on the big screen are in for a disappointment 
if they hope to see Ava DuVernay’s13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
, when they don’t live or work near London. The film, which is available on 
Netflix, is playing an exclusive one-week engagement at the Bertha DocHouse at 
London’s Curzon Bloomsbury – a run that qualifies it for the Bafta film awards 
– following its special presentation as part of the London film festival last 
Thursday. Other cinemas seeking to book it report having been rebuffed. The 
Selma director’s acclaimed investigation into US mass incarceration of African 
Americans grossed £455 at the weekend. The film ends its run on Thursday.

The personal milestone: The BFG

Now in its 12th week of release, Steven Spielberg’s The BFG passed the £30m 
barrier at the weekend – the ninth film to do so this year, following The 
Jungle Book, Finding Dory, Bridget Jones’s Baby, Deadpool, Batman V Superman: 
Dawn of Justice, Captain America: Civil War, The Secret Life of Pets and 
Suicide Squad. The UK is the runaway winning territory forThe BFG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-bfg>, relative to the size of its overall 
cinema market. US gross was a disappointing $55m.

The future

American Honey review: Andrea Arnold mislays map on sweet, indelible roadtrip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
Thanks to the arrival of The Girl on the Train, takings at the weekend were 
overall 9% up on the previous frame, and 56% up on the equivalent session from 
2015, when The Martian stayed at the top spot, fending off challenges from the 
newly released Sicario and The Walk. Box office has now been up on the 
equivalent 2015 weekends for four weeks in a row. Cinema owners have hopes 
pinned this weekend on the arrival ofRon Howard’s Inferno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/10/inferno-review-tom-hanks-felicity-jones-dan-brown>
, the third in the series that began with The Da Vinci Code. Warners’ animation 
division presents Storks, which it hopes can repeat – or at least vaguely 
approach – the stellar success of The Lego Movie. Alternatives include Andrea 
Arnold’s critically acclaimed Cannes competitor American Honey, starring 
newcomer Sasha Lane opposite Shia LaBeouf.

Top 10 films October 7-9

1. The Girl on the Train, £6,957,945 from 612 sites (new)

2. Bridget Jones’s Baby, £2,997,832 from 616 sites. Total: £37,866,152

3. Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children, £2,224,702 from 572 sites. 
Total: £6,717,045

4. Deepwater Horizon, £987,694 from 486 sites. Total: £3,823,467

5. The Magnificent Seven, £511,539 from 445 sites. Total: £5,371,104

6. Finding Dory, £282,031 from 456 sites. Total: £42,030,294

7. War on Everyone, £187,564 from 203 sites (new)

8. Tristan Und Isolde – Met Opera, £178,283 from 172 sites (live event)

9. Kubo and the Two Strings, £131,951 from 414 sites. Total: £2,887,889

10. Don’t Breathe, £128,090 from 171 sites. Total: £3,574,940

Other openers

My Scientology Movie, £106,720 (including £13,404 previews) from 26 sites

Remo, £74,132 from 35 sites

Blood Father, £68,808 from 117 sites

I Belonged to You, £28,058 from 10 sites

Mirzya, £16,206 from 39 sites

The Greasy Strangler, £9,063 from nine sites

Bir Baba Hindu, £5,120 from three sites

Mattress Men, £3,296 from six sites (Ireland only)

Mission Milano, £2,381 from seven sites

The Guv’nor, £762 from 10 sites

Oozham, £502 from three sites

The 13th, £455 from one site

 * Thanks to comScore. <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK> All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.


 