
The latest issue of The New European <http://www.theneweuropean.co.uk/home>, 
the weekly newspaper dedicated to reversing the EU referendum result, carries 
an attack on national titles responsible for “brainwashing Britain over 
immigration.”

In what it calls “a special investigation into the real Project Fear”, the 
paper has devoted its front page and four inside pages to the subject.

It has reproduced scores of front pages, mostly from the Daily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, which have promoted 
anti-migrant stories and, arguably, distorted the debate about immigration in 
the run-up to the 23 June vote.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-new-european-on-the-brainwashing-of-britain-over-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35c462d5d3a6f2818e7269eede949c24c51a617%2F0_0_1536_1920%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20New%20European%20on%20the%20'brainwashing%20of%20Britain%20over%20immigration'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-new-european-on-the-brainwashing-of-britain-over-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20New%20European%20on%20the%20%27brainwashing%20of%20Britain%20over%20immigration%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-new-european-on-the-brainwashing-of-britain-over-immigration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd35c462d5d3a6f2818e7269eede949c24c51a617%2F0_0_1536_1920%2F1536.jpg>
 The full front page. Photograph: Archant 
The piece was written by Liz Gerard, the former Times and Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> subeditor, who has carried out 
extensive research into the way in which the Express and Daily Mail, with 
occasional assistance from other titles, have created a climate of fear about 
immigrants.

In a series of articles on her sub-scribe blog <http://www.sub-scribe.co.uk/> 
she has chronicled the relentless catalogue of negative stories about migrants, 
many of which have been suspiciously short on facts.

The underlying message of her piece is that the referendum result was unduly 
influenced by the misinformation and disinformation about immigration published 
in several rightwing titles.

Editor Matt Kelly said: “When you see the front pages laid out together it is 
a stark image. It show just how insidious this campaign has been, working away 
inside people’s heads and make them fearful of migrants.

“I think a lot people now feel they were manipulated. And we are all reaping 
the consequences.”

Kelly, a former Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> executive, had not expected 
his so-called “pop-up paper” to last beyond four issues after it was launched 
in early July by Archant following the Brexit vote.

But it appears to have caught the imagination of thousands of people drawn to 
its pro-remain agenda. Similarly, it has attracted a number of high-profile 
writers.


In the latest issue, there are also articles by Bonnie Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bonnie-greer>, GQ editor Dylan Jones and the 
Observer’s columnist Barbara Ellen, who argues that Brexiteers do not own the 
monopoly on patriotism.

Although sales figures have not been made public, it is believed to be selling 
around 25,000 copies a weekafter an initial launch sale of 40,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
.

It did poorly in August, but retailers report that sales of the title, with a 
cover price of £2, have begun to rise in recent weeks.
 