
The Nice Guys review: Crowe and Gosling are abysmal PIs in a high hit-rate 
action comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
A lot of people liked Shane Black’s 2005 directorial debut, the 
self-referential neo-noir rompKiss Kiss Bang Bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/11/2>, but Russell Crowe wasn’t 
one of them. “I think it’s too aware of itself,” he says. “It feels like 
there’s an in-joke going on in that movie, and I don’t connect to that. It’s 
not funny for me if the guy thinks he’s being funny.”

Luckily for Crowe, Black’s new comedy drops the meta shtick in favour of 
outright ineptitude. InThe Nice Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-nice-guys>, Crowe and Ryan Gosling are a 
pair of schmucks bungling their way through a private eye case in 1977 Los 
Angeles. It’s not just that they don’t know they’re being funny, it’s that they 
don’t know what they’re doing at all. In one early scene, Gosling’s 
booze-soaked sleuth Holland March messes up a bar break-in so badly he ends up 
in an ambulance, while Jackson Healy, Crowe’s burly enforcer, is more 
interested in beating up small-time creeps than following any lead they might 
give up. The film works because Black’s dialogue is sharper than broken glass, 
but there’s plenty of the latter, too; he can barely look at a window without 
wanting to send a character flying through it. It’s an old-fashioned Raymond 
Chandler crime caper repainted with 70s sleaze.

Eleven years on from Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, The Nice Guys is something of a 
comeback for Black. For a time, he was the king of the high-octane buddy-movie 
and his voice permeated through an entire era of Hollywood action. The first 
script he sold, at the age of 23, was for Lethal Weapon. After working on the 
sequel, the next script he pitched to producer Joel Silver – with whom he’s 
worked on and off ever since – was called Die Hard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI5Fo-Us3Nk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI5Fo-Us3Nk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI5Fo-Us3Nk&media=>
Lethal weapons: Shane Black's pulp fiction is still the best action around
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/shane-black-the-nice-guys-lethal-weapon-best-action-movies>
“At the time, he wasn’t sure whether he was going to finish it, and I was 
doing another movie based on a book called Nothing Lasts Forever,” recalls 
Silver. “I said: ‘Can I use that title?’ and he said: ‘Of course you can.’ So 
that was where Die Hard came from.”

Black’s own Die Hard was eventually made as The Last Boy Scout in 1991; then 
came Last Action Hero in 1993, before he sold the screenplay for 1996’s The 
Long Kiss Goodnight for a then-record $4m. Burnt out by his own success, it 
would be nine years before he made another film.

When he returned, as writer-director of Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, he won over just 
about everyone (except Crowe). The film resurrected both his own career and 
Robert Downey Jr’s reputation, and Downey Jr repaid the favour by getting him 
in to write and direct Iron Man 3. It went on to become the 10th 
highest-grossing film of all time.

“After Iron Man 3, I could probably have parlayed that into something else 
that was more superheroic,” says Black. “But I thought: you know what, Joel 
Silver and The Nice Guys is just sitting there, and that’s the well I wanted to 
return to.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecb4d6aacef034abee2b4fd4e3758d3d9c740c7e%2F119_0_1550_930%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20'You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20%27You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecb4d6aacef034abee2b4fd4e3758d3d9c740c7e%2F119_0_1550_930%2F1550.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar 
Ryan Gosling: 'If I had to shake it like a showgirl, I was going to do it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/09/ryan-gosling-directing-lost-river-interview>
The freewheeling plot of The Nice Guys sees March and Healy teaming up to 
investigate a string of deaths of people involved in making a porn film. That 
eventually leads them to stumble across a conspiracy at the heart of the 
American auto industry. Black wrote the script with his writing partner Anthony 
Bagarozzi back in 2001 during his wilderness years.

“We wrote this a long time ago and we just wanted to do a detective movie 
because we didn’t feel there were enough of ’em”, he says. “Was it returning to 
the signature? The mojo? No, I just like it.”

Originally, the film was set in the present day but Black soon saw advantages 
in moving back in time. “A displacement from the current day adds a lot,” he 
says. “First off, in suspense movies you lose cell phones, which is always 
great because when someone is in trouble they have to run and find a fucking 
phone. But secondly, it adds an element of myth. You take this latter-day Sodom 
and Gomorrah that LA had become and these tarnished angels and then you let 
them loose. Chinatown did it for the 30s, so we looked at the 70s and found 
this horrible combination of smog and porn, which had sort of assailed the 
city.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5940ccff1071738b62eb2761d4004c3f866a86fa%2F0_381_5640_3386%2F5640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20'You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20%27You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5940ccff1071738b62eb2761d4004c3f866a86fa%2F0_381_5640_3386%2F5640.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar 
Russell Crowe on acting: 'Seriously, it's not that complicated'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/russell-crowe-on-acting-seriously-its-not-that-complicated>
The shift of perspective also gives Black the opportunity to ask questions 
about masculinity. Healy believes in solving problems with his fists, but only 
because he knows no other way. He concludes a story about beating up a man 
threatening a diner by confessing, “It was the best day of my life, because I 
felt useful.”

Gosling’s March, meanwhile, is a single father, trying to be a good dad, just 
with heavy drinking and gun fighting thrown in. There’s a great running gag 
about him correcting his 13-year-old daughter Holly’s poor phrasing. “It’s his 
lame attempt,” laughs Black. “He’s being the worst dad possible but he has this 
one little trope that he comes back to. He’s like the husband who fixes a 
doorknob and then for six months every time the wife says something: ‘Hey, I 
fixed that doorknob!’ It’s him going: ‘Hey, I tell her to speak properly,’ but 
he does everything else wrong.”

Black’s scripts have drawn criticism for depicting testosterone-fogged worlds 
where men are men and women are either porn stars or strippers, (such as Halle 
Berry in The Last Boy Scout). He defends The Nice Guys on the grounds that the 
smartest person onscreen is the precocious, quick-witted Holly, played by 
Angourie Rice, who, like many a child sidekick before her, outthinks her dad at 
every turn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf9030916a8f67d9420dbea9e6ee486e6fa155c%2F0_336_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20'You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20%27You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf9030916a8f67d9420dbea9e6ee486e6fa155c%2F0_336_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar 
“She’s the best of the group in terms of being a detective,” Black points out. 
“Even on set we used to joke that she’s the mature one. Those two schmucks 
would be arguing and laughing all the time, while she’d just be on her mark 
ready to go.”

Black dismisses the idea that as a screenwriter he should consider things like 
the Bechdel test when writing female characters. “It would be silly of me to 
rely on anything other than my own intuitions when coming up with characters, 
because addressing people’s expectations is one way, I think, to fail them 
consistently,” he says. “I just think you write organically, but I love women 
characters. To do a movie with two women would be one of my goals.”

You could say the study in masculinity continues off screen, too. Black has 
something of a reputation as a difficult character, as does Crowe and even 
Gosling, who was reportedly fired from The Lovely Bones by Peter Jackson for 
being too demanding and recalcitrant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff65ff1e4a0bc37a43062fc09851d6f6e96a3b598%2F0_0_3420_3419%2F3420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20'You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Nice%20Guys%3A%20%27You%20take%20these%20tarnished%20angels%20and%20then%20you%20let%20them%20loose%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fshane-black-ryan-gosling-russell-crowe-iron-man-robert-downey-the-nice-guys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff65ff1e4a0bc37a43062fc09851d6f6e96a3b598%2F0_0_3420_3419%2F3420.jpg>
 Shane Black at the Cannes film festival, May 2016. Photograph: Ian Gavan/Getty 
Over tea and cigarettes, Crowe argues that a shared willingness to fight for 
their characters brought out the best in each other. “It’s funny, right, 
because Joel’s got a reputation. Shane has a reputation. Ryan has a reputation. 
I have a reputation. But put those four guys on a set together and it’s like a 
fucking Beatles reunion. There’s melody everywhere, man. It makes you question 
who defines this word ‘difficult’, and applies it to people who only want to do 
their best?”

Any plans of writing a film for two female leads will have to wait for a 
moment; Black’s next job is the upcoming reboot of Predator. The 1987 original 
is a film he saw from the inside after Silver gave him the part of Hawkins, 
radio operator and teller of filthy jokes. His take won’t, of course, be a 
buddy comedy – although it won’t be entirely removed. “It will have elements of 
this,” says Black. “Tone-shifting, so the movie is not just one tone 
throughout, is kind of what keeps it alive and fun. You’re making it a stew so 
it’s not just one thing.” With Shane Black, it never is.

The Nice Guys is in cinemas from Friday 3 June
 