
Real numbers have been crunching in public these last few days. The gallant 
editor of theOldham Evening Chronicle, on stage at the Society of Editors 
conference, remembers the days when his paper (all departments included) 
employed some 250 people. Now that’s shrunk to 40 – including just 17 
journalists – plus long-distance subbing from Newport, 185 miles down the M6.

Meanwhile that journalists’ strike against yet more cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/11/gannett-hovers-richmond-newsquest-dimblebys>
 – 12 reporters providing all copy for 11 papers and eight websites – ratchets 
on in south-west London, with Newsquest managers citing “the need to reduce our 
cost base to ensure a sustainable future”. But how sustainable is journalism 
itself in such straitened circumstances?

Newsquest, of course, is owned by the Gannett company of McLean, Virginia – 
the chain media group to end all chains. And it’s fascinating to see how such 
chains still grow with a rush of venture capital. The University of North 
Carolina has been crunching numbersfor a report  
<http://newspaperownership.com/>expansively titled The Rise of a New Media 
Baron and the Emerging Threat of News Deserts.

It shows how, in the last 12 years, papers have become simple investment 
targets. In 2004, the “three largest investment companies owned 352 newspapers 
in 27 states”. Today, the “seven largest investment companies own 1,031 
newspapers in 42 states”.

The media correspondent of the Washington Post, rootling around in the 
report’s text 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2016/10/17/report-mcnewspapers-are-gobbling-up-small-town-america/?utm_term=.3394252f4c0a>
, comes up with some brilliantly desultory quotes from the manual of one chain 
that owns nearly 50 papers in Texas and Arizona:

• “Many companies in our industry have wrongly divided their focus among many 
customer groups. We do not. Our customer is the advertiser. Readers are our 
customers’ customers.”

• “Our newspapers have a highly defined approach to specific content features 
and a template approach that produces high recognition for readers and specific 
locations in the paper for advertisers.”

• “Staffing levels should be as high as possible in sales and as low as 
possible in all other areas. In sales, that means we should have as many sales 
staff members as our products and market can support. Generally speaking, more 
sales staff means more sales.”

Don’t mention that in Oldham, Twickenham or Richmond, of course. They’re still 
trying to believe in journalism.
 