
 Troops have been deployed to the streets of Banjul, the capital of the 
Gambia, after the autocratic president, Yahya Jammeh, unexpectedly rejected his 
defeat in an election last week and called for a fresh vote.

Jammeh had initially accepted the result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
, ceding power after 22 years, to a coalition led by the opposition leader, 
Adama Barrow. But few observers expected Jammeh to give up control of the small 
west African country.

The election result – and Jammeh’s acceptance of defeat – was widely seen as a 
moment of democratic hope on the continent and prompted widespread celebration 
in the Gambia and elsewhere.

But in an announcement <https://youtu.be/de1cdoDM3KA> on state TV on Friday, 
Jammeh said he had changed his mind and wanted “fresh and transparent elections 
which will be officiated by a god-fearing and independent electoral commission”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambian%20president%20rejects%20election%20result%20in%20television%20address%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fgambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video&media=>
Gambian president rejects election result in television address to the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-result-in-television-address-to-the-nation-video>
 “After a thorough investigation, I have decided to reject the outcome of the 
recent election. I lament serious and unacceptable abnormalities which have 
reportedly transpired during the electoral process,” Jammeh said.

 There was immediate speculation that the autocratic leader’s defiant 
announcement had been prompted by the prospect of prosecution under the new 
government.

Human rights groups have accused Jammeh’s government of detaining, torturing 
and killing his opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/30/young-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime>
 during his rule. Dozens of pro-democracy activists were arrested earlier this 
year and one well-known leader killed.

 Last week the chair of the country’s new ruling coalition said Jammeh would 
be prosecuted for his crimes within a year of handing over the reins of 
government in January.

 Jammeh’s earlier decision to resign was reportedly due to a lack of support 
from senior security officials. However, the prospect of being held to to 
account for previous human rights abuses may have rallied the military and 
police behind the president. It is also possible Jammeh hopes to secure 
immunity from prosecution in return for withdrawing his rejection of the poll 
results.

Soldiers were seen placing sandbags in strategic locations across the capital, 
Banjul, a development that triggered widespread unease among the already 
spooked population, who had been panic-buying food before the vote due to fear 
of unrest.

 The US embassy in Banjul urged the army to continue to show “respect for the 
rule of law and the outcome of the presidential election”. It added: “The 
Gambian people have made a clear choice for change and a new start.”

 In Washington, the state department issued a statement calling Jammeh’s 
change of heart “a reprehensible and unacceptable breach of faith with the 
people of the Gambia and an egregious attempt to undermine a credible election 
process and remain in power illegitimately.”

The Gambian opposition spokeswoman Isatou Touray criticised the “violation of 
democracy” and called for people to “remain calm, lucid, vigilant and not 
retreat”.

 Babatunde Olugboji, deputy programme director at the New York-based Human 
Rights Watch, said the organisation was “deeply concerned by reports of belated 
objections to the Gambian election results raised by President Jammeh”.

 Olugboji called on “the international community, notably Ecowas [the Economic 
Community of West African States] and the African Union” to “loudly protest 
against any unlawful attempt to subvert the will of the Gambian people”.

 Jammeh’s defeat and resignation led to euphoria in the Gambia last week. The 
country is suffering a severe economic crisis, triggering an exodus of young 
people across the Sahara in an attempt to reach Europe. It is increasingly 
isolated diplomatically.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gambians%20celebrate%20shock%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gambians%20celebrate%20shock%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video&media=>
Gambians celebrate shock election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/02/gambians-celebrate-shock-election-result-video>
 Official election results from the electoral commission gave Barrow, a 
property developer whoonce worked as a security guard at Argos in London, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
 45.5% of the vote against Jammeh’s 36.7%.

 Opposition figures had earlier said that although they expected some 
electoral fraud and rigging, they hoped to win by a sufficient margin to make 
their victory impossible to contest.

Barrow is set to take over in late January following a transition period, but 
Jammeh is likely to make strenuous efforts to ensure that does not happen. 
Though democracy has made progress inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in recent decades, the momentum has 
slowed in recent years.
 