
In a world of conflict, confrontation, deadlocks and dead ends, few crises are 
as protracted as the Israeli-Palestinian impasse.

But however inauspicious a situation, pockets of humanity can always be found.

The hospital

Within minutes of arriving at the emergency wing of the Hadassah Ein Kerem 
hospital in Jerusalem with severe chest pain, a 58-year-old heart attack 
patient is lying on an operating table. A cardiologist and a team of three 
specialist cardiovascular nurses stand over her.

In a room behind a glass screen beyond the operating table stands the head 
technician, Siham Sheble Masarwa, an Israeli Arab, who monitors the operation, 
directing a team of Jewish and Arab medical experts.

Fed up with all the dreadful news out there? Then click here
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/and-now-for-something-completely-different-some-positive-news>
Masarwa monitors x-ray images on a screen that show where the blockage is in 
the woman’s left coronary artery. She has been a nurse at the hospital for 20 
years and now runs the catheterisation lab in the intensive cardiac care unit.

The Hadassah Ein Kerem hospital sits on what was an Arab village that was 
cleared when the Israeli army attacked it in 1948 and the Arab residents fled. 
Today the hospital is a rare island of calm where Jews, Israeli Arabs and some 
Palestinian staff work together to treat patients.

Outside, there is a sea of distrust and growing violence between Israelis and 
Palestinians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/israel-palestine-violence-knife-attacks-west-bank-gaza>
, with divisive political rhetoric on the rise and the loudest voices pushing 
for nationalism and more division.

Next door to the lab is the cardiology ward, where Rashad Rizeq, 32, a 
Palestinian from Ramallah, has been selected for a residency.

Rizeq studied for seven years at Cairo University in Egypt and spent three 
years working in public hospitals in Ramallah.

His grandmother died 10 years ago aged 65 after a heart attack because there 
was no interventional cardiology treatment in thePalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories>. He has vowed to 
take what he learns back to Palestinian public hospitals, which still have few 
cardiology facilities.

At Hadassah Rizeq does his rounds, speaking to Palestinian patients in Arabic, 
most of whom are heart attack patients transferred from the West Bank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4ea1c9c085278d32f9cd33fccfc26ea5cbfa36%2F75_355_3274_1965%2F3274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4ea1c9c085278d32f9cd33fccfc26ea5cbfa36%2F75_355_3274_1965%2F3274.jpg>
 Rashad Rizeq talks to one of his patients. Photograph: Kate Shuttleworth for 
the Guardian 
The Palestinian Authority pays for Palestinian patients treated in Israeli 
hospitals. The EU picks up some of the bill, paying £20.5m for hospitals in 
East Jerusalem to treat Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza in 2015.

Rizeq says his residency at the hospital has been smooth – while there are 
growing divisions on the streets of Jerusalem, he does not face animosity 
within the hospital grounds.


“The only real challenge I face is passing through the checkpoints. This is 
hard and frustrating, I have to leave the house by 4am, to reach the hospital 
by 7am, and sometimes I don’t get home until 8pm,” says Rizeq.

Sometimes he spends up to three hours travelling each way from Ramallah to the 
hospital on the south-western side of Jerusalem.

He has been given permission by Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to work and use his 
Palestinian-registered car.

“Travelling on Israeli transport didn’t work – if my wife called me on the 
telephone I would speak in Arabic,” he says. “People got tense. A couple of 
times they wouldn’t sit next to me or would leave the bus. But here in the 
hospital it’s super professional.”

Prof Chaim Lotan has directed the heart institute at the hospital for 15 
years. He selected Rizeq for his placement and believes ties between 
Palestinian and Israeli hospitals will continue to strengthen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ce155aacafe5a2321624641911d0cd9db4ed0c7%2F0_307_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ce155aacafe5a2321624641911d0cd9db4ed0c7%2F0_307_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Rizeq with Chaim Lotan. Photograph: Kate Shuttleworth for the Guardian 
“For me it doesn’t matter who someone is, once they are here they’re people. I 
don’t care about ethnicity or age,” he says.

Lotan started his medical career just a month before the Yom Kippur war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/oct/10/israel2> in 1973. He had been 
discharged but when the war broke out he returned to the army to try to reclaim 
Mount Hermon from the Syrians.

“The Yom Kippur war was the biggest trauma that I think the Israelis have had. 
In my case it established a lot of what I think,” Lotan says. “I feel we have 
to find a solution – at the end of the day young people are killed for nothing, 
in the name of nothing.”

He says he has treated many Palestinians who have carried out attacks inside 
Israel.

Masarwa, from Kafr Qara, an Arab town south-east of Haifa, believes the 
hospital is a rare model of freedom.

“The way we do things in the hospital is the future for this country – we have 
to start somewhere,” she says. “My two children go to a bilingual school for 
Arabs and Jews. We have to start there, with education. We are doing the same 
thing in this hospital.”

The school

Masarwa’s two children attend Max Rayne Hand in Hand school in Jerusalem, on 
the “green line” between the Jewish neighbourhood of Patt and the Arab 
neighbourhood of Beit Safafa.

The school has a mix of Jewish, Christian and Muslim pupils. 

“We’re not here to solve the conflict, but we aim to create change,” says the 
school’s principal, Nadia Kanani, an Israeli Arab. “It’s easier to not do 
something – to ignore the other side and say: ‘We’re here, they hate me, I hate 
him, I don’t see them, they’re far away.’ But we chose the harder way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91ff915b083cf6665199cba0e857c2d26ba97490%2F0_41_1089_653%2F1089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91ff915b083cf6665199cba0e857c2d26ba97490%2F0_41_1089_653%2F1089.jpg>
 Nadira Hussein with her students at Max Rayne Hand in Hand school. Photograph: 
Kate Shuttleworth for the Guardian 
Nadira Hussein, from Beit Safafa, has been teaching at the school for nine 
years and her two children are among the students. There are 10 Muslims, five 
Christians and four Jews in her class.

“I am proud of being here, and being part of this,” she says as she ushers out 
a group of excitable 10-year-old girls. “I think differently, I speak 
differently and I see it with the kids too, even my own children.”

She believes Jews and Arabs coming together in the classroom is a vital step 
in living together peacefully.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a43672d64885582cfc7d23e18411be5642bb5ca%2F0_238_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a43672d64885582cfc7d23e18411be5642bb5ca%2F0_238_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Children playing at Max Rayne school. Photograph: Kate Shuttleworth for the 
Guardian 
Guy Aloni, a Jewish film teacher, agrees.

“Sometimes an epiphany takes time. If I was walking down the street and I had 
an argument with an Arab, I would never see him again. There is no dialogue, I 
stand in my position and he stands in his. But here, at the school, there’s a 
process. I think we need to create a new perspective, a new narrative about how 
we want to see each other. It happens slowly and it’s stronger when it doesn’t 
happen overnight,” Aloni says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25a0ac607b3356e835089cddf93ac2160fec5538%2F0_235_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Israelis%20and%20Palestinians%20who%20work%20together%20in%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fisrael-jews-arabs-palestinians-work-together-peace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25a0ac607b3356e835089cddf93ac2160fec5538%2F0_235_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 A poster at the school. Photograph: Kate Shuttleworth for the Guardian 
The school has seen an unprecedented demand with 200 students on a waiting 
list across six Hand in Hand schools in Israel. This is despite a rise in 
violence. The “knife intifada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/18/knife-intifada-palestinian-israel-west-bank>
” has seen 34 people killed by Palestinians, including two American nationals.

The organisation aimed to have a network of up to 15 integrated bilingual 
schools, which would engage a wider community of up to 20,000 Israeli Jews and 
Arabs.

“The harder it is outside the bigger the demand to join the school is,” says 
Kanani.

The tourists

Sikkuy, an organisation that runs Ramadan tours for Jewish Israelis, was sure 
bookings would drop drastically after four people were killedin an attack on a 
market in Tel Aviv last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/tel-aviv-market-shooting-sarona-complex>
.

For two years Sikkuy <http://www.sikkuy.org.il/?lang=en>, made up of Jewish 
and Arab citizens, has been running tours for Jews to Arab towns in Israel. 
DuringRamadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/ramadan-canada-arctic-fasting-hours-sunlight>
, the group held 50 tours for more than 1,500 people, to 10 Arab towns and 
villages.

“Despite the fact that the opening night was the day after the attack in Tel 
Aviv’s Sarona market, we didn’t experience a trend of cancellations. People 
have cancelled, but not in significant numbers and not different than any other 
year,” says Sikkuy’s co-director, Gili Re’i.

This year groups have been taken to Nazareth’s market, the white mosque, and 
have gathered in an old mansion to talk to residents and owners as they break 
their daily fast.

The startups

Forsan Hussein, a Muslim Israeli, and his Jewish compatriot Ami Dror started 
Zaitoun Ventures <http://www.zaitounventures.com/> nearly two years ago to help 
build and support Jewish-Arab startups.

And now for something completely different: some positive news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/and-now-for-something-completely-different-some-positive-news>
“I spent a lot of my life working in the area of coexistence and economic 
development in one way or another,” says Hussein. “I always knew that I wanted 
to create a company that not only maximises return to investors but also does 
something that is socially aware and meaningful.”

Zaitoun Ventures is an investment business that helps create technology 
companies in cooperation with Israeli and Arab business people in Israel, the 
occupied West Bank and the wider Middle East.

Israel’s technology sector has been widely lauded as one of the country’s 
major success stories, but it is not diverse; few startups involve Arabs or 
Palestinians, minority groups, anyone over 40, women or ultra-Orthodox Jews.

Forsan and Ami decided to invest in companies co-founded by Jews and Arabs or 
that would benefit the world in some way. In the first year, they invested 
about £14m and plan to increase that to £75m this year.
 