
The Gambia’s autocratic president, Yahya Jammeh, who once claimed a 
“billion-year” mandate to rule, has conceded defeat after a shock election loss 
to a real-estate developer who once worked as a security guard in London.

'Fear has faded': Gambian election could finally end dictator's grip on power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/gambia-election-voters-polls-adama-barrow-yahya-jammeh>
Jammeh had kept the tiny west African country under an iron grip for more than 
two decades, and there were fears that the eccentric 51-year-old would use 
violence or fraud to maintain power.

Instead he became a rare dictator to accept defeat in a democratic election, 
agreeing to hand power to challenger Adama Barrow, a softly spoken businessman 
who previously had little public profile.

Barrow told the Guardian that Jammeh had called him to concede defeat with the 
words: “Congratulations. I’m the outgoing president; you’re the incoming 
president.”

The father of five used his lack of political baggage to woo voters desperate 
for change, claiming 45.5% of the vote to Jammeh’s 36.7%. If Jammeh sticks to 
his word, Barrow will become only the third Gambian head of state since the 
country’s independence in 1965.

In a televised statement, Jammeh said the vote had been “the most transparent 
election in the whole world,” adding that he would not contest the result.

“I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Adama for his victory. It’s a 
clear victory. I wish him all the best and I wish all Gambians the best. As a 
true Muslim who believes in the almighty Allah I will never question Allah’s 
decision. You Gambians have decided,” he said.


The prerecorded message then cut to a shot of Jammeh phoning the 
president-elect.


“Hello, are you hearing me?” Jammeh asked Barrow, grinning widely on his 
mobile. “I wish you all the best. The country will be in your hands in January. 
You are assured of my guidance. You have to work with me. You are the elected 
president ofThe Gambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia>. I have no 
ill will and I wish you all the best.”

Barrow said he was confident Jammeh would stand down. “Power belongs to the 
people. It’s the people who have spoken. He cannot hang on,” he said. “We won 
the election clearly so there’s nothing he can do about it.”

Barrow said his priority was to name a cabinet. “I’m very, very happy and 
excited. I’m happy that we won this election.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e7ddf510721f1f61792fa3ece9c688afd4133b1%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e7ddf510721f1f61792fa3ece9c688afd4133b1%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 A supporter holding a broom celebrates, with other supporters, the victory of 
the newly elected president in Senegambia. Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Even the head of the electoral commission, Alieu Momarr Njai, seemed stunned 
by Jammeh’s rapid concession.

“The president is magnanimous enough to accept that he had lost the election, 
and he will call the new president to congratulate him as well as to pray for 
peace and tranquility,” he said after announcing preliminary results. “It’s 
very rare that this present situation now, inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, that this happens.” .

Internet and international phone services cut off for “security” during the 
poll were restored soon after Njai’s announcement and, as news of the election 
result spread, the country erupted into celebration.

The streets of the capital, Banjul, deserted until that point, began to fill 
with cars screeching their horns and blasting out music.

Children sang, men stripped off their shirts and punched the air, and others 
went online to celebrate using the hashtaggambiadecides 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/search?q=%23gambiadecides>. Several said the 
historic change had moved them to tears.

One Twitter user, Muhammad Sanu Jallow, said:
Muhammad Sanu Jallow (@msjallow) 
I couldn't hold back the tears. I'm almost 30, and I've known only 1 President 
this whole time. Good time to be alive.#GambiaDecides 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GambiaDecides?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/msjallow/status/804720176440688644> December 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/msjallow/status/804720176440688644> 
Gambians abroad joined the celebration, with several saying they were planning 
to return or expected friends and relatives to head back.
EffSalla-lamtoro (@effsalla) 
Thanks to Allah!!!!🙏🏽Now our very own can return back home and play their 
part in developing our motherland 🇬🇲🇬🇲🇬🇲✌🏾️✌🏾️✌🏾️😪#GambiaDecides 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GambiaDecides?src=hash> #
 <https://twitter.com/effsalla/status/804734939191242752> December 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/effsalla/status/804734939191242752> 
The country’s poverty and repressive political climate means many Gambians 
live overseas, particularly in Europe, even though it is one of Africa’s 
smallest states with only 2 million people.

Casting his vote on Thursday, Jammeh said he was confident of winning “a 
bigger landslide” than the Gambia had ever seen, and refused to say whether he 
would concede if he lost.

This year’s election was the first time since 1994, when Jammeh seized control 
of the country in a coup, that he faced a serious challenge to his rule. Over 
that period he consolidated power in a series of presidential elections, and 
skilfully exploited tribal and other divisions among multiple opposition 
parties.

Opposition politicians, journalists and activists were arbitrarily arrested, 
thrown into jail, tortured and killed during Jammeh’s tenure.

Njai had been about to announce the latest batch of results when he received a 
call on his mobile phone. He told waiting observers and press that the 
president knew the result and was ready to concede.

The interior minister, sitting in a magnolia office cubicle and trembling 
behind his sunglasses, called on all to remain calm.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4ff3c6139f593b7e53318fc2ab9e294522d0f6%2F0_188_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4ff3c6139f593b7e53318fc2ab9e294522d0f6%2F0_188_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Gambians celebrate the victory of opposition coalition candidate Adama Barrow 
in Serekunda. Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
“Keep the peace and tranquility,” Modou Bah said. “People should go for their 
lawful businesses. We should not allow politics to divide us.”


Meanwhile, those hosting the live broadcast of election results on state 
television could not hide their astonishment.


“Have all the people loyal to the president migrated?” asked Malick Jones, 
presenting an all-night broadcast of Gambia Decides, when he realised Jammeh 
had lost the capital.

Outside Barrow’s house, crowds gathered, some celebrating and some in shock. 
Anger at Jammeh for his decades of repression bubbled up in others.


“We’ll put him in jail. We want him to go to the [international criminal 
court],” said Adama Faye, an 18-year-old student. “He killed my father – I 
promise you, he did. Since I was born, I haven’t felt this kind of happiness.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2927bda3936aef3cb13feb7f94e4beae2022d4e5%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2927bda3936aef3cb13feb7f94e4beae2022d4e5%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A poll worker counts votes cast by marbles. Photograph: Thierry 
Gouegnon/Reuters 
Jubilant crowds sang, whistled, cheered and stormed Barrow’s compound in 
celebration trying to get in and shake his hand, as a man with a basket-hat and 
a posse of bouncers tried to keep them out.

Inside, the first lady-elect, Fatou Bah, the first of Barrow’s two wives, 
arrived in a blue dress and large gold earrings and was blessed by a close 
family friend, Catholic priest Bruno Toupan.

Barrow is a devout Muslim, and Toupan said his decision to call a Catholic to 
bless the family was proof that he would be a president for all Gambians.

“We have great hope in the Gambia,” he said. “It’s a great relief, as Jammeh 
was planning to bring in sharia law. I would have been a second-class citizen.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073aba59c275802e54cbfd8b1a987c6665dcce57%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%E2%80%99s%20President%20Jammeh%20concedes%20defeat%20in%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fthe-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073aba59c275802e54cbfd8b1a987c6665dcce57%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Gambians celebrate the victory of opposition coalition candidate Adama Barrow 
by tearing down a poster of longtime president Yahya Jammeh. Photograph: Jerome 
Delay/AP 
Cheering crowds also gathered outside the home of Ousainou Darbo, the 
opposition leader who was sentenced to three years in prison in April, giving 
rise to Barrow’s candidacy.

His court hearing will be on Monday and the crowds were calling for his 
release. Amnesty International added its voice to these calls.

“An immediate first step for this new government is to release political 
prisoners and those who have disappeared,” Sabrina Mahtani, from Amnesty 
International, said.

“We’ve seen how important the rights of freedom of information and freedom of 
assembly are over the last few weeks – it’s important that the new government 
reforms repressive laws.”
 