
Say what you like about Seth Rogen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/seth-rogen> and Evan Goldberg: they dance 
with the ones that brung them. And since the ones that brung them are 
foul-mouthed, filth-obsessed dopeheads, Sausage Party is well up to standard. 
It’s an insanely surreal animated comedy about talking supermarket food (who 
said they’ve been smoking too much?), which is finished with all the polish of 
a Pixar or Blue Sky production. But it ventures (or should that be staggers 
woozily) into territory no one else would dare to. The final consumables-orgy 
scene is the onethat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/french-film-ratings-board-under-fire-after-sausage-party-granted-12-certificate>
got censors in a twist across the globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/french-film-ratings-board-under-fire-after-sausage-party-granted-12-certificate>
; and, while the spectacle of food items going at each other every which way 
is, to put it mildly, unlike anything ever seen before in mainstream 
entertainment, it’s actually the bit where Sausage Party’s otherwise brilliant 
brain finally turns to mush.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sausage%20Party%20trailer%3A%20Seth%20Rogen%20and%20Kristen%20Wiig%20in%20adult%20cartoon%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fsausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video&media=>
Sausage Party trailer: Seth Rogen and Kristen Wiig in adult cartoon comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/10/sausage-party-trailer-seth-rogan-and-kristen-wiig-in-adult-cartoon-comedy-video>
Because, as is their wont, Rogen and Goldberg have used the carapace of 
gross-out and screw-up as a vehicle for something that possesses pin-sharp 
smartness and is really rather moving in all its oddball freakiness. (Directors 
Conrad Vernon and Greg Tiernan, who have worked on everything from Madagascar 3 
to Thomas the Tank Engine, shouldn’t be forgotten in all this.) Rogen is – what 
else? – a sausage, looking to nestle in the voluptuous folds of a Glamour 
hotdog bun (voiced byKristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig>) on the same supermarket shelf. 
While this central idea is a bit 1982, it’s the detail of the surrounding story 
architecture that allows the film to take flight.

For example, all the produce are in thrall to the belief that, when they are 
selected by shoppers (AKA “gods”), they will be transported to some kind of 
heavenly paradise. From this, Evan and Goldberg have worked out a wonderfully 
complex satire on organised religion, the like of which no other film could get 
away with. It’s but a short skip to some blunt points about Israel-Palestine, 
courtesy of two bread-based characters: a Muslim lavash and a Jewish bagel – 
the latter played, with full Woody Allen-effect kvetching, byEdward Norton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/edward-norton>, of all people.

Sausage Party <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sausage-party> won’t please 
everyone – the relentless boysiness of it all, and the inevitable moments where 
the horndog comedy lurches into misjudged bantz – but this is a rarity among 
2016’s films in which the laugh-o-meter remains ticking over at a furious rate. 
Funny, smartand disgusting: Rogen and Goldberg have pulled it off, as it were.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 