
“I think that the thought of him leaving, that’s affecting most of us right 
now,” said trainer Bob Baffert. It was early October, and we were perched high 
up in the empty cavern of the Santa Anita grandstand on a balmy, bulging 
sunrise of a morning that tipped a paint-pot of colors over the leafy canopy of 
the surrounding city. The “him” in question was, of course,American Pharoah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/american-pharoah> – the horse Baffert sent 
to Belmont Park earlier this year to capture the first Triple Crown in 37 years.

I had interrupted Baffert midway through the busy morning grind. With 
walkie-talkie in hand, he was sending orders to his battalion of exercise 
riders – each with an ear-piece tucked discreetly into their helmet – still 
executing their maneuvers around the racetrack. And time was in short supply.

American Pharoah keeping powder dry during Breeders’ Cup downpours | Greg Wood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/28/american-pharoah-breeders-cup-triple-crown-keeneland-bob-baffert>
“Let’s get this done,” Baffert had said as he hurried up the steps to find a 
quiet spot to talk, indicating that the interview would be conducted with 
similar haste. Only the longer Baffert lingered on the topic of American 
Pharoah, the further he seemed to slip into a state of reverie – to the point 
where I suspected a lump had risen to his throat.

“We see him every day, and we know he’ll be leaving,” he said, a definite edge 
to his voice. “It’s going to be tough. For me, him leaving, it’s going to be 
the toughest.”

That American Pharoah is able to reduce his trainer to tears (or close to, at 
the very least) is no new revelation. After many of the horse’s big-race 
appearances this year, the cameras have closed in on the familiar monochromatic 
Baffert portrait of snowy white hair and dark suit, and sunglasses that do 
little to hide the full emotional whack of each event: first theKentucky Derby 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/02/american-pharoah-wins-141st-kentucky-derby-at-churchill-downs-in-tight-finish>
, then theTriple Crown success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/06/american-pharoah-belmont-stakes-triple-crown-live>
, then theHaskell Invitational victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/02/american-pharoah-makes-winning-return-at-haskell-invitational>
, and then the stunning defeat last time out in theTravers Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/29/saratoga-stunner-american-pharoah-upset-by-keen-ice-in-travers-stakes>
 at Saratoga.

Those moments each comprised an amalgam of reactions: elation, pride, relief 
and, in the case of the Travers, anti-climax. “I felt more pressure in the 
Haskell than any other time. It was very important for me that the horse didn’t 
get beat coming off the Triple Crown – I’ve seen a lot of horses beaten after 
winning that. So, it was really nice to see him win after the Triple Crown.”

Only now, as American Pharoah approaches his swansong in Saturday’s Breeders’ 
Cup Classic, after which he assumes stallion duties at Coolmore’s Ashford Stud 
in Kentucky, Baffert’s thoughts are tinged with an added pinch of melancholy.

“Him going to another barn to have a terrific life, that’s a good thing,” 
Baffert said, as he paused to collect his thoughts. “But right now, we’re just 
enjoying him every day, watching him, being around him. He’s just such a sweet, 
kind horse. I don’t think about the Breeders’ Cup, I just think of him not 
being there when I get to work. The joy that he’s brought us, me and my family, 
the Zayat family [of owner Ahmed Zayat], I tell ya, it’s tough.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ec5c7e38fde4182a5763c37ed1a6dced5281f67%2F0_48_3505_2104%2F3505.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20trains%20American%20Pharoah%20prepares%20to%20say%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20trains%20American%20Pharoah%20prepares%20to%20say%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ec5c7e38fde4182a5763c37ed1a6dced5281f67%2F0_48_3505_2104%2F3505.jpg>
 Bob Baffert before the Belmont Stakes in June. Photograph: Jon Durr/ZUMA 
Press/Corbis 
When dealing with such a media-seasoned performer as Baffert, it’s tempting to 
think that behind his words lies an element of the circus ring-master playing 
to the audience. And he’s had much practice to hone is craft. In the 30 years 
he’s been training Thoroughbreds, Baffert has mopped up a laundry list of big 
races in North America, some multiple times (his Kentucky Derby record alone 
stands at four wins).

But as he expanded upon the sense of loss that will come when American Pharoah 
is ushered from his stall at Santa Anita one last time, gone were the pithy, 
headline-ready aphorisms plucked from the pages of the NRA handbook – “We’re 
not going to eat the son of a gun 
<http://articles.baltimoresun.com/1998-04-30/sports/1998120054_1_bob-baffert-kentucky-derby-pegram>
,” or “We’re going to the OK Corral with guns blazing 
<http://www.startribune.com/bucked-by-life-trainer-bob-baffert-makes-another-push-for-the-triple-crown/305632421/>
” – replaced by something prosaic and sincere.

Still, I asked Baffert whether fear that he will never have in his barn 
another horse as good as American Pharoah is fueling part of this sense of 
foreboding.

“Every time I’ve ever had a really good horse, I think I’ll never have another 
like him again,” he replied. “We’re always looking to find another good one, 
but they’re hard to come by. It’s like Frankel. What’s the chance of getting 
another horse like that?”

Breeders’ Cup Classic: litmus test of his talent

Just how good American Pharoah is should be made much clearer in the Breeders’ 
Cup Classic this Saturday, in which he has drawn stall four. The race marks the 
first time that he has raced against older horses. And he faces a stellar field 
of runners in what is perhaps the most eagerly anticipated edition of the race 
in years.

There’s Gleneagles, the latest to emerge from trainer Aiden O’Brien’s 
conveyor-belt of superstars. There’s Keen Ice, American Pharoah’s conqueror in 
the Travers. As well as Tonalist and Honor Code, either of whom in any ordinary 
year would be considered among the favorites for the race.

Nevertheless, whatever happens in the Classic, American Pharoah has already 
proven himself a racehorse of rare ability and durability.

After his debut loss at two, American Pharoah wracked up a string of eight 
successive victories, seven at the top level. What’s more, his last six runs 
have been at six different tracks in five different states, with long flights 
west to east and vise versa punctuating many of those grueling racecourse 
appearances.

“What he’s done, all the travelling, is amazing,” said Baffert, acknowledging 
how a rigorous campaign of long flights and hard races is beyond the measure of 
those made of less hardwearing equine flesh.

“I’ve never had another horse that can handle something like that. They can’t 
sustain it. I think he’s just a throwback to the old style of horse. He’s smart 
and kind, and a beautiful mover. He jumps a long way, and he just floats over 
the ground. Mentally and physically, he’s just got that formula of genetic 
freakishness. That’s what he is: a freak.”

Come the Travers at the end of August, though, the long flights and hard races 
had worn through that veneer of invincibility. “I could tell it was catching up 
with him. He got a little light on me – he was a tired horse. But you know 
what, I think he almost could have pulled it off.”

He probably would have won in the Travers, Baffert said, had Frosted, with 
jockey Jose Lezcano aboard, not harangued American Pharoah for the lead during 
the first half of the race.

“Frosted is a difficult horse to ride, and [Lezcano] was trying to win by 
pinning us on the rail. Most of the jocks who had ridden against [American 
Pharoah] paid him a lot of respect, but this guy went after him, and he thought 
he was doing the right thing at the time, but he cost his own horse, too [they 
finished third]. I think if Victor [Espinoza] would have ridden him 
differently,” Baffert started, before trailing off. And I asked Baffert whether 
he regrets running American Pharoah in the Travers.

“Running him in the Saratoga race messed my preparations for him a little 
bit,” he admitted. “After the Haskell, I was going to give him a little time to 
come back, then prep him and get ready. Right now, I feel pretty confident that 
I get him back to that level. It’s getting tight. As long as he keeps working, 
and doesn’t miss a beat, everything should be fine.”

American Pharoah: American hero

One facet of the Saratoga trip that brings better memories is the reception 
his horse was afforded by throngs of fans, the size and rabid fervor of which 
is typically reserved for sightings of Justin Bieber.

“When we went to Saratoga to gallop, that was pretty overwhelming,” he said, 
alluding to crowds 15,000-strong that turned out to watch American Pharoah 
simply exercise of a morning. “It was an incredible scene. I’ve never seen 
anything like that in America before,” he added, before shifting tack to the 
Triple Crown.

“In America, we’re all about sports history. The people who showed up at 
Belmont Park, they knew down deep, ‘this is the guy who’ gonna get it done.’ 
During those 37 years, we’ve seen some really useful horses fail. I had three 
of them. I was getting to the point, ‘maybe it can’t be done?’ But it can be 
done – you’ve just got to be way the best in your age group.

“You’ve got to be superior, and that’s what he’s proved,” Baffert added. 
“People, they tell me how good that win made him feel that day, and that’s with 
everything going on in people’s lives, everything going on in the world. He 
made people cry – made everybody cry. It was something unique and special that 
reminds us just how beautiful these animals are. Sometimes you take it for 
granted.”

Suspicion that the trainer had, indeed, taken his horses for granted dogged 
Baffert in light of the seven horses he trainedthat died of sudden death 
syndrome 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2013/may/02/sports/la-sp-dwyre-kentucky-derby-20130503>
 in the space of 16 months between 2012 and 2013. The heat was turned up to 
boiling point on Baffert during that investigation. And while the official 
outcome found no wrongdoing, the shadow from that episode persisted long after 
the case was closed.

For Baffert, the Triple Crown was an opportunity for his horses to once again 
“do all the talking,” and a chance to finally put right a wrong that had 
lingered over his career. For the Triple Crown had three times narrowly and 
famously slipped through his fingers: in 1997 with Silver Charm, in 1998 with 
Real Quiet, and in 2002 with War Emblem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66963261cf57c2ac07369f2320a4251536f61766%2F50_0_3233_1943%2F3233.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20trains%20American%20Pharoah%20prepares%20to%20say%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20trains%20American%20Pharoah%20prepares%20to%20say%20goodbye&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Famerican-pharoah-breeders-cup-bob-baffert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66963261cf57c2ac07369f2320a4251536f61766%2F50_0_3233_1943%2F3233.jpg>
 Victor Espinoza rides American Pharoah to victory in the Kentucky Derby in 
May. Photograph: David J. Phillip/AP 
“The Triple Crown was the only thing that was missing. People used to ask me, 
‘is it important to you?’ I’d reply, ‘it’s nice, but it’s not the whole deal.’ 
But it was bugging me. Losing the Triple Crown by a nose with Real Quiet, that 
was tough. I just couldn’t believe we were going through it again. But having 
had those other horses, it made it much easier this time.

“I didn’t do anything differently this time though,” Baffert added. “I mean, 
those horses ran well, they just weren’t the best. They were stars, but not the 
real one. Pharoah, he’s way the best, and you’ve got to be way the best to 
overcome what he has. I feel fortunate. I keep saying he’s a gift from god. It 
was meant to be.”

I asked: “So, where does he stand in comparison to all of the horses you’ve 
trained?”

“He ranks number one,” Baffert replied, barely drawing breath. “Point Given, 
he was a really good horse, he was tough. But not only the fact that American 
Pharoah is fast and brilliant, but he’s sustained all the shipping and the 
running and still come out of it so well. Effortlessly so.”

***

“I think it’s a combination of what he’s accomplished, who he is and also his 
personality that attracts people to him,” said Justin Zayat, the son of owner 
Ahmed Zayat, of the “Pharoah-effect” that has shadowed his horse this summer.

A recent NYU graduate, Zayat manages his father’s racing stable – they have 
horses scattered all over the country with a handful of trainers. Young and 
personable with a bright zeal for racing, Zayat’s has been a ubiquitous face 
throughout the Triple Crown trail. And he’s the first port of call as news of 
American Pharoah trickles in from the trainer.

“I just got a text from Baffert that the champ worked awesome just now,” Zayat 
said (after American Pharoah had clocked a lightening work at Santa Anita on 
October 20). “I wake up every morning and the first thing I think about is 
American Pharoah. Then Bob will text me videos of this horse coming off the 
track, stuff like, ‘Wow, look at this beast!’”

The Zayats have had horses with Baffert for 10 years, including 2009 Kentucky 
Derby runner-up Pioneer of the Nile, American Pharoah’s sire. None have left 
their mark on the family in the manner of the Triple Crown winner though.

“He’s like another sibling at this point, you know,” he said. “This horse 
brought the whole family together, created such amazing moments and memories 
that we’ll never forget in our entire life.” Which is why the Breeders’ Cup 
Classic will bring with it conflicting emotions.

“It’s gonna be pretty bittersweet,” he said. “I love having him in training, 
going to see him at the track. But at the same time, I feel very happy for him 
to go to a new career. I know he’s going to be great at what he does. I hope he 
retires very happy, healthy and sound, and that’s all we want. This horse owns 
us nothing.”

***

“Right now, my only concern is to get him to where he’s 100% for the race,” 
said Baffert, when asked about the Classic, before he ticked off a list of 
other concerns that proved how American Pharoah’s condition is only one of a 
number of headaches.

On such is Keeneland’s track conditions, with the threat of rain likely in 
Kentucky in late October. Though Baffert is less concerned about the prospect 
of a deluge before the race than he is of the typical rough-and-tumble of the 
Classic.

“Keeneland, it’s a different kind of track. But he’s handled everything we’ve 
thrown at him so far,” he said, pointing to American Pharoah’s victories in the 
slop first at Oaklawn in the Grade II Rebel Stakes in March, and then in the 
Preakness Stakes at Pimlico.

“It’s just that I’ve seen so many horses in the Classic, I don’t care how good 
your horse is, if you don’t get a good trip you won’t win.” And Baffert singled 
out as an example Shared Belief, who went into the last year’s Classic as 
favorite but who, after being side-swiped at the beginning of the race last 
year, was never a fact thereafter.

“[Shared Belief] got crowded behind horses and he’d never been in that 
position before – it was tough for him. If you don’t break well, stay in the 
clear, get locked up in between horses, you’re just out of it immediately.”

Whatever the result on Saturday, win or lose, one certainty is that the 
cameras that pan to Baffert post-race will capture a trainer flanked as he has 
been all year by family – wife Jill, and five children. Missing from the 
equation will be his mother and father who passed away in 2011 and 2012 
respectively, but who he credits for grounding the roots of his nascent 
training career all those years ago.

“I’m just so sorry that my parents who were my biggest fans, that they weren’t 
around to witness [the Triple Crown],” he said. “That’s why I got emotional 
this run. My parents, they went through it with the other ones. My mother 
always told me, ‘you’re going to win the Triple Crown.’”

“Did you think they were still there somehow watching it all unfold?” I asked.

“I felt like they’re with me. I felt like they were protecting [American 
Pharoah] in some ways. It’s one of those things that no one ever knows, but it 
sure feels good just thinking about it. That’s the way I look at it.”

The tractors having finished renovating the track and the surface once again 
Nutella-smooth, an infantry of horses poised with engines running spilled back 
onto the track. This was the cue for Baffert to return to the grind. He made 
his goodbyes and threaded down the steps back to his perch beside the track, 
where he watched a wave of workers wing by.

Some were two-year-olds with their careers still ahead of them. Chances are 
they won’t come anywhere near replicating the success of their illustrious 
stable mate. But the quest for the next headline-maker is as ceaseless as the 
tides. Win or lose Saturday, for Baffert, that quest has already assumed 
another wrinkle, and one that already appears to be dogging his thoughts: just 
exactly how do you follow a horse like American Pharoah?

 * This article was updated on Friday October 30 to reflect the news that 
Beholder has been scratched from the Breeders’ Cup Classic.  