
Heaven help us – it’s 2017. Donald Trump will take office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/observer-view-on-2017>, 
the British governmentwill lay down the terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/uks-lack-of-negotiating-experience-may-lead-to-very-hard-brexit>
 of an impossible-looking Brexit, Marine Le Penwill contest the French 
presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
 with a moderate chance of winning and, most importantly, we will see how a 
number of critical climate feedback loops, including the astonishingtemperature 
anomalies in the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
, play out through the world’s weather systems. Cheery prospects all round.

Every week, I’m asked why I don’t despair. But sometimes I do. Crises of the 
kind that I’ve warned of for 30 years are materialising everywhere. The 
frustration of witnessing the incompetence, short-termism and self-interest of 
our governments, as they periodically look our long-running problems in the eye 
only to turn away and shrug their shoulders, is sometimes overwhelming. Playing 
Cassandra is no fun at all.

Perilous as these times are, it’s worth remembering that the political systems 
at risk almost everywhere are deeply flawed. The prospect of losing anything 
familiar is frightening, but even if we could return to thehalcyon days of Tony 
Blair’s wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/tony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry>
, Bill Clinton’s love affair with Wall Street, Barack Obama’s mass surveillance 
of US citizens and David Cameron’s assaults on the poor, would we wish to?

Out of our multiple crises come opportunities to build new systems more 
responsive to the needs of people and the rest of the living world than those 
we endure today. There is little in the past to which we can return: neither 
neoliberalism nor Keynesianism equip us for the challenges of the 21st century.

I’ll be devoting much of the year to testing out proposals for new political 
and economic systems with Guardian readers, and I hope you will let me know 
what you think. And if you have a friend or family member who wants to be part 
of this debate and part of the Guardian’s future, please encourage themto 
become a Member and join us 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_georgenewyear_inarticle>
.

Let’s not allow the global wrecking party to determine our futures. Here’s to 
a scary but hopeful 2017.
 