
Based on a True Story

Now 83, Roman Polanski remains firmly in the public eye, despite not having 
shot a film since 2013’s ropy Venus in Fur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/25/cannes-2013-venus-in-fur-review>. 
But Carnage, released a couple of years before that, suggested there was life 
and fire in the old genius yet, and this one has the great advantage of being
scripted by Olivier Assayas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/roman-polanski-and-olivier-assayas-join-forces-on-new-film>
. Another meta-fictional thriller in the mould ofThe Ghost Writer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/12/roman-polanski-ghost-writer>, 
this one stars Eva Green as a writer who becomes involved with an obsessive 
admirer.

Call Me By Your Name

Maybe the most intriguing among a strikingly tasty-looking bunch of Sundance 
titles, Luca Guadagnino’s latest may not feature Tilda Swinton, but it does 
look of a brilliant, shimmering kind with the likes ofA Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/04/bigger-splash-director-luca-guadagnino-italian-cinema-is-mostly-a-bureau-for-tourism>
. Armie Hammer stars as an American academic who starts a summer love affair 
with an adolescent boy (Timothée Chalamet) while staying at his parents’ house 
on the Italian Riviera. Michael Stuhlbarg is the – possibly spluttering – papa.




The Death and Life of John F Donovan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9rtoyWif2Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9rtoyWif2Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9rtoyWif2Y&media=>
Don’t expect it to show up at Cannes – no way, no how, not after what happened 
last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/xavier-dolan-snubs-cannes-film-festival-over-trolling-and-bullying>
 – but still we’re reserving space for the latest by enfant terrible Xavier 
Dolan. Another English-language debut, this one stars Kit Harington as a rising 
US actor accused by gossip mag editor Jessica Chastain of being a paedophile. 
The supporting cast is as wow-y as that premise: Natalie Portman, Kathy Bates, 
Susan Sarandon, Michael Gambon.

Downsizing

Here’s one that should make someone who, say, might be on maternity leave from 
March, feel really sore to miss:Alexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/24/alexander-payne-interview-nebraska-sideways>
’s follow-up to the masterful Nebraska. And it’s his most ambitious to date: a 
sci-fi comedy drama starring Matt Damon and Kristen Wiig (subbing at the last 
minute for Reese Witherspoon) as a couple who voluntarily decide to be shrunk. 
But then she backs out at the last minute. Margo Martindale (star of Payne’s
fantastic Paris short <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mJG0lqukJTQ>), Jason 
Sudeikis, Alec Baldwin and Christoph Waltz co-star.

The Handmaiden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db3662f997074ccbdd6f3b87046d519f47eba62%2F733_248_4088_2453%2F4088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20films%20of%202017%3A%20returning%20auteurs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20films%20of%202017%3A%20returning%20auteurs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-most-exciting-films-of-2017-returning-auteurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db3662f997074ccbdd6f3b87046d519f47eba62%2F733_248_4088_2453%2F4088.jpg>
Here’s the only one on this list any of us have seen already: Park Chan-wook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/park-chan-wook-on-relocating-sarah-waters-fingersmith-to-korea>
’s simmering adaptation of the Sarah Walters novel Fingersmith. It premiered at 
Cannes in May and waswarmly received 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
 as one of the most erotic movies ever made.

Happy End 

Michael Haneke and Isabelle Huppert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/isabelle-huppert-woody-allen-noah-baumbach-interview-phaedra-elle>
 reunite for his first film sinceAmour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/15/amour-review> and hers since, 
well, the trio of brilliant hits she had this year. Details are sketchy, but we 
know it co-stars Amour leadJean-Louis Trintignant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/emmanuelle-riva-amour-michael-haneke>
 as well as Mathieu Kassovitz, that it was shot in Paris, Calais and London, 
and that the migrant crisis might be a backdrop. Nous l’aimons déjà.

The Killing of a Sacred Deer

The Lobster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/18/the-lobster-review-colin-farrell-rachel-weisz-mark-kermode>
 might not have picked up the acclaim it deserved but Colin Farrell is still in 
with a shot at the Golden Globes and it’s certainly upped Yorgos Lanthimos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/yorgos-lanthimos-cannes-palme-dor-contender-colin-farrell-lobster>
’s profile in the US. Hopefully that bodes well for a great launch for this 
Cincinnati-set drama about a surgeon (Farrell, again) who forms a familial bond 
with a teenage boy, with apparently disastrous results. Nicole Kidman plays his 
wife; Alicia Silverstone crops up too, amazingly.

Lean on Pete

Of all the projects to follow 45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
, Lean on Pete wasn’t quite what we anticipated fromAndrew Haigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/09/andrew-haigh-interview-45-hours>. 
But whatever that fella dishes out, we’ll take it. Lean on Pete is a racehorse; 
he and a 15-year-old take the trip from Portland, Oregon, to distant relatives 
in Wyoming. Steve Buscemi, Chloe Sevigny and Steve Zahn feature.


Mektoub Is Mektoub

The fallout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/24/blue-warmest-colour-kechiche-slander-lea-seydoux>
 fromAbdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
’s 2013 Cannes win forBlue Is the Warmest Colour  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-review>
did not paint him in the rosiest light. This one is based on Antoine 
Bégaudeau’s novel La blessure, la vraie, about a screenwriter whose personal 
and professional dealings intermingle during a visit to his hometown on the 
Mediterranean. Other than that, it’s a puzzle: the cast is a mystery, but we’re 
guessing we’ll find our around late April, when the Cannes contenders are 
announced.

Metalhead 

It’s easy to see why Derek Cianfrance might want a change of direction. His 
last movie,The Light Between Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/the-light-between-oceans-review-michael-fassbender-alicia-vikander>
, was a bruising, heartfelt, 100-hankie weepie on which multiple critics poured 
scorn (leading to Cianfrance’s wife, no less, writing a letter of protest). The
Blue Valentine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/13/blue-valentine-review> director 
this time round is going down the quasi-documentary route with the story of a 
heavy metal drummer who blows his eardrums out and must learn to adapt to a 
world of silence.

Redoubtable

As one of the few people who liked The Search 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/21/the-search-cannes-review-berenice-bejo>
, Michel Hazanavicius’s follow-up proper toThe Artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/the-artist-film-review> (never 
released in England due to the brutal festival reception), I’m a nervous for 
and excited aboutthis biopic of Jean-Luc Godard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/03/jean-luc-godard-biopic-michel-hazanavicius-the-artist>
, about his courting of the then 17-year-old wife Anne Wiazemsky. Louis Garrel 
plays the director, Stacy Martin the actor.Bérénice Bejo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/11/berenice-bejo-interview-childhood-of-a-leader>
 is also in the mix; her relationship with husband Hazanavicius may also have 
informed their involvement in this one.

The Sisters Brothers

Joaquin Phoenix makes his first appearance on this list, this time in the 
first English-language film fromJacques Audiard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/03/jacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director>
. Based onPatrick DeWitt’s novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/15/sisters-brothers-patrick-dewitt-review>
, it’s about sibling assassins (Phoenix and John C Reilly) pursing a gold 
prospector across 1,000 miles of 1850s Oregon desert. Audiard was the surprise 
winner of the Palme d’Or at Cannes last year forDheepan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/07/dheepan-review-jacques-audiard-palme-d-or>
; this looks quite wildly different.

Submergence

Wim Wenders’ latest sounds faintly bananas. James McAvoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/20/james-mcavoy-five-best-moments-x-men-apocalypse>
 plays an Englishman imprisoned by jihadists in a windowless room on the 
eastern coast of Africa.Alicia Vikander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/13/alicia-vikander-danish-girl-interview-ex-machina>
 is a diver prepping to hit the ocean floor in Greenland. The previous 
Christmas, they had a romance which began on a French beach. How this one will 
play we have no idea, but Charlotte Rampling co-stars, which suggests 
swimmingly.

T2 Trainspotting
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ft2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=T2%3A%20Trainspotting%20-%20full%20trailer%20for%20the%20sequel%20to%20the%201996%20hit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ft2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=T2%3A%20Trainspotting%20-%20full%20trailer%20for%20the%20sequel%20to%20the%201996%20hit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Ft2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video&media=>
T2: Trainspotting - full trailer for the sequel to the 1996 hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/03/t2-trainspotting-trailer-for-the-sequel-danny-boyle-ewan-mcgregor-video>
To everyone complaining about why this didn’t make yesterday’s sequels list … 
it’s because we wanted to put Boyle in the classiest of company. Plus, we 
reckon this return to the scene of his finest hour might give him a chance to 
flex his directorial chops with more force than in the likes ofSteve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/steve-jobs-review-apple-co-founder-danny-boyle-michael-fassbender-aaron-sorkin>
. Over a decade after Trainspotting’s release, Ewan McGregor, Ewen Bremner, 
Jonny Lee Miller and Robert Carlyle are back and look just as disturbed as 
ever, thank God.

Untitled Paul Thomas Anderson/Daniel Day Lewis movie

Here things get really serious. The pair responsible for the best film of the 
century so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/jan/01/best-films-noughties-there-will-be-blood>
 return with a story set in the fashion world of 1950s London. Even movies such 
asThe Master <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/01/the-master-review> 
andInherent Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/inherent-vice-review-paul-thomas-anderson>
 weren’t a patch on PTA’s work with DDL; as for the actor, he’s only done two 
movies in the 10 years since There Will Be Blood (from the sublimeLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/lincoln-review> to the ridiculous 
Nine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/17/nine-review>). We absolutely 
can’t wait.

Weightless

We can and probably will have to wait an absolute eternity for Terrence 
Malick’s new one. Given his last two –To the Wonder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/21/to-the-wonder-review> and Knight 
of Cups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/05/knight-of-cups-review-malick-stagnates-in-dull-tinseltown-tale>
 – that may be a mercy. But, somehow, we’re still more optimistic about this 
Austin-set number featuring Ryan Gosling, Cate Blanchett, Natalie Portman, 
Michael Fassbender, Christian Bale, Rooney Mara and Benicio del Toro. Maybe 
it’s that killer cast; maybe it’s the fact it’s more rooted in a recognisable 
present (the action unfolds at a music festival). Anyhow, keep ’em crossed.

Wonderstruck 

More dual narratives in the latest from Todd Haynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/15/todd-haynes-interview-carol-frock-film-cate-blanchett-rooney-mara>
, which splices the story of a girl in 1920s New York who grows up to be 
Julianne Moore with a partially deaf boy in the 1970s Midwest. Based on the 
novel byBrian Selznick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/08/brian-selznick-on-visual-novel-the-marvels-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize>
, whose earlier book was adapted by Martin Scorsese asHugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/01/hugo-scorsese-film-review>, this 
looks like a more naive tale for the Carol director. Michelle Williams co-stars.

You Were Never Really Here

And here’s Joaquin Phoenix again, this time in Lynne Ramsay’s first film since 
the debacle of Jane Got a Gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/12/lynne-ramsay-jane-got-a-gun-lawsuit-settle>
. It’s about a war veteran whose attempts to save a young girl from a sex 
trafficking ring go horribly wrong. But we’re guessing we’re a long way from 
Taken.
 