
The riveting plot in The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> got plenty of coverage 
in newspapers on Sunday and today. Editors were aware that the drama of Helen 
Titchener’s trial for stabbing her abusive husband, Rob, had caught the public 
imagination.

Well, that segment of the public that listens to BBC Radio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> and also reads the quality and 
middle-market press.

So the outcome of the unprecedented hour-long episode of the show - the jury’s 
decision to acquit Helen of attempting to murder Rob - got plenty of headlines.

Both the Guardian and the Daily Telegraph gave it front page slots, “Helen not 
guilty in in Archers drama that gripped listeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired>
” and “Nation breathes sigh of relief as Helen Archer is found not guilty 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/11/the-nation-breathes-a-sigh-of-relief-as-the-archers-helen-titche/>
” respectively.

The Times featured it on page 3 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/helen-not-guilty-in-archers-trial-that-gripped-nation-7djmxbqtx>
, as did the Daily Mail, with a triumphant “Not guilty! 
<http://www.nla-clipshare.com/#/browse/article/print/wordcount/DML/20160912/01/null/null/3/0>
” headline. And the Daily Express realised its significance too with a page 5 
lead, “5m hear jury of stars clear Archers’ Helen 
<http://www.express.co.uk/showbiz/tv-radio/709570/The-Archers-trial-Helen-Titchener-not-guilty-Rob-Titchener>
”.

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> caught on to the 
plot some time ago and there have been occasional articles plus the odd 
spin-off feature about domineering husbands.

But, as the Archers’ editor, Sean O’Connor, pointed out in a Today programme 
interview, newspapers have been playing catch-up ever since the plot began.

Concern about the way Rob was treating Helen was initially expressed on social 
media and then, as the twists and turns unfolded, more and more people took to 
Twitter andFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> to 
register their views, or simply to record what had happened.

Asked whether he had any sense that it would take off, O’Connor said: “We knew 
it would be quite big. What we didn’t realise was that social media was so 
powerful.”

In other words, it was the audience that made it into a success with their 
online chatter about the issues raised by the way in which Rob gradually sought 
to control his wife. Result: record-breaking listening figures over the past 
week during the trial and the verdict.

Here was a radio soap opera, a fiction, willing to spend the best part of 
three years dealing with a serious subject, drawn from real life, and 
discovering that it had hit a nerve.

Moreover, it was the immediacy of social media that stimuated interest in the 
output of a traditional medium, radio. That’s 21st century media synergy for 
you.

And it continues. As the Today interviewer said excitedly, “Helen is still 
trending on Twitter.” It had produced an amazing response,as the Guardian also 
reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-titchener-lights-up-social-media>
.

O’Connor told of a transformational moment in the relationship between old and 
new media. A relatively tiny scene, in which Rob persuaded Helen to change her 
dress (because he thought her own choice too provocative), caught listeners’ 
imagination.

They took to social media and the Archers’ team realised, as O’Connor put it, 
that the audience had not only caught on, but were “quite far ahead of us.”

Awareness of the public conversation, undoubtedly affected the writing of the 
plot and the amount of time O’Connor was prepared to devote to it.

The Archers, originally billed as “an everyday story of country folk”, had 
lived up to its millennial change of description: “a contemporary drama in a 
rural setting”.

Two newspaper commentators registered their appreciation. Allison Pearson, in 
the Telegraph, recalled the way in which the jailing of Coronation Street’s 
Deirdre Barlow in 1998 also fascinated the public and blurred the boundary 
between fiction and real life.

She wrote: “Those of us who had listened for months as Rob stole Helen’s sense 
of self, who had come to understand the insidious crime of coercive control 
(not introduced till 2015) knew that she was innocent, but would the jury?”

And when they did, observed Pearson, “there was such a sigh of relief across 
the land that trees swayed and hearts leapt with gladness.”

In the Mail, Brian Viner noted that “his wife didn’t regain her equilibrium 
until halfway through Poldark” 
<http://www.nla-clipshare.com/#/browse/article/print/wordcount/DML/20160912/01/null/null/3/1>
 following the Archers almost two hours before.

He thought some of the social media stuff that abused the actor playing Rob, 
Timothy Watson, had been silly, and other material had been divisive. But, he 
concluded, “Helen is free, that’s the main thing”.

If you want a left-field - in fact, far-right field - take on the Archers, 
then try this Express nonsense, “Fans slam ‘constant Brexit analogies’ as Helen 
Titchener walks free 
<http://www.express.co.uk/showbiz/tv-radio/709596/The-Archers-trial-Brexit-Helen-Titchener-Rob-Titchener>
”.
 