
Back story 

With an estimated $200bn lost from developing countries to corporate tax 
dodging <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=42973.0> every 
year, ActionAid believes that tackling this problem is fundamental to 
overcoming poverty and injustice. The gap between the most powerful and 
ordinary people is growing across the world and corporate tax dodging has 
become both a symptom of that trend and a key battle to help reverse it – 
making it a flagship campaign for ActionAid UK.

The anatomy of a campaign: giving child marriage the finger, Plan UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/17/campaign-ngo-charity-marketing-child-marriage-plan>
We have been campaigning on tax since 2008 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/tax-justice/campaign-successes> and more than 20 
countries <http://www.actionaid.org/tax-power> in ActionAid’s global federation 
are now also taking up this issue. It has been catapulted into the mainstream 
across the globe through high-profilecorporate exposes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/09/british-sugar-giant-tax-scandal>
and campaigning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/08/starbucks-uk-stores-protests-tax>
 by people angry that they have to play by one set of rules while the powerful 
play by another. A campaign on a structural poverty issue like this is a 
long-term game, and each stage requires careful planning.


Aims 

In 2013 our campaign achieved commitments from the UK government at the G8 for 
action on tax dodging 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/press-conference-prime-minister-at-end-of-g8-summit>
. We knew that in 2014 we needed to keep the campaign fresh and inspiring, 
motivate our supporters and build momentum ahead of the 2015 general election.

Strategy 

One of the biggest challenges we face is that stopping tax dodging in 
developing countries can seem like an intractable problem to UK audiences. Our 
approach is to break that down – explaining why preventing tax dodging can have 
a big impact on the lives of people living in poverty. We strategically 
identified and targeted the people with the power to change this to make them 
relevant to UK supporters.

Execution 

To kick off the year we launched our clean up Barclays campaign 
<http://www.cleanupbarclays.co.uk> after discovering that the high street bank 
waspromoting the use of tax havens to companies investing in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/20/barclays-bank-tax-havens-africa-mauritius-offshore>
. We staged stunts outside Barclays branches, securing media coverage, ran 
supporter actions to press for change and made a noise online. The culmination 
was at the bank’s annual general meeting,where we held a demonstration outside 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/04/24/barclays-agm-shareholders-antony-jenkins-_n_5204089.html>
 while inside our campaigners met with Barclays’ chief executive, building 
internal pressure while raising the campaign’s profile in the media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-anatomy-of-a-campaign-tax-justice-actionaid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435069914708%2F3da2ec18-72cf-4c83-b016-a713469705fd-2060x1319.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20anatomy%20of%20a%20campaign%3A%20tax%20justice%2C%20ActionAid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-anatomy-of-a-campaign-tax-justice-actionaid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20anatomy%20of%20a%20campaign%3A%20tax%20justice%2C%20ActionAid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F07%2Fthe-anatomy-of-a-campaign-tax-justice-actionaid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435069914708%2F3da2ec18-72cf-4c83-b016-a713469705fd-2060x1319.jpeg>
 ActionAid tax-haven stunt outside Barclays AGM. Photograph: Matt Alexander/PA 
Wire/ActionAid 
We also responded quickly to breaking events. In May, footage emerged of the 
chairman of Vedanta Resources, a UK-listed mining company, bragging about the 
profits the company makes in Zambia. ActionAid Zambia called on the Zambian 
government to audit the mine’s activities. On the same day as a protest march 
in Zambia we launched a supporter action and securedUK media coverage 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/markets/article-2643172/Vedanta-faces-African-anger-Hundreds-Zambians-protest-miners-chairman-boasts-profits.html>
 to put pressure on Vedanta.

Our towns against tax dodging campaign 
<http://www.townsagainsttaxdodging.org.uk> encouraged the public and local 
businesses to pressure local councils to pass a motion in support of the 
campaign. The campaign was driven by events across the UK, which mobilised 
hundreds of people to take action locally, including the launch of our new 
local organiser network, which empowers people to lead the campaign in their 
area.

We also introduced the ActionAid tax-dodging walking tour of Mayfair 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/campaign/show-me-the-money-a-tax-treasure-hunt-walking-tour-of-mayfair>
. This tour presented the story in new way, with guides taking to the streets 
in bowler hats. It proved a huge hit, securing media coverage fromthe Financial 
Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/9161e012-c7e4-11e4-8210-00144feab7de,Authorised=false.html?_i_location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ft.com%2Fcms%2Fs%2F0%2F9161e012-c7e4-11e4-8210-00144feab7de.html&_i_referer=#axzz3UB3iQyIh>
 toDutch TV 
<http://www.rtlnieuws.nl/economie/home/belastingontduikerstoer-londen>.

This laid the groundwork for the run-up to the 2015 general election. Aware 
that our voice alone could not cut through the election noise, we worked with 
others to build a coalition of more than 25 organisations calling for atax 
dodging bill <http://taxdodgingbill.org.uk/>, a package of tax reforms that 
could engage and inspire campaigners to lobby their candidates in ahead of the 
election.

Challenges

With several diverse targets for our campaign – Barclays, local councils, 
parliamentary candidates – we ran the risk of the bigger narrative becoming 
unclear. We had to work hard to make sure this was threaded through each phase, 
and that our key messages came through.

During the Barclays campaign it wasn’t always easy to navigate a strong public 
message and call to action about Barclays while maintaining constructive 
insider relationships with them. There was a gap for months between the last 
action that supporters took and when we could feed back a positive result to 
them. Not ideal, but at least we had positive news when it came.

Results 

We persuaded Barclays to stop marketing the benefits of tax havens to 
companies investing in Africa 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/blog/campaigns/2014/11/12/barclays-we-did-it?slide=1>
, we saw a huge supporter response to the Vedanta campaign and met with its 
chief executive, and 50 local councils passed motions in support of a 
tax-dodging bill. Our tax campaign was one of constituents’ top issues in 
parliamentary candidates’ inboxes, helping us to establish tax as a priority 
issue for the next five years.

Jenny Ricks is head of campaigns at ActionAid UK <http://www.actionaid.org.uk/>
. Follow@jenny_ricks <https://twitter.com/jenny_ricks> on Twitter. 


This week GDPN and Action Aid will be co-hosting a panel discussion 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/campaign/tax-competitions-impact-on-developing-countries-panel-discussion?utm_source=guardian.co.uk&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=pac_justice>
 about the impact of tax competition on developing countries; Siobhan Kennedy, 
Channel 4’s Business editor will chair a panel that includes Chris Morgan, Head 
of Tax Policy, KPMG in the UK, Belema Obuoforibo, Director of the Knowledge 
Centre at the International Bureau for Fiscal Documentation, Netherlands, and 
Diarmid O’Sullivan, Tax Justice Policy Advisor, ActionAid. We look forward to 
seeing you there; for more information and tickets clickhere 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/campaign/tax-competitions-impact-on-developing-countries-panel-discussion?utm_source=guardian.co.uk&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=pac_justice>
.


Do you work for an NGO that’s run an unusual campaign? Email 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com to tell us why it should feature in this series.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 