
When it comes to whether Britain should remain in the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, almost all political parties and 
traditions – Labour, the Greens, Liberal Democrats, the SNP, Plaid Cymru, and 
half of the Tory Party – agree that we are better off in Europe.

But that doesn’t mean we all have the same reasons for wanting to stay in. A 
few days agoJeremy Corbyn set out the Labour case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/jeremy-corbyn-supporters-boo-bbcs-laura-kuenssberg>
. When it comes to jobs, investment, growth, security and our influence in the 
world we are clearly stronger in Europe. But we are also making a Labour 
argument about workers’ rights that really matter, to millions of working 
people and the trade unions that represent them.

Labour has changed its view on Europe since 1975, in part because the world 
has changed but also because of the benefits that Europe has brought to people 
at work. At a time when the Tories were undermining workers’ rights back home, 
Jacques Delors, in hiscelebrated speech to the Trades Union Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/sep/12/eu> in 1988, opened our 
eyes to Europe’s potential to strengthen them. And as more and more workers 
across Europe discovered that their firm now had an owner from another EU 
country, cooperating with colleagues across the Channel became the norm.

Which rights should my constituents not be entitled to any more when they are 
at work?

And Europe was as good as its word. It helped to guarantee paid holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/25/workers-rights-are-on-the-line-in-eu-referendum-warns-tuc>
, improved maternity and paternity leave, put limits on working time and gave 
better protection to agency and temporary workers. By ensuring these rights 
across borders, it helped stop a race to bottom that globalisation, left 
unchecked, could otherwise bring.

That’s why Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress,
is backing remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/brexit-threatens-british-workers-rights-maternity-leave-holiday-frances-ogrady-tuc-trades-union-congress-eu>
. It’s why unions including Unite, the GMB, Unison and Usdaw are all backing 
remain. And Labour is backing remain to protect these rights.

Millions of people in the UK are guaranteed a minimum of four weeks’ paid 
holiday. Workers are guaranteed 11 consecutive hours’ rest in any 24-hour 
period, a 20-minute rest break if the working day is longer than six hours, a 
minimum of one day off each week, a working week limited to on average 48 hours 
a week, and limits to night work of an average eight hours in any 24-hour 
period.

More than 8 million part-time workers in the UK have the same rights as 
full-time workers. About three-quarters of these are women. It was a European 
court of justice ruling that helped part-time workersto have the same rights 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/basic-rights-work/categories-workers/01-part-time-workers/part-time-work-your-rights>
 to join occupational pension schemes as their full-time colleagues.

About 13 million women in work are protected from discrimination as a result 
of equality legislation; 340,000 women receive paid maternity leave each year 
in the UK. In addition, 1.6 million people on temporary contracts now have the 
same rights as permanent workers. That’s an awful lot of people protected, and 
yet the Brexiters scoff at those rights.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: Brexit for non-Brits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
The employment minister, Priti Patel, a prominent Tory Brexiter, has called 
them a burden 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/business/news/brexit-would-boost-uk-economy-by-43bn-claims-patel-34723908.html>
 and would like to halve them.Boris Johnson said it was 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/11836209/Boris-Johnson-I-could-vote-for-Britain-to-leave-the-European-Union.html>
 “very disappointing” that Britain had not made “changes to employment law”, 
complaining that we “need to weigh in on all that stuff, all that social 
chapter stuff”.

Cameron’s former adviser Steve Hilton has complained 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3603793/Why-quit-EU-Cameron-s-guru-Friend-strategist-Steve-Hilton-breaks-ranks-Brexit-say-Britain-literally-ungovernable-unless-power-self-serving-elite.html>
 that “membership of the EU brings with it constraints on everything from 
employment law to family policy”. And whenChris Grayling was asked 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/8871618/Chris-Grayling-interview-We-need-a-big-bang-to-speed-up-our-cuts-to-red-tape.html>
 what European “red tape” he disliked, he referred to health and safety laws.

Their target is very clear, but the specifics of what they want to do, and 
which of our rights they want to get rid of, are not yet clear.

Our own bad habits have brought Britain to the brink of Brexit | Martin Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/03/our-bad-habits-britain-brink-brexit-leave-remain-failures-culture-politics-media>
So my challenge to them is this: it’s time for you to come clean: which rights 
that the EU today guarantees for British workers do you want to get rid of if 
we leave? Which rights should my constituents not be entitled to any more when 
they are at work? Is it health and safety, limits on working time, or rights 
for part-timers?

And why should we trust a Conservative government in Westminster to protect 
them if we leave, when so many Tory Brexiters clearly have so little enthusiasm 
for them?

Of course, the reason why the Brexiters won’t go into any more detail about 
their plans is because they know British workers would be appalled. And the 
vast majority of businesses don’t want these rights to be eroded either.

I spent 20 years working for the trade union movement before becoming a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP. I’m proud to have done both 
jobs. The union movement has achieved a huge amount in the past century or so. 
It has secured important rights at work, tackled unfair discrimination and 
ensured that Britain is one of the safest places in the world in which to go to 
work.

And because we know how hard it was to win those rights, the whole Labour 
movement is united not only in pride at their achievement but in determination 
to protect them. And that’s why, Labour, the trade unions and millions of 
British workers will come together on 23 June and vote to remain in the EU.
 