
Few people settle in for a three-hour German comedy about an uptight woman and 
her farty father expecting a masterpiece. Yet that’s whatMaren Ade’s 
extraordinary, genre-bending revolution of a movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/11/toni-erdmann-sweeps-the-board-at-european-film-awards-2016>
 is. It tells of Ines (Sandra Hüller), an efficient, humourless, whippet-thin 
businesswoman in her mid-30s. She’s focused on success with no apparent aim but 
for its own sake (“You’re an animal,” someone tells her – there are a lot 
beasties in this film). To this end, she sacrifices her free time, much of her 
social life, and many of her ethics.

There’s one appalling scene in which she must take shopping the wife of a 
powerful contact she’s courting. “I’m not a feminist,” she witheringly tells 
one of the colleagues above whom she is miles more capable and bright, “or I 
wouldn’t tolerate guys like you.” We pity brittle Ines. We don’t necessarily 
like her.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ftoni-erdmann-exclusive-uk-trailer-for-oscar-favourite-german-comedy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toni%20Erdmann%3A%20UK%20trailer%20for%20Oscar%20favourite%20German%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ftoni-erdmann-exclusive-uk-trailer-for-oscar-favourite-german-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toni%20Erdmann%3A%20UK%20trailer%20for%20Oscar%20favourite%20German%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ftoni-erdmann-exclusive-uk-trailer-for-oscar-favourite-german-comedy-video&media=>
Toni Erdmann: UK trailer for Oscar favourite German comedy – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/25/toni-erdmann-exclusive-uk-trailer-for-oscar-favourite-german-comedy-video>
Following the death of his dog, her prank-loving dad, Winfried (Peter 
Simonichek), decides to pay her a visit for the weekend. This goes appallingly; 
the endless wait for the lift down from her apartment to the cab is a perfect 
horror-show of two people with deep affection who can’t stand the sight one 
another.

But Winfried, concerned for Ines’s sanity, does not actually leave. Rather, he 
shows up again, infiltrating her sacred professional circle, beneath weird wig 
and ill-fitting false teeth, calling himself a life coach called Toni Erdmann. 
Similarities to Les Patterson are accidental – but irresistible. Toni also 
bears a striking resemblance to Harold Bornstein, aka Donald Trump’s trusted 
doctor (on the left in this Twitter comparison 
<https://twitter.com/daveyjenkins/status/769510359577333760/photo/1>).
David Jenkins (@daveyjenkins) 
Erm… pic.twitter.com/3pJAqJLRbI <https://t.co/3pJAqJLRbI>
 <https://twitter.com/daveyjenkins/status/769510359577333760> August 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/daveyjenkins/status/769510359577333760> 
The remainder of the film is essentially a compendium of showcase scenes which 
you can’t shift, even months on. There’s an Easter egg painting party which 
culminates in an angry, flabbergasting rendition of Whitney Houston’s The 
Greatest Love of All (which had the Cannes press audience erupting in 
spontaneous, mid-screening applause). There’s the naked birthday bash. The sex 
scene involving petits fours. The shockingly moving playground chase involving a
Kukeri <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kukeri> (like an elephant, they’re hard 
to describe, but you know one once you’ve seen one).

Ade’s film, highly scripted but culled from hundreds of hours of footage, is 
like nothing you’ve ever seen before. It tickles, frequently, but it also 
touches you more deeply than you could have anticipated. It is an extravagant 
film about loneliness and DNA, its web of emotional hostage-taking too complex 
to ever begin to unpick.
 