Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIfHzJU-Rlo4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIfHzJU-Rlo4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIfHzJU-Rlo4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
1 T-Rex, Hot Love February 1971

Marc Bolan's third huge hit in a row, No 1 for four weeks. His Top of the Pops 
performance showed him going truly imperial, with flying-V guitar, pink 
trousers, silver jacket and, prompted by his friend and colleague Chelita 
Secunda, glitter on his cheekbones.

2 David Bowie, Queen Bitch December 1971

"There should be some real unabashed prostitution in this business," Bowie 
told Cream magazine in late 1971. He did his best to make it happen with this 
Velvet Underground tribute, saturated in homosexuality and Manhattan sleaze. 
Mick Ronson's guitar slices through everything.

3 Alice Cooper, School's Out April 1972

From Detroit by way of LA, these hard rockers had been wearing makeup and 
frocks since 1969, so were well-suited to the glam imperative. School's Out was 
a definitive entrant in the teenage rampage stakes and scored hard with the 
kids, hitting No 1 for three weeks in the summer holidays.

4 Roxy Music, Virginia Plain August 1972

With Bryan Ferry's ultra-stylised performance and Eno's other wordly synth 
shrieks, this one definitely arrived from Planet Mars in the late summer of 
1972. Chock-full of pop art and pop culture references, Virginia Plain was 
nothing less than a manifesto for a new age: "So me and you, just we two, got 
to search for something new."

5 Mott The Hoople, All the Young Dudes July 1972

Bowie may have provided the raw material, but Mott gave the definitive 
performance of this generation-defining song, with its sneering reference to 
the Beatles and the Stones. The musicians curled and uncurled around Ian 
Hunter's snarling voice: "Oh is there concrete all around/ Or is it in my head."

6 Lou Reed, Vicious November 1972

Another Bowie production, and another career revival. Vicious begins Reed's 
second solo album in exactly the way that you would wish, with the poet 
laureate of Manhattan spitting out the Warhol inspired lyrics – "Vicious: you 
hit me with a flower" – while Mick Ronson, cutting through everything, embodies 
the song's threat.

David Bowie - The Jean Genie 
<http://www.muzu.tv/davidbowie/the-jean-genie-music-video/153664/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
7 David Bowie, The Jean Genie November 1972


Bowie reached back to his 60s R&B days with this one, based on the old I'm a 
Man riff but updated with Ronson's buzzing guitar, burlesque rhythms, gay 
double entendres – his by-now patented patch.The band did a fantastic Top of 
the Pops performance, recently rediscovered 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hGKu5F2prg>.

8 Slade, Cum On Feel the Noize February 1973


This was their fourth No 1 in 18 months, which gave guitarist Dave Hill an 
excuse – as if he needed it – to wear ever more outrageous outfits on Top of 
the Pops. An anthemic chorus and a lyric that's a direct invitation "to get 
wild, wild, wild".

Roxy Music - Editions Of You 
<http://www.muzu.tv/roxymusic/editions-of-you-music-video/652402/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
9 Roxy Music, Editions of You March 1973


"For Your Pleasure" – with model and singer Amanda Lear on the cover – is one 
of the period's few coherent albums, and this 120mph rocker is one of its 
hidden pleasures: a camp-saturated male bonding song, featuring ooohs, sirens, 
and the immortal line, "boys will be boys will be boyoyoys".

10 Bonnie St Claire, Clap Your Hands and Stamp Your Feet May 1973

With its stomping tunes and rock'n'roll roots, glam was huge on the continent 
– blending, as it would, into Europop – and this is a great entrant from 
Holland, featuring Beach-Boys' style backing vocals, terrace handclaps, and of 
course the ever-present Chuck Berry riffs.

11 T-Rex, 20th Century Boy May 1973


It could have been any of the four top-two hits that T-Rex had in 1972 – 
particularly Metal Guru – but this was the toughest of them all: a furious 
rocker with a heroic riff that showed, plain for all to see, just how well 
Bolan understood the nature of pop fame – 20th century toy, I wanna be your boy.

12 Iggy and the Stooges, Search and Destroy June 1973

Iggy wore silver, the Stooges were produced by David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>, the record sounded glam – all 
treble tones and slicing guitar – but Search and Destroy, like its parent album 
Raw Power, went much further and deeper than hardly anyone wished in 1973. 
Three years later, it would find its time.

13 New York Dolls, Trash July 1973

Simultaneously ludicrous and tough, sloppy and hard, vicious and tender – just 
listen to those soaring, girl-group harmonies – Trash was, along with Jet Boy, 
the Dolls' big pop move. It being 1973, of course, there could only have been 
one question: "Uh, how do you call your lover boy?" In the US, they didn't 
answer.

14 The Sweet, The Ballroom Blitz September 1973

The Sweet were on a roll after Blockbuster and this may well be the archetypal 
glam song: teenage hysteria – check; camp interjections and beyond over the top 
TV costumes – check; a stomping beat, tough guitar riffs and a fey vocal – 
check. Unstoppable and still thrilling: the contrived becomes real.

15 Mud, Dyna-Mite October 1973

Written by the Sweet svengalis, Nicky Chinn and Mike Chapman, "Dyna-Mite" 
stays firmly within the ballroom – glam's central location – during this 
relentless stomper. Mud yocked it up on Top of the Pops with ludicrous flares 
and a spot of aceing – the biker's dance, shoulder to shoulder – and the future 
Sex Pistols were listening.

16 Suzi Quatro, Devil Gate Drive January 1974

Quatro had gold-plated garage credentials – her first band, the Pleasure 
Seekers, had recorded What a Way to Die in 1966 – and this, her fourth hit (No 
1 for two weeks), mixes rock'n'roll with a hint of the Burundi beat, while 
continuing the explosive club/ballroom theme of the time with a hint of 
autobiography.

17 Sparks, This Town Ain't Big Enough for Both of Us April 1974

Sparks were the late great glam flash: tricky, artificial, super-hooky and 
high-concept, with a hard rocking band and definitive high gloss sleeves. They 
took a song with the lyric "you hear the thunder of stampeding rhinos, 
elephants and tacky tigers" all the way to No 2, and made it seem natural.

18 David Bowie, Rebel Rebel US version May 1974

Bowie's goodbye to the youth movement he had helped to form – "You've got your 
mother in a whirl, because she's not sure whether you're a boy or a girl" – and 
his last top 10 hit for 18 months. This US mix has dreamy backwards harmonies, 
extra percussion and phased guitar.

19 Iron, Virgin Rebels Rule June 1974

Almost all the great glam records were hits, but this is one of the best that 
wasn't: an abrasive slice of Sweetarama from a Scottish band, who toughened up 
the teenage-rampage meme while wearing Clockwork Orange-inspired costumes. The 
singer had a padlock on his crotch with the legend: "No Entry."

20 Sweet, The Sixteens July 1974

A four-minute mini-opera on the theme of failed youth revolution, and a summer 
top-10 hit, this shows the renamed group – having lost the definite article – 
rising to the song's complex structure with a totally convincing performance. 
The Sixteens is a classic of teen disillusionment, at the point of glam's 
supersession.

• Glam! The Performance of Style is at Tate Liverpool from 8 February 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/glam-performance-style>

• This article was amended on 6 February 2013 because the original said Hot 
Love by T-Rex was released in July 1971. This has been corrected to say 
February 1971.
 