
The autocratic ruler of the Gambia will be prosecuted for his crimes within a 
year of handing over the reins of government in January, the chair of the 
country’s new ruling coalition has vowed.

Yahya Jammeh, whose defeat in last Thursday’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 marks the first democratic transition of power in the tiny west African 
nation, is being prevented from leaving the country in case he starts a rebel 
movement, according to Fatoumata Jallow-Tambajang, the architect of the 
coalition and a senior politician considered the mother of the nation.


In an extraordinary speech on Friday, Jammeh said he wanted to return to his 
farm to “eat what I grow and grow what I eat” – his favourite political slogan. 
But Jallow-Tambajang claimed that on this farm, in Kanilai, close to the 
Senegalese border, he had the “bunkers and treasure” to start an insurgency and 
the coalition feared he could move weapons out of the country.

“He can’t leave. If he leaves, he’s going to escape us,” she said. “We are 
stopping him from leaving. We are negotiating. He said he wants to go to 
Kanilai. Any day he tells us he wants to go abroad, then we say no. It’s the 
presidential prerogative.”

The Gambia’s poll shock offers rare hope on the continent | Ruth Maclean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/gambia-poll-shock-change-africa-yahya-jammeh-electoral-democracy>
She said the government wanted him prosecuted quickly in case he tried to flee 
– although it had not yet decided whether to try him in the Gambia or 
internationally. The government also planned to rejoin the international 
criminal court – Jammeh withdrew the Gambia from it, so the president who once 
vowed to bury opposition figures “nine feet deep” could find himself at The 
Hague.

Prosecution would not be immediate, first, things in the Gambia had to calm 
down, Jallow-Tambajang said, sitting outside the court where 19 political 
prisoners were freed on bail on Monday.

“Even if it [the constitution] said that he was to be prosecuted immediately, 
our government will not do so because of the volatility of the environment. The 
environment is complex – you see them?” she said, pointing at a large lorry 
full of soldiers speeding down the road past the court.


There was no question of immunity, however. “He will be prosecuted. I’m saying 
a year but it could be less than that,” Jallow-Tambajang said. “This is my 
personal opinion – it might have taken three months because we really want to 
really work fast.

“We don’t trust him. The longer we leave him, the more possibilities he has to 
leave the country, to escape from the country and to even do an insurgency. He 
is capable. The man is capable. In Kanilai, he has bunkers. I have reliable 
sources that [say that] he has bunkers. I have been reliably informed that he 
has treasure in Kanilai, he’s sitting on treasure, on gold as they say.”


She said that although Jammeh insisted he wanted to stay on his farm, the new 
coalition – led by Adama Barrow, aformer estate agent who once worked at an 
Argos in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
 – suspected him of wanting to move all the weaponry and soldiers he had there 
over the border to Casamance, in the south of Senegal.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-gambias-new-rulers-vow-to-prosecute-outgoing-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e0dfee5ae3ad342c8e804068059f882e062ea8%2F64_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Gambia's%20new%20rulers%20vow%20to%20prosecute%20outgoing%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-gambias-new-rulers-vow-to-prosecute-outgoing-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Gambia%27s%20new%20rulers%20vow%20to%20prosecute%20outgoing%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-gambias-new-rulers-vow-to-prosecute-outgoing-president%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e0dfee5ae3ad342c8e804068059f882e062ea8%2F64_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 The Gambia’s president-elect, Adama Barrow (centre), greets the crowds after 
his election victory. Photograph: Joe Sinclair/AFP/Getty Images 
“Senegal is very alert,” she said. “Nobody trusts him, so they are also taking 
their own measures to ensure that nothing goes in. Because if anything goes in 
he’s going to move all the ammunition to Casamance and start a rebel movement. 
He’s a rebel.”


There was no deal between Jammeh and Barrow exchanging the acceptance of 
defeat for a promise of immunity, Jallow-Tambajang said.

“The only time he spoke to Mr Barrow in my presence was when he reluctantly 
conceded defeat and pledged to cede power from January 2017. There was no deal. 
We were resolved to really go up to the end. We knew we had won and we didn’t 
want to compromise any ethics.”


When Jammeh realised he was losing the election, she said, he tried to stop 
the results from being announced. “But we insisted. [We were] determined to 
protest if the results were rigged. And he had no support from the 
international community, from the military, nor the police. He was isolated. He 
was compelled to take such a decision.”


Jallow-Tambajang said Jammeh had petitioned to meet Barrow but that so far, 
the president-elect had refused because his predecessor was so unpredictable.

“He wants to meet Barrow. He has asked him to meet at his convenience, but we 
have decided not to meet him, because we don’t trust him. You can never take 
chances with Yahya Jammeh. That’s the level of distrust we have, that the 
population has. Our priority is the security of Barrow.”


Jammeh had amassed “billions of dollars, pounds, whatever” in stolen wealth, 
she claimed, including from deceased dictators such as Gaddafi and Mobutu who 
lodged their assets in the Gambia – and one of the things the new government 
would do was try to get some of it back.


“We are going to have a national commission for asset recovery,” 
Jallow-Tambajang said. “We’re going to investigate, to follow up not only him 
but his wife. His wife is a gold-digger. She has emptied our coffers. Each time 
you see her here it’s to empty our coffers,” she alleged.


He even tried to take the British embassy’s land, she claimed. “They said no – 
you can’t joke with them. The man is wealthy.”
 