
Who wants more grammar schools? The Daily Telegraph, of course: “a selective 
education system would deliver better results for individual pupils and raise 
the overall standard of schooling 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2016/09/09/mays-brave-education-reforms-will-challenge-the-left-wing-elite/>
”.

The Daily Mail is keen: “grammars can be great engines of social mobility, as 
millions of baby-boomers can attest 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3782616/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Mrs-defeat-Blob.html>
.” The Daily Express thought it “good news 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/709208/Do-we-really-need-police-women-wearing-burkas>
”, as did the Sun: praising it as a step towards “the reshaping of Britain as a 
‘meritocracy’ 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1759192/theresa-may-promises-brave-new-school-system-to-reshape-britain-for-ordinary-working-class-people/>
”.

The Sunday Times appeared to support Theresa May’s proposals, urging that they 
“are worthy of a fair hearing” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/give-mrs-mays-grammars-a-fair-hearing-336t6z3xm>
.

By contrast, the Guardian was totally unimpressed. It’s nuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-mays-schools-speech-a-divisive-blueprint>
, it said. The Observer felt the same way: “Selection is bad for children, bad 
for society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/observer-view-on-grammar-schools>
”.

The Times was also unconvinced by May’s plans. It argued that “recreating a 
top tier of selective grammar schools would be retrograde 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/selective-memory-j7c7wlbd8>... divisive and 
bad for overall standards”.

The paper approvingly quoted the one-word response by Sir Michael Wilshaw, the 
outgoing Ofsted chief, to the argument that a wave of new grammar schools would 
help working-class children: “tosh”.

“She is an ex-grammar school girl,” said the Times, “but autobiography in this 
case would be a poor guide to good policy.”

Just so. Consider also the ambivalent views of Sun columnist, and product of a 
grammar school,Trevor Kavanagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trevor-kavanagh>. He recalled the gross 
unfairness of the education system under which he, and I, grew up:

“Many 11-year-olds were scarred for life by a dubious IQ test 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1766221/theresa-may-must-pass-this-tough-school-test-in-order-to-give-working-class-children-the-chance-to-shine/>
 which sorted us into sheep or goats, successes or failures, stupid or clever...

We now realise it is absurd to set a child’s educational trajectory at 11. We 
develop at different speeds and the classroom door must stay open right up to 
age 16.”

Despite his concern about “school leavers in England and Scotland lag[ging] 
behind children from other countries”, he was very cautious about returning to 
selective education.

Acknowledging that “the issue divides voters as bitterly as Brexit”, he 
thought May had “to show this revolution, which has taken many in her party by 
surprise, has been carefully thought through.”

Indeed, she does. She needs to take to heart that Times remark about 
autobiography being “a poor guide to good policy.” I know what that means 
because I’ve been there.

As a former grammar school pupil, my views about its benefits have see-sawed 
down the years. Initially, in a book I wrote some 10 years after leaving 
school, I was very critical of the education I received. (I was a convinced 
enthusiast for the comprehensive system).


Later, I often found myself revelling in the benefits of going to a grammar, 
regarding it as an invaluable social mobility mechanism that had helped to 
propel me up the ladder.

I’ve heard any number of grammar school pupils from that era, the late 1950s 
and early 60s, say the same. And they still say it.

It is necessary, however, to put what happened to all of us in perspective 
because the Britain of that time was very different from the country today, 
most especially in terms of the economy.

We moved into so-called white-collar jobs that were so different from the 
those of our parents (meaning, incidentally, in most cases, our fathers) 
because of two key factors: the economy was expanding and, in parallel, 
manufacturing industry was already beginning to decline.


Our schooling enabled us to take up a range of occupations crying out for our 
educational skills. Some went to universities (also growing in number) and then 
into even better jobs - the law, banking, administration and, of course, 
teaching.

We were, to be frank, lucky. We baby-boomers were in the right place at the 
right time. Our grammar school was part of the reason for our success, but not 
even the major part.

It did not strike us like that at the time, of course. Nor, going on 
conversations at past school reunions, does it appear to have struck my 
contemporaries.

We did not simply look back on our schooldays and think them the best days of 
our lives. We look back and think they are the reason for the lives we have 
lived since.

We have therefore perpetuated a myth about it being the motor behind the 
insistent call for their return by those who misguidedly believe that the 
ground-breaking social mobility upheaval of the 1960s can be reproduced a half 
century later.

Part of the grammar school ethos drummed into us was that we were enjoying a 
privilege because we were part of a relatively small proportion of the 
population (I recall a teacher saying we were part of a fortunate 11%).

What then of the not-so-fortunates? Consigned to secondary moderns, their 
struggle to find jobs and move up that ladder was made infinitely more 
difficult. Some did succeed against the odds, just as some grammar school 
children fell by the wayside.

But the overwhelming unfairness, a splitting of the old working class into an 
educational us-and-them, was evident then and, shouldTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> get her way, will occur all 
over again.

I agree with the prime minister that Britain has developed a form of 
educational selection by wealth. That is unjust. Creating grammar schools will 
add to the injustice rather than cure it, and plenty of Conservative MPs know 
that too.

As Tim Ross wrote in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/10/cabinet-split-on-grammar-schools-as-theresa-mays-supporters-accu/>
, this issue has the capacity to split the Tory party apart. Note the split 
between the the Times and Sunday Times. Note also the difference between the 
Sun and Kavanagh. Grammar schools are Brexit part 2.
 