
Garry Kasparov <https://www.theguardian.com/world/garry-kasparov> demonstrated 
that he has not completely forgotten how the pieces move by coming out of 
retirement this week to win, jointly with Anatoly Karpov, the Credit Suisse 
Blitz in front of Judit Polgar and Viktor Korchnoi. Nor has he abandoned casual 
games, as he appears regularly (and rather successfully) on the Playchess 
server, under a pseudonym, to do battle with the leading lights. He even 
condescended to challenge me a while back; I politely declined, having suffered 
too often at his hands over the decades.

While chatting on that occasion, the Russian legend claimed - a touch 
disingenuously, one suspects - to be indifferent to chess politics, although it 
was only a couple of months ago that he was publicly urging FIDE delegates in 
Turin to make "the right move" - a reference to the election campaign of Dutch 
businessman Bessel Kok. Perhaps he was merely expressing disappointment at the 
astonishing conversion of Bessel's deputy, Ali Nihat Yazici, who recently 
welcomed his erstwhile opponent, President Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, to Turkey, with 
such fawning obsequiousness as to make those of delicate constitution reach for 
their sick bags. One would have thought it possible to attain the worthy 
objective of establishing cordial relations with a little less self-abasement.

The renowned Dutch grandmaster Ivan Sokolov romped to victory in the Staunton 
Memorial Tournament ahead of Michael Adams and Jan Timman. A sizeable disparity 
in strength allowed the favourites to go on a bunny-bashing binge. My apologies 
to upcoming teenager David Howell for casting him as a member of the family 
Leporidae for the following game, but the chess term "rabbit" is relative, and 
we are each one to someone or other.

Sokolov, I (2652) - Howell, D (2479), 4th Staunton Memorial, London/ 
Crowthorne, England, 18/08/061.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 
6.bxc3 Bg7 7.Qa4+ Qd7 8.Qb3 [Doubtless this manoeuvre has a purpose, but do not 
ask me what it is. The Black queen is well positioned on d7 and frequently goes 
there anyway in the Gruenfeld]0-0 9.Nf3 b6 10.Be3 Bb7 11.Bd3 c5 12.0-0 Nc6 
13.Rad1 Na5 14.Qb1 cxd4 15.cxd4 e6 [Despite my previous comment, White has 
arranged his pieces quite well and can count on an edge due to his pawn centre]
16.h4 [Broadening the attacking front] f5 17.Bb5 Qd6 18.d5!? exd5 19.e5! Bxe5 
[A move of a brave man. Black will miss this bishop, but the alternative was to 
allow a dangerous passed pawn]20.Nxe5 Qxe5 21.Bd4 Qe4 22.Qc1! Qxh4 [David would 
have been aware of the risks he was running but by now it was difficult to turn 
back]23.Qc7 Rf7 24.Qe5 Re7 [Forced] 25.Qh8+ Kf7 26.Qg7+ Ke6 27.Rfe1+ Kd6 
28.Be5+ Kc5 29.Bd4+ Kd6 30.Rxe7 [Amazingly, there is nothing better than 
acquiescing to this exchange]Qxe7 31.Qh6 [Regrouping for a second assault on 
the king]Bc6 32.Bc3 Kc7 33.Bb4!? Qd7? [Black has defended excellently so far 
but now, seduced by his extra material, he bravely, and rashly, goes for 
victory. However, correct was 33...Qxb4! 34.Qxh7+ Kb8 35. Qg8+ Kb7 when White 
has a draw by perpetual check, but no more]34.Ba6! Bb5? [Here 34...Bb7! was far 
more resilient]35.Bxb5 Qxb5 36.Bxa5 Qxa5 37.Qxh7+ Kc6 38.Rc1+ Kb5 39.Qb7! 
DIAGRAM [The killer! So woeful is Black's coordination that he cannot hope to 
survive the combined onslaught of queen and rook]Rh8 40.Rb1+ Kc4 41.Qc6+ Kd3 
42.Rd1+ Ke4 43.Qe6+ Kf4 44.Rd4+ [Black resigns. After Kg5 45.Qe7+ Kh6 46.Rh4 is 
mate. A thrilling game]
 