
This was the year British television underwent one of the most profound 
changes in its history. The upheaval was as significant as in 1955, when ITV 
launched as the first commercial rival to the BBC; 1982, when the duopoly was 
challenged by Channel 4; and 1989-90, when Sky TV and BSB introduced the first 
non-terrestrial competition.


But much of the audience may not have noticed this time, for the nature of the 
revolution involved where key work could be watched. Although the arrival of 
satellite and cable channels a quarter of a century ago broke the tradition of 
programming being available to all possessors of a TV set, it was initially a 
transformation of technology rather than content. In 2016 the difference was 
this: the shows that couldn’t be seen in the old ways were frequently the 
must-see ones.

Three of the most talked-about series of the year neither occupied a time-slot 
in the schedules nor required a conventional TV: the royal dramaThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
 and the retro-thrillerStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 were streamed by Netflix, andThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
, Jeremy Clarkson’s post-BBC vehicle, on Amazon. Having started as a film 
rental business, Netflix also had on its 2016 slate Charlie Brooker’sBlack 
Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/reflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality>
, while Amazon, still at core an online shop and innovator in taxation 
arrangements, hosted the third run of another hit series,Transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0dc3b3b0cbf64513c0d9eb3bbd45314cacac457%2F0_0_2960_1980%2F2960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0dc3b3b0cbf64513c0d9eb3bbd45314cacac457%2F0_0_2960_1980%2F2960.jpg>
 The most talked-about shows of the year neither occupied a time-slot in the 
schedules nor required the possession ofa conventional TV … Stranger Things. 
Photograph: Netflix 
Transparently, the Guardian list of the year’s 50 best TV shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/06/best-tv-shows-of-2016> is 
subjective rather than scientific, but the 2016 roll call strongly reflects a 
shift. The top 10 includes two spots for Netflix (Stranger Things, Black 
Mirror), and one each for Amazon (Transparent) and Sky Atlantic (The Night Of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/09/the-night-of-review-hbo-crime-series>
).

The other six slots are taken by the BBC, which looks at first sight like 
business as usual. Certainly, the emperor of public-service TV remains on his 
throne (David Attenborough’sPlanet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii> conquered all before 
it) and the corporation’s long-running strength in crime and thriller fiction 
continued with the third series ofLine of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/line-of-duty>, the second of Happy 
Valley <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/happy-valley> and the John le 
Carré adaptationThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>. 

But, strikingly, two other BBC highlights of the period – Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge’sFleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
 (an 18-certificate Bridget Jones) and Adam Curtis’s latest conspiracy 
documentary,HyperNormalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/15/hypernormalisation-adam-curtis-trump-putin-syria>
 – were shown in ways that Lord Reith would not have recognised: the former was 
originally streamed on the online BBC3, the latter has only ever been available 
on iPlayer. Although the concept (if not the value) of the licence fee has been 
preserved in the BBC’s latest renegotiations with the government, the quality 
of the material available on BBC3 and iPlayer clearly feels like an experiment 
with subscription models for the future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb3326276e182cebde893bbe5abc61d792ae8a9%2F0_0_720_576%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb3326276e182cebde893bbe5abc61d792ae8a9%2F0_0_720_576%2F720.jpg>
 Only available on iPlayer … Adam Curtis’s latest conspiracy documentary, 
HyperNormalisation. Photograph: Courtesy of Adam Curtis 
And, across the board, much of the creative energy now seems to be in 
fee-paying TV. If the quality of Amazon Originals is depressing for those 
opposed to the company, then opponents ofRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> must find themselves torn by 
the confirmation this year that his UK television interests (soon to be under 
his sole control if the government agrees the 21st Century Fox takeover of 
part-owned Sky) now have an artistic strength to match their economic clout.

 Sky, which in the past often led its programming with products (football, 
cricket, Mad Men, The Simpsons) expensively nicked from terrestrial channels, 
now regularly has original content that traditional networks would envy. A 
particular source of strength is its investment in the HBO dramas that show on 
Sky Atlantic, such as The Night Of,The Young Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-young-pope> and Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> (all new this year) and 
the continuingGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd4628a85c153bdee6f36078cac6d22ab87acac1%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd4628a85c153bdee6f36078cac6d22ab87acac1%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Sky now has original content that traditional networks would envy … Westworld. 
Photograph: HBO 
Tellingly, ITV is struggling in both the most-watched charts and the best-of 
lists. Intermittent flashes of originality included the James Nesbitt-led 
Northern Irish murder storyThe Secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/30/the-secret-review-infidelity-its-what-god-would-have-wanted>
, although even that raised concerns about the ethics of fictionalising recent 
real-life cases. Otherwise, there was heavy reliance on an emergency dust-off 
(the revivedCold Feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/05/cold-feet-review>), the 
14-year-oldI’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/nov/08/im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-2016-meet-the-new-contestants>
 and the 10-year-oldBritain’s Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent>, although the 
struggles ofThe X Factor <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor>
 served as a warning that all ratings goldmines eventually start to scrape the 
bottom. The popularity next year ofThe Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-voice> (its move from BBC1 
further evidence of the new free market in content) and the topical satire show 
planned to displace News at Ten will be a test of ITV’s viability.

Despite suffering clear brand damage from casting Mary, Mel and Sue out of 
their tent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-triumphant-finale-channel-4-tricky-task>
, Channel 4 continued to make the sort of new and distinctive shows that 
create, at awards ceremonies and among opinion-formers, an impact 
disproportionate to their ratings. Standout work included the post-Savile drama
National Treasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/national-treasure-review-robbie-coltrane>
 and the comedyFlowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/25/flowers-olivia-colman-julian-baratt>
, which, as a co-production with the American streamerSeeso 
<https://www.seeso.com/>, showed an alertness to the new means of production.

Channel 4 also showed itself to be at the forefront of thinking about the 
reformation in broadcasting by becoming the first terrestrial British 
broadcaster to start an online network, throughWalter Presents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/08/sopranos-foreign-summer-tv-walter-presents-deutschland-83>
 (launched on 3 January), a remarkable archive of foreign language dramas – a 
few (including Deutschland 83 and Spin) also shown on C4 or E4, but most 
(including the astonishing Brazilian seriesMagnifica 70 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/27/porn-stars-of-the-junta-magnifica-70-south-americas-breaking-bad-tv-walter-presents>
) simply dropped as streamed box sets. Curated by Italian visionaryWalter 
Iuzzolino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/08/sopranos-foreign-summer-tv-walter-presents-deutschland-83>
, this was another game-changer for British audiences. Whereas the BBC launched 
its online channel (BBC3, in February) to save cash, Channel 4 created its with 
the aim of increasing viewer choice. Walter Presents has become such a vital 
viewing option that I just had to check it really has only been running for 12 
months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3282c163071b63ac0c0f9440c783b0c82a66b886%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3282c163071b63ac0c0f9440c783b0c82a66b886%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 A game-changer … Magnifica 70, part of the remarkable online foreign drama 
archive Walter Presents. Photograph: Dan Behr/Global Series Network 
Almost all current trends look ominous for Britain’s first four broadcast 
networks. Of the Top 30 most-watched TV programmes in Britain so far this year 
– from the Great British Bake Off final with 15.9 million viewers to Euro 2016: 
England v Iceland with 11.42 million – every single one is a longstanding 
format (Planet Earth II, I’m a Celebrity …, Britain’s Got Talent, Strictly Come 
Dancing) or a perennial (football).

The absence of any new breakthrough show confirms fears of a creative crisis 
at the mainstream channels. There is a particular challenge to Charlotte Moore, 
the BBC’s impressive director of television. Although BBC1 shows occupy 20 of 
the Top 30 slots, 10 of these are taken by Bake Off (which has been lost to 
Channel 4), five byPlanet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii>
 (whose presenter might reasonably be seeking a quieter diary at the age of 90) 
and two by aninternational football tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/12/euro-2016-24-teams-fans-verdict>
, of which there is not another until 2018. So the only big BBC hits available 
in 2017 are Sherlock and Strictly Come Dancing.

Moore will also be aware that the BBC2 listings would have been dominated by 
series 23 of Top Gear, if Clarkson, Hammond and May had presented it. And, 
beyond Bake Off, a key TV theme of the year was the free movement of programmes 
and talent.

The BBC chose to lose Clarkson from Top Gear after he hit a producer (and, 
inevitably, Richard Hammond and James May followed him), but Channel 4 had no 
choice but to surrenderBlack Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror> when its independent 
producers, Endemol Shine, got a better offer from Netflix.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3848e5b77d760860e1a41f8545f764a5c315b917%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3848e5b77d760860e1a41f8545f764a5c315b917%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Stars like Charlie Brooker are now able to find more lucrative employment on a 
new form of broadcasting … Netflix’s Black Mirror. Photograph: Laurie 
Sparham/Netflix 
What links those cases is that the ex-Top Gear three and Brooker were able to 
find more lucrative employment ona form of broadcasting that has only recently 
existed <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tv-streaming>. Ironically, 
the furious comments made by the C4 chief creative officer, Jay Hunt, when her 
network lost Black Mirror to a higher bidder – “This couldn’t be a more Channel 
4 show!” – are almost identical to those from the BBC when sheoffered the 
production company Love more money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
 than the BBC felt it could afford. This new fluidity of copyright and 
employment in TV is changing the game.

Alan Yentob, the BBC’s former creative director, complained in a recent 
interview that the BBC is finding it hard to compete financially with the new 
drama streamers: he argued that they would have needed co-producers to afford 
The Crown, whereasNetflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> could 
fully fund it.

But it’s not just about money. Would Peter Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/27/peter-morgan-the-crown-netflix-queen-elizabeth-ii>
, screenwriter of The Crown, really have preferred his scripts about a living 
monarch and her relatives to go through the terrified layers of editorial 
“compliance” that seem likely to have been applied at a historically 
pro-monarchist broadcaster that still employs a royal liaison officer?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23378b696383960d975283fc89593198a7722d9d%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20revolution%20will%20not%20be%20televised%3A%202016%20was%20the%20year%20TV%20turned%20upside%20down&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F2016-tv-turned-upside-down-terrestrial-channels-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23378b696383960d975283fc89593198a7722d9d%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
 Would The Crown have been able to exist on a historically pro-monarchist 
broadcaster like the BBC? Photograph: Alex Bailey/Netflix 
There must also be considerable doubt about whether the corporation – made 
increasingly cautious by successive controversies stoked by politicians and the 
media – would have wished to risk the daring ideas and storytelling in Paolo 
Sorrentino’sThe Young Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/03/the-young-pope-review-jude-laws-sleek-pontiff-shines-in-sorrentinos-twin-peaks>
. There is a feeling in that HBO-Sky Atlantic series of talent revelling in 
creative freedom, just as Clarkson and chums tangibly feel released from BBC 
interference in The Grand Tour. Similarly,Julia Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/06/julia-davis-i-like-that-really-repressed-stuff-you-can-kick-against>
, one of the most dangerous comedy-makers of the day, has made her most recent 
series, Hunderby and Camping, for Sky.

The BBC can still produce edgy output – Fleabag, NW, Line of Duty, Happy 
Valley, Sherlock – but whoever succeeds Rona Fairhead andLord Hall of Birkenhead
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/24/bbc-tony-hall-nice-changes-tough>
 as chair of the BBC Trust and director general must urgently ensure that a 
culture of obedience does not restrict the broadcaster to heritage TV: 
wildlife, classic novel adaptations, remade 70s sitcoms.

Although the ex-Top Gear team nodded to the old viewing speed limit by 
dropping one episode a week of The Grand Tour, Amazon, Netflix, Walter Presents 
and Sky Box-Sets represent a dramatic shift in where and when much of the most 
original and interesting TV is now shown. Many viewers may have understandable 
reasons for refusing to give money to Murdoch or Amazon, and sticking with what 
you can watch for your £145.50licence fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-licence-fee>. But such refuseniks are at 
ever greater risk of missing out on extraordinary television.

For at least a decade, speakers at TV conferences have been predicting that 
the medium was about to be changed for ever by multi-device viewing, 
self-scheduling, independent production and liberation from regulation; 2016 
was the year the revolution finally happened. We will never look at television 
the same way again.
 