Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FChuYpoajar0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FChuYpoajar0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FChuYpoajar0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Garage rock is the sound that will not die: from its first boom in the early 
60s, through its seeding of punk, to regular revivals ever since, it seems 
there will always be an audience for the forthright pleasures of noisy, primal 
rock'n'roll. Atlanta'sBlack Lips <http://www.black-lips.com/> have been 
foisting their own rowdy racket on audiences around the world for more than a 
decade; their new, Mark Ronson-produced albumArabia Mountain 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/02/black-lips-arabia-mountain-review> 
sounds a bit like a great garage-rock compilation, darting from powerpop to 
psych to punk and more. We played them a rag-tag selection of garage songs to 
test their record-nerd knowledge and find out what made them fall for the sound 
in the first place.

The song

I Fought the Law 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxmlcTVFvic&feature=player_embedded> by the 
Crickets (1959)

Chosen because

This is the oldest song here and there are echoes of early, pre-Beatles 
rock'n'roll on Arabia Mountain. So how far back do their influences go?

Jared Swilley (bass and vocals): I Fought the Law by the Bobby Fuller Four! 
No? Oh, the Crickets – OK. I'd say [the spirit of garage] goes back to the 20s 
or 30s … basically any primitive music made by wild people. We love doo-wop, 
too, yeah. Wilson Pickett's first group, the Falcons, were amazing. The 
Olympics, too. Who singsBehind the Door 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BmbYlP5UWHo>? [It was Vernon Green and the 
Medallions.] That's one of my new favourite songs. Back then it was all tough 
guys standing around an oil drum singing on the street. Can you imagine? Those 
were the tough guys, the guys you should be afraid of, harmonising on a street 
corner in Queens somewhere!

The song

Nobody But Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxtJoGdujYo> by the Human Beinz 
(1968)

Chosen because

This was a US top 10 hit, the one and only for this band. Garage has generated 
plenty of hit singles over the years, many of them one-hit wonders.

JS: It's Nobody But Me ... Mitch Ryder did it first. [Afraid not: the Isley 
Brothers <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jf5zXwgv5M4> did.] This is like early 
hip-hop: the guy's bragging about how badass he can dance.

Film&Music: Who's it by?

JS: Umm … it's hard because there are about 10 versions of all these songs. It 
was all about singles back then. We were talking about this last night – I 
don't totally understand the concept of albums. Unless you're making a Sgt 
Pepper's or a Village Green Preservation Society-type thing. All the things I 
love are punk singles, R&B singles, early rock'n'roll, stuff like that. Not 
many garage bands made albums. You've got bands like Love, but then maybe 
they're more psychedelia. I dunno – if you're talking garage in the purest 
form, there aren't many.

The song

Be My Lover <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HhI_khA8w-I&feature=related> by 
Alice Cooper (1972)

Chosen because

Alice Cooper (the man) started out in high-school garage bands in the 60s; 
Alice Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alicecooper> (the band) were 
still making garagey songs such as this in the 70s. Plus, Cooper was, of 
course, given to shocking audiences with his on-stage antics – as indeed are 
the Black Lips now and then.

Joe Bradley (drums and vocals): Is it Alice Cooper?

JS: Oh yeah. He was in the Spiders originally. That song I'm Eighteen from 
[Love It to Death] is amazing. Thefirst version 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6MzRfOiPnJk> of it is so lo-fi it sounds like 
he's singing, "I'm edgy!" That would have been ever cooler: "I'm edgy!" Yeah, 
that early Alice Cooper stuff is awesome. But he's a Republican now.

Cole Alexander (guitar, vocals): We've had chickens on stage 
<http://www.thefader.com/2007/07/24/q-a-video-black-lips/>, too. [In Alice 
Cooper's infamous "chicken incident <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eq9bEzADxyk>
" at a gig in Toronto in 1969, the audience ripped a live chicken apart.]

JS: Yeah, we created the illusion of a chicken exploding on stage. But we 
didn't really kill it … well, maybe in essence. We gave it to a family 
afterwards, and they were probably going to kill it and eat it.

Film&Music: And didn't you once get chased out of India 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/34470-black-lips-chased-out-of-india-by-police/> for 
getting naked on stage?

JS: Yeah we got kicked out of India for "homosexual activity". But after we 
left theydecriminalised homosexuality 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jul/02/homosexuality-decriminalised-delhi-india>
 in India, so we were clearly at the forefront of that – gay warriors in India.

The song

My Time <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0gYgsp9cWVw> by the Golden Dawn (1968)

Chosen because

Gorgeous psych-garage side from this Austin, Texas band, who are affiliated 
with the mighty13th Floor Elevators <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwSA0Tckwbk>
. A good example of how garage bands often cluster around local scenes and 
record labels – as in the Lips' hometown, Atlanta.

JS: Is this the Eyes? The Pretty Things? No, don't know this. There are so 
many songs on so many compilations, it's hard to remember them all …

Film&Music: It's the Golden Dawn, part of a little group of bands from Texas 
on the International Artists label.

CA: Oh yeah, International Artists. I've got a few of their albums. Lightnin' 
Hopkins was on that label, too.

Film&Music: Have scenes and labels been a big thing for you?

JS: I believe there's a good scene in Atlanta, but we haven't been home in a 
few years so it's hard to tell. But there's always gonna be a good scene there 
because it's one of the only big cities in the south. If you're weird and wanna 
do stuff and you're from one of the five surrounding states, well, the south is 
not a forgiving place: you have to go to Atlanta or New Orleans. The first 
label we were on got us into the kind of music that we're into. It was called 
Bomp! Records.Greg Shaw <http://www.bomp.com/x/?page_id=102> was the owner, he 
used to write for Creem and Rolling Stone, and had his own fanzine. He 
basically helpedsave rock'n'roll 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bomp-Saving-World-Record-Time/dp/0978607686/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1313069857&sr=8-1>
 by documenting it – he helped collaborate on theNuggets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2006/jun/16/popandrock.shopping> compilations 
with Lenny Kaye [and himself set up the laterPebbles 
<http://turnmeondeadman.org/ADM/GPCSeries/Pebbles.html> compilations series]. 
It opened the door to all that stuff for us. It was really an amazing thing for 
us to do our first two records with them.

The song

Always Wanting More <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0rob_TrU9Ls> by Jay 
Reatard (2008)

Chosen because

Memphis boy Jay Reatard was a big noise in the US garage rock scene throughout 
the 2000s, and thus a close contemporary of Black Lips. He washugely prolific 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jay_Reatard#Discography> and a bit of a 
hellraiser. Hedied suddenly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jan/14/jay-reatard-dies> in 2010, aged 
just 29.

Ian St Pe (guitar): Jay Reatard.

JS: He was a good friend of ours.

ISP: The last job I ever had, I worked with him in Memphis. We worked in a 
bar. We sold cigarettes and took to-go orders. I left to join the Black Lips 
and he left to start his solo project at the same time.

JS: Yeah, we lived together for a while in Atlanta. Both of our bands kind of 
came up in the same scene, in the south, and started getting more known at the 
same time. It was a love/hate relationship. Mostly love. You know, he's buried 
next toIsaac Hayes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/aug/15/isaachayes.popandrock> in Memphis.

The song

Complication <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=feMvRfOQC50> by the Monks (1966)

Chosen because

It's a stone-cold classic of the form. The Monks were the original garage-rock 
costume band: five former American GIs based in Germany in the mid-60s who
shaved monks' tonsures 
<http://above-thefold.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2008/10/01monkspromo.jpg> on 
their heads and played some of the heaviest, fuzziest, weirdest proto-punk 
you'll ever hear.

JS: Hell yeah. Complication. The Monks. They were just so fucking weird. Only 
the Germans couldcook up an idea like that 
<http://www.frieze.com/issue/article/black_monk_time/> and think it could work. 
So absurd. They were extremely normal guys, in an extremely strange situation, 
being ex-US military who hated the military, starting a band with these creepy 
Phil Spector-type guys [design graduates and "existential visionaries" Karl 
Remy and Walther Niemann] who thought they were going to be the "anti-Beatles". 
The best garage rock costume band? Yeah, the Monks. Oh, andthe Mummies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9pxEieRaGmA>.

CA: I like the Music Machine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jJR_KGZO4U0>, all 
in black with one black glove.

JS: We did the gospel robes thing [with Black Lips/King Khan supergroup 
project the Almighty Defenders 
<http://www.last.fm/music/The+Almighty+Defenders/+images/35567169>]. But 
I don't really like costumes, unless they're awesome. Our choir robes weren't 
that awesome.

The song

Sunday's Coming <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nkJALwMKdXc> by Eddy Current 
Suppression Ring (2008)

Chosen because

They're one of the best garage bands around today. A bunch of oddballs from 
Melbourne specialising in stupid-clever riffs,weird philosophical ramblings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pIX6YbpJ5wM> and a brilliantly slanted sense of 
fun <http://www.dajuroka.co/images/9/95/EddyCurrent.jpg>.

JS: Is it Eddy Current Suppression Ring?

JB: Oh yeah I forgot about those guys, they're awesome!

JS: We did a tour with them in Australia. It's one of the few bands I've ever 
been really mesmerised by. I didn't know what it was: it's not quite punk, it's 
not quite garage. Yeah, they were really impressive. Other Australian bands?The 
Saints <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/jul/20/popandrock2>.

CA: The Missing Links <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFtD5NplShk>.

ISP: I love the Masters Apprentices 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_GJkjRo5jkg>.

JS: And the New Zealand stuff, too. I've just got into the Chills, on Flying 
Nun <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/may/15/flying-nun-indie-rought-trade>
. And the Clean.

The song

Fujiyama Attack <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HLuv5qNhKg> by Guitar Wolf 
(1999)

Chosen because

This eardrum-busting Nagasaki power trio show how garage has thrived worldwide 
– the truly international language of guitars and fuzz and screaming.

ISP: It's Guitar Wolf! We were just in Japan!

JS: Japan's the coolest place on earth.

ISP: We like to drink at Fifi's bar in Tokyo. It's owned by Fifi, the singer 
from [another legendarily raucous Japanese garage outfit]Teengenerate 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teengenerate>.

JS: Yeah, he has this bar, and keeps his entire record collection in there. 
It's like hanging out in his living room. You can pick out whatever record you 
want and play it. And the people there are so respectful, they always put the 
records back. If you were to do that in Atlanta or London, the records would be 
all over the floor, people would be playing Frisbee with them.

Garage is everywhere, from Sardinia to Slovakia. It's just kids having fun. 
It's rock'n'roll: everybody has the same things they wanna do, the same urges. 
It's the primal desire to drink and fuck.

The song

Do You Love Me? <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_nLk5yS7XE> by the Sonics 
(1965)

Chosen because

It's another classic. Perhaps the most celebrated 60s garage band of all.

JS: Yes! The Sonics! We played with them in Texas, we're playing with them 
again in November.

Have they still got it?

JB: If the singer would actually sing through a guitar amp, or the sound man 
would totally blow out the vocals, they would sound just as they did back then.

ISP: Exactly.

JS: The music still sounds just like it did.

JB: But you need that voice, blown out, in the red.

The song 


99th Floor <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oTa0TGJ8J74> by the Moving 
Sidewalks (1967)

Chosen because


It's a flashback to another stadium-filling rock star's garagey origins: this 
was ZZ Top guitarist Billy Gibbons's first band. This song's title was a nod to 
the aforementioned 13th Floor Elevators.

ISP: Moving Sidewalks! I met Billy Gibbons a while ago. I met him and my jaw 
kind of dropped, and I guess he thought I was going to say, "Billy Gibbons – ZZ 
Top!" and instead I said, "Billy Gibbons – Moving Sidewalks blew my fucking 
mind." And he was like, "I haven't heard that name in years!" He took down my 
address and sent me an advance copy of the Moving Sidewalks record when the 
reissue came out.

CA: He was Jimi Hendrix's favourite guitarist, too.

The song


Apples and Oranges <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w4aAgFnZgQ0> by Pink Floyd 
(1967)

Chosen because


Garage can mean a lot of things, from thudding, primitivist rock'n'roll to 
baroque, way-out psychedelic stuff – where this early, Syd Barrett-penned Pink 
Floyd single certainly belongs.

JS: Is this Country Teasers? The Rebel? Swell Maps? Don't know. Oh, right, 
Pink Floyd.

ISP: Ah yeah, Syd Barrett.

JS: If it's between the psych end and the rock'n'roll end of things, I wanna 
be right there in the middle. You've got to be in the middle and take the best 
of both worlds. I like [Pink Floyd's] The Piper at the Gates of Dawn, that's 
pretty rockin'. It doesn't meander too much, like when the Pretty Things went 
psychedelic – I didn't like that, it's too proggy. I don't like prog.

CA: I like three-minute psych songs, I don't like eight-minute psych songs.

JS: There's gotta be a hook or a chorus or something. Unless you're on acid, 
it doesn't really make sense.

ISP: Hawkwind <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p02-77XI1Gs> could do rockin' 
and psychedelic at once.

JS: I need to get more into Hawkwind.

• The Black Lips play four UK dates in September, and release the single New 
Directions on 22 August on Vice Records.
 