
Prince Charles’s Thought for the Day in this morning’s Today programme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qj9z> was well received far beyond his 
normal circle of support. After all the reverses that have marked out 2016 as 
the average liberal’s annus horribilis,a plea for tolerance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-christmas-day-message-today-future-monarch>
 from the heir to the throne wasan unexpectedly welcome intervention. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
 With a public debate soured after Brexit and the election of Donald Trump, it 
held a hint of regal rebuke, not least for the UK government for denying visas 
to bishops of the Syriac church whose persecution he was highlighting. Yet the 
actions of an institution as effective at managing public opinion as the 
monarchy should always be closely examined.

The prince has only done Thought for the Day twice before, and he took this 
opportunity to tidy up some loose ends. Without reneging on an ambition he 
expressed in an interview in 1994 to be “defender of faith” rather than “the 
faith”, he made his loyalty to the Christian church explicit. His appearance 
was also a public confirmation that the twitchy relationship he has with the 
BBC was on an improving trend. It is more than a decade since thenotorious 
off-camera display <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMSzIG4a5cw>of animosity by 
Charles to the corporation’s royal correspondent Nicholas Witchell, but last 
year an unflattering documentary about the prince and his PR man Mark Bolland 
in the wake of the death of Princess Dianawas delayed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/29/bbc-postpones-prince-charles-spin-doctor-documentary>
in a row over picture rights. So there is at least a restoration of amity, a 
sense that is endorsed by a second appearance on Radio 4 within a week, when on 
Christmas Day the prince features in a special edition of the comedy show Just 
a Minute.

No institution survives – and certainly not, like the monarchy, for more than 
300 years – without developing a nimble approach to compromise and concession. 
But this is about much more than the palace and the BBC. In only a few days a 
succession of small developments taken together amount to the kind of policy 
advance by stealth that is the hallmark of many successful royal initiatives. 
The Queen, who celebrated her 90th birthday this year and remains as popular 
and admired as ever, is stepping back from some of her good causes; last 
weekend, a new photographic portrait ofher, seated, with Charles 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/ap/article-4045408/Queens-new-portrait-features-Prince-Charles-guest-star.html>
 looming over her, was released to mark the end of her momentous year. Then, in 
a rare and unplanned intimation of mortality, the Queen and Prince Philip had 
to delay setting off for Christmas at Sandringham because both have heavy 
colds. Quietly, a sense of the inevitability of the succession has been 
reinforced.

The prince’s standing in public opinion has significantly improved since he 
married Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, in 2005, when an Ipsos Mori poll found 
barely 40% thought he would make a good king. Now he has 60% approval according 
to a survey earlier this year. It also found that the monarchy was thought to 
have an important role to play now and in the future, and thatmonarchy was 
preferred over a republic 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3720/Monarchy-popular-as-ever-ahead-of-Queens-90th-Birthday-celebrations.aspx#gallery[m]/4/>
 by 76% to 17% – a margin that increased if people were asked if they would 
prefer an elected president to a monarchy. That was when Barack Obama still had 
nearly a year ahead of him in the White House and Donald Trump was the joke 
presidential candidate. The monarchy may now have added lustre. All the same, 
like the whole ramshackle British constitution, it should always be kept under 
review.
 