
Breaking Bad star Bryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/02/breaking-bad-bryan-cranston-interview>
 is in Britain promoting his autobiography,A Life in Parts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/18/bryan-cranston-i-was-walter-white-a-life-in-parts-breaking-bad>
. I demurely took to the stage with him in London this week, in front of all 
those superfans andHeisenberg 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/breaking-bads-bryan-cranston-birth-598751>
 lookalikes, to introducehis talk for the Guardian Live series 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/an-evening-with-bryan-cranston-27774619635>
. He gave a storming one-man show, and sitting next to him gave me a sense of 
what it must have been like forJimmie Nicol, the stand-in drummer who toured 
with the Beatles  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2012/may/08/beatles-harry-benson-in-pictures#img-6>
for a fortnight in 1964 when Ringo Starr got tonsillitis: standing in a wave of 
adulation for which one is superfluous.

Bryan Cranston: 'I was Walter White – but I was never more myself'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/18/bryan-cranston-i-was-walter-white-a-life-in-parts-breaking-bad>
Cranston is respected for researching his roles, so I naturally asked him what 
it is like to takecrystal meth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/no-one-smuggles-oil-any-more-basra-police-battle-crystal-meth-epidemic>
. He replied that he had not tried it, but conceded that at a Californian 
dinner party he was prevailed upon to try one of the popular “suckers” or 
exotically flavoured narcotic lollipops (they were muchfavoured by the late pop 
legend Prince 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1344287/latest-hollywood-craze-is-for-berry-flavoured-lollipops-laced-with-powerful-opiates/>
). Bryan insisted on cutting the lolly to a fraction of the size that 
enthusiasts generally prefer, and even at this reduced level it gave him a 
benign feeling.

As for crystal meth, Cranston has a certain expertise. He said he watched a 
recent, solemn TV news report on the subject of a drug bust, in which the 
journalist said the meth recovered was tinged with blue, “famously the sign of 
good quality”. Cranston revealed that they tinged their crystal with blue on
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> so that it 
would look better on camera.

Overhead overheads



If Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/oct/25/boris-johnson-heathrow-third-runway-is-undeliverable-video>
 is heroically run over by the bulldozer and thethird Heathrow runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/25/third-heathrow-runway-taxies-to-take-off>
 goes ahead, but with no extra terminal space, then we can look forward to an 
extra portion of that essential airport experience: standing submissively yet 
resentfully in a line.

My colleague Stuart Heritage this week wrote about how people with boarding 
cards and designated seatsqueue unnecessarily at departure gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/24/dont-floss-peel-veg-wash-your-jeans-40-things-you-can-stop-doing-right-now>
. Why are they doing it? Is it just a masochistic love of queueing, and being 
seen to display your right to be on the plane? Not quite. Those people barging 
to the front are the ones with items of wheeled “carry on” luggage the size of 
Smart cars. They want to get them in the overhead lockers. If you’re not quick 
getting on a plane these days you’ll find the overhead lockers are taken up by 
these monsters and your bag will have to be crushed against your legs. A pain 
on long-haul.

So it won’t be long before Ryanair and EasyJet offer a new way of paying: 
reserved overhead luggage lockers at, shall we say, 30 quid a flight? It has to 
come.

Down with the clowns



The approach of Halloween brings with it the prospect of adults giving us 
their zombie impression: autopilot parent-trudging behind excitable little kids 
who are getting sweets door-to-door in scary dress-up. But the toxic 
scary-clown fad means that Halloween this year is a trickier prospect than 
usual. In Germany, the craze has swept the nation, leading to a16-year-old in 
clown costume getting stabbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/german-teenager-stabbed-trying-to-frighten-clown-mask-hammer-berlin-police>
. In the UK we are bound to see something similar on Monday.

For me, this phenomenon is the result of generations of bad faith. Baffled 
kids dragged to circuses assumed grown-ups knew what they were talking about, 
vis-a-vis the officially accepted funniness of clowns. Adults assumed the kids 
enjoyed it. But in a convulsion of boredom and discontent, the clown morphed 
into astock horror figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/oct/14/coulrophobia-why-clowns-trigger-our-fear-reflexes>
.

We need a new anthem to be sung by magistrates – Send Down the Clowns (with 
apologies toStephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/clowns-scary-black-lives-matter-arizona-halloween>
):

Isn’t it rich? / Aren’t they so sa-a-d / Ruffians dressing as clowns, it’s 
really too ba-a-ad. / Why are they clowns?/ Send down the clowns.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKOZhmsp6iBQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKOZhmsp6iBQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKOZhmsp6iBQ&media=>
 Stephen Sondheim accompanies Bernadette Peters on Send In the Clowns, in 1994  