The view from Middletown timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/middletown-timeline/embed.html>
In the early 1920s husband-and-wife sociologists Robert Staughton Lynd and 
Helen Merrell Lynd scoured America in search of a city “as representative as 
possible of contemporary American life”. They found Muncie, Indiana. “A typical 
city, strictly speaking, does not exist,” they conceded in the first paragraph. 
“But the city was selected as having many features common to a wide group of 
communities.” They didn’t tell anyone it was Muncie. They justcalled it 
Middletown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2aRFcRFNUNQ>.

They published their findings in 1929 with a detailed portrayal of a town 
becoming less devout and less deferent, more educated and more automated, where 
women were less likely to bake their own bread and more likely to work outside 
the home, young people lead more independent lives, where public speeches were 
getting shorter and schoolgirls preferred cotton to silk stockings.

Derisive of politicians (“Our politics smell to heaven,” said one business 
leader) Muncie residents were also fiercely loyal to the two main parties in 
ways that still ring true. “A man is a Republican or he is not,” argued one 
local editorial. “A Democrat or he is not, and the test of his partisanship is 
the support he gives his party.”
Union members outside the Warner Gear factory, 1960 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/fe4ee626515163a525904ed399b699b777ef193a/0_0_5715_3965/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/fe4ee626515163a525904ed399b699b777ef193a/0_0_5715_3965/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/d4b89fad67b06405f46f9279b51e6e115fb9145e/0_0_5715_3965/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/d4b89fad67b06405f46f9279b51e6e115fb9145e/0_0_5715_3965/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Warner Gear factory 
{{atom}}

Amid these shifts in gender, generation and religion, the central focus was on 
class. This was their central aim, tochallenge the myth of meritocracy and 
social fluidity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/feb/27/republican-attack-unions-class-wisconsin>
, and show how much the America one was born into shaped your life chances. 
Surveying the streets in the early winter’s morning, for example, they 
explained that it is in the working class part of town where lights go on at 
6am so labourers can make the early shift while the well-to-do areas remained 
in darkness. “[The] division into working class and business class constitutes 
the outstanding cleavage in Middletown,” they wrote. “The mere fact of being 
born upon one or the other side of the watershed roughly formed by these two 
groups is the most significant single cultural factor tending to influence what 
one does all day long throughout one’s life.”

Norman Birnbaum, a longtime Guardian reader and retired academic who contacted 
me on reading of this project, knew the Lynds in the late 1940s and early 
1950s. “Bob was the prototypical midwestern New Dealer and progressivist,” he 
said. “They were very proud of Middletown because they thought it brought into 
sharp profile some key problems.”

The book was released to rave reviews and enduring success. HL Mencken 
declared: “It reveals, in cold-blooded, scientific terms, the sort of lives 
millions of Americans are leading.” Stuart Chase at the Nation magazine wrote: 
“Whoever touches the book touches the heart of America.”
The corner of Walnut and Charles, Muncie, 1964 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/653778bfee9b00b0d8fc1b73e4434c0303285b04/0_0_2141_1515/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/653778bfee9b00b0d8fc1b73e4434c0303285b04/0_0_2141_1515/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/ca8884016449eaabffa9fd7c921b5e8717e1184e/0_0_2141_1515/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/ca8884016449eaabffa9fd7c921b5e8717e1184e/0_0_2141_1515/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 The corner of Walnut and Charles 
And so it is that Middletown 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/305468.Middletown>, and therefore Muncie, 
became a proxy for the quintessential America. “The Lynds tried to have it both 
ways,” saysJames Connolly, director of the Center for Middletown Studies 
<http://cms.bsu.edu/academics/centersandinstitutes/middletown> at Ball State 
University in Muncie. “They called it Middletown. They clearly wanted it to 
represent more than just this one community. But on the other hand they suggest 
that you shouldn’t generalise too quickly from it. But the reaction was: ‘This 
is the real America.’ And that conceit, however well you think it holds up, and 
it doesn’t hold up that well demographically, carries this whole enterprise 
forward. It’s the reason I have a job. It’s the reason why you’re here.”

{{callout link}}

And from there began what Sarah Igo, in The Averaged American 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/21/books/review/Stossel.t.html?_r=0>, describes 
as “the strange slippage between the typical and the good, the average and the 
ideal”.

In 1935 Robert Lynd, under pressure from his publishers, came back to do a 
follow-up, Middletown in Transition 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/305472.Middletown_in_Transition>, which 
examined the effects of the Great Depression on Muncie.

When the book came out in 1937 Muncie’s mayor said: “We think we are a typical 
city of typical Americans. We do not mind being in the spotlight.” None of 
that, it turned out, was remotely true.
Emerson School group, 1923 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/6a5cb03707bc94317a331d8960c69d3127abc20c/0_0_2881_2362/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/6a5cb03707bc94317a331d8960c69d3127abc20c/0_0_2881_2362/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/6369c0a36c3b7bd6c9f9432ec63f1aefd3278c52/0_0_2881_2362/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/6369c0a36c3b7bd6c9f9432ec63f1aefd3278c52/0_0_2881_2362/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Emerson School now Emerson dog park 
Whether Muncie liked being in the spotlight or not depended heavily on what 
that light exposed. “Muncie has always had a mixed response to the attention it 
has received since Middletown,” says Connolly. “On the one hand they really 
like this idea that this is quintessential America. They are the ur-Americans. 
They are the ground zero of American life. And that’s an attractive idea for 
them and for outside observers. On the other hand they would bridle at some of 
the ways that they were portrayed.”


When the acclaimed photographer Margaret Bourke-White took a series of 
photographs for Life magazine 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/c3/cf/35/c3cf3554fa9d498dd8aacd024e3f9839.jpg>
 that showedthe deep economic inequalities  
<http://imgsrc.art.com/img/print/print/margaret-bourke-white-muncie-mayor-rollin-bunch-having-breakfast-with-his-wife-and-bulldog-in-his-dining-room_a-g-4920262-4990000.jpg?w=894&h=671>
following the Depression, the town was in uproar. In 1982,as one of our readers 
noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/11/middletown-gary-younge-us-election-presidential-muncie-indiana#comment-85280992>
, PBS released a six-part documentary on Muncie called Middletown.One episode, 
set in Southside High School <https://vimeo.com/36651048>, which has since 
closed, depicted casual drug use, profanity and sexual banter while focusing 
considerable attention on an teenage interracial relationship. After tense 
discussions between local leaders, PBS and the film-makers,the episode was 
withdrawn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1982/03/31/arts/final-pbs-middletown-segment-is-withdrawn.html>
 and the series sponsor, Xerox, withdrew its sponsorship – but not its funding 
– from that particular program, whichhas since been released on DVD 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/06/movies/homevideo/seventeen-and-cooley-high-no-easy-as-but-powerful-lessons.html?_r=0>
. One person involved in the talks at the time told the New York Times that the 
decision was made to protect the children. ‘’It’s a very difficult issue of 
freedom of speech versus what these kids might have been doing to themselves. 
There’s a possibility that they really could be destroying their lives in 
saying some of the things they said in the film. In a way, you have to protect 
them – they’re minors, after all – from themselves.’’

And like a fairground mirror, Middletown gave America an image of itself that 
was both familiar and woefully distorted – an image that the American 
commentariat preferred to reality. For when the Lynds selected a city they 
settled on three key characteristics: that it be between 25,000 and 50,000 
people, that it was “self-contained” (not a “satellite” or suburb) and finally, 
that it should “have a small Negro and foreign-born population”. Muncie did not 
actually fit the bill for the final point. At 5% its black population was 
proportionally higher at the time than New York, Chicago and Detroit . It did 
have a small foreign-born population because the local business class imported 
workers from Tennessee and Kentucky. “There was a conscious attempt to keep 
foreign workers out,” says Connolly. “Because they wanted people to go home 
during slack times and they were worried foreigners would bring in dangerous 
ideas.” But once again, this made it atypical compared with other towns of its 
size.
Delaware Courthouse 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/52311fa9413df6d33f6530a355523586f57930cc/0_0_6533_4540/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/52311fa9413df6d33f6530a355523586f57930cc/0_0_6533_4540/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c6b30b1f2fda993a6526aa12ef16eb680a9afcab/0_0_6533_4540/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c6b30b1f2fda993a6526aa12ef16eb680a9afcab/0_0_6533_4540/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Delaware Courthouse 
The Lynds did this consciously because they wanted to concentrate on class and 
therefore avoid dealing with “two major variables” and deal instead with a 
“homogeonous, native-born population”. “They understood that they were doing 
that and they justified it in a social-scientific sense,” says Igo, an 
associate professor at Vanderbilt University. “They try to unmask this myth 
about class. But what it did was create this other myth about a representative 
America – a nostalgic, white nativist America.” That myth, says Igo, is 
enduring. It can be found inSarah Palin’s praise of the “real America” in 2008 
<http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/10/17/palin-visits-a-pro-america-kind-of-town/?_r=0>
 orRonald Reagan’s ad “It’s morning again in America” in 1984 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EU-IBF8nwSY> or even Donald Trump’s “Make 
America great again”. “Every country has a mythical sense of what it is, so 
it’s not unique to America,” says Igo.

Nor is it limited to Republicans. In the runup to the 2008 primaries Hillary 
Clinton’s chief strategist, Mark Penn, laid outa plan of attack against Barack 
Obama 
<http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/08/10/more-peeks-at-clinton-campaign-turmoil/>
. “His roots to basic American values and culture are at best limited. I cannot 
imagine America electing a president during a time of war who is not at his 
centre fundamentally American in his thinking and in his values ... Every 
speech should contain the line you were born in the middle of America to the 
middle class in the middle of the last century ... Let’s explicitly own 
‘American’ in our programmes, the speeches and the values. He doesn’t ... Let’s 
use our logo to make some flags we can give out. Let’s add flag symbols to the 
backgrounds.”
Mulberry looking north from Adams, Muncie, 1978 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/1e0457828f7c2e46ea2098ef85e7a1804b7e6b69/0_0_2786_2066/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/1e0457828f7c2e46ea2098ef85e7a1804b7e6b69/0_0_2786_2066/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/e4fe58fbc719cb85389efa146b4f4e65b68c03f1/0_0_2786_2066/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/e4fe58fbc719cb85389efa146b4f4e65b68c03f1/0_0_2786_2066/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Mulberry looking north from Adams Street 
During a drive around town, Yvonne Thompson, the African American director of 
Muncie’s Human Rights Office, says the town’s black population (now 12%, 
roughly the same proportion as the nation at large) which lives on the east 
side of the railroad tracks remains largely forgotten. For a long time there 
was no fire station and there is still no supermarket there, she explains, and 
if a train is on the line and the roads are blocked it can slow down the 
response time for ambulances. “We have to remind people that we’re here,” she 
says. “And that we’re not going away, so don’t forget about us.”


We pull up at Shaffer chapel and she shows me a plaque. On 7 August 1930 a 
white mob in Marion, Indiana, some 40 miles away, broke into the local jail 
with sledgehammers, dragged three black teenagers out of their cell, beat them 
and then hung two of them from a tree by their necks (the third managed to get 
away). The night before, they had been arrested and charged with robbing and 
murdering a white factory worker, Claude Deeter, and raping his white 
girlfriend, Mary Ball. (Ball later testified she had not been raped.)Lawrence 
Beitler took pictures of the crowd 
<http://bloximages.newyork1.vip.townnews.com/dallasweekly.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/2/60/260733be-de53-11e4-a930-3fab186cb747/5526039c2a740.image.jpg?resize=1115%2C593>
, including children, that had come to watch the bodies swing. Over the next 10 
days he would sell thousands in what became the inspiration for Billie 
Holiday’s Strange Fruit and is now an iconic image.
Muncie Civic Theatre, 1981 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/a7df9b20eca3c31e945d2e4346cc1d17b8829e3d/0_0_5680_3753/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/a7df9b20eca3c31e945d2e4346cc1d17b8829e3d/0_0_5680_3753/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/98c6db1ce1466c3919b9858da33069e9e5868d15/0_0_5680_3753/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/98c6db1ce1466c3919b9858da33069e9e5868d15/0_0_5680_3753/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Muncie Civic Theatre 
The bodies were left to hang overnight and were cut down in the morning. By 
that time news reached Reverend JE Johnson, a pastor and mortician 30 or so 
miles away in Muncie. Knowing that Marion had no black undertakers, he braved 
the trip to Marion that morning to pick up their bodies and prepare them for a 
Christian burial. When rumours spread that a white mob was coming to take the 
bodies back, Muncie’s black community armed themselves in preparation and the 
town’s white sheriff, Fred Puckett, stood with them. The next day Puckett and a 
posse from Muncie’s black community escorted Johnson to the county line from 
where he continued to Marion to deliver them for burial.

This took place just one year after Middletown was published. But the 
experiences of people like Johnson and many of those who stood with him that 
day, are omitted from the “typical” American story of Middletown.

“How are you going to have a thorough study of this town and leave us out?” 
asks Thompson, who’s wearing a black T-shirt stating: “It Matters.” “And then 
tell everybody it’s the ‘real America’.”

Archive photographs by Ball State University Libraries Archives and Special 
Collections <http://cms.bsu.edu/academics/libraries/collectionsanddept/archives>
; current photographs byDavid Levene for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidlevene>

 * Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is expensive – but 
supporting us isn’t. If you value and enjoy this approach to covering politics, 
please help to fund our journalism through eithera one-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_middletown> 
ora regular 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_gyoungemiddletownus_footer>
 contribution. 
{{newsletter signup}}
 