
Mel Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mel-brooks> is 82 now. In the 40s 
he fought in the second world war, in the 1950s he pioneered TV sketch writing 
with The Sid Caesar Show, and in the 1970s he single-handed invented the movie 
spoof with Blazing Saddles (1974), a pastiche of western gags that paved the 
way for the Airplane! film, the Scary Movie franchise and recent run of 
parodies that continues with next month's Disaster Movie. Nothing this 
groundbreaking Jewish comedian ever did, however, has lasted like The 
Producers, the film he directed in 1968 from a script he wrote himself and 
finished on a budget of just $941,000.

There has never been a movie quite like it, in which two theatre producers - 
one (Zero Mostel) a sleazy opportunist, the other (Gene Wilder) a wide-eyed 
dreamer - raise more money than they need to fund a bad-taste musical about 
Hitler that (they think) will be a dead-cert flop, only to find that their plan 
backfires and their tax-loss disaster becomes a Broadway hit.

After 23 years of cult success, The Producers made news again by becoming a 
New York stage production in 2001, taking 12 awards at that year's Tonys, 
before being turned back into a movie again in 2005. This month it turns 40, in 
a special-edition DVD that refuses to show its age, still fresh, still funny 
and still breathtakingly outrageous. Here, Brooks explains the film's 
remarkable journey.

1. Broadway
 'I don't know what kept that movie alive' ... Mel Brooks. Photo: Eamonn McCabe
 "I worked for a producer who wore a chicken fat-stained homburg and a black 
alpaca coat. He pounced on little old ladies and would make love to them. They 
gave him money for his plays, and they were so grateful for his attention. 
Later on there were a couple of guys who were doing flop after flop and living 
like kings. A press agent told me, 'God forbid they should ever get a hit, 
because they'd never be able to pay off the backers!' I coupled the producer 
with these two crooks and - BANG! - there was my story."

2. Adolf Hitler

"It was such a delicious scheme, and I said to myself: so what is the flop? 
They've got to make a surefire flop, one that simply can't run! But what would 
have people packing up and leaving the theatre even before the first act is 
over? Well, how about something about Hitler! How about a musical! A gay romp 
with Adolf and Eva in the Berchtesgaden! Well, that would certainly send the 
Jews flying out of the theatre! So that's what I called my script: Springtime 
For Hitler."

3. The orchestra

"I only had eight weeks to get it all in the can, including a big production 
number, Springtime For Hitler. I was lucky to have John Morris as my composer. 
He'd never done a score before. I said, 'Look, I've written a beautiful song 
called Springtime For Hitler. Forget the lyrics. If you sing the lyrics, it's 
crazy, but if you just stay with the tune, it's a very beautiful song, all 
you've got to do is play variations on that. When we have a sad scene, play it 
sad. When we have a happy scene, play it happy.' He said, 'Well, that's a good 
start!'"

4. A tuna sandwich

"Sidney Glazier was the only producer who would do this. He'd won an Academy 
award for The Eleanor Roosevelt Story, so I knew the guy had good taste, but I 
didn't know why he'd want to do this crazy comedy. I went to see him, and he 
was eating a tuna fish sandwich, and he said, 'Read it to me.' So I began to 
read it to him ... When I got to the part about Springtime For Hitler he 
exploded. He was choking with laughter; he came sputtering up from behind his 
desk and he said, 'BY GOD, WE'LL MAKE THIS MOVIE!'"

5. Horse racing

"Sidney went to a guy called Louis Wolfson, a rich philanthropist. He also was 
a great racetrack enthusiast, so he was a gambler. And when he heard my idea, 
he said, 'Oh good, this is getting back at Hitler. You can't bring dictators 
down on a soapbox with rhetoric. But if you can make people LAUGH at them, 
you've won.' He put up half the money. It cost $941,000 to make. The other half 
was put up by a producer called Joseph E Levine, who said, 'I'll do it if you 
change the title.' That's when we decided to call it The Producers."

6. Gene Wilder's eyes

"I found Gene in a Bertolt Brecht play called Mother Courage. My wife, Anne 
Bancroft, was starring in it, and Gene and I got to be friends. He'd say, 'Why 
do people laugh at me?' I said, 'Because you're a funny guy.' He said, 'But I 
don't intend to be funny.' I said, 'That's what comedy is all about: having the 
audience discover it.' So I said, 'I'm writing this script, and you're going to 
be Leo Bloom.' He said, 'Ha ha, that'll be the day!' Then, two years later, I 
went back to him. By that time he had become a star, but he read the script and 
cried. Gene was nuts. Crazy. I loved Gene, because he was always an inch and a 
half away from hysteria. It was right there in his eyes. He was like a trapped 
animal and, in The Producers, Max Bialystock is the thing that's trapping him."

7. The Tuesday Night Gourmet Club

"I knew it was always Zero Mostel that had to play Max Bialystock. Who else 
would pounce on old ladies to get the last dollar out of them? But Zero 
wouldn't do it. Now, in those days I was part of a club called The Tuesday 
Night Gourmet Club, and we would meet at Chinese restaurants. It consisted of 
Speed Vogel, a clothing merchant and sculptor, and George Mandel, a novelist, 
who was best friends with Joseph Heller, and Joseph Heller was very good 
friends with Mario Puzo. Speed knew Zero's wife, because they had a loft 
together where Speed sculpted and Zero painted, and Speed knew Kate, Zero's 
Irish wife. He said, 'Kate would love this, we gotta get it to Kate.' So he 
gave her the script, she loved it, and she made Zero do it. She said, 'No more 
sex,' or something."

8. Peter Sellers

"Peter Sellers was a champion of The Producers and he nearly ruined it. It was 
about to open in England, and he took out a double-page ad in the Sunday Times 
that said, 'This is the funniest and the best picture ever made.' The critics 
said, 'Hmm, we'll be the judges of that, thank you.' So I got good and bad 
reviews because they decided that they would judge it for themselves and not 
just take Peter Sellers' word for it."

9. Frank Sinatra

"I only got one really great review at the time, and that was, 'No one will be 
seated during the last 88 minutes - they'll all be on the floor laughing.' Oh, 
and someone at Newsweek said it was best lunatic humour since the Marx brothers 
invaded the opera. But word of mouth floated it, and the next year I found 
myself at the Oscars. Why? I don't know! I was just lucky. I was up against 
Stanley Kubrick's 2001! I was up against The Battle Of Algiers! I said, 'Forget 
it.' But sure enough, when Frank Sinatra was giving out the award, he said, 
'Best Original Screenplay... Mel Brooks!' I got up and I took the award and I 
said, 'I must tell you all what's deep in my heart, what's really in my heart.' 
They waited, and I said, 'Ba-DUM ... Ba-DUM ... Ba-DUM ...' And then I left!"

10. The New York Times

"The first review, God bless the critics, was by Renata Adler in the New York 
Times. She crucified it. She said it was a lousy picture - not worth seeing. 
And when you do a little arts picture like that, you need the Times. You can't 
survive without it. I don't know what kept that movie alive! I mean, it wasn't 
a Doris Day/Rock Hudson movie! It was definitely bizarre. Who would go see a 
film about Hitler and two Jews trying to outsmart their investors? Who cares 
about that?"

Â· The Producers is re-released on DVD on August 25
 