
Transport was one of the winners in Philip Hammond’s painfully cautious autumn 
statement last month 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
. Considering the size of Britain’s infrastructure spending backlog, and the 
cost of the rail, road and air projects now on the national wishlist, the 
chancellor’sadditional £1.1bn transport spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
, with £110m earmarked for the new east-west rail link between Oxford and 
Cambridge, was perhaps an unambitious amount. But it was a decent down payment, 
and it was a step towards an embrace of public investment to boost growth and 
support the regions. It was not radical Keynesianism; but it was not quite the 
old fiscal straitjacket either. It was a touch of pragmatism amid the 
ideological sterilities.

On Tuesday the transport secretary Chris Grayling began to fill in some 
details. The headline announcement is the gradual ending of the division 
between the privately owned train operating companies and the 
government-controlled Network Rail (NR), which is responsible for the tracks. 
Under Mr Grayling’s plans, new franchises would integrate more closely with NR. 
This already happens in Scotland and has been trialled in parts of the English 
network, not always with success. East West Rail  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/new-fully-privatised-rail-line-chris-grayling-plans-oxford-cambridge>
will be a wholly separate organisation, responsible for designing, building and 
operating the route, run by the private sector, not involving NR.

Most people reading Mr Grayling’s announcement will struggle to find enough in 
it to justify the instantreaction of the RMT rail union  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-38212467>that this represents “a slippery 
slope to privatisation,” not least because Mr Grayling explicitly told MPs on 
Tuesday: “I am not privatising Network Rail.” The transport secretary insisted 
later that he is simply “testing the way we do things,” which, if true, would 
justify a more cautious response.

The problem, though, is that Mr Grayling is not really the pragmatist he is 
pretending to be. He may not be privatising NR. But he is certainly 
discriminating against the public sector and against forms of public regulation 
he dislikes. Asked by the Liberal Democrat MP Tom Brake if there had been a 
cost-benefit analysis on the East West Rail private sector decision, or whether 
NR would be allowed to bid, Mr Grayling made clear he was not interested in a 
fair test of what works. This is just as ideological, but in a different way.

Most egregious of all is the way Mr Grayling has torn up an agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/transport-for-london-plans-ditched-chris-grayling-sadiq-khan>
 made by his predecessor when Boris Johnson was London mayor to allow Transport 
for London to take control – not ownership – of the capital’s suburban rail 
network as franchises come up for renewal.Hugely promoted 11 months ago 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/tfl-to-take-command-of-londons-entire-suburban-rail-network-a3161586.html>
 as a partnership that would put passengers’ needs first, this plan was killed 
off by Mr Grayling this week. TfL will now only be “more closely involved” in 
franchise specification. This is far from the “control” promised to Mr Johnson 
by Patrick McLoughlin in January. It is a small-minded and partisan betrayal. 
It is impossible not to assume it has happened because there is now a Labour 
mayor in City Hall and an ideologue in charge of the transport department.

Mr Grayling may have more to say about rail needs in the north in due course. 
But the treatment of the public realm in the south – marginalised in London, 
and excluded from the east-west link – is a worrying precedent. Public money 
and a partnership with local government should be fundamental to rail network 
modernisation, north and south. If Mr Grayling refuses to invest and share 
control in areas where Labour has power, the neglect of the north will continue 
and economic inequality between the south-east and the rest of Britain only 
deepen. When Crossrail opens, work on HS2 starts in the south, and if the likes 
of Crossrail 2 also get a jump-start on plans to forge better rail links across 
the north, it will hardly be surprising if northerners conclude that they have 
been deliberately left behind.
 