
Few organisations within the British film industry have done more to establish 
themselves as part of the cinematic landscape than Film4, thanks in large part 
to four decades of impressively consistent branding (the company must now be 
entitled to take ownership, Yves Klein-style, of their preferred shade of red).

This month, it releases a slew of titles from its back catalogue on iTunes and 
Amazon and – perhaps recognising that iconic brands are built on more than just 
their hits – they’re not all canonical classics. Take 2001’sThe Low Down, the 
largely forgotten feature debut of British director Jamie Thraves. Made around 
the turn of the millennium, the film was one of a rash of Blair-era paeans to 
the lives, loves and drinking habits of the kinds of young Londoners whose 
biggest problem was deciding how to kit out the Camden loft they could afford 
to buy with their part-time jobs “in the media”. So entirely of its era is it 
that it’s now something of a mesmerising time capsule.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk&media=>
Kate Ashfield and Aidan Gillen play mumbling lovebirds Ruby and Frank, who 
navigate love in the time of Loaded and affordable lager with a listless 
self-assurance that betrays The Low Down’s central assumption: that its 
audience want nothing more than to jump through the screen and join the ranks 
of its boho protagonists. That may have been true in 2000, but now that such 
characters are more likely to be written off as deluded members of a 
metropolitan elite, it’s a surreal sight to behold. Held up against 
contemporaneous outings such as Human Traffic and Late Night Shopping, The Low 
Down is undoubtedly a nuanced piece of work — one that nimbly treads the same 
low-key, emotionally complex ground that the US mumblecore movement would later 
colonise. Like so many of that movement’s key films, however, it’s also 
screamingly self-indulgent.

Made by, for and about London “creatives”, the film is most striking as a 
document of the British film industry’s capacity for unchecked self-regard. 
What are we to make, for instance, of an extended cameo from comedy duo (and 
latter-day national treasures) Adam and Joe? Neither looks especially 
comfortable playing himself, and though the film seems chuffed to have bagged 
them, it’s hard to imagine their presence struck too resonant a chord at the 
film’s various international festival berths. Now, though, with 16 years of 
hindsight and a cinematic landscape unrecognisable from the one in which it was 
created, just try to tear your eyes away from it.
 