
Before Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> 
unleashed Jane Eyre on the world, she was already – in secret – an accomplished 
fantasy writer. Her and her writer siblings’ collaborative worlds of Glass Town 
and Angria are as complex as Game of Thrones: fantastical, magical kingdoms, 
steeped in violence, politics, lust and betrayal. In private letters, Brontë 
called it her “world below”, a private escape where she could act out her 
desires and multiple identities.

Written in dozens of miniature books, these manuscripts – with curious, 
secretive titles such as A Peep into a Picture Book, The Spell, A Leaf from an 
Unopened Volume – are not only an astonishing example of craftsmanship, but 
contain extraordinary, uncensored content. The Brontës’ father had poor 
eyesight and could not read them, so Charlotte was able to write in confidence. 
Over the course of 10 years, she created characters and events that became 
inextricably bound with her own selfhood, some of whom we know and love in her 
later works.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea875e41671fed417e586b4e474d223880dd0b7%2F0_0_6753_4196%2F6753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB's%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%27s%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea875e41671fed417e586b4e474d223880dd0b7%2F0_0_6753_4196%2F6753.jpg>
 Map of Verdopolis, or Glass Town; part of an imaginary history created by the 
Brontë siblings – first by Charlotte and Branwell, and later developed by Emily 
and Ann. After 1834, Charlotte and Branwell concentrated on an evolution of the 
Glass Town Confederacy, called Angria. Photograph: The British Library Board, 
Ashley 2468, f.1v 
The fiery, passionate dynamic between Jane Eyre and Edward Rochester has 
captivated readers and writers for nearly two centuries. Rochester’s dark, 
brooding sexuality matched with Jane’s strong mind and determined nature has 
crowned them one of the most powerful couples in English literature. But where 
did they come from? How did Charlotte, then a single woman living in Haworth, 
imagine such a passionate relationship?

From the age of 10, Brontë devoured accounts of military men, revelled in the 
sensual, exotic stories of Arabian Nights

The answer can be found almost two decades earlier when, in 1829, a 
13-year-old Charlotte began building a wild, exotic kingdom in Two Romantic 
Tales. Set on the golden shores of West Africa, this volume transports readers 
through the haunted misty Mountains of the Moon – home of the gods – through to 
the sweeping, “burning air” of the Sahara desert, where the brutal Ashantee 
tribesman cry out for war. She creates metropolitan cities, with elegant 
streets and glittering skylines that “rise, soar … the buildings spring like 
magic”. She delights in the dense forests that nestle the estates and palaces 
of gentry and royalty: “Here the tufted olive, the fragrant myrtle, the stately 
palm-tree … the rich vine and the queenly rose mingled in sweet and odorous 
shadiness.” It is in one of these secluded palaces that we find an early 
Rochester: the dangerously dark Duke of Zamorna.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d40e6d294e49363907d0202694a39c5c633dc94%2F0_77_1640_2049%2F1640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB's%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%27s%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d40e6d294e49363907d0202694a39c5c633dc94%2F0_77_1640_2049%2F1640.jpg>
 Illustration of Charlotte Brontë at home, writing with her ailing father in 
the background. Photograph: Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
Zamorna is the king of Charlotte’s fantasy world. With the ever-maturing 
Charlotte’s pen, he is described as “passion and fire unquenchable, as 
impetuous sin and stormy pride, as a young duke – young demon!”

Zamorna grew out of the racy material that Charlotte loved reading: from the 
age of 10, she devoured accounts of military men, fixating especially on the 
rivalry between Wellington and Napoleon, the age’s two titans of war. She 
revelled in the sensual, exotic stories of Arabian Nights; in Walter Scott’s 
sweeping battle landscapes with their heroic, warrior clansmen; was fascinated 
by Byron’s scandalous life and works. Like her literary and historical idols, 
Zamorna is muscular, charismatic and radiating sexual mystique: he’s a 
prototype Rochester. He is driven by instinct, considers matrimony a loose 
commitment and struggles with his degenerate lifestyle and inner demons: a 
devil in need of redemption. Devil-like red is worn by all of Zamorna’s 
admirers, just as Rochester’s drawing room is draped in crimson, a symbol of 
his appetite for luxury and decadence.

It was only in 1839, at the very end of her fantasy writing, that Brontë 
discovered her ideal heroine. In tale after tale, Charlotte filled her kingdom 
with beautiful wives and mistresses decked in the finest clothes and jewels. 
Despite the glitz and glamour, however, they all lack any form of autonomy or 
personality. Even worse, in most cases, Charlotte killed off her leading ladies 
with a “broken heart” when their husband either neglected or abandoned them. 
Mary Percy, one of Charlotte’s leading ladies, is left to rot away in a 
secluded tower when her husband Zamorna spurns her and leaves for war.

However, when Charlotte turned 24, she changed her way of thinking about 
women: in Henry Hastings, Elizabeth Hastings was born. Elizabeth has a “wan 
complexion, expressive features and dark hair smoothly combed in two plain 
folds from her forehead”. She possesses strong morals and refuses to submit to 
passion without the prospect of marriage. Does this description remind you of 
“poor obscure plain and little” Jane? A girl who falls in love with a married 
man and, in order to keep her integrity, fights against her heart and soul to 
conform to what she feels is right? Elizabeth Hastings is Jane Eyre in a 
parallel universe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ecec843c006acd2aa4c66bbe86ce632aa85ddb6%2F178_31_1627_976%2F1627.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB's%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20history%20of%20Jane%20Eyre%3A%20Charlotte%20Bront%C3%AB%27s%20private%20fantasy%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fthe-secret-history-of-jane-eyre-charlotte-brontes-private-fantasy-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ecec843c006acd2aa4c66bbe86ce632aa85ddb6%2F178_31_1627_976%2F1627.jpg>
 Charlotte Gainsbourg as Jane Eyre in the 1996 film adaptation. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/MIRAMAX 
Both women are of course versions of Charlotte herself, who, according to the 
memoirs of her friends, thought herself “old and ugly”. Like Jane, Elizabeth is 
a mirror into Brontë’s soul, who, through her legacy of heroines, unleashed an 
inspirational new voice for womankind, proposing that women did not need to 
rely on the whims of men. When Elizabeth rejects her suitor’s offer of becoming 
his mistress she feels “a secret triumph” that she had been “left entirely to 
[her] own guidance”. Only a year later, Brontë revealed her thoughts on 
marriage to her dear friend Ellen Nussey: “I am tolerably well convinced that I 
shall never marry at all.”

At the end of 1839, Brontë said goodbye to her fantasy world in a manuscript 
called Farewell to Angria. More and more, she was finding that she preferred to 
escape to her imagined worlds over remaining in reality – and she feared that 
she was going mad. So she said goodbye to her characters, scenes and subjects. 
Brontë imagined her beautiful kingdom, in “every variety of shade and light 
which morning, noon and evening – the rising, the meridian & the setting sun – 
can bestow upon them”. She wrote of the pain she felt at wrenching herself from 
her “friends” and venturing into lands unknown: “I feel almost as if I stood on 
the threshold of a home and were bidding farewell to its inmates.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Little did she know that eight years later, she would arrive at a country 
manor, in the depths of the Yorkshire countryside, with a familiar governess, a 
tyrannous aristocrat, and a hidden monster in the attic.


Tales of Glass Town, Angria, and Gondal is published by Oxford World’s 
Classics at £12.99 andcan be purchased from the Guardian Bookshop for £10.39 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tales-of-glass-town-angria-and-gondal.html>.

 * The British Library is celebrating Charlotte Brontë’s 200th birthday on 21 
April <http://www.bl.uk/events/happy-birthday-charlotte>.
 