
No one at 40 puts much thought or planning into the distant day that they will 
be 60. In 1995, women in their 40s learned that, sometime in the next century, 
their pensionable age would rise. From 2010, it would drift upwards until by 
2020, women, like men, would be 65 before they were eligible. The oldest in the 
group, those born early in 1950, would see their pension date slip by just a 
couple of months; those born after October in 1953 would wait a whole year. 
Little was made of the change. It was not a perfectly fair system, but all this 
lay years ahead.

Women’s state pension age rise: an unfair burden or a necessary reform?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
In 2011, all that changed. The coalition government decided equalisation must 
be brought forward two years to 2018; and that by 2020, the new state pension 
age for both men and women would be raised to 66.The upshot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/state-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign>
 is that women born at the end of 1953 or in 1954 will be around 65 before they 
are eligible. These changes are coming in so sharply that a year’s difference 
in age can mean an extra three years’ wait for a pension. They were only 
clarified when the people concerned were already at least 57.

No one is complaining about equalising state pension age. Even though many 
women of this generation were still steeply discriminated against in terms of 
pay and access to pensions, equalisation is accepted as fair. But for a 
government that defends its protection of generous benefits to older people – 
the winter fuel allowance, say, or free TV licences, or the freedom travel pass 
– on the grounds that pensioners can’t suddenly compensate for lost income, the 
failure to make sure that future pensioners were individually informed of the 
changes is a serious administrative failure.At the time, protesters 
<http://www.rosaltmann.com/womens_SPA.htm> argued that the consequences would 
be unfair and disproportionate, not least because women would have no time to 
make up for a loss of pension income that could amount to £10,000. They argued 
that equalisation should return to its original timetable of completion by 
2020. The most forceful of the campaigners was the director general of Saga, 
Ros Altmann.

State pension changes 'smash' women's expectations, MPs warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/11/state-pension-changes-smash-womens-expectations-mps-warn>
Baroness Altmann, as the pensions minister, now sits across the desk from her 
former self. She says she has shot her bolt, done all she can to try to 
persuade colleagues to soften the impact of equalisation, and failed. It would 
be too expensive. Rightly, MPs on the Commons pensions committee are holding 
her feet to the fire. Inan interim report 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmworpen/550/55003.htm#_idTextAnchor019>
 published on Monday it called for urgent action on concerns that go beyond the 
impact of rushing through age equalisation. On top of the unwelcome and 
sometimes unexpected raising of the age, from April, all new claimants will 
start to receive the new state pension instead of the old two-tier pension. MPs 
say the statements sent on request to show how much a new pensioner can expect 
to receive are confusing and unduly complex; MPs warn that people, already 
wrestling with the impact of delay, may also be getting unrealistically 
optimistic expectations of their future incomes. Retirement, when it comes, may 
be an unpleasant shock.

The Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> is a huge department with many 
very complex responsibilities. It makes life-changing judgments in the lives of 
vulnerable people and, as the demand for food banks shows, too often it gets 
them wrong. Now it must move fast and decisively to make sure that the MPs’ 
next inquiry is not into a new pensions crisis.

• The picture caption on this article was amended on 12 January 2016. An 
earlier version described Ros Altmann as the former pensions minister; she is 
the current pensions minister. The text of the article was tweaked to make this 
clear.
 