Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVOj40HC5R1s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVOj40HC5R1s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVOj40HC5R1s%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Please click here to view <>

In December 2011, at a cinema on the edge of Hyde Park – a stone's throw from 
Edgware Road, London's Arab quarter – 300 punters were filing out of a test 
screening ofDjinn <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1770672/>, the United Arab 
Emirates' first horror film and the eighth full-length Emirati feature to date.
Image Nation Abu Dhabi <http://imagenationabudhabi.com/en>, the 
government-backed company who made it, had scored a coup: persuading Texas 
Chainsaw Massacre legendTobe Hooper <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tobe_Hooper> 
to direct. And it seemed to have paid dividends. "It's the return of the 
master," crowed one viewer at the screening.

Then Djinn vanished. It didn't appear at the Dubai film festival, where it had 
been offered a red-carpet premiere. Promised spring and summer 2012 release 
dates came and went. It was puzzling: shooting on the story – aRosemary's Baby 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/80947/rosemary-s-baby>-esque spooker set 
in a fishing village redevelopment inRas al-Khaimah 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ras_al-Khaimah> – was nearly a year back; 
post-production almost six months gone.

After Djinn's Cannes launch in 2010 hailing the country's entry into the 
commercial fast-lane and the earlyrash of publicity 
<http://www.thenational.ae/arts-culture/film/a-visit-to-the-rak-set-of-the-uaes-first-major-horror-movie#page2>
 in government-sponsored publications, the silence was deafening. With Hooper's 
imprimatur and an intriguing collision of modern genre thrills and traditional 
Arabic culture, Djinn had the potential finally to bring global attention to the
fledgling UAE film scene 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/oct/27/united-arab-emirates-film-industry>
 ; "a much-awaited film for all our distributors around the world", Fortissimo, 
Image Nation's international sales agent, was saying. But come the end of the 
year, more tumbleweed.

Shortly after the London screening, an Italian website, Moviesushi 
<http://www.moviesushi.it/cinema/item/7888-l-ultimo-film-di-tobe-hooper-boicottato-dai-produttori-in-esclusiva-le-prime-immagini/7888-l-ultimo-film-di-tobe-hooper-boicottato-dai-produttori-in-esclusiva-le-prime-immagini.html>
, printed a possible reason for Djinn's disappearance. According to a source on 
the production: "Someone close to Abu Dhabi's royal family has seen the movie 
and does not appreciate its portrayal of the UAE, and considers the movie to be 
politically subversive." The old suspicion surrounding the Emirati industry had 
risen again: that it was too tightly supervised from above (usually through the
National Media Council 
<http://www.abudhabi.ae/egovPoolPortal_WAR/appmanager/ADeGP/Citizen?_nfpb=true&_pageLabel=p_citizen_departments&lang=en&did=137044>
 censorship body) to blossom freely.

Michael Garin 
<http://imagenationabudhabi.com/en/team/about-us/our-people/our-board/michael-garin.html>
, Image Nation's CEO, says the story is a "total lie" and that "politics are 
not what we're about". The company is still, according to him, "excited" about 
Djinn, which they plan to have on sale in February at the Berlinale and to 
release in the UAE in the first quarter of 2013. He blames the delay on having 
to fulfil the requirements of theDirector's Guild of America 
<http://www.dga.org/> (DGA), "things that we would never have to do with any 
other local production": safeguards for directors like mandatory test 
screenings and the right to produce two director's cuts before Image Nation 
takes control of the film.

But one source who worked on Djinn says that there may well have been 
high-level concerns – if not objecting to the portrayal of the country, then at 
least failing to understand the project. "I do find that believable," they say. 
"Horror films are not appreciated in these parts. They are generally seen as 
totally foreign, culturally speaking, and the fate of Djinn shows a disregard 
so quick it ignores the fact that regardless, horror is still one of the most, 
if not the most commercially lucrative genre."

Garin disagrees with that judgment, saying Image Nation's research shows that 
UAE audiences are "thrilled" at the prospect: "It's a genre that they really 
like that is now in their own language and their own locale." It's true there 
is no fundamental incompatibility between Islam and the film's subject matter: 
djinns are part of Qur'anic cosmology and related folklore, and there is a 
small existing body ofArab-language horror 
<http://english.al-akhbar.com/node/13233>, mostly from Egypt: Sadir Guhannam 
(The Ambassador of Hell), from 1945, is cited as the first such film.

Another person involved with Djinn believes that local pride was the real 
reason for its awkward gestation, and for the rewrites and restructuring that 
Garin admits have caused holdups with the DGA. "I suspect that the Arab Spring 
was not a good thing for poor Djinn," they say – believing that such a flagship 
film project going out under an American film director's name may have been a 
source of embarrassment and what exacerbated the creative struggles.

Post-Tahrir, there has been throughout the region an upswell in Arab pride and 
a desire to not be seen in hock to western governments that, in the UAE, has 
resulted in greater pressure to prioritise Emirati citizens – already a loaded 
issue in a country where only 13% are native-born, and reliance on foreign 
expertise is essential. The source speaks of a sudden "coldness" by the UAE 
leadership towards the idea of westerners in high-profile positions, and this 
seems to have hit the cultural sphere: Peter Scarlet, at the Abu Dhabi film 
festival, David Shepheard, at the film commission, and Tony Orsten, at local 
media zone twofour54, all departed this year as heads of their respective 
institutions 
<http://varietyarabia.com/Docs.Viewer/77cf7d01-b96d-468e-b4e2-0a927cef4b90/default.aspx>
.

Garin won't comment on the specifics of what has happened on Djinn. But it 
shows the tensions in the film industry in the UAE, as a potential beacon of 
its lightspeed passage into the modern world. The CEO is trying to introduce a 
sense of proportion to the country's first steps in the business where, 
famously, nobody knows anything: "One of the biggest problems generally here is 
this is a society where failure is punished severely. Failure of all kinds. One 
of my biggest challenges in building up Image Nation is making people feel safe 
to fail. If you don't take creative risks, you'll never achieve creative 
excellence."

Djinn, with a budget just over $5m (£3.1m), is not a big risk for such an 
oil-rich nation – but the money is beside the point (Garin admits that the 
economics of making films for Emirati audiences, in a country that still has 
under 300 screens, won't add up for another five years). How it's treated and 
what form it's released in by the present Image Nation team (it was 
commissioned by a previous incarnation) could indicate the future direction of 
the wider Gulf industry. Garin says the company now prefers a more modest 
strategy, focusing on locally themed, locally staffed productions.

One of the sources agrees that a period of "naïve optimism" is coming to an 
end – "a birthing period in an environment of 'just throw money at it' that 
allowed people to believe we could compete with Hollywood by approaching the 
product in terms of scale". "Acceptable losses" likeCity of Life <>, Dubai's 
much-publicised feature debut, andBlack Gold 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146086/black-gold>, Qatar's 2011 oil 
epic, which looks to have haemorrhaged around $50m, are likely to be scarcer 
from now on – particularly given the world economic climate.

Djinn, when it goes on release, could be left as a relic of that era. What 
remains to be seen if Garin's slow-stream alternative for UAE cinema – relying 
partly on the Arab Film Studio lab to gradually drum the country's cinema 
skills-base up to critical mass – is fast enough for the country's young 
film-makers. There is talent there: that much is obvious from City of Life 
directorAli F Mostafa <>'s visual pep, and the irrepressible supply of shorts 
that have mostly been the country's showings at its own film festivals. Garin 
is aware of the need to feed the younger, media-literate and cosmopolitan 
generation that is growing up in the Emirates: "[Otherwise] we're going to lose 
them to LA and New York. These guys and girls are not going to lose their 
passion for the industry."

It's far from obvious that the current Emirati setup, with its strong 
censorship, offers enough opportunities. Image Nation Abu Dhabi, with its 
government links, offers the clearest route to the green light – but is still 
heavily linked to establishment families (chairmanMohammed al-Muburak 
<http://imagenationabudhabi.com/en/team/about-us/our-people/our-board/mohamed-al-mubarak.html>
 comes from a family with close ties to the country's crown prince; the head of 
the local arm,Mohammed al-Otaiba  
<http://imagenationabudhabi.com/en/team/about-us/our-people/our-team/mohammed-al-otaiba.html>
 from a family of diplomats) with a vested interest in the status quo. Garin 
says there is no direct political interference, but it's not clear how much 
freedom there is, either.

The company is due to announce the start of production on another feature 
before the end of the year, with three TV series and another film to come in 
2013 – Garin says all "push the envelope". They're going to need to if the 
industry is going to keep up with neighbouring developments: it's ironic that, 
while there's no full-length fiction-feature from the Emirates at this week's
Dubai film festival <http://www.dubaifilmfest.com/en/>, star Arab pick is the 
Saudi feature Wadjda. It was, of course, filmed clandestinely by a woman in a 
country where it'sillegal to go the cinema 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/aug/31/venice-film-female-director-saudi-prejudice>
. But if there is any temptation the powers that be to intervene, perhaps they 
should remember horror's rule No 1: the repressed always returns.

• Djinn will be released in the UAE next year; the Dubai film festival ends on 
Sunday.

• Next week's After Hollywood will review the year in global cinema. 
Meanwhile, what global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the 
column? Let us know in the comments below.
 