
Theresa May’s new proposals to crack down on boardroom excess and rebuild 
trust between corporate Britain and voters have received a mixed reaction from 
business leaders.

The moves, announced by the incoming prime minister just minutes before her 
rival,Andrea Leadsom, pulled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/conservative-leadership-andrea-leadsom-pulls-out-of-race>
 of the leadership contest, include allowing employee and consumer 
representatives to sit on company boards, and making shareholder votes on 
executive pay legally binding. “It is not anti-business to suggest that big 
business needs to change,” she said.

However, Josh Hardie, deputy director general of the Confederation of British 
Industry, gave May’s plans a lukewarm response on behalf of the big business 
lobby.

Theresa May's plan to put workers in boardrooms is extraordinary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-plan-workers-boardroom-reform-extraordinary-tories>
He said: “Changes to pay reporting rules that have already taken place, 
including a binding shareholder vote on executive pay policies, have struck a 
good balance ... To ensure the most effective proposals are considered, it’s 
important that issues – such as putting employees on boards, whether they would 
need to sit on the full board, and how they would use their voting rights – are 
discussed between the government and business.”

A leading figure in the retail and consumer industry, who did not want to be 
named, added: “On what basis can a prime minister, who has no popular 
acclamation either through party members or a general election, pursue policies 
unconnected to the manifesto on which her party was elected? How contractually 
will binding votes on pay work? Look at what happened withemployee 
representatives at the Co-op 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/11/co-operative-group-chief-executive-euan-sutherland-resign>
.”

Another said: “Look, she gave a speech in the morning that was a campaign 
speech, and when she sat down she was prime minister. Bloody hell.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftheresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15588452cec27b564f59a9984b975af700548c6%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May's%20plans%20to%20curb%20boardroom%20excess%20receive%20mixed%20reaction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftheresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%27s%20plans%20to%20curb%20boardroom%20excess%20receive%20mixed%20reaction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ftheresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15588452cec27b564f59a9984b975af700548c6%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Joe Kaeser, chief executive of Siemens, where 50% of the supervisory board is 
made up of employee representatives. Photograph: Christof Stache/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Others, who have personal experience of boardroom employee representatives, 
warned of potential pitfalls.

Joe Kaeser, the chief executive of engineering multinational Siemens and whose 
supervisory board consists of 50% employee representatives, said: “In Germany 
we’ve seen companies where workers’ representatives thought they co-managed the 
company – that obviously is a bit too much ... You need to get used to it but 
if it’s being practised well it has its benefits.

“A board member needs to act in the best interests of [his or her] company no 
matter which region they are from. So if you have workers’ representatives that 
are hypothetically from the UK, they also need to act in the best interests of 
the company if [the issue] is about job cuts in the UK and creating new jobs in 
China because demand has shifted. This typically puts quite a strain on the 
workers’ representatives.”

May’s speech on Monday echoed several corporate responsibility themes 
championed by the former Labour leader Ed Miliband during the 2015 election 
campaign and came after a EU referendum result that many viewed as a protest 
over inequality in the UK.

The issue has been raised in some surprising parts of the business world, with 
Bank of America and the international investment firm Pimco last month warning 
their clients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/28/investment-inequality-bank-of-america-pimco-warn-risk-brexit>
 that the gulf between rich and poor could spark a further anti-establishment 
backlash.

Sir Mike Rake, the chairman of BT and Worldpay, hinted that the attitude of 
business leaders might have changed since last year’s general election.

May promises social reform in centrist leadership pitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
“If you’d asked me 18 months ago I would have said business leaders were not 
at all receptive but there is now a huge awareness among people I speak to, who 
are mainly in the FTSE 100, that we need to do something about this gap,” he 
said. “It was shown in stereophonic sound in the referendum that there is a 
lack of trust in the establishment, politicians and business.”


Tim Martin, the chairman and founder of pubs chain JD Wetherspoon, added: “The 
current system is up the spout. It’s far too much of an old boys’ network. 
Boards need to be more aware of what consumers think and in most businesses 
like ours you need to be aware of what your employees think.


“Instinctively yes [it could work] as long as it doesn’t become a muddle. What 
has worked in Britain is we have got relatively high employment. What hasn’t 
worked in France [where they have employee representatives on boards] is moving 
to the other end of the spectrum and making the system too employer unfriendly.”

First Group, which has faced numerous shareholder revolts over executive pay 
in recent years, although without suffering absolute defeats, can claim at 
least to be a step ahead of May, whose constituency is served by its Great 
Western trains.


“In most of First Group’s UK businesses, bus and trains, an employee director 
chosen by the workforce is on the board, up to and including the group plc 
board – it’s a well-established practice,” a company spokesman said. “We’ve 
found it helpful to have an employees’ voice on the board.”
 