
As we leave the EU, the UK can turn its back on the austerity policies that 
have been thehallmark of the euro area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/austerity-policies-do-more-harm-than-good-imf-study-concludes>
. My main argument against staying in the EU has been the poor economic record 
of the EU as a whole, and the eurozone in particular. The performance has got 
worse the more the EU has developed joint policies and central controls.

Housing gets £4bn boost to increase number of new homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/housing-gets-4bn-boost-to-increase-number-of-new-homes>
The UK public warmed to the idea of spending our own money on our own 
priorities in the referendum campaign. The main issue between leave and remain 
was the money. Remain tried to dismiss its importance by claiming there was in 
practice little money at stake, and disagreed strongly with any reference to 
the gross figure for UK contributions.

The public did not take away one particular figure from the debate, but did 
believe that we contributed substantial money that it would be useful to spend 
at home. Cancelling the contributions would also make an important reduction in 
our large balance of payments deficit, as every penny we send and do not get 
back swells the deficit, just as surely as if we bought another import.

During the campaign I released a draft post-Brexit budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/14/british-austerity-brexit-budget-nhs-disability-benefits-property>
, showing how we could scrap VAT on domestic fuel, tampons and green products, 
and boost spending substantially on the NHS.

The government will be able to choose what to do once we have stopped the 
payments. The autumn statement showed a saving of a net contribution of £11.6bn 
in 2019-20 once we are out of the EU, as well as additional domestic spending 
in place of spending in the UK by the EU currently.

I am glad the chancellor has also adopted more flexible rules for the budget 
deficit. There is no need to genuflect to the Maastricht debt and deficit 
criteria once we leave, nor to pretend that we are about to get our overall 
debt down to 60% of GDP, as is required by those rules. The UK economy needs 
further stimulus, as the autumn statement acknowledged. There are roads and 
railway lines to be built, new power stations to be added, more water storage, 
schools and hospitals to cater for the rising population.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdavid-davis-statement-brexit-britain-should-make-its-own-laws-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20secretary%3A%20Britain%20should%20make%20its%20own%20laws%20for%20its%20own%20people%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdavid-davis-statement-brexit-britain-should-make-its-own-laws-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20secretary%3A%20Britain%20should%20make%20its%20own%20laws%20for%20its%20own%20people%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdavid-davis-statement-brexit-britain-should-make-its-own-laws-referendum-video&media=>
Brexit secretary: Britain should make its own laws for its own people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/10/david-davis-statement-brexit-britain-should-make-its-own-laws-referendum-video>
The government is right to say the UK needs to invest more. We need to make 
new provision for all the additional people who have joined the country in 
recent years, and to improve the efficiency of our infrastructure. The country 
is well behind in meeting demand for train and road capacity, and in energy 
provision.

The UK also needs to make, grow and provide more for its own needs. Leaving 
the EU will enable the UK to undertake a major campaign for import 
substitution. When we have our own fishing policy we could move back to being 
net exporters, instead of being importers. The common fisheries policy means 
too much of our fish is taken by other member states, leaving us short for our 
own needs. Designing our own agriculture policy will mean we can put behind us 
the quotas and regulations that have held back UK output during our years in 
the EU. We can change our procurement rules, so that the government when 
spending taxpayers’ money can ensure more is bought from home suppliers.

Why do we have a balance of payments surplus with the rest of the world but a 
deficit with our EU neighbours?

The UK is embarking on a substantial expansion of housebuilding. Too many 
materials and components for our new homes are imported. The lower level of 
sterling provides an opportunity for the UK to put in more brick, block and 
tile capacity, to prefabricate and manufacture more of the components and 
systems a new home needs. If more of the home is fabricated off-site – as 
happens in Germany and Scandinavia – we reduce the impact of bad weather, of 
labour shortages and other inefficiencies on the building site. Industry by 
industry there are opportunities for suitable investment and entrepreneurial 
activity, to meet more of the UK’s own demands. This will be good for jobs, and 
better for the environment, when more is produced close to the place of 
consumption.

One of the great unanswered questions of our time in the EU is: why do we run 
a balance of payments surplus with the rest of the world but a deficit with our 
EU neighbours? Why has it been so large and so persistent? Part of the reason 
rests in theway the EU rules were organised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/27/uk-renegotiate-eu-role-juncker-centralised-control>
.

Early liberalisation was designed to help the sectors the continent was best 
at, rather than the sectors where the UK had a relative advantage. The 
continental competitors soon outpaced us in their better areas, leading to UK 
factory closures and job losses in areas like shipbuilding steel production and 
cars in the early years of membership. The special designs of the common 
agricultural and fishing policies also led to larger import bills for us.

Leaving the EU has coincided, so far, with a fall in the value of the pound. 
The UK should now be very competitive. It is time for business to respond to 
the favourable levels of domestic demand, and to work with government to put in 
the extra capacity we need to meet more of our own requirements. Prosperity, 
not austerity, should be the watchword.

• John Redwood is the author of Brexit Benefits: Prosperity not Austerity – 
Britain’s New Economy, published by Politeia
 