
Theresa May wants to reform capitalism and stamp out irresponsible corporate 
behaviour after the scandal overSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green>’s stewardship of the failed 
department chain BHS, Downing Street has said.

The prime minister’s spokeswoman said on Monday the government planned to take 
action, after adamning report by MPs into the collapse of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 said the retailer had fallen prey to the “unacceptable face of capitalism”.

Asked what May would do to curb corporate greed, she said: “The prime minister 
has already set out that we need to tackle corporate irresponsibility, reform 
capitalism so that it works for everyone not just the privileged few. That 
means in the long run doing more to prevent irresponsible and reckless 
behaviour and look carefully at the policies linked to that and work at the 
best way forward.”

Theresa May's plan to put workers in boardrooms is extraordinary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-plan-workers-boardroom-reform-extraordinary-tories>
The spokeswoman would not be drawn on what it meant to reform capitalism, 
other than saying there would be an approach “to make sure everyone shares in 
the country’s economic benefits and growth”.

May talked in her autumn party conference speech of 2013 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/07/full-text-of-theresa-mays-speech-we-will-win-by-being-the-party-for-all.html>
 about wanting the Conservatives to be a party for all “by reforming capitalism 
and making sure our economy works for all of us”, without specifying exactly 
how this would be done.

In that speech, she mentioned the public’s “anger about companies that evade 
taxes and excessive corporate pay”, with people feeling the system does not 
seem to be working for the whole country.

The Financial Times reported on Monday that May was considering drawing up 
legislation to curb excessive boardroom pay and improve corporate governance.

She has set out plans to have worker representatives on company boards and 
make shareholder votes on director remuneration binding rather than advisory.

The issue has become a pressing problem for May in her first weeks as prime 
minister after the collapse ofBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22406a33ed1540f5751a3ba8063ac179dded050e%2F730_42_2633_2633%2F2633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20to%20'reform%20capitalism'%20after%20Philip%20Green%20BHS%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20to%20%27reform%20capitalism%27%20after%20Philip%20Green%20BHS%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22406a33ed1540f5751a3ba8063ac179dded050e%2F730_42_2633_2633%2F2633.jpg>
 BHS workers hug outside a closing store in Newport, Wales. Photograph: Matthew 
Horwood/Getty Images 
There have been calls for Green to lose his knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/15/boss-philip-green-knighthood-bhs-employee-injustice>
 after the report by the House of Commons work and pensions committee laid the 
blame for BHS’s predicament squarely at his feet.

Frank Field, chairman of the committee, told the BBC on Monday that Green was 
somebody “who behaves like Napoleon”, plunderedBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>, and must now pay out at least £571m 
to fund the pensions hole left behind.

The Labour MP said Green’s behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/mp-says-sir-philip-green-worse-than-robert-maxwell>
 had been worse than that ofRobert Maxwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,1078193,00.html>, the 
media tycoon and Daily Mirror owner who died in 1991 after falling from his 
yacht in the Canary Islands.

Lawyers for Green later issued a letter disputing Field’s statements saying 
they were “highly defamatory and completely false. Our client has never stolen 
any money from BHS, Arcadia or the pension funds.”

Owen Smith, the Labour leadership challenger, and Jon Trickett, the shadow 
business secretary, called for Green to be stripped of his honour, which is 
under review.

Smith said it exposed “the level of incompetence and corporate 
irresponsibility at the heart of BHS’s leadership … Sir Philip Green’s greed 
has cost thousands of people their jobs and put tens of thousands of people’s 
pensions at risk. Despite this, Sir Philip has shown no contrition for the 
damage he has done or the suffering he has caused.

MP says Sir Philip Green 'worse than Robert Maxwell'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/mp-says-sir-philip-green-worse-than-robert-maxwell>
“The Tories should take immediate action to hold Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> to account, starting with 
stripping him of his knighthood and making sure he makes a proper contribution 
to cover the black hole in the current pension fund.”

Trickett also called for the knighthood to be stripped but highlighted 
irresponsible behaviour that went wider than just Green. He said: “The select 
committee’s damning report shows how Phillip Green extracted millions fromBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> over 15 years and then sold it to a 
bankruptee who went on to receive further millions from the company.

“But a range of well-known accountancy, banking and other companies who had a 
duty to provide professional independent advice failed to prevent the actions 
described in the report.

“This left 11,000 loyal hardworking people without a job and a massive pension 
deficit. No one should be allowed to keep a knighthood after such actions. He 
must also pay back the millions of pounds to the pension fund.”
 