
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has told 
business leaders that her government will not force companies to directly 
appoint workers or consumers on to their boards, watering down an earlier 
pledge on the issue.


She used a keynote speech at the CBI conference to say she had no plans to 
mandate such changes, despite suggesting that would be the case during the 
leadership contest and at the Conservative party conference.

“While it is important that the voices of workers and consumers should be 
represented, I can categorically tell you that this is not about mandating 
works councils, or the direct appointment of workers or trade union 
representatives on boards,” the prime minister told a packed room in central 
London.

“Some companies may find that these models work best for them – but there are 
other routes that use existing board structures, complemented or supplemented 
by advisory councils or panels, to ensure all those with a stake in the company 
are properly represented. It will be a question of finding the model that 
works.”

May’s pledge was one of the more eye-catching elements of her pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
 to replace David Cameron, on a platform centred around social justice.


In July, she used a key speech in her bid to become Conservative leader to 
say: “If I’m prime minister, we’re going to change that system – and we’re 
going to have not just consumers represented on company boards, but employees 
as well.”


She returned to the theme as prime minister, using her Tory party conference 
speech to promise: “Later this year we will publish our plans to have not just 
consumers represented on company boards, but workers as well.”

Theresa May's plan to put workers in boardrooms is extraordinary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-plan-workers-boardroom-reform-extraordinary-tories>
Pushed on the change of position in questions after her CBI speech, May played 
down the idea of a U-turn, saying there were a number of ways to boost 
representation of workers.

It came after Greg Clark, the business secretary, made a similar argument on 
Radio 4’s Today programme. He said plans would be outlined by the end of the 
year, but declined to confirm that they would involve workers sitting on boards.

“There are different ways of doing this,” Clark said. “Theresa May has talked 
about an economy that works for everyone – that includes workers, employees, 
consumers, the supply chain businesses – so we will put forward a series of 
ways in which those voices can be represented on boards.”

Asked if this meant the government was pulling back from the plan, Clark did 
not fully deny this, saying only: “There will be different options.” He added: 
“We will publish those plans. We will have options. We are working with 
business. They will be produced and we will talk about it.”

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “Theresa May made a clear 
promise to have workers represented on company boards. The proposals in her 
speech today do not deliver on this.

“This is not the way to show that you want to govern for ordinary working 
people.”

The GMB also accused the prime minister of failing to stick to her promise. 
“The Tories can claim to be the party of workers all they want, but actions 
speak louder than warm words,” he said, arguing that the watering down of the 
pledge was telling.

“The mask is slipping - nice speeches followed by broken promises will not 
help working people get fairness and dignity in the workplace.”

But May’s official spokeswoman denied the policy had been watered down. “Look 
at what the PM has said all the way through. This is about how workers’ views 
are represented on boards. This is consistent with that... I think there will 
be a number of ways to do it. Part of the approach we will be taking is to put 
it out to consultation and hear views from stakeholders, employees and 
businesses on the best way forward. We are absolutely committed to having the 
voice of workers heard on boards as part of establishing the best corporate 
governance of any major economy.”
 