
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is to promise a 
crackdown on boardroom excess at large privately owned businesses as she 
unveils proposals intended to hold corporate Britain to account.


The prime minister said the government would look at ways to bring privately 
owned companies under a regime that could mimic the one imposed on major stock 
market companies.

While many private companies were performing well, “we have, however, seen an 
irresponsible minority of privately held companies acting carelessly – leaving 
employees, customers and pension fund beneficiaries to suffer when things go 
wrong.

“So we will explore ways to improve and extend good governance across big 
business so that everybody plays by the same rules and we create an economy 
that works for everyone, not just the privileged few.”

During her campaign to become prime minister in the wake of the Brexit vote, 
May hadput corporate reform on her agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
, raised the prospect of employee representatives on boards and also of making 
votes on executive pay legally binding. In July, after a damning report by MPs 
into thecollapse of department store BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/bhs-rescue-bid-fails-putting-11000-jobs-at-risk>
, she alsoprepared the way for closer scrutiny of private companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
.

Proposals published on Tuesday will reopen the debate about ways to clamp down 
on unacceptable boardroom behaviour – although May has already told business 
leaders that shedoes not intend to force companies to directly appoint workers 
or consumer representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi>
 on to their boards.

The TUC said she should press on with giving workers a greater say at the 
companies where they work, publishing a poll showing six in 10 people support 
the idea. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “Workers on 
boards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-tory-conference-workers-on-boards>
 is a policy that’s tried, tested and proven in many other countries. And it 
will work for Britain too, helping us build a stronger and fairer economy.”

The proposals being set out by the business secretary, Greg Clark, could raise 
the idea of publishingpay ratios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/pay-ratio-between-bosses-and-employees-will-be-2016s-hot-topic>
 – the difference between the chief executive’s pay and that of the workforce – 
and will also attempt to bring private companies under closer public scrutiny.


If stock market companies depart from corporate governance codes they are 
expected to explain why and the government could suggest that the largest 
privately owned companies adopt a similar practice under a newly created code 
of practice.

The green paper will have three sections: one on remuneration, one on 
stakeholder engagement and a third that asks what elements of these should 
apply to private companies.

The shadow business secretary, Clive Lewis, said: “The problems of spiralling 
executive pay and poor corporate governance have escalated over the last six 
years while the government sat idle. The prime minister already rowed back on 
her flagship policy of putting workers on boards.

“Sadly, this green paper looks like offering tokenism rather than a 
much-needed call to action.


“The real test has to be whether these proposals would have saved jobs and 
pensions at BHS or prevented the gross mistreatment of staff at Sports Direct, 
and whether they’ll tackle the scourge of low pay and escalated executive pay. 
Anything that falls short of doing that is just not good enough.”
 