
What a happy day for the national newspaper Brexiteers. They reflect their joy 
in front page headlines and triumphant leading articles about Theresa May’s
pledge to leave the single European market. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>

“We will get clean break from EU 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/754954/Brexit-plan-speech-Theresa-May-plan-leave-EU-build-Global-Britain>
” trumpets the Daily Express. “Theresa’s new FREE Britain 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4126314/Theresa-unveils-bold-12-point-plan-Brexit.html>
”, is the Daily Mail’s front page headline. Now, says the Sun, for “Great 
Brexpectations 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2630806/theresa-may-to-spell-out-list-of-12-demands-for-britains-clean-break-from-eu-as-two-year-hard-brexit-begins/>
”. And Metro weighs in with “May: we’ll go it alone with CLEAN Brexit.”

The Daily Telegraph is more sober, “May: my 12-point plan for Brexit 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/17/theresa-may-brexit-12-point-plan-live/>
”, as is the Times “May sets out hard Brexit vision in bid to calm markets 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/may-sets-out-hard-brexit-vision-in-bid-to-calm-markets-ngs5p5w5g>
.”

The non-Brexit press cannot avoid reporting the unwelcome news. “May rules out 
UK staying in the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
”, says the Guardian, “Britain’s clean break from EU”, says the i. And the 
Daily Mirror, which does not think the speech worthy of page 1 show, runs a 
spread headlined “May’s 12 Brexit battlegrounds”.

The ode to joy sung by the Brexit-supporting papers is even more evident in 
the editorial columns. The Mail is delighted at the prime minister’s coming 
“clear and unequivocal” speech. “There will be no partial membership, no 
associate membership, or anything that leaves us ‘half in, half out’”.

The Mail continues: “May’s bold, positive stance is a welcome relief from the 
relentless pessimism and scaremongering of her opponents...

“She offers an inspiring vision of the sort of country we can become when 
unshackled from the sclerotic Brussels machine that has held us back for so 
long: a Britain that is freer, more outward-looking, more prosperous and 
stronger than ever before.”


The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> is pleased too: “The omens are 
all good. She knows we must leave the single market to take back control of our 
immigration policy and our laws.”

The Express is particuarly pleased about the likelihood of “removing ourselves 
from the jurisdiction of the European court of justice to prevent foreign 
judges from overruling our own supreme court.”

Now, its says, with May “having set out her stall, it is up to the leaders of 
the rest of the EU to decide if they are willing to work towards a mutually 
beneficial free trade deal”.

The Telegraph thinks May’s speech today “may turn out to be every bit as 
momentous as that of her predecessor four years ago.” And it spends some time 
pouring scorn onDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> before praising the current 
prime minister’s stance.

“The British position is a strong one,” sasy the paper, “and if the EU is 
unwilling to recognise how its interests can be served with a mutually 
beneficial deal on trade in goods and services, then the UK can go it alone and 
succeed. The economic backdrop to the Prime Minister’s speech remains 
auspicious”.

The Times’s Rachel Sylvester is altogether more sceptical about May’s grasp of 
the situation: “Her problem remains that she thinks of Brexit as a still 
photograph when it is really a moving picture.

“With her meaningless slogans and her insistence on prioritising immigration 
controls, the prime minister is behaving as if the world around her is static. 
In fact it is an action drama, with a fast-moving plot”.

She argues that “ministers seem to assume that nobody else has a role to play 
in the negotiations. Yet, as the slump in the value of sterling shows, this may 
be an island but Britain cannot act alone”.

As for immigration, Sylvester believes May The “is striking a pose” in order 
“to demonstrate her commitment to Brexit, and sometimes overcompensates”. Boris 
Johnson, she suggests, would have acted differently and, by implication, more 
sympathetically.

In the Guardian, Lord Mandelson argues that in Britain loses free access to 
its main export market inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>
, “our economy will become smaller and poorer”.

Although May will claim that this can be mitigated by special new trade 
arrangements between Britain and the EU, he writes: “I can testify that 
so-called free trade agreements never come for free, they never cover all 
trade, and they are a devil’s own job to agree”.

He believes “the prime minister’s reading of the referendum is that the only 
thing the public cares about is immigration, and that immigration should now 
run economic policy even if it means the country becoming poorer as a result”.

The Mirror contends that May “remains clueless about where she wants to take 
Britain and how we’ll get to the destination.

“Broad strokes are fine but this country’s prosperity, our jobs and our living 
standards, depend on trade deals and, yes, migration agreements, with 27 
nations who are unhappy that we’re bailing out of the European Union”.

But it does think her approach to negotiations “with a velvet glove draped on 
the iron fist... is sensible, adding: “The PM is wise to ignore ideological 
headbangers who believe abusing neighbours is the key to living in harmony”.
 