
The media does not yet seem to fully appreciate the implications of the AV 
referendum (No to AV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/06/no-to-av-constitutional-conflict?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 7 May). For half a century the entire strategy of the Liberals/Lib Dems was 
to win enough MPs to force a coalition and use it to obtain a new electoral 
system. Finally their chance came and it didn't work. They made a pact with the 
devil, and got their reward – nothing. They have no prospect of another 
referendum and so no reason to continue to exist as a party in national 
politics after living out this parliament as lame ducks. If they fight the next 
general election, they can expect to lose almost every seat. Perhaps Clegg and 
a few others can negotiate safe seats if they formally join the Conservatives. 
The real question is whether a new third party will arise to replace them.

Richard Tobin

Edinburgh

• You report a "Clegg aide" as saying that now "we will have greater latitude 
to talk about when we disagree". It's not talk that is now needed – it's 
action. Starting with thehealth and social care bill 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Legislation/Actsandbills/HealthandSocialCareBill2011/index.htm>
. The minimum that is required is substantial redrafting on the lines of the 
Lib Dem Sheffield motion. Without that, the party conference in September will 
see a massive revolt. What Lib Dems should insist on is the immediate 
withdrawal of the bill and a review panel, including all the major professional 
interests, as well as experts from the parties, to work out and negotiate a 
consensus for reforms to create a devolved, more democratic and accountable NHS 
located firmly within the public sector. If that means a delay, the wait will 
be worthwhile.

Tony Greaves

Lib Dem, House of Lords

• A year ago Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> made 
a great issue of the fact that UK voters had demonstrated that they wanted 
change at the election. This week the voters have made it clear that they don't 
want the Lib Dems or their policies. Surely the honourable thing would be for 
the Lib Dems to leave the coalition in line with clear voter preferences?

Jacqueline Lawrence

Milford Haven, Pembrokeshire 

• There is much concern about the vilification of Nick Clegg, I cannot 
remember the same concern over the vilification of Gordon Brown.

Sheila Cooper

Coventry

• Here lie the Lib Dems, lost at sea,/ Torpedoed, bombed and sunk by AV/ RIP.

Geoff Clegg

Carshalton, Surrey

• Does David Cameron know any jokes? Er... Nick Clegg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nqh8e4W5PtM>?

Richard Knights

Liverpool
 