
Quick – picture Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.

What comes to mind? A progressive wonderland of polite manners and majestic 
moose? What America might be if it evolved a little? That placeyou’ll move to 
if Trump wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2016/may/12/donald-trump-president-move-to-canada>
?

If that’s what you think, that’s fine by us. In fact, it’s our brand: not 
America. The nice guys. Dull, kind and harmless. That’s how we like to be 
thought of.

But it’s mooseshit. 

We are not the country you think we are. We never have been.

The first prime minister and founding father of Canada, John A Macdonald, was 
a raging alcoholic. He spent entire campaigns fabulously drunk and once vomited 
on stage during a stump speech. When his rival pointed it out, Macdonald shot 
back that he hadn’t puked because of booze, but because he had been “forced to 
listen to the ranting of my honourable opponent”. It was a deflection worthy of 
Trump. Macdonald handily won the election.

Canada is Justin Trudeau, but it is also Rob Ford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/23/canada-justin-trudeau-rob-ford-donald-trump>
The reason the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (our “Mounties”) ride horses is 
because during the labour movement of the 30s, horseback was the best way to 
trample protesting immigrants and miners. By the 60s, the horses were mostly 
just for show and the Mounties’ regular activities included subjecting 
suspected homosexuals to the “Fruit Machine”, a device designed to measure 
erotic responses to gay porn.

These days, Canada is the second-largest arms exporter to the Middle East. Our 
Alberta oil sands produce more carbon emissions each year than the entire state 
of California. Our intelligence agency is allowed to act on information 
obtained through torture. And a lot ofFrench Canadians are into blackface comedy
 <http://www.vice.com/en_ca/read/blackface-is-still-a-thing-in-quebec-729>.

It’s nice to be thought of as the world’s nice guys. And it’s useful – it 
obscures a lot of dirt

Little of this is widely known, because we happen to share a border with 
America. When your next-door neighbour is a billionaire celebrity genius with 
automatic weapons and an undying need for attention, you can get away with all 
sorts of stuff. It’s nice to be thought of as the world’s nice guys. And it’s 
useful – it obscures a lot of dirt.

Last year, Canadians almost came to terms with the lie in our branding. After 
a decade of the rightwing Harper government, with its pro-oil, anti-science and 
anti-Muslim ideas, it had become difficult to maintain our sense of smug 
superiority. Add to that the global coverage of crack-smoking Toronto mayor Rob 
Ford (since deceased), and the maple leaf flag patch sewn to our metaphorical 
backpack was coming loose at the seams.

In this disillusionment, there was opportunity. If we wanted to reclaim our 
reputation as a just and caring and helpful society, perhaps we could try 
behaving like one. During our 2015 election, everything from electoral and 
environmental reform to international peacekeeping was put back on the table, 
and we dared to open our eyes (just a peek) to the neglected, remote indigenous 
communities wheresuicide rates 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/sudbury/attawapiskat-suicide-emergency-help-1.3529750>
 are shockingly high and access to untainteddrinking water 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/bad-water-third-world-conditions-on-first-nations-in-canada-1.3269500>
 is shamefully low. There was a sense that Canada was ready to grow up and 
forge a national identity based on what we do, not on who we aren’t.

There was a sense that Canada was ready to grow up. Instead, we elected Justin 
Trudeau

Instead, we elected Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, a social media savant who 
has positioned himself, and by extension Canada, as a sunny chaser to the 
world’s bitter news. Trudeau is the political equivalent of a YouTube puppy 
video. After your daily barrage of Trump and terror, you can settle your 
jangled nerves with his comforting memes.

Each week, Trudeau feeds the news cycle a new sharable moment, and our 
Facebook feeds are overwhelmed with shots of the adorable young statesman 
cuddling pandas and hugging refugees and getting accidentally photographed in 
the wild with his top off, twice.

Environmentalists 'expected better' of Trudeau as Canada backs gas project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/canada-pacific-northwest-lng-natural-gas-pipeline-british-columbia>
For international audiences, the Justin moment has been a harmless diversion. 
For Canadians, it’s a dangerous distraction. Canadians care far more about what 
Americans think of us than we do about Canadian politics. Little wonder that 
things remain so grim.

Despite Trudeau’s progressive branding, Canada is right where Stephen Harper 
left us. It’s been a year since the election, and we’re still selling arms to 
Saudi Arabia, still cutting $36bn from healthcare and still basing our economy 
on fossil fuel extraction, andrunning roughshod over indigenous rights 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/09/27/liberals-to-decide-on-lng-plant-in-bc-seen-as-a-litmus-test-for-trudeau.html>
 to do so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprince-george-rebuffs-justin-trudeau-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20George%20rebuffs%20Justin%20Trudeau%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprince-george-rebuffs-justin-trudeau-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20George%20rebuffs%20Justin%20Trudeau%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fprince-george-rebuffs-justin-trudeau-video&media=>
Prince George rebuffs Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/sep/26/prince-george-rebuffs-justin-trudeau-video>
Too much maple syrup will make anyone sick, and I thought Trudeau’s honeymoon 
was finally over when, sensing a hot meme, he knelt down to offer a 
three-year-old Prince George a high-five. But the royal toddler left our common 
prime minister hanging – and to me it seemed the spell was broken. But it 
wasn’t. A few weeks later, right as he was backtracking on a campaign promise 
for electoral reform, Trudeau’s approval rating hit 64%.

Canada’s moment would likely have lapsed by now if not for the American 
election. The comparison of Trump v Trudeau is just too rich for the press to 
resist. Canada has a dashing Disney prince for a ruler, and the US is 
considering this guy? The Washington Post dubbed Trudeau “the anti-Trump”. 
Every idle threat to move to Canada if Trump wins has been treated as a major 
news event by the Canadian press.

The world adores Justin Trudeau. In Canada, we're still reserving judgment | 
Rebecca Shapiro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/29/justin-trudeau-popular-world-canada-reserving-judgment-prime-minister-political-resume>
(A note to my fellow Canadians on that: when an American says that they’ll 
move to Canada if Trump wins, it’s like when the head cheerleader tells the 
arrogant quarterback that he’s so conceited, she’d sooner date Urkel. Urkel may 
swoon to hear his name coming from a pretty girl’s lips. But it’s not really a 
compliment, and she’s never really going to date him.)

Last week an opportunistic Canadian ad firm sent America a shit-eating YouTube 
sympathy card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/canada-response-to-us-election-tell-america-its-great>
, in which a handful of pasty Canadians assured their beleaguered neighbors 
that despite you-know-who, we still think America’s great! The passive 
aggressive subtext is of course that we also think we’re a little bit better.

But we’re not. And for that, I’m sorry.

Jesse Brown is the co-author of the upcoming CANADALAND Guide to Canada 
<https://www.amazon.com/Canadaland-Guide-Canada-Jesse-Brown/dp/1501150634/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1477005797&sr=8-1&keywords=canadaland+guide+to+canada>
 (published in America). Available in May from Touchstone Books.

 * This article was amended on 21 October 2016. A previous version incorrectly 
stated Canada is the third-largest arms dealer in the world; it is the 
second-largest exporter to the Middle East.  