
Clocks have changed, scarves are out and critics are already being 
commissioned by antsy editors to compile best-of-2016 lists. Premature, yes, 
but I’ll be surprised and delighted if I see anything better thanThings to Come 
(Curzon Artificial Eye, 12) in the next few weeks.Mia Hansen-Løve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/apr/29/mia-hansen-love-french-director>
’s formally simple yet emotionally immense drama of midlife crisis and creation 
skates gracefully on the edge of perfection.

It’s easy to imagine many versions of a merely good sauvignon blanc drama in 
whichIsabelle Huppert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/things-to-come-review-mia-hansen-love-isabelle-huppert>
 pristinely plays a Parisian intellectual handling a divorce with dry wit and 
elegant fury. Hansen-Løve’s voice, however, is extraordinary in its democratic 
compassion and detail-fixated honesty. She has made a life study in which 
everything and nothing that happens is remarkable and surprising: raucous 
humour is found where there should be none, while sudden heartbreak sneaks up 
out of nowhere. It’s evidently the fruit of a notably free collaboration with 
Huppert. The actress’s signature spiky intelligence permeates the film, yet she 
has absorbed her director’s crepe-paper tenderness and vulnerability. Each has 
brought out the other’s most acute, most generous expertise. The narrative 
comes to a close on Christmas Day; this gorgeous film may just be my new 
holiday standard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DERZmbVAoGsI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DERZmbVAoGsI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DERZmbVAoGsI&media=>
Watch the trailer for Cemetery of Splendour. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERZmbVAoGsI> 
Many are equally enraptured by Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/apichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview>
’sCemetery of Splendour (New Wave, 12), though my admiration for this 
immaculately formed life-and-death reverie remains theoretical rather than 
rooted in the heart. Set largely in a clinic – or a vision of one – for 
patients stricken with an enigmatic sleeping sickness, it has mood, sound and 
texture to shiver and swoon for, though like a dream, I didn’t retain 
everything when it was over.

Jonás Cuarón’s Desierto (Altitude, 18) is less elusive. It’s a bluntly 
schematic chase thrillerfor the Trump era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/us-mexico-border-patrol-trump-beautiful-wall>
, as a group of Mexican illegal immigrants is literally hunted down by a lone 
American bigot. Cuarón has a measure of his father (and co-producer) Alfonso’s 
flair for staging, but it’s a visceral idea rendered in such rudimentary moral 
terms that it doesn’t cut very deep.

Since seeing it at last month’s London film festival, however, I’ve found it 
hard to shakePark (Bounty Films, 15), gifted newcomer Sofia Exarchou’s 
piercing, astonishingly rigorous snapshot of impoverished, disaffected Greek 
youth. Vividly set in and around the disused Olympic park where a group of 
tussling, horny, angry kids have formed their own impenetrable community, the 
bristling socioeconomic metaphors paint themselves; Exarchou’s watchful camera 
doesn’t force them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthings-to-come-cemetery-of-splendour-x-men-apocalypse-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6a6acd4cedf3791a760aade0d3f9cf2d5ddd75%2F265_0_1919_1152%2F1919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Things%20to%20Come%3B%20Cemetery%20of%20Splendour%3B%20X-Men%3A%20Apocalypse%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthings-to-come-cemetery-of-splendour-x-men-apocalypse-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Things%20to%20Come%3B%20Cemetery%20of%20Splendour%3B%20X-Men%3A%20Apocalypse%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthings-to-come-cemetery-of-splendour-x-men-apocalypse-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6a6acd4cedf3791a760aade0d3f9cf2d5ddd75%2F265_0_1919_1152%2F1919.jpg>
 Adding stars and losing character… Jennifer Lawrence and Oscar Isaac in X-Men: 
Apocalypse. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
The glitziest release of the week is X-Men: Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/xmen-apocalypse-review-lots-to-marvel-at-oscar-isaac>
 (Fox, 12), though the shine is mostly limited to the packaging. Even the 
visuals look a bit murky in the latest episode of this mushrooming mutant 
franchise, which keeps adding stars as it loses character. Oscar Isaac, as a 
reawakened supervillain pursuing a new world order, doesn’t bring much to 
proceedings, which is rarely a true sentence.

Also keeping a lot of A-listers half-heartedly occupied: Now You See Me 2 
(eOne, 12), another FBI-allied illusionist caper that doubles down on the 
quick, silly rug-pulling of itsdorkily agreeable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/bling-ring-twixt-coppola-review> 
predecessor, but with a hefty shot of added smugness.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlptlZe5EYDU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlptlZe5EYDU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlptlZe5EYDU&media=>
‘Ordinary and special’: Henry Gamble’s Birthday Party. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lptlZe5EYDU> 
A standout from London’s LGBT Flare festival now making its Netflix debut 
<https://www.netflix.com/watch/80094578>, Stephen Cone’s Henry Gamble’s 
Birthday Party is at once ordinary and special: this story of a 17-year-old boy 
getting to grips with his sexuality in a suburban America of swimming pools and 
purity rings locates fresh pockets of curiosity and insight in his achingly 
familiar struggle. Unfolding with a natural eavesdropper’s deliberation over 
the course of his bumpy birthday party, Cone’s film finds room to observe and 
understand multiple factions of his conflicted hero’s equally confused 
community. In this fractious American election week, it makes a welcome case 
for understanding.

 