
Colin Tizzard reported on Monday that his handful of stable stars remain in 
excellent health after their various successes over the Christmas period, and 
the West Country trainer hopes to have at least three runners in the Cheltenham 
Gold Cup 10 weeks from now. Thistlecrack, who provoked such excitement with the 
manner ofhis King George success, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
 is already on course for a return to Cheltenham at the end of this month, when 
Tizzard hopes to see a more fluent round of jumping than he produced there in 
November.

“The buildup to it all seemed to go on for ever,” Tizzard said of last week’s 
action, “but before you knew it, it had all come and gone. It was a fantastic 
few days for us. All the good horses ran right up to their best, apart from Cue 
Card, who might not have been quite as good.

“The decisions we made worked out a treat,” he said, referring to 
Thistlecrack’s switch into the King George from the Kauto Star Chase, which 
Tizzard then won with the 33-1 shot Royal Vacation. He alsolanded the Welsh 
National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/douvan-native-river-wins-in-frame-cheltenham>
 at Chepstow with Native River.

“Thistlecrack looked every bit as good as we hoped he would. He looked like 
that over hurdles and then over fences and now he’s done it to Grade One 
horses. He’s right at the top of his game.

Brilliant Thistlecrack smooth winner of King George VI Chase at Kempton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/brilliant-thistlecrack-smooth-winner-king-george-vi-chase-kempton-horse-racing>
“When he was clear at the second-last, he shortened up and jumped it steadily 
with the race in the bag, which other horses couldn’t do. He’s got a big 
engine; he’s got everything.

“The only time when his jumping looked slightly suspect was at Cheltenham and 
then it was only at one or two fences, when he stood off too far and landed on 
one. I think he learnt from that. These good horses don’t make the same mistake 
twice.”

Just the same, Thistlecrack <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thistlecrack> 
will return to Gloucestershire for the Cotswold Chase on 28 January for the 
sake of some more experience at the home of jump racing. “We’re trying to win a 
Gold Cup, so are we going to leave him in his box for 10 weeks? No,” Tizzard 
said.

“He’s a big, strong boy but he quite often looks a bit tired in his stable for 
a few days after a race. It might appear he’s not been involved in a hard 
finish but I’m glad it’s five weeks between his races. That’s plenty of time to 
recover.”

Tizzard suggested Native River might, by contrast, go straight to the Gold 
Cup. His ex-French seven-year-old Alary is also being aimed at that race and 
could make his debut for the yard in Newbury’s Denman Chase next month. Cue 
Card will be returned to a shorter distance in next month’s Ascot Chase before 
a decision is taken about whether he also lines up in the Gold Cup or tries to 
win a second Ryanair Chase at the Festival.

The Charlie Hall Chase-winning trainer Rebecca Curtis and jockey Jonathan 
Moore appear to have gone their separate ways. Moore has ridden only in Ireland 
for the past fortnight and his second place on Aurillac at Newbury on 14 
December was his most recent ride for Curtis, the 22-year-old having been named 
as her stable jockey only seven months before. Curtis said on Monday she did 
not wish to comment, while Moore did not respond to inquiries.

Irish Cavalier provided both with a major success when beating Cue Card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/29/cue-card-irish-cavalier-charlie-hall-shock>
 in Wetherby’s Charlie Hall in late October and they shared 19 other winners in 
recent months at an excellent strike rate.

Curtis’s stable, near Newport on the Pembrokeshire coast, continues in form, 
the trainer having relied on Richard Johnson and Aidan Coleman for most of her 
recent runners, including a Grade Three success with Shantou Flyer at 
Cheltenham on Sunday.
 