
I wonder if the days of the single-minded virtuoso are coming to an end. In 
the 19th century, violinists such asPaganini 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niccol%C3%B2_Paganini> and Joachim 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Joachim>, or last century, Heifetz 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPcnGrie__M> and Oistrakh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77DgEqwRnrA> held the world in thrall, touring 
concert halls with a handful of iconic concertos and recital programmes. But 
the music world today has changed.

With music-streaming websites and iPhone shuffle having largely replaced home 
record collections, today’s listeners have broad musical tastes across diverse 
musical genres. This carries over to concert audiences too, many of whom are 
tired with the same overture/concerto/symphony formula of the classical 
orchestral concert. Musicians, too, are bored, and they’re trying to do things 
that haven’t been done before.


Increasingly that means they need to have a feeling for different genres of 
music. Alongside that, soloists are diversifying, whether through playing 
chamber music, directing ensembles from their instrument or improvising. I’d 
argue that not only is this a good thing for the sanity, health and musical 
understanding of the players, but it’s also exciting for listeners, and can 
only help attract new audiences.

Many of today’s leading classical soloists have embraced new directions. 
Joshua Bell <http://bach.joshuabell.com/> collaborates with players such as 
banjo starBéla Fleck <http://belafleck.com/> or sitarist Anoushka Shankar 
<http://www.anoushkashankar.com/>. He also directs symphonies with the Academy 
of St Martin-in-the-Fields from the leader’s chair and appears in non-classical 
venues such as the 100 Club.Hilary Hahn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uSlbO14hR_0>, too, has collaborated with 
musicians ranging from folk-rock singerJosh Ritter <http://www.joshritter.com/> 
to prepared-piano specialistHauschka <http://hauschka-net.de/>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrSmoZ5h9EI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrSmoZ5h9EI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQrSmoZ5h9EI&media=>
In the UK, Anthony Marwood <http://www.anthonymarwood.com/> plays concertos 
(he gave the world premiere ofThomas Adès’s Violin Concerto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVG5R6sIobo>) and chamber music, but has also 
combined playing and acting in Stravinsky’s Soldier’s Tale and worked with 
Indian classical dancerMayuri Boonham 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/mayuri-boonham>. If you look at the variety of 
his career, you can see how the role of the violin soloist has changed so much 
since the days of Joachim, who, like Marwood, premiered the most important 
concerto of his own age, the Brahms.

My own career is a fairly equal division between solo work and orchestral 
leading (withAurora <http://www.auroraorchestra.com/> and Britten Sinfonia 
<http://www.brittensinfonia.com/>), with as much jazz and chamber music as time 
allows. I love the balance. I get to play pretty much the entire repertoire for 
the instrument, from Beethoven trios to Mahler symphonies to recording with 
Radiohead. I’m constantly playing new repertoire and working with new 
colleagues. That’s an enormous privilege. It might mean feeling stressed at 
times for having multiple projects on the go simultaneously, but it means you 
never get that stagnant feeling of giving the umpteenth performance of the same 
concerto in a season. It makes it much easier to play in a way that’s fresh, 
spontaneous and alive. If, as a performer, you enjoy what you are doing, then 
your audience will too.


I’ve found that the best way to approach a solo concerto is as chamber music. 
For example, near the end of the first movement of theBeethoven Violin Concerto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CkD3V2kVQJo>, there is a beautiful dialogue 
between the solo violin and the bassoon that I try to play as if it were from 
theBeethoven Septet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmex-7V0IRI>. Because I’ve 
spent so much time playing in an orchestra, sharing with and listening to 
colleagues, it makes it much easier to think of solo music in this group 
context, and it is also easier to build a rapport with the musicians in the 
orchestra.
 ‘Improvisation benefits classical musicians without question’ Photograph: 
Laura Bodo Lajber 
The life of the traditional concerto soloist can be incredibly lonely, and 
it’s not surprising that some of the greatest players in the last century had 
physical or mental breakdowns. Last year I was in Australia as a soloist: I was 
flown in, I stayed in a five-star hotel and ate every meal by myself – I didn’t 
meet anyone in the orchestra because there wasn’t the opportunity. The concert 
was fine, but I felt it could have been with any orchestra, because there was 
no chance to build rapport. More recently I was back in the country playing a 
series of concerts with theAurora Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aurora-orchestra>. We spent every minute 
together in a warm and supportive atmosphere. I’m convinced that was 
transmitted to our audiences.

It’s an approach that is filtering down to younger generations. When I was a 
student at music college, there was very little interplay between the jazz and 
classical departments, but that’s no longer the case today as more and more 
music making sits outside the traditional envelope and makes demands on the 
players to improvise and collaborate with different genres.


Improvisation, still sadly neglected in formal classical training, benefits 
classical players without question. It has certainly made my own playing much 
more free. I’m less afraid of making mistakes, for a start, and it has meant I 
don’t have the same reliance on the printed score. By the same token, listening 
to so much different music across so many genres when I was young, fromArt 
Blakey <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2IQNPlnc9c0> to Led Zeppelin, has 
hopefully enriched my playing and my approach today.


Of course, I still love the challenge of playing, say, the Brahms Concerto, 
because that’s when you feel like you are a galloping racehorse, using 
everything you’ve been trained for, and every bit of practice you’ve ever done 
is coming into play. There is a place for players who travel the world 
performing the same dozen concertos, but I think there’s much less demand for 
it than there was 20 years ago. And that has to be good for the health of 
classical music.

 * Thomas Gould <http://www.thomasgould.com>’s new album Bach to Parker on 
Champs Hill Records <http://www.champshillrecords.co.uk> launches at 
nonclassical global <http://www.nonclassical.co.uk/global-streaming> on 26 
November at a concert that will be live streamed. Follow@ThomasGouldVLN 
<https://twitter.com/thomasgouldvln>  