
A month ago it seemed inconceivable that struggling West Ham United could win 
three consecutive matches, but those who knowThomas Hitzlsperger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/thomas-hitzlsperger> might have guessed at 
the impact the German would make when he returned from a serious calf injury to 
play his first competitive football for the club.

The introduction of Hitzlsperger, who signed from Lazio last summer, sparked 
West Ham's best run of results for more than two years, three straight wins 
that featured two rockets from a left foot that has earned him theDer Hammer 
moniker. On Sunday he lines up against Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium in 
the FA Cup quarter-finals and his manager,Avram Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/avram-grant>, is clear regarding the 
influence of the midfielder who was injured captaining Germany against Denmark 
in a friendly in August.

"He was our first signing and we wanted him very much," Grant says. "He was 
very good before in the preparation games and he was injured just before the 
start of the season. To lose a very important player like him was not easy and 
he is now coming back. He is an intelligent player and more efficient player 
from the midfield."

This is Hitzlsperger's second spell in England. He signed for Aston Villa on a 
free transfer in 2000, 11 years after the boy from Upper Bavaria had joined 
Bayern Munich as a seven-year-old. Hitzlsperger's departure from Bayern shocked 
the club into a policy change regarding their future stars. "He left because he 
had an offer from Villa," says Werner Kern, who has been in charge of the youth 
department there since 1998. "It was the first time a player left Bayern for 
another professional club. We were heavily surprised when we learned he was 
leaving. But I have learned my lesson and from this point on I signed all the 
players up which have a chance to become a first-team player."

John Gregory, the Villa manager at the time, recalls Hitzlsperger's entry into 
English football: "Brian Jones, who is now the academy director [at Aston 
Villa], brought him to our attention and he came to the club. He had this 
amazing left-foot as you've seen with the goals he's scored. The problem with 
Thomas, as he still has to this day, is that he's injury prone. He had one or 
two injuries when he came to us and we couldn't get him in the team as quickly 
as we wanted to."

Five years and 99 Premier League appearances later Hitzlsperger returned to 
Germany to join Stuttgart. He was pivotal in helping the club to claim the 
Bundesliga title in 2007, before he fell from favour last year and spent the 
second half of the season at Lazio.

When his contract in Italy expired the 28-year-old signed a three-year deal at 
Upton Park. But injury struck and while Hitzlsperger spent eight months 
recuperating Grant was telling a sceptical audience that his loss was key to 
West Ham's failure to remove themselves from the mire. When he finally made his 
debut, against Burnley at Upton Park in the last round of theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, Grant was vindicated, a drive 
from his left foot opening the scoring in the 5-1 rout of the Championship club.

The stalling of Kenny Dalglish's Liverpool project followed, beaten 3-1, 
before another Hitzlsperger thunderbolt featured last Saturday in a vital 3-0 
win over Sunday's opponents. "I'm enjoying being back playing again, that's 
three games and three wins, so what more could I ask for?" he says. "It's a 
pure joy being out there. The fans are behind us and there is a very good 
atmosphere."

Grant says Hitzlsperger is inspiring his colleagues. "They like him because he 
was here for five or six weeks in the pre-season [and] we saw his quality and 
they saw him and his quality," the Israeli says. "That's important for the 
team. He is a quality professional and the players missed him."

This is a recurring theme of his career. Gregory speaks of a professional who 
neither drank or smoked, nor ever caused an issue, and Kern says: "His was a 
fantastic character, a very good boy, we never had any problems with him â€“ he 
had understanding, camaraderie. It is no surprise that he has over 50 caps [52] 
because he was always one of our best players in the youth development 
programme."

Despite being a win away from a semi-final at Wembley, and those recent 
victories, West Ham are still third from bottom and fighting relegation. But 
they might just have the right man at the right time. "We're in a difficult 
phase at the moment, but we seem to be handling the pressure very well," 
Hitzlsperger says. "The business is not finished yet, though. There is a long 
way to go and we're looking forward to it."
 