
Actor Chris Hemsworth won’t be the only Australian involved in Marvel’s next 
Thor film, Ragnarok – the movie will also be filmed in Australia, as part of a 
deal struck by foreign ministerJulie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>.

Prometheus sequel to be shot in Australia or Canada, says Ridley Scott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/prometheus-sequel-to-be-shot-in-australia-or-canada-says-ridley-scott>
Canberra-cum-Hollywood’s newest movie mogul revealed she had also secured 
local production for Ridley Scott’s next as-yet-untitledAlien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alien> film with 20th Century Fox.

Scott, who previously hinted his Prometheus sequel would be made in either 
Australia or Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/prometheus-sequel-to-be-shot-in-australia-or-canada-says-ridley-scott>
, appeared by video link at the press conference in Canberra on Wednesday, 
where Bishop and the federal arts minister, Mitch Fifield, were joined by Mary 
Ann Hughes, representing the Walt Disney Company for Ragnarok.

Bishop said securing the two big-budget films was the product of recent trips 
she made to Los Angeles and New York, where she spruiked Australian’s film 
industry talent, stable economy and low dollar to US producers.

“Australia’s creative industries are well placed to take advantage of a 
growing global economy and I have been actively promoting Australia for the 
production of major international films,” said Bishop, who revealed she had met 
with Disney,Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>, 20th Century 
Fox, Warner Brothers, Village Roadshow and NBCUniversal while in the US.

“They specifically spoke about the value in Australia as a filming 
destination, the quality and variety of our locations,” she said, while 
stressing Australia’s appeal to foreign film-makers lay in its crew and 
facilities as much as its picture postcard settings.

The federal government will invest $47.25m in attracting these productions, 
claiming an estimated return of more than $300m in offshore investment, 3,000 
new local jobs and benefits to thousands of Australian businesses.

Hugo Weaving: Just because Australian films aren't seen doesn't mean they 
don't exist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/29/hugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist>
“Australian crews and actors will also gain the skills and experience to 
further strengthen our capacity to produce high-quality films for Australian 
and international audiences,” said Fifield at the announcement.

Hollywood actor Hugo Weaving recently praised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/29/hugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist>
 Australia’s behind-the-camera talent while regretting it did not lead to more 
homegrown box office successes.

“In terms of the skilled practitioners making the films, they are here,” he 
told Guardian Australia. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/29/hugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist>
 “And they’ll keep on doing what they do in the hope that somehow, at the end, 
when the tap’s turned on, something comes out.”

Bishop took to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/JulieBishopMP/status/657033664736333824>, where her 
followers already include Marvel and 20th Century Fox, to share the 
announcement with a customarystream of emojis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/oct/22/julie-bishops-emoji-putin-senate-penny-wong-video>
.
jaymz (@hell4u02) 
@JulieBishopMP <https://twitter.com/JulieBishopMP> @SenatorFifield 
<https://twitter.com/SenatorFifield> @chrishemsworth 
<https://twitter.com/chrishemsworth> @Marvel <https://twitter.com/Marvel> 
@20thcenturyfox <https://twitter.com/20thcenturyfox> make sure you declare your 
pets!#auspol <https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/hell4u02/status/657040053567250433> October 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/hell4u02/status/657040053567250433> 
One Twitter user replied with a reminder to the crews of both films to 
“declare your pets”, referencingthe recent row over dogs Boo and Pistol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/amber-heard-charged-with-taking-dogs-to-australia-johnny-depp>
, brought illegally into Australia by Amber Heard when her partner Johnny Depp 
was filming the latest Pirates of the Caribbean film on the Gold Coast, 
Queensland.

The incident prompted the agriculture minister, Barnaby Joyce, to accuse the 
pair of smuggling, before threateningto have the dogs put down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/barnaby-joyce-defends-threat-to-put-down-johnny-depps-dogs>
, an anecdote Bishop presumably left out of her high-level Hollywood meetings.
BuzzFeedOz Politics (@BuzzFeedOzPol) 
Julie Bishop confirms the next Thor film and the second Prometheus film will 
be filmed in Australia!pic.twitter.com/p45DFnAUJR <https://t.co/p45DFnAUJR>
 <https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedOzPol/status/657015658530521088> October 22, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedOzPol/status/657015658530521088>  