
Looking overwhelmed by the attention, yet resplendent in an elaborate fuchsia 
dress and gleaming tiara, Rubi Ibarra celebrated her 15th birthday on Monday on 
a ranch in central Mexico after the invitation to the event by her fatherwent 
viral and made her the toast of the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/mexico-rubi-birthday-video-quinceanera>
.

Family members had to open a path for the girl through dozens of reporters and 
photographers snapping her picture so she could reach a Mass for her in a field 
in the state of San Luis Potosi. A large billboard saying “Welcome to my 15th 
birthday party” with Rubi’s picture towered over the tents and tables filled 
with food.

Mexican man's open invitation for daughter's birthday goes too viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/mexico-rubi-birthday-video-quinceanera>
Thousands of people came from across Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> for the quincenearacelebration, a 
traditional coming-of-age party similar to American “sweet sixteen” parties in 
which Mexican families often throw big, costly bashes so their daughter can be 
a princess for a day.

Rubi’s party gained national and international notoriety in early December 
after a local event photographer posted on his Facebook page a video of the 
girl’s father describing a down-home birthday party complete with food, horse 
races and local bands. In the video, cowboy hat-wearing Crescencio Ibarra 
haltingly but proudly describes the party and prizes, before announcing that 
“everyone is cordially invited.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd2f04c89e7a26f569a67228746785da01c556e2%2F0_0_3522_2113%2F3522.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20attend%20Mexican%20girl's%2015th%20birthday%20party%20after%20invite%20goes%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20attend%20Mexican%20girl%27s%2015th%20birthday%20party%20after%20invite%20goes%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd2f04c89e7a26f569a67228746785da01c556e2%2F0_0_3522_2113%2F3522.jpg>
 Rubi Ibarra arrives at Mass surrounded by a horde of journalists. Photograph: 
Enric Marti/AP 
Rubi’s mother later explained that Crescencio had only been referring to 
everyone in the neighbouring communities, not the world, but by then the video 
had been picked up dozens of times on Youtube and had been seen by millions, 
sparking tributes by musical stars, jokes and offers of sponsorships by 
companies.

Mexican airline Interjet published a promotion offering 30% discounts on 
flights to San Luis Potosi, under the slogan “Are you going to Rubi’s party?”

Internet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> users published 
mocked-up photos of troops of turkeys, backhoes stirring giant caldrons of soup 
and massive crowds “heading for Rubi’s party.”

Actor Gael Garcia Bernal made a parody video of the invitation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJKVBZBuNMQ>, and singer Luis Antonio Lopez 
“El Mimoso” composed a “corrido” song especially for Rubi. The humble daughter 
of ranchers even got an offer to appear on the soap opera The Rose of Guadalupe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa8966faa8c9f715dbd3e9840719cf0c0001158%2F0_0_5410_3247%2F5410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20attend%20Mexican%20girl's%2015th%20birthday%20party%20after%20invite%20goes%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20attend%20Mexican%20girl%27s%2015th%20birthday%20party%20after%20invite%20goes%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Frubi-ibarra-thousands-attend-mexican-girls-15th-birthday-party-invite-viral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa8966faa8c9f715dbd3e9840719cf0c0001158%2F0_0_5410_3247%2F5410.jpg>
 Rubi Ibarra looks at her mother Anaelda as photographers crowd around during a 
Mass part of Rubi’s 15th birthday party. Photograph: Enric Marti/AP 
Several hundred guests had arrived by Monday morning for the Mass, but the 
number swelled as the day progressed so that by evening there were thousands 
and the event resembled a rock concert. Cars blocked the access roads to the 
communities and state police and Red Cross workers monitored the situation.

“I came to see if they would give me a dress for my granddaughter for her 15th 
birthday in May,” said Victoriano Obregon, who had come all the way from the 
northern state of Coahuila.

“What happened with Rubi is an interesting example of how the internet 
amplifies and makes hyper-transparent people’s personal lives and how 
traditional media look for stories on social networks to bring in new 
audiences” who they have been losing, said Sergio Octavio Contreras, a 
communications professor at Mexico’s La Salle-Bajio University.

Rubi’s neighbours say they hope all the attention will bring improvements to 
the poor community, where there is a mescal distillery but residents are 
pleading for mobile phone coverage.

“More than anything, this can bring attention to us ... so people can see the 
unemployment,” said local resident Rutilio Ibarra.
 