
Marks & Spencer looks to cut up to 500 jobs at London head office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/03/marks-spencer-500-job-cuts-london-head-office>
Thousands of workers could lose their job at Marks & Spencer if they do not 
agree to changes to their pay and pensions, according to an MP.

Siobhain McDonagh, the Labour MP for Mitcham and Morden, said a leaked 
document fromM&S <https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer> showed the 
clothing and food retailer was prepared to cut in-store jobs if employees did 
not accept new terms.

The internal document, headlined “pay and pension changes”, refers to a 
“collective consultation for dissenters if required”. A timetable shows the 
consultation beginning on 14 November and the notice period for staff starting 
on 19 December, just days before Christmas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmarks-and-spencer-staff-jobs-pensions-pay-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716ef3dc955d8f2ade654180814d37ad6b3600ea%2F0_0_2835_3541%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20M%26S%20staff%20could%20lose%20jobs%20if%20they%20reject%20pay%20deal%2C%20says%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmarks-and-spencer-staff-jobs-pensions-pay-working-conditions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20M%26S%20staff%20could%20lose%20jobs%20if%20they%20reject%20pay%20deal%2C%20says%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmarks-and-spencer-staff-jobs-pensions-pay-working-conditions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716ef3dc955d8f2ade654180814d37ad6b3600ea%2F0_0_2835_3541%2F2835.jpg>
 Siobhain McDonagh, Labour MP for Mitcham and Morden, has criticised Marks & 
Spencer’s pledge to top-up staff pay. Photograph: Katie Collins/PA 
However, the retailer insisted that it did not want any employees to leave and 
the consultation was just one option being considered. Under this plan, staff 
who have rejected the new conditions would have their existing contracts 
terminated and then be offered a new contract with the new terms.

A spokesperson for M&S said: “The company has no intention that anyone would 
leave as a result of these changes. The changes, which will take effect from 
April, will reward our people in a fair and consistent way, simplify and 
modernise our business and make our colleagues amongst the highest paid in UK 
retail. Nobody need be worse off and the vast majority will receive higher 
total pay.”

Long-serving shop staff fear they could face pay cuts that could potentially 
cost thousands of pounds after M&S removed premiums for working Sundays and 
antisocial hours, trimmed bank holiday payments and changed pension payments. 
McDonagh said 2,700 staff would lose more than £1,000 a year and 700 would lose 
more than £2,000.

The retailer claims 90% of its 69,000 staff will be better off from the pay 
changes. Approximately 11,000 workers will be affected by the pension overhaul, 
under which those in the defined benefit scheme will no longer earn new 
benefits.

The retailer said it was making the changes to help pay for a 15% increase in 
basic pay for its 69,000 workers from April to £8.50 an hour.


In response to criticism of the move, M&S has improved its offer to staff  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/ms-improves-pay-deal-but-critics-say-offer-still-falls-short>
so everyone will either receive higher pay or have the opportunity to maintain 
their current pay level through top up payments and working more hours.

M&S has pledged to top-up the pay of those affected to 2015-16 levels for two 
years. Any employee whose pay in 2019-20 is still lower under the new regime 
will receive an additional top-up payment representing 50% of that shortfall in 
total pay and be offered guaranteed extra hours to make up the remaining 50%.

However, McDonagh has criticised this offer, claiming that utility bills, rent 
and travel costs are likely to be higher by 2019 and 2020.

Separately, M&S is cutting 525 jobs from its head office in London and is 
moving another 400 roles outside the capital. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/marks-spencer-to-cut-hundreds-of-jobs-at-london-hq>
 The company has about 3,000 head office staff working across seven locations 
so the changes will affect about a third of them.

Steve Rowe, who replaced Marc Bolland as M&S boss earlier this year, said that 
the retailer need to become a “simpler and more effective organisation if we 
are to deliver our plans to recover and grow our business”.

The head office cuts will save M&S about 1% of its UK costs, after a one-off 
charge of £15m including payoffs for senior managers.
 