
Scientists have offered a genetic explanation for why some people are obese 
and healthy while others develop diabetes and heart disease as a result of 
their weight.

The study identified three genes, which appear to influence whether fat is 
compartmentalised and stored around the outside of the body or whether it 
spills into the circulatory system. Higher levels of fat in the blood supply 
increase the risk of type 2 diabetes and can lead to fatty deposits around the 
heart and liver.

Professor Haja Kadarmideen, a geneticist who led the work at the University of 
Copenhagen, said: “People who have the ability to store large amounts of fat 
are able to be fat, but not unhealthy.”

Yo-yo weight gain driven by gut bacteria's 'memory' of obesity, says study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/24/yo-yo-weight-caused-by-gut-bacterias-memory-of-past-obesity-says-study-diet>
Previous studies have found that while being overweight or obese is a risk 
factor for diabetes, liver disease and heart disease, about 15-20% of those who 
are obese appear to suffer no health consequences.

Other research 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2013/01january/pages/overweight-people-live-longer-study-claims.aspx>
, involving more than 100,000 adults in Denmark, found that those with an 
“overweight” body mass index (or BMI) were more likely to live longer than 
those in the “healthy”, “underweight”, and “obese” categories, suggesting that 
the relationship between weight, health and lifespan is not straightforward.

“We wanted to ask what is it that allows some people to be overweight and 
remain healthy,” said Kadarmideen.

The findings suggest that an individual’s genetic makeup influences the weight 
threshold at which health problems begin to emerge – and for some people this 
will fall outside a “healthy” body mass index (BMI), as defined by public 
health guidelines. Conversely, a small proportion of people within the healthy 
BMI range are so-called TOFIs (thin on the outside, fat on the inside) and 
develop metabolic problems normally associated with obesity.

The study involved 60 men and women, all of whom were morbidly obese (average 
BMI of over 45), half of whom had metabolic disease and half of whom were 
healthy. The participants were all undergoing elective bariatric surgery.

Obesity alters brain structure and function
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/nov/23/obesity-alters-brain-structure-and-function>
The scientists scanned tens of thousands of genes for variations between the 
two groups. They identified three genes that showed very different profiles 
between the two groups, both in terms of the gene activity and the underlying 
genetic sequence. When the activity of the genes was examined more closely in 
fat and tissue samples, the scientists concluded that the genes played a 
significant role in regulating how fat is transported and stored in cells. The 
team are now hoping to replicate the findings in a larger population study.

In the future, it may be possible to give personalised estimates for a healthy 
BMI based on a person’s genetic profile and other biomarkers, the scientists 
said. “This paves the way for being able to diagnose, develop drugs and target 
treatment at the specific genes,” said Kadarmideen.


He added that the findings should not be interpreted as an excuse for 
abandoning guidelines for a balanced diet or forgoing exercise, because these 
lifestyle factors have an impact on health, regardless of a person’s weight.

The findings are published in the journal PLOS One 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/authors?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0167519>
.

 