
Three more big UK companies have suffered damaging investor revolts over 
executive pay at their annual shareholder meetings.

The latest rebukes came at bookmaker Ladbrokes, consumer goods company Reckitt 
Benckiser <https://www.theguardian.com/business/reckittbenckiser> and 
construction firm Carillion.


At the Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> AGM, 42% of 
investors voted against the company’s remuneration report.

At Reckitt, known for products such as Dettol, Nurofen and Durex, nearly one 
in four shareholders opposed the group’s pay policy that covers the next three 
years, and abstentions took the protest vote to 29%.

Almost 18% voted against the remuneration report for the past year, which 
included a £23m pay package for the chief executive, Rakesh Kapoor.

Kapoor is thought to be the second-best paid FTSE 100 boss after WPP’s Sir 
Martin Sorrell, who washanded a £70m pay package last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/18/sir-martin-sorrell-im-worth-every-penny-im-paid>
.

At construction firm Carillion 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/carillion-plc--clln-/rns/result-of-agm/201605051528114125X/>
, 46% of shareholders failed to back its remuneration report, including 
abstentions.

The trio are the latest high-profile companies to face the wrath of 
shareholders, afterhuge rebellions at  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
oil giant BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
,drugmaker Shire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
 and others.

The chief executive of Ladbrokes, Jim Mullen, who took over in April last 
year, was paid £567,000 for the nine months he was in the role, and his 
predecessor, Richard Glynn, received a big payoff.

Ladbrokes said it understood the concerns expressed by some shareholders over 
the payoff for its former finance director Ian Bull, who left in February. As 
“a good leaver” he stands to get up to £600,000 of shares for 2015. The firm 
said shareholder views would “play a key part in the board’s thinking as 
remuneration is considered for the business going forward and the potential 
merger with Coral”.

Aside from its pay row, Reckitt is also embroiled in a humidifier steriliser 
scandal that has claimed around 100 lives and injured hundreds more in South 
Korea. Kapoor issued a personal apology at the company’s AGM in London, just 
days after thecompany publicly accepted responsibility for its role in the 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/reckitt-benckiser-exec-slapped-press-conference-south-korea>
 for the first time. The problem with the steriliser humidifiers, which caused 
deadly lung problems, came to light five years ago.

Kapoor said: “I’m personally very sorry and very much regret that our Oxy 
product caused harm to people in Korea.” His apology came a day after South 
Korean retailer Lotte Mart and several online firms dropped Reckitt’s products.

He reiterated that the company had “made a mistake” and vowed to ensure that 
“something like this never happens again”. He said he would meet on Friday with 
representatives of the victims, a handful of whom had travelled to London and 
were demonstrating outside the AGM.

Reckitt’s disinfectant – a liquid added to the water of humidifiers – was 
among several products, also manufactured by rival companies, that were 
suspended by the South Korean government in 2011 after being linked to lung 
damage.

At the shareholders’ meeting the consumer goods group came under fire over 
top-level pay and governance issues. Cliff Weight from individual shareholder 
group ShareSoc said Reckitt had performed well in terms of shareholder returns 
since 2002 but even so, Kapoor’s pay package was “indefensibly high” at £23m 
for 2015, and £56m since his appointment in 2011. Weight said a reasonable 
remuneration would be “less than half this amount”.

He drew applause from other shareholders when he said: “It is difficult to 
have a cost-conscious culture when you are paid excessively yourself.”

Last year Kapoor said he would fly economy on flights under six hours as part 
of a £150m cost-cutting drive.

A representative from responsible investment charity ShareAction urged Reckitt 
to follow other big companies such as Unilever in paying its staff the UK 
living wage as set by the Living Wage Foundation.

Deborah Gilshan, from the Railways Pension Scheme, was also applauded when she 
voiced “significant concerns about the quality of board governance at the 
company” and executive pay.

She levelled her criticism at the head of the remuneration committee, Judith 
Sprieser, who has been on the board for 12 years and was re-elected on 
Thursday. She said the pension fund had met with Reckitt’s chairman, Adrian 
Bellamy, to discuss its concerns.

“It is a pity that the remuneration committee under Ms Sprieser’s leadership 
has failed to address these concerns,” she said.

Bellamy replied: “We hear you,” but defended the firm’s pay policy, saying it 
was linked to company performance. He added that Sprieser had managed the 
committee “extraordinarily well” and was therefore invited to stay on the board.

Sprieser said that the strengths of Reckitt’s pay policy had been its 
“simplicity, consistency and transparency” and claimed: “It works.” She said: 
“We take the feedback we get from our investors very seriously,” and added that 
some changes to long-term incentive plans had been made.
 