
A couple of weeks ago, Timothy Spall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/timothy-spall>’s agent asked his client – 
quite casually, as you do – how he was. Spall told him: “I’m feeling a bit that 
I don’t really feel I can do it at the minute.” It being acting. Acting being 
what he has slaved at for 40 years, hitting the summit some time back.

The agent set him straight: “You’re in the best part of your career ever!” But 
Spall isn’t the sort to shed vexation easily. Never was. And as he nears 60, 
that isn’t changing. For all thoseBBC barge larks 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/9612741/Timothy-Spall-interview-no-more-messing-about-in-boats.html>
 (he has shot three series touring Britain with his wife, Shane, on the 52ft 
Princess Matilda) and bonhomie, all that acclaim and affection, age has neither 
eased his fretfulness nor mellowed his ambition. Quite the opposite.

In a windowless dressing room on an industrial estate outside Harlington (left 
at theIncontinence Shop <https://www.incontinenceshop.com/>, carry on past Mr 
Clutch <http://www.allinlondon.co.uk/directory/1075/126484.php>), Spall hunches 
on a sofa and murmurs darkly. “The feeling of doing it wrong gets bigger and 
bigger and bigger,” he says. “The challenges get bigger and bigger. I feel 
ashamed if I feel I’m repeating myself or I’m being lazy.”

He eyes the rack of shirts in front of him: his wardrobe for the new Sally 
Potter film 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/kristin-scott-thomas-cillian-murphy-timothy-spall-join-sally-potters-the-party/5104937.article>
, The Party, which is shooting on a soundstage here. Today, he’s wearing two, 
and looks about as relaxed as a man about to shin up the scaffold.

I don’t enjoy the theatre. I don’t go. Don’t like going in the back door or 
the front

“I feel absolutely that I want it to be different, more textured, deeper, 
realer. If you are afflicted with an artistic feeling, it’s just perfecting 
something.” A swig of Coke Zero. He wants, he says, “to elicit in people a 
feeling they’ve never felt before. Capturing that drives me more and more and 
more.”

Spall invokes JMW Turner, the artist he lately played 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/14/timothy-spall-mr-turner-snubbed>
, slathering on determiners like layers of paint (“accretion” is a watchword). 
“Turner became more and more intangible – revolutionary and eternal as well as 
real. It wasn’t until he was old, and then regarded as mad, that he broke right 
through and presaged modern art by 50 years. I’m not saying I’m Turner in 
acting, but as you get older you don’t lose that desire to advance.”

His eyes pop with worry: gobstoppers in a sea of stubble. The weight he last 
sported for Turner has since been lost. Today, he looks younger, blonder, 
certainly more urgent. Two years ago that grunting, genius turn ignited big 
Oscar buzz off the back of hisbest actor win at Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/may/24/cannes-2014-timothy-spall-winner-winter-sleep>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400412351653%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202014%3A%20Mr%20Turner's%20Timothy%20Spall%3A%20'I%20like%20to%20paint%20angels%20in%20anguish'%20%20-%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202014%3A%20Mr%20Turner%27s%20Timothy%20Spall%3A%20%27I%20like%20to%20paint%20angels%20in%20anguish%27%20%20-%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400412351653%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-010.jpg>
Cannes 2014: Mr Turner’s Timothy Spall: ‘I like to paint angels in anguish’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/may/18/cannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview>
But then … nothing. The film was a critical success, a commercial one too (in 
Mike Leigh terms at least), but awards bodies turned up their nose. Not only 
did Spall getsnubbed at the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscar-nominations-2015-mr-turner-selma-grand-budapest-hotel-birdman>
 first round, hedidn’t even get nominated for a Bafta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/16/the-baftas-vs-mike-leigh-why-is-mr-turner-director-continually-snubbed>
.

At the time, he admitted disappointment 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/oscars-2015-mr-turner-star-timothy-spall-admits-disappointment-at-snub-9990301.html>
. Small wonder: it was an unfathomable slap. And yet it has evidently acted as 
a fillip. Mr Turner stuck him centre-stage and, save for lucrative cameos, he 
has stayed there ever since. That he was denied prizes also lends him momentum 
– useful, potentially, this autumn, when we will see him as Ian Paisley in 
reconciliation dramaThe Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/timothy-spall-to-play-ian-paisley-in-troubles-drama-the-journey>
 (“bit of a mindfuck”) and David Irving inDenial 
<http://www.cornerstonefilm.com/denial/>, about the holocaust sceptic’s libel 
case.

Timothy Spall to play Ian Paisley in Troubles drama The Journey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/timothy-spall-to-play-ian-paisley-in-troubles-drama-the-journey>
He has a fresh appetite, he says, “to understand the atrocious … Say those two 
names and people have an instant reaction. You have to try and find a humanity. 
To be loathed and understood at the same time.”

The character he plays in the film he is plugging today, Away 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3430548/reference>, is none too cuddly, either. 
Joseph is a grieving alcoholic saved from suicide by Juno Temple’s runaway 
junkie in off-season Blackpool. He’s excellent; she’s excellent. He compares 
the film to Lost in Translation. It’s true, there are echoes. But it’s hard to 
imagine it gaining quite the same kind of traction.

He cheerleads for a scene at the end of Away that boasts a moment of pure, 
platonic love. Any art that shows us something like that is inherently 
valuable, he thinks. He recently had an epiphany about human beauty, he says, 
when he worked with a bloke he hated. “I thought: you’re unpleasant, vile, 
something wrong with you. But then I just caught this glimpse of the nape of 
his neck, exposed. Like a bare ankle. Where you’re vulnerable. All of a sudden 
you go: oh, fuck! This rush of love and affection.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7CGCkYKRq2U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7CGCkYKRq2U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7CGCkYKRq2U&media=>
Away film trailer on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CGCkYKRq2U> 
Spall is an old pro at flicking that switch in us, too, making us fall hard 
for flawed men (“I wish I’d had a dad like you; you’re lovely,” sobs someone at 
him inSecrets and Lies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tzX1sPoZVZk>). His 
character’s relationship with Temple in Away is weird, but works. It mimics 
what often happens when the cameras stop rolling, he says. “I have had 
friendships with young actresses and actors. I’m in danger of sounding 
idealistic or a wanker or both, but all actors have this tacit thing that 
because everyone’s shitting it a bit, it’s egalitarian. An absolute 
meritocracy.”

The Caretaker review – Pinter given renewed zest by Warchus and Spall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/07/the-caretaker-review-old-vic> 
Spall – who says he’s long felt like an “old nine-year-old” – warms to his 
theme. On film sets, “there’s a wonderful currency of vituperation and 
bawdiness that cuts through. A Liberty House quality. People are candid.” Spall 
prides candour high. “If you’ve got a turd,” he says at one point, of duff 
scripts, “you can roll it in glitter, but you can’t polish it.” It could be his 
motto.

Last year, he was in a revival of The Caretaker at the Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/07/the-caretaker-review-old-vic>, 
which was well received by everyone, it seems, save him. “I never felt I got it 
right. But bottom line is: who gives a fuck what I think?” He rolls the words 
round his mouth like a wine gum. “If the audience are enjoying it, that’s all 
that matters.” Solipsism is for scorning, he says, slapping the Coke can 
against his knee.

Just as actors aren’t all luvvies, the audience, he stresses, weren’t all 
nobs. Spall’s ex-publican brother and his hairdresser daughter liked it a lot, 
though he concedes such productions “do appeal to a certain faction of society” 
– not one he counts himself part of. He grins. “I don’t enjoy the theatre. I 
don’t go. Don’t like going in the back door or the front.

“When it’s fantastic, it’s wonderful: I go and see my son [Rafe], my mates. I 
just got used to lying about watching telly – prefer that, to be honest.” He 
mentions a show calledHidden Killers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03n2yxq>
, about radium in the toothpaste. At the movies, he heads for the back row, 
isolated as possible. “I love a cinema with two people in it,” he cackles. 
“Love it! Absolutely love it!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftimothy-spall-the-feeling-of-doing-it-wrong-gets-bigger-and-bigger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc23d31b6aa98d94545df03dbb87033e947adee8%2F0_191_5120_3071%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Timothy%20Spall%3A%20'The%20feeling%20of%20doing%20it%20wrong%20gets%20bigger%20and%20bigger'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftimothy-spall-the-feeling-of-doing-it-wrong-gets-bigger-and-bigger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Timothy%20Spall%3A%20%27The%20feeling%20of%20doing%20it%20wrong%20gets%20bigger%20and%20bigger%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Ftimothy-spall-the-feeling-of-doing-it-wrong-gets-bigger-and-bigger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc23d31b6aa98d94545df03dbb87033e947adee8%2F0_191_5120_3071%2F5120.jpg>
 Timothy Spall (left) as Ian Paisley in The Journey. Photograph: Steffan Hill 
Being back on stage made him realise he prefers film. He kept wanting to do 
scenes again, out of sequence, in the morning, without an audience. Spall might 
have gone straight to the RSC from Rada, but he hadn’t trod the boards since 
his near-fatal bout of leukaemia in 1996. “I’d forgotten how bloody different 
it is. It was such a massive, terrifying shock to my system.”

He was 39 at the time, with three small children, and he was given half a week 
to live. “It wasn’t until recently I realised I was still dealing with it. You 
forget the trauma. But you never get over it. The toll it takes on you. The 
horror you had to deal with.” He’s quieter here; the words tumble out slower, 
the sentences come shorter. Spall likes stringy lines broiling with adjectives, 
bubbly with learning. Not now. “The older I get the more I feel that’s all we 
are: a big bunch of feelings and instincts all wrapped up in some brief 
encounter with intellect.”

Timothy Spall: dealing with ghosts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/19/timothy-spall-dealing-with-ghosts-the-enfield-haunting>
He says he has recently been pondering what drives people to suicide, “how 
ill, how unhappy do you have to be”, how faith affects those who are thinking, 
“I’m gonna die, or I could have died, I feel terrible, I’m dying.”

“There is nothing more profound than making that choice or being close to it. 
There’s only two things: being alive or dead. That’s it, that’sit. We forget 
that that is fucking it. Bye! Gone!”

He looks up: friendly, spooky. Spall does not seem on the brink. But what he 
calls his “peek over the other side” might have left in him a strange 
appreciation of precariousness. He doesn’t subscribe to any particular 
religion, he says, but speaks of feelings he doesn’t want structured. “I don’t 
know. It’s almost as preposterous not to think there’s a God as it is to 
believe.”

When he made Mr Turner, he took painting lessons, then exhibited in a Soho 
cake shop a collection ofsmall ink paintings 
<http://www.hooliganartdealer.com/hooliganartdealer/Timothy_Spall.html>, plus 
accompanying poems, of angels in anguish: “The basic Biblical thing,” he says 
lightly, “penance, repentance, attrition.” In fact, they belie an immersion in 
a culture he calls “the furnace of our civilisation. You can’t get away from 
it. All that imagery is in us, innit.”

Now, he can’t bear to look at them. “I hate it. I think: that’s shit, 
terrible.” His curse, he says, is having enough talent to know his limits. 
“When I look at what I paint I think: nah, fuck off. I don’t like doing 
anything unless I can do it well.” A chuckle. “That’s why I don’t do very much. 
Apart from act.” His agent will be relieved, at least.

• Away world premieres at the Edinburgh film festival on 22 June and is in 
competition for the Michael Powell award

 