
If Africa is a country, then Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro> is one of our national heroes. 
This may come as a surprise to many oblivious of Africa’s postcolonial history 
and Castro’s role in it – especially the fate of white regimes and former 
Portuguese colonies in southern Africa.

In the west, Castro’s legacy is usually dismissed as an authoritarian, and 
Cuba as a one-party state with few freedoms. Despite the many achievements of 
Cuba under Castro (high quality public healthcare 
<http://kff.org/news-summary/cubas-health-care-system-can-serve-as-example-to-other-countries/>
, as well as life expectancy,child immunisation 
<http://www.macleans.ca/society/health/what-cuba-can-teach-canada-about-vaccines/>
 andliteracy systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/castros-legacy-and-the-envy-of-many-nations-social-care-in-cuba>
 parallel to those of first-world nations, and evensurpassing the US 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/11/tom-morello-defends-fidel-castros-legacy.html>
), at various times the country became renowned for economic crisis, media 
repression, exiling and imprisoning dissidents, and discriminating against gays 
and people with AIDS.

Those things were a betrayal of the revolution, and it is important to 
acknowledge that. But history has absolved Castro when it comes to Cuba’s 
foreign policy, especially itsAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
policy.

A great irony about the reaction to Castro is that many of the same people 
demanding acknowledgement of his wrongs have never acknowledged that their 
governments were on the wrong side of history, or sponsored dictatorships in 
many developing countries.

After fronting the Cuban revolution against a corrupt, American-sponsored 
dictatorship in 1959 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/09/cuban-revolution-fidel-castro-casinos-batista/>
, Cuba under Fidel worked hard to develop its own distinct foreign policy 
independent from that of its more powerful neighbour, the United States, or its 
supposed ally, the Soviet Union. Africa became central to that foreign policy. 
For me, and people of my generation, Fidel Castro entered our consciousness as 
a hero of our liberation. He wasn’t just fighting for an abstract cause. He was 
fighting for us.

One of Castro’s central foreign policy goals was internationalism – the 
promotion of decolonisation and revolutionary politics abroad. This involved 
sending troops to fight in wars against colonial or proxy forces on the African 
continent, as well as supporting those movements with logistical and technical 
support.Cuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> sent troops but it also 
sent tens of thousands of Cuban doctors, dentists, nurses, health-care 
technicians, academics, teachers and engineers to the continent and elsewhere. 
That a significant proportion of Cubans trace their ancestries to west and 
central Africa (owing to slavery) contributes to this politics.

Critics of Cuba have pointed to the paradox of Cuba’s African policy: while 
Cuba has a progressive foreign policy on race, at home Afro-Cubans have often 
been at odds with the Communist party’s failure to reflect the full range of 
Cuba’s racial diversity in its leadership structures or to fully address race 
politics.

Castro’s regime did achieve more for Afro-Cubans in 50 years than previous 
administrations had in the last 400 years. But as theCouncil on Hemispheric 
Affairs <http://www.coha.org/revolutionary-racism-in-cuba/> concludes, Castro’s 
policies “only addressed issues of unequal access without changing structural 
biases underlying society”. And it added, with the new wave of economic changes 
affecting the country, “race and racism are once again becoming important 
issues in Cuba”.

Cuba’s involvement in Africa started with its support of Algeria’s liberation 
struggle <http://www.jstor.org/stable/157991> against France, then moved to the 
Congo, now the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). In 1964 Castro sent his 
personal emissary, Che Guevara, on a three-month visit to a number of African 
countries. The Cubans believed there was a revolutionary situation in central 
Africa, and they wanted to help, argues the historian Piero Gleijeses.

While Cuba record in the Horn of Africa was mixed under Castro (it followed 
the Soviet Union’s lead in militarily aiding Ethiopia’s dictatorship against a
Somalian invasion 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/fidel-castro-left-mark-on-somalia-horn-africa/3612803.html>
 andEritrean independence fighters 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1978/04/28/castro-seen-undecided-on-cuban-role-in-eritrea/5023ce66-635c-4645-9e2c-2e63412d34fe/?utm_term=.f74be84ce372>
), successes did follow elsewhere, where it pursued a more independent foreign 
policy.

Even as Cuba’s intervention struggled in Congo, Amilcar Cabral, leading a 
guerrilla struggle against Portuguese colonialism in Guinea Bissau and Cape 
Verde, asked for Cuban assistance. Between 1966 and 1974 a small Cuban force 
proved pivotal in the Guineans’ victory over the Portuguese. Following the 
Carnation Revolution in Portugal in 1974, Guinea-Bissau finally won 
independence.

Cuba’s involvement in the freedom of South Africa from white minority rule was 
even more dramatic. Twice – in 1976 and again in 1988 – the Cubans defeated a 
US-supported proxy force of the South African apartheid army and Angolan 
“rebels”. These instances were the first times South Africa’s army was 
defeated, a humbling experience that theapartheid regime’s white generals 
<http://www.historytoday.com/gary-baines/replaying-cuito-cuanavale> still, in 
retirement, find hard to stomach.

As Gleijeses told Democracy Now! 
<https://www.democracynow.org/2013/12/11/the_secret_history_of_how_cuba> in 
December 2013, at the time of Mandela’s passing, black South Africans 
understood the significance of these defeats. The black South African newspaper 
the World wrote about the skirmishes: “Black Africa is riding the crest of a 
wave generated by the Cuban victory in Angola.”

Gleijeses remembered Mandela writing from Robben Island: “It was the first 
time that a country had come from another continent not to take something away, 
but to help Africans to achieve their freedom.”

In a 1998 speech <http://www.cuba.cu/gobierno/discursos/1998/ing/f040998i.html>
, Fidel Castro told the South African parliament during his first visit to the 
country that by the end of the cold war at least 381,432 Cuban soldiers and 
officers had been on duty or “fought hand-in-hand with African soldiers and 
officers in this continent for national independence or against foreign 
aggression”. Many Cubans also lost their lives in these wars. In 1987, theLos 
Angeles Times reported 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1987-06-16/news/mn-7734_1_del-pino> that “10,000 
Cuban troops have been killed in Angola since 1976 … proportionately much 
higher than American fatalities in Vietnam”.

Given this history, it was no surprise that one of Mandela’s first trips 
outside South Africa – after he was freed – was to Havana. There, in July 1991,
Mandela referred to Castro 
<https://www.democracynow.org/2013/12/10/nelson_mandela_fidel_castro_a_video> 
as “a source of inspiration to all freedom-loving people”. At the end of his 
Cuban trip,Mandela responded 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1991-07-28/news/mn-519_1_leader-nelson-mandela> to 
American criticism about his loyalty to Castro: “We are now being advised about 
Cuba by people who have supported the apartheid regime these last 40 years. No 
honourable man or woman could ever accept advice from people who never cared 
for us at the most difficult times.”

The cold war ended a long time ago, but Cuba continues its involvement on the 
African continent, including training Africans in Cuban universities. During 
the Ebola outbreak in three west African countries, even Cuba’s US critics had 
to acknowledge the Cuban contribution to alleviating the crisis. At one point 
during the Ebola crisis, Cuba – a country with only 11 million people – had 
supplied the largest contingent of foreign medical personnel by any single 
nation working alongside African medics.

Altogether fitting was President Raúl Castro’s address at Nelson Mandela’s 
funeral in 2013. In Johannesburg, Raúlreminded his audience 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7yd0o6OdMy4>: “We shall never forget Mandela’s 
moving homage to our common struggle when on the occasion of his visit to our 
country on 26 July, 1991, he said: ‘The Cuban people have a special place in 
the hearts of the peoples of Africa.’”

If Raúl Castro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raul-castro> decided to give 
all the credit for that love to his older brother, Fidel, no one would blame 
him.

• Sean Jacobs, a South African, is an associate professor of international 
affairs atthe New School 
<https://www.newschool.edu/public-engagement/milano-school-faculty/?id=4e7a-5179-4e54-6b3d>
, and founder and editor ofAfrica is a Country <http://africasacountry.com/>
 