
The architect behind Tokyo’s new Olympic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympics-general> stadium has denied that he 
borrowed parts of the design submitted by Zaha Hadid, the British-Iraqi 
designer whose original stadium design was scrapped last year tocut costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/29/tokyo-2020-olympics-stadium-cost>
 for the 2020 Games.

Kengo Kuma denied claims by Hadid’s office that the new design bore striking 
similarities to the original.

This week the London-based Hadid complained that the Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> Sports Council was withholding 
payment for her work and demanding that she waive any copyright claims.

“In the design, I would like to say there are no similarities at all,” Kuma 
told reporters when asked about Hadid’s claims.

Kuma said both architects had to meet strict requirements for the 80,000-seat 
stadium, which will be built on the site of the now-demolished national stadium 
used when Tokyo last hosted the summer Games, in 1964.

“The conditions set for the competition mean that automatically some 
similarities emerge,” he said, adding that “the concept is completely 
different, so it is absolutely a different building, despite the similarities”.

Hadid’s office said it had turned down a request by the sports council to hand 
over copyright of her design in exchange for payment for the work she had 
submitted.

Her office sent a report to the sports council detailing the similarities in 
“the structure, layout and numerous elements” between her design and Kuma’s 
replacement.

Hadid’s office is reportedly consulting lawyers, and said it would “take legal 
action if our concerns are not promptly addressed to our satisfaction”.

Kuma, whose replacement design was chosen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/dec/16/tokyo-olympic-stadium-new-proposals-after-zaha-hadid>
 late last month, declined to comment on Hadid’s demand for negotiations over 
copyright.

The consortium working on the new stadium includes two Japanese companies that 
earlier worked with Hadid.

The outer structure of Kuma’s design is smaller than Hadid’s, which some 
critics likened to a bicycle helmet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/17/tokyo-denounce-zaha-hadid-olympic-stadium>
 or toilet seat. Others said its futuristic design was not in keeping with its 
surroundings in an old neighbourhood of central Tokyo.

Details of the layout and internal aspects of the structure are considered to 
be similar, however.

The decision by Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, to scrap Hadid’s design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/japan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design>
 last July was one of several setbacks to have hit Tokyo’s preparations since 
it was chosen to host the 2020 Olympics.

In September organisers decided to ditch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/01/tokyo-2020-olympics-logo-scrapped-after-allegations-of-plagiarism>
 the Games’s official logo amid accusations of plagiarism against designer 
Kenjiro Sano. A new logo will be selected in the next few months.

Last month the Tokyo Olympic organising committee admitted that the total cost 
of hosting the Games would be much higher than the original estimate of just 
over 300bn yen (£1.8bn).

Japanese media reported that the estimated bill had soared to 1.8tn yen due to 
“unforeseen” extra costs such as the construction of temporary venues, 
transport and infrastructure, and tightened security.

The organising committee is due to submit a revised cost estimate to the 
International Olympic Committee this summer.
 