
When he was running, unsuccessfully, in the 1990s to be governor of California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, Tom Hayden, who has died aged 
76, complained ruefully to the Los Angeles Times that his image among the 
voters of his adopted state could be summed up in just four words: “60s radical 
Jane Fonda”.

He had been married for 17 years to Fonda, Hollywood royalty and a living 
symbol of what many loved and more despised about the New Left. Although she 
was many times a millionaire, they lived modestly in a house in Santa Monica 
that did not even have sea views, and did their own shopping and laundry.

He was indeed a radical in the 1960s and – although the subjects that drew his 
thoughtful rage and formidable energy varied in the course of his life – a 
radical he remained. “I’m Jefferson in terms of democracy,” he said, “I’m 
Thoreau in terms of environment, andCrazy Horse 
<https://crazyhorsememorial.org/> in terms of social movements.”

In 1960, as a sociology undergraduate at the University of Michigan, he was 
one of 35 co-founders ofStudents for a Democratic Society 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/Students-for-a-Democratic-Society> (SDS) – 
perhaps, with theStudent Nonviolent Coordinating Committee 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/Student-Nonviolent-Coordinating-Committee> 
(SNCC), the most important of the radical political movements of the 60s in 
America. He was one of theFreedom Riders 
<http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/freedom-rides> chased and beaten 
by murderous mobs when they set out to desegregate bus travel in the Deep South.

As a civil rights activist in Mississippi he was beaten, and it was in prison 
there that he drafted what became the25,000-word Port Huron statement 
<https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/the-port-huron-statement-at-fifty> of 
1962, the manifesto of SDS that resonated for many of his contemporaries, 
beginning: “We are people of this generation, bred in at least modest 
prosperity, housed now in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we 
inherit.”

Like many in his generation, he was horrified by US involvement in the Vietnam 
war. Unlike most, he visited Hanoi several times and negotiated the return of 
some American prisoners of war. In the late 1960s he ran an anti-poverty 
programme in Newark, New Jersey, and in 1968 he was arrested as one of the 
Chicago Seven on charges of conspiracy and inciting to riot at the tumultuous 
Chicago convention of the Democratic party: sentenced to five years on the riot 
charge, he and his fellow radicals avoided jail on appeal.

In 1973 he married Fonda, whom he had met at an anti-war rally, and turned his 
attention to electoral politics. He lost several primary elections for high 
office in California, before being elected to the California state legislature 
in 1982 and to the state senate in 1993.

Born and brought up in Royal Oak, a white suburb of Detroit, Tom was the son 
of Irish Catholic parents, Genevieve (nee Garity), a film librarian, and John 
Hayden, an accountant. After their divorce he was brought up by his mother, and 
went to Dondero high school.

The family’s parish priest was Father Charles Coughlin 
<http://www.fathercoughlin.org/>, who had preached far-right politics against 
President Franklin Roosevelt on the radio. From the start, Hayden’s political 
instincts were opposite to those. (Asked by a reporter if he was a liberal, in 
later years when that was an unpopular thing for a politician to be called in 
the US, he replied simply, “I hope so!”)

In 1960, in Mississippi on the highly dangerous mission to register black 
people to vote, Hayden met Sandra “Casey” Cason. They married in 1961. The 
experience of campaigning led Cason to contribute toan SNCC position paper 
<http://womhist.alexanderstreet.com/SNCC/doc43.htm> (1964) that she and her 
friend Mary King expanded into “a kind of memo”,Sex and Caste 
<http://womhist.alexanderstreet.com/SNCC/doc86A.htm> (1965). It voiced the 
disillusion of white female civil rights workers who went to the south with 
high ambitions to liberate African Americans but found they were expected to 
make coffee for their male fellow activists, type out their papers and sleep 
with them, and it marked a key step in the “second wave” of American radical 
feminism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftom-hayden-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0614da86db0dde89e1bb7d11354c503c8da8897e%2F0_6_3109_1866%2F3109.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Hayden%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftom-hayden-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Hayden%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftom-hayden-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0614da86db0dde89e1bb7d11354c503c8da8897e%2F0_6_3109_1866%2F3109.jpg>
 Tom Hayden and Jane Fonda in 1978. They were married for 17 years. Photograph: 
Columbia/Rex/Shutterstock 
The marriage ended after a couple of years. Cason was a committed Protestant, 
a quiet woman who shunned publicity and worked unobtrusively for many causes 
for the rest of her life, whereas Hayden had a notable gift for publicity in 
the service of many radical causes.

Later in life he did express regret for “romanticising” the North Vietnamese 
and also for allowing his zeal against the war to turn into anti-Americanism, 
something of which his political opponents routinely accused him and, 
especially, Fonda. His gift for self-promotion got him into a lot of trouble 
even with sympathetic voters, and he complained, not unfairly, that he was 
criticised by both left and right.

His radical and in particular his democratic instincts, and his commitment to 
activism, all remained undiminished. Because he thought American democracy was 
drowning in money, he would accept donations only of less than $250. As a 
result of the settlement that followed his divorce from Fonda in 1990, he 
became a relatively wealthy man who could help fund his own campaigns. In 1993 
he married the Canadian actor Barbara Williams.

He poured out books, journalism and speeches on behalf of many causes, 
especially care for the environment and issues of class inequality. After he 
left electoral politics in 2000 he set up the Peace and Justice Resource 
Center. Critical as he remained of racial, gender and class injustice, he was 
proud of his adopted state of California. “The wind is blowing for California,” 
he told an interviewer on al-Jazeera, “and the wind is progressive.”

In 2001 his unconquered radicalism found an expression that surprised many and 
infuriated not a few. In a passionate account of Irish history, Irish Inside, 
he assailed British colonialism, but denounced even more the respectable 
version of Irishness embraced by many Irish Americans including, as he pointed 
out, his own parents.

He is survived by Barbara and their son, Liam; and by the son from his 
marriage to Fonda, the actor Troy Garity.

• Thomas Emmet Hayden, political activist, born 11 December 1939; died 23 
October 2016 
 