
The search for a new Spider-Man had prompted months of speculation, but the 
announcement this week that 19-year-old Tom Holland would be donning the 
spandex suit and following in the web tracks of Tobey Maguire andAndrew Garfield
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield> still came as something of 
a surprise.

Has Marvel chosen the wrong Spider-Man for its cinematic universe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/25/has-marvel-chosen-the-wrong-spider-man-for-its-cinematic-universe>
The teenager from Kingston-on-Thames, Surrey, who beat Asa Butterfield and a 
reported 1,500 other actors to the role, is the latest British actor to be cast 
as an American superhero.

Holland started out aged 12 in Billy Elliot the Musical 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-omDVx5IEl4> after a choreographer spotted him 
performing with his Wimbledon-based dance school. He graduated to the title 
role after mere months of playing Billy’s friend Michael. He subsequently 
appeared alongside Naomi Watts in the tsunami drama The Impossible and in the 
BBC’s dramatisation of Wolf Hall. Despite bigger projects, however, he remains 
under the radar. He will next be seen in Ron Howard’s nautical adventure In the 
Heart of the Sea.

The actor’s youth makes him a particularly interesting choice for the role. 
Maguire was 26 and Garfield 27 when they were cast as the city-saving high 
school kid. “He’s the first actual teenager to play Peter Parker,” said Anthony 
Breznican, a senior writer with Entertainment Weekly.

“I think Spider-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spider-man> strikes a 
nerve because it’s a coming-of-age story. We all take those steps from 
childhood to adulthood … I hope he brings some of that subtext and angst and 
enthusiasm to the role in between all the battles and web-slinging.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Ftom-holland-from-billy-elliots-buddy-to-the-latest-brit-cast-as-a-us-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435312221538%2F3f601b95-b55d-4f6e-b2b6-54c1ba85e8f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Holland%3A%20from%20Billy%20Elliot's%20buddy%20to%20the%20latest%20Brit%20cast%20as%20a%20US%20superhero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Ftom-holland-from-billy-elliots-buddy-to-the-latest-brit-cast-as-a-us-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Holland%3A%20from%20Billy%20Elliot%27s%20buddy%20to%20the%20latest%20Brit%20cast%20as%20a%20US%20superhero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Ftom-holland-from-billy-elliots-buddy-to-the-latest-brit-cast-as-a-us-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435312221538%2F3f601b95-b55d-4f6e-b2b6-54c1ba85e8f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Charlie Cox as Matt Murdock in Netflix’s Daredevil show. Photograph: Michael 
Muller 
Casting a teenager is just what the character needed, said David Hughes, 
author of The Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made. “I guarantee you, seven- to 
13- year-olds will be eager to see a Spider-Man who looks closer to their age 
than their geography teacher,” he said.

Aside from Holland’s young start and social media stunts – his Instagram 
profile <https://instagram.com/tomholland2013/> includes a series of videos 
that showcase his skills from football tricks to backflips – one of his major 
selling points might be something more simple – his nationality.

He is the latest in a string of British actors picked to play US superheroes, 
fromChristian Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> in the Dark 
Knight trilogy and Henry Cavill as Superman, to Charlie Cox as Netflix’s 
Daredevil and Garfield’s Spider-Man.

Stan Lee: Spider-Man should stay white and straight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/stan-lee-spider-man-should-stay-white-and-straight>
On-screen portrayals of superheroes have shifted over the past decade, with 
the cartoonish tone of the past – from TV’s campy 60s Batman through to Bryan 
Singer’s lightweight Superman Returns – gradually giving way to more substance.

Christopher Nolan’s franchise-restarter Batman Begins gave a character that 
had fallen into parody a moody and weightier face-lift, then emulated in Man of 
Steel, while Marvel’s cinematic universe has prioritised storytelling and 
acting talent over special effects.

The casting of British actors has helped to give superhero characters more 
legitimacy, at least superficially, as studios take the genre more seriously 
thanks to its growing financial importance.This summer’s Avengers sequel has 
already made $1.3bn worldwide 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=avengers2.htm>.

“British actors used to get cast because they were cheaper,” Hughes said. “But 
it really comes down to three things: theatre, theatre, theatre.”

At one point it might have been the fees, but it is increasingly British 
actors’ talents that are making them so attractive, agrees Andreas Wiseman, 
chief reporter at Screen International.

“There’s no doubt that the US appreciates UK acting muscle, often developed in 
the rigorous theatre arena, and that UK actors have grown up accustomed to US 
shows so don’t always struggle with the accent,” he said.

Holland’s stage background gives him an edge, and it is one that has helped 
fellow comic book Brits Tom Hiddleston, Tom Hardy, Hayley Atwell and Garfield 
bring something different to the table.

IA more deep-rooted explanation is also possible, that Britain’s long 
tradition in, and commitment to the arts produces great acting talent. “We have 
great actors in the US, but in our schools, public or private, the first thing 
to get cut when budgets get tight is usually the drama programme,” said 
Breznican.

“In the UK, theatre and performing have deeper roots in the cultural heritage, 
dating back centuries. That may be what generates such a deep bench of acting 
talent.”

It is another fast turnaround for a character who was last on-screen in 2014’s 
rebooted sequel The Amazing Spider-Man 2. Marvel’s ever-expanding cinematic 
universe, most recently seen inAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, has yet to be 
integrated with Spider-Man, arguably their most globally recognised superhero.

Issues with Sony, who hold the rights to the character, have been smoothed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/spider-man-to-join-marvel-superheroes-in-shared-movie-universe>
 and Peter Parker will debut in next year’s Captain America: Civil War.The 
casting process involved Holland screen-testing alongside Robert Downey Jr and 
Chris Evans, who will both star in the upcoming sequel 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/how-new-spider-man-team-804569>.

There is bound to be some franchise fatigue with critics and audiences, 
Wiseman said, but the franchise is among the top 10 highest-grossing for a 
reason.

“Enough people keep coming back for more, and studios will go with the money. 
New markets such as China are also enticing in the decision to pump these films 
out,” he said.
 