
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> has rejected the 
Chilcot inquiry’s criticisms of his decision to lead Britain to war in Iraq in 
2003, but expressed “sorrow, regret and apology” for some mistakes he made in 
planning the conflict.

The former prime minister called a press conference to respond to the report, 
starting with an emotional statement that he accepted “full responsibility 
without exception or excuse” for the consequences of the war.

But, by the end, Blair had delivered a defiant justification of his reasons 
for taking the UK to war, and rejected most of the criticisms contained in the 
report, authored by Sir John Chilcot.

He began by describing the choice to join the US in military action as the 
“hardest, most momentous, most agonising decision” of his life.

Blair said he had wanted to set the Iraqi people free and secure them from the 
“evil” of Saddam Hussein, but instead they had become victims of sectarian 
violence.


“For all of this, I express more sorrow, regret and apology than you can ever 
know or believe,” he said, in a speech in which his voice cracked with emotion.

The Labour politician went on to repeat that he apologised for the failures in 
planning the war and its aftermath, but was clear that he still believes the 
decision to remove Saddam was correct.Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> could be in a worse state than Syria 
is now if the regime had not been stopped, he suggested.

“I did it because I thought it was right,” Blair said.

Pressed on what he was apologising for, the former prime minister named three 
areas where he would have done things differently: presenting the cabinet with 
an “option paper”; pressing the US to have better planning in place for the 
aftermath; and sharing the advice of the attorney general to senior colleagues.

Following the report, some MPs said they believe he lied to parliament, while 
Labour frontbencher Paul Flynn and Green MP Caroline Lucas suggested he should 
face prosecution.

But Blair insisted: “I did not mislead this country. I made the decision in 
good faith and I believe it is better we took that decision. I acknowledge the 
mistakes and accept responsibility for them.

“What I cannot and will not do is say we took the wrong decision ... As this 
report makes clear, there were no lies, there was no deceit.”
What does the Chilcot report say? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=chilcot_findings>
Responding to the criticism that he had not exhausted all the options before 
sending in troops, Blair insisted that there was no “rush to war”, and asked 
people to put themselves in his shoes.

He said there had appeared to be evidence mounting on weapons of mass 
destruction; fears of a terrorist attack were growing; and he felt he had a 
duty to protect the country.

He was increasingly critical of the Chilcot report as the press conference 
progressed, repeating several times that it said he was wrong to go to war 
without examining the alternatives.

“There are real lessons of political and military strategy, but I don’t see 
where these are in this report,” he said.

Stressing the toll the decision had taken on him personally, Blair said he 
made the choice to put British troops in Iraq with the “heaviest of hearts”, 
and that he now thinks about it everyday. This was the reason he chose to work 
on the Middle East peace process after leaving his role as prime minister, he 
said.


It came after his former chief adviser, Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/chilcot-we-did-not-sex-up-wmd-dossier>
, said the issue would haunt Blair until his death.

“He will, for the rest of his days, think about that; it weighs heavily on him 
and all who worked with him,” Campbell said, adding that it was the 
responsibility of a leader ultimately to make decisions, and that this was 
Blair’s most difficult one.

Blair called the press conference after the Chilcot report concluded that he 
had deliberately exaggerated the threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/tony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry>
 posed by the Iraqi regime as he sought to make the case for military action to 
MPs and the public in the buildup to the invasion.

In a forensic account of the way Blair and his ministers built the case for 
military action, Chilcot found that Blair disregarded warnings about the 
potential consequences of military action and relied too heavily on his own 
beliefs, rather than the more nuanced judgments of the intelligence services.

A memo published by Chilcot also revealed that Blair had written to the US 
president, George W Bush, eight months before the 2003 invasion, promising him:
“I will be with you, whatever.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/with-you-whatever-tony-blair-letters-george-w-bush-chilcot>

Blair claimed at the press conference that this did not mean he had committed 
to war at this point. “It’s not a blank cheque, and it wasn’t taken as that,” 
he said.

He also said he strongly rejected the idea that soldiers had died 
unnecessarily. “I will never agree that people made their sacrifice in vain,” 
he said.

“I know some of the families cannot and do not accept that this is so; I know 
that there are those that can never forget or forgive me for taking this 
decision and think I did it dishonestly,” he said.

Chilcot identified two separate, key occasions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/iraq-inquiry-key-points-from-the-chilcot-report>
 in the buildup to the conflict, against the background of mass protests on the 
streets of London by the Stop the War Coalition, when Blair appeared to have 
overplayed the threat from Iraq and underplayed the risks of invasion.

Why is the report being published now? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=chilcot_publish>
“In the House of Commons on 24 September 2002, Mr Blair presented Iraq’s past, 
current and future capabilities as evidence of the severity of the potential 
threat from Iraq’s WMDs [weapons of mass destruction]. He said that, at some 
point in the future, that threat would become a reality,” Chilcot says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fit-isnt-about-a-lie-tony-blair-on-iraq-from-2001-to-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20isn't%20about%20a%20lie'%3A%20Tony%20Blair%20on%20Iraq%20from%202001%20to%202016%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fit-isnt-about-a-lie-tony-blair-on-iraq-from-2001-to-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20isn%27t%20about%20a%20lie%27%3A%20Tony%20Blair%20on%20Iraq%20from%202001%20to%202016%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fit-isnt-about-a-lie-tony-blair-on-iraq-from-2001-to-2016-video&media=>
‘It isn’t about a lie’: Tony Blair on Iraq from 2001 to 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/06/it-isnt-about-a-lie-tony-blair-on-iraq-from-2001-to-2016-video>
But Chilcot argues instead: “The judgments about Iraq’s capabilities in that 
statement, and in the dossier published the same day, were presented with a 
certainty that was not justified.”

The inquiry finds that the report, which subsequently became notorious as the 
“dodgy dossier”, was deliberately aimed at maximising the perceived threat from 
Iraq.

The foreword, in which the then prime minister said he believed intelligence 
“established beyond doubt” that Saddam was continuing to produce chemical and 
biological weapons, and hoped to produce nuclear weapons, was “grounded in what 
Mr Blair believed, rather than in the judgments which the joint intelligence 
committee had actually reached in its assessment of the intelligence”, Chilcot 
finds.

Separately, Chilcot contrasted the powerful language used by Blair in the 
House of Commons on 18 March 2003, when he was making the case for military 
action to sceptical MPs, with the more nuanced picture presented by 
intelligence at the time.

Blair warned about the possibility of WMDs falling into the hands of terrorist 
groups, which he said posed “a real and present danger to Britain and its 
national security”.

But Chilcot points out that the UK’s intelligence assessment was that:

 * Iran, North Korea and Libya were considered greater threats in terms of 
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons proliferation.

 * The joint intelligence committee believed it would take Iraq five years, 
after the lifting of sanctions, to produce enough fissile material for a weapon.

 * There was no evidence that Iraq had tried to acquire fissile material and 
other components or – were it able to do so – that it had the technical 
capabilities to turn these materials into a usable weapon.

 * Saddam’s regime was “not judged likely” to share its weapons or knowhow 
with terrorist groups.

In his statement after the publication of the report on Wednesday, Chilcot 
said that, at the time of his statement to the Commons: “Mr Blair had been 
warned that military action would increase the threat from al-Qaida to the UK 
and to UK interests. He had also been warned that an invasion might lead to 
Iraq’s weapons and capabilities being transferred into the hands of terrorists.”


The report also suggests that the Blair government’s approach to making the 
case for war – including the “dodgy dossier” – undermined future public debate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7b193672f79da75fcd82dfcc3327d5e978322e%2F0_115_2168_1301%2F2168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%3A%20'I%20express%20more%20sorrow%2C%20regret%20and%20apology%20than%20you%20can%20ever%20believe'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%3A%20%27I%20express%20more%20sorrow%2C%20regret%20and%20apology%20than%20you%20can%20ever%20believe%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7b193672f79da75fcd82dfcc3327d5e978322e%2F0_115_2168_1301%2F2168.jpg>
 Blair arrives at Basra airport in Iraq in December 2004. Photograph: Adrian 
Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
“The widespread perception that the September 2002 dossier overstated the 
firmness of the evidence about Iraq’s capabilities and intentions in order to 
influence opinion and ‘make the case’ for action to disarm Iraq has produced a 
damaging legacy, including undermining trust and confidence in government 
statements, particularly those that rely on intelligence that cannot be 
independently verified,” the report says.

Campbell was widely blamed at the time for “sexing up” the claims in the 
dossier, but he barely merits a mention in the report’s executive summary, 
which focuses squarely on Blair’s key role in taking Britain to war in the 
Middle East.

Chilcot finds that Campbell largely left the task of writing the dossier to 
Sir John Scarlett, then chairman of the joint intelligence committee, and 
others – although Campbell did chair a September 2002 meeting at which the need 
for a “substantial rewrite” was agreed – and later gave a series of comments on 
drafts, including one urging Scarlett to “cut the rhetoric”.

Campbell’s role in shaping the government’s public statements about the case 
for going to war is set out clearly in the report. He argued over the Christmas 
break in 2002, for example, that the UK had to “communicate better the threat 
and relevance to the UK”.

The UK position “should be that the issue of Iraq/WMD has to be addressed, we 
worked hard to get [the] UN route … and we’re working hard to make that route 
work. But Saddam has to understand this is his last chance, and in the meantime 
we carry on military preparations”.

Setting out the lessons that future governments should take from the dossier 
episode, Chilcot emphasised “the need for vigilance to avoid unwittingly 
crossing the line from supposition to certainty” and “the need to be scrupulous 
in discriminating between facts and knowledge on the one hand and opinion, 
judgment and belief on the other”.


As well as questioning the basis for many of Blair’s public statements about 
the threat posed by Iraq at the time, Chilcot also underlines a series of 
failings in the style of government practised behind the scenes, criticised at 
the time as “sofa government”, which he says failed to provide sufficient 
challenge to decisions made by a select inner circle.

The inquiry identifies 11 separate “decision points” in the buildup to the 
conflict that could have benefited from “collective discussion” in a cabinet 
sub-committee, with advice from civil servants.


It also criticises Blair for failing to consult more widely within the 
government about his promise to Bush – in a “long note” of September 2002 – 
that: “I will be with you, whatever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b120953389cebf604074585089c87b7ed06015a%2F179_0_1646_988%2F1646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%3A%20'I%20express%20more%20sorrow%2C%20regret%20and%20apology%20than%20you%20can%20ever%20believe'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%3A%20%27I%20express%20more%20sorrow%2C%20regret%20and%20apology%20than%20you%20can%20ever%20believe%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Ftony-blair-deliberately-exaggerated-threat-from-iraq-chilcot-report-war-inquiry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b120953389cebf604074585089c87b7ed06015a%2F179_0_1646_988%2F1646.jpg>
 Blair promised Bush: ‘I will be with you, whatever.’ Photograph: Luke 
Frazza/AFP/Getty Images 
The note was seen only by No 10 officials before it was sent, and was shared 
afterwards with the then foreign secretary, Jack Straw, but not with the then 
defence secretary, Geoff Hoon.

“While the note was marked ‘personal’ (to signal that it should have a 
restricted circulation), it represented an extensive statement of the UK 
government’s position by the prime minister to the president of the US. The 
foreign and defence secretaries should certainly have been given an opportunity 
to comment on the draft in advance,” it says.

 * You can join the discussion about the Chilcot report on our politics live 
blog 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/politics/live/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-live-inquiry-war-iraq> 