
Spiderweb by Penelope Lively 218pp, Viking, Â£15.99 

 If Penelope Lively was a short, dark-haired man with a plummy voice who 
smoked roll-ups, then perhaps she would get the attention she deserved. But 
despite regularly winning prestigious prizes and being the author of some of 
the best novels written in the past 30 years, she doesn't get the notice that 
the men of her generation do. And yet, her Booker prizewinning novel Moon Tiger 
was far superior to that other Booker prize winner (which contained very 
similar subject matter), Michael Ondaatje's The English Patient; her City of 
the Mind, meanwhile, explores the problems of urban life in a much more 
engaging fashion than Martin Amis's London Fields.

 But perhaps she prefers it this way. It means that she can get on with the 
business of writing without the distractions of drumming up publicity. Indeed, 
her writing seems to suffer when it becomes too concerned with the world of the 
media - her previous novel Heatwave was rather sterile because it depicted the 
arid folk who work in publishing.

 But her new novel, Spiderweb, finds Lively coming back to her home ground 
and, as a consequence, is a real return to form. As with Moon Tiger, her 
central protagonist is a highly intelligent, older woman who is haunted by her 
past. Stella Brentwood is a retired anthropologist who has grown up in a 
generation when women were expected to marry and settle down; but her 
profession, and her character, have meant that she has led the life of the wild 
and free. She has studied the social behaviour and organisation of the isolated 
villagers living in the Nile Delta, in Malta, Greece and a remote Orkney 
island. She has enchanted men along the way but never become tied to any of 
them.

 Now 65, Stella abandons her nomadic lifestyle and buys a home in Somerset, 
hoping to root herself in one place. But she soon discovers that it is 
impossible to keep the cool, detached distance from people that she has 
maintained for most of her adult life. People keep trying to lure her into 
their emotional 'spiderwebs': there's Richard, a former civil servant and widow 
of her best friend, who harbours a secret passion for her; there's Judith, a 
lesbian archaeologist, whose close friendship with Stella upsets Judith's 
lover; and, most unexpected of all, there is a troubled rural family whose 
proximity and psychotic tendencies present a hidden but menacing threat to 
Stella.

 The diversity of these characters is mirrored in the diversity of the prose: 
the novel is constantly shifting in register. Newspaper clippings, letters, 
diary entries and classified adverts are interspersed with novelistic scenes 
which are less lyrical and more starkly pessimistic than any of her previous 
fiction. But although her prose may have acquired a new spareness, Lively's 
obsession with memory remains. As she weaves in and out of past and present, 
readers will become ensnared by a novel that is itself something of a spider's 
web.
 