
I live a few miles inland from the Welsh coast, near Aberaeron, and see 
Cardigan Bay every day. I usually know in my gut if the tide is in or out. I’ve 
netted the pools, know the beach here like the back of my hand and, when I can, 
spend hours on the cliff path. And there is the sea, always. Facing me. Asking 
questions, which are the beginning of stories. Like the story of Cove,my latest 
novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/cove-cynan-jones-review-granta-fiction>
, about a man hit by lightning at sea.


I’ve been fishing and sailing, and kayak inshore, but most of my travel on the 
sea has been by book, not by boat. Here are 10 stories, not only about our 
battle with the elemental power of the water, but also about the riddles found 
in the currents and the sea’s hold over us.

1. The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway
Hemingway’s enduring classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/24/books-to-give-you-hope-the-old-man-and-the-sea-by-ernest-hemingway>
 is the book I’ve reread most often. It is a simple story of a Cuban fisherman 
who has gone 84 days without catching a fish – until he hooks a giant marlin, 
far out off the coast of Florida.

It is an ancient, religious, fundamental story of epic struggle, of 
stubbornness against energy. It is also, for me, an example of the individual 
will to recognise achievement, regardless of witness. That said, every time 
I’ve read it, it’s affected me differently. That is its key power.

2. Story of a Shipwrecked Sailor 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/story-of-a-shipwrecked-sailor.html> by Gabriel
García Márquez
Told from the perspective of 20-year-old seaman Luis Alejandro Velasco, and 
attributed to him when first published, the story was ghostwritten by García 
Márquez and presented in 14 instalments in the Colombian newspaper El 
Espectador in 1955. Márquez’s name was not associated with the story until it 
was published in book form in 1970, with its full title: The Story of a 
Shipwrecked Sailor: Who Drifted on a Liferaft for 10 Days Without Food or 
Water, Was Proclaimed a National Hero, Kissed by Beauty Queens, Made Rich 
Through Publicity, and Then Spurned by the Government and Forgotten for All 
Time.

3. Moby-Duck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/30/moby-duck-toys-donovan-hohn> by 
Donovan Hohn
This is not a typo! These last few Christmases I’ve committed to reading a big 
book I should have read before – The Count of Monte Cristo, East of Eden and 
the utterly extraordinaryMoby-Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/13/100-best-novels-observer-moby-dick>
.

It was during a conversation about Melville’s masterpiece that Geoff from 
Pen’rallt Gallery bookshop <http://www.penralltgallerybookshop.co.uk/> in 
Machynlleth handed me Moby-Duck. Although sometimes waterlogged with too much 
writing, this book follows – or rediscovers – the plastic ducks and other bath 
toys that were washed overboard from a container ship in the Pacific in January 
1992, revealing all manner of things about ocean currents and the habits of the 
sea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F110659df91e392e731d9d92ed71fa4933e36498c%2F0_35_2067_1240%2F2067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20hostile%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20hostile%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F110659df91e392e731d9d92ed71fa4933e36498c%2F0_35_2067_1240%2F2067.jpg>
 George Clooney in the 2000 film adaptation of Sebastian Junger’s book The 
Perfect Storm. Photograph: Warner Bros 
4. The Perfect Storm <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/perfect-storm.html> by 
Sebastian Junger <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sebastian-junger> 
When warm air from a low-pressure system collides with a flow of cool, dry air 
generated by high pressure, and this coincides with tropical moisture provided 
by a hurricane, the situation is ripe for a “perfect storm”. Such a storm is at 
the centre of this true account of the disaster that beset the Andrea Gail and 
its crew, out of Gloucester, Massachusetts, on a late-season fishing expedition 
in 1991.

Rarely has a book battered me with so many astounding facts and figures – how 
much power a lightning strike delivers, how long trawl lines can be, the 
numbers behind waves … I read this book a long time ago, but it remains vivid 
in my mind.

5. Close to the Wind by Pete Goss 
This list wouldn’t be right without an account of a sailor travelling around 
the world single handedly. And there are many. But I have Simon fromAberystwyth 
<https://www.aberystwythartscentre.co.uk/bookshop> Centre bookshop 
<https://www.aberystwythartscentre.co.uk/bookshop> to thank in helping me 
choose this startling account of bravery during the gruelling Vendée Globe 
race, during which Pete Goss turned his boat into the teeth of a hurricane and 
sailed into it to rescue a fellow competitor. I’ll let Goss tell you the rest.

6. A Mile Down by David Vann
Vann’s account of his attempt to skipper a luxury charter yacht works because 
his writing is so good, honest and pragmatic. He is blunt about his failings, 
lucid – in retrospect – at the blindness of his plan, and his physical writing 
is compelling. This book, really, is about ambition as an ocean: a place of 
escape and loss and possibility. Vann’s ambition is to prove to himself that he 
will not repeathis father’s suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/02/david-vann-caribou-island-interview>
, which hangs over the book like a dark cloud on the horizon.

7. Pincher Martin by William Golding
I (shamefully) had never heard of Pincher Martin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pincher-martin.html>. Then, in the space of 
10 days, three people recommended it to me once they heard I had written a book 
about a man alone at sea. I bought Golding’s book straight away.

Happily, it was quickly clear that Golding’s third novel was nothing like my 
story. The narrative bulges and shrinks like the anemones Martin is reduced to 
eating and there is an ebb and flow in reality, with Martin dismissing 
terrifying events as hallucinations, as he fights to hold on to his sanity.

As the story continues, Martin also feels the drag of guilt, and an 
undercurrent of greed and personal ambition – to tell any more would be to 
spoil a virtuoso twist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4af8c6d246f24eda9b6e5fb262c75e37d2da86c%2F0_0_5076_3456%2F5076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20hostile%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20hostile%20ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftop-10-humans-ocean%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4af8c6d246f24eda9b6e5fb262c75e37d2da86c%2F0_0_5076_3456%2F5076.jpg>
 Jacques Cousteau with one of his underwater research vessel, the bathyscaphe 
Calypso, in Puerto Rico. Photograph: Thomas J Abercrombie/National 
Geographic/Getty Images 
8. The Silent World by Jacques Cousteau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/jacques-cousteau-french-ocean-explorer-odyssee-film>

At night I had often had visions of flying by extending my arms as wings. Now 
I flew without wings …

 As a child, I was fascinated by Cousteau’s account of his first scuba dive, 
off the French Riviera in 1943. What intrigued me most was his lyrical 
description of the life – and experience of being – under water. I was 
determined to be a natural historian when I grew up. Returning to The Silent 
World as an adult, however, I’m also struck by the basic human achievement, and 
the understanding that Cousteau and Parisian engineer Émile Gagnan did it all 
during the second world war.

9. Orkney by Amy Sackville
The draw of the ocean is often physical. But to act on that draw, for most of 
us, an emotional pull is needed too (much like acting on physical attraction to 
someone).

 That emotional pull is at the centre of this elusive, poetic story about an 
ageing professor’s honeymoon by the sea with the beautiful young pupil he has 
married. The book is full of space and light, but – much like the ocean – 
Sackville’s writing is also brooding and hypnotic

10. Harpoon at a Venture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/19/gavin-maxwell-shark-robert-macfarlane-harpoon-venture-ring-bright-water>
 by Gavin Maxwell
Better known for his later work Ring of Bright Water, Gavin Maxwell’s account 
of his attempt to set up a basking shark fishery off the Hebridean coast of 
Scotland is extraordinary. Once you navigate the discomfort of reading about 
the slaughter of big animals, and Maxwell’s stalwart upper-class approach to 
such an endeavour, this is a book full of wit, humility and a surprisingly 
modern respect for the environment.

 * Cove by Cynan Jones is published by Granta at £9.99. It is available from 
theGuardian Bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cove-451147.html> for 
£8.19.  