
Britain’s best known fund manager has likened the current stock market 
euphoria tothe dotcom bubble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/23/nasdaq-new-record-high-dotcom-bubble>
, even as the FTSE 100 closed at yet another record high.

After a volatile day’s trading, the leading index finished 1.88 points higher 
at 7292.37, marking the 11th consecutive day of record closes and the market’s 
13th successive daily rise.

But Neil Woodford, who admitted his own fund’s performance in 2016 was 
disappointing, said the current situation reminded him of the technology bubble 
which reached a peak on the last day of 1999 and then burst dramatically.

He said : “There was a period then when fundamentals didn’t matter at all and 
markets just became completely momentum-orientated. There was no price that 
people wouldn’t pay to be positioned in technology stocks and no price that 
they wouldn’t sell shares that were focused on the old economy.

“And in a similar sort of way – maybe not to the same extreme, but in a 
similar way, we have seen 2016 play out like that. Valuation has become 
significantly less important. Indeed, arguably irrelevant in this sort of 
post-Trump period. Momentum has driven the share prices, not fundamentals.”

Global markets have been buoyed by president elect Donald Trump’s promises to 
introduce measures to boost economic growth. On top of that theFTSE 100 has 
been lifted by a fall in sterling since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/qa-falling-pound-rising-markets>
, which has helped those companies which make most of their earnings overseas 
and has also made UK businesses cheaper for overseas investors.

Related: Marks & Spencer, Tesco, Primark and JD Sports lead flurry of 
Christmas trading news – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/12/marks-spencer-tesco-debenhams-primark-jd-sports-flurry-christmas-trading-business-live>

An early rise in the pound on Thursday, as the dollar weakened, sent the index 
lower in early trading. The slump in the greenback, which pushed the pound up 
nearly 1% to $1.2316, followed disappointment that Trump had not given details 
of his proposed spending and tax plans at Wednesday’s press conference.


Pharmaceutical companies, hit by renewed threats by Trump to cut the prices 
they charge for their drugs, were among the losers,while Christmas trading 
statements from UK retailers proved a mixed bag. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/uk-christmas-retail-winners-losers>

But sterling lost its gains as the day progressed and was marginally lower at 
$1.221 by the time the London stock market closed, helping the leading index 
edge to its new peak.

In the US, the disappointment with Trump’s press conference performance and 
the lack of economic news from the president-elect sent the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average down 152 points to 19,802 by lunchtime.On Friday, it had 
come within one point of breaching the elusive 20,000 barrier. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/ftse-100-on-course-for-longest-ever-winning-streak>
 Neil Woodford. Photograph: REX 
Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, said: “The apparent demise of the 
rally is being blamed on disappointment following the president-elect’s press 
conference, but in reality the surge was already running on air, with US 
markets in particular having essentially gone nowhere since mid-December. This 
fact was masked by the ongoing hope of Dow 20,000, but it looks like this has 
been scrubbed from the timetable for the next few weeks.”

In the eurozone, a stronger euro saw Germany’s Dax drop 1% and France’s Cac 
close down 0.5% with exporters among the leading fallers.

 