
Britain’s biggest companies paid five times more in dividends than they did 
pension contributions last year, according to a new report that highlights the 
pressure on retirement schemes.

FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 companies paid £13.3bn 
towards their defined benefit pension schemes, compared with £71.8bn in 
payments to shareholders, according to the consultancy firm LCP’s annual study 
of pensions.

Younger generation in UK face overwhelming pensions bill, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/14/uk-younger-generation-pensions-bill-report>
The report has been published after Sir Philip Green was heavily criticised by 
a parliamentary investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 into the collapse of BHS for leaving the retailer with a £571m pension 
deficit, despite his family and other investorsbanking more than £400m in 
dividends. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>

BHS’s 164 stores are all scheduled to close by 28 August, a week later than 
administrators planned last month as the retailer continues to sell its 
remaining stock.

Green remains locked in talks with the Pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Regulator about a rescue deal for 
the BHS pension scheme. He has pledged to sort out the problems facing it, but 
the regulator has launched an investigation into whether the billionaire tycoon 
should be forced to make a financial contribution to fill the black hole.

Other companies with large pension deficits could face action from the 
regulator if they are paying dividends, LCP says in its report.


The 56 FTSE 100 companies that disclosed a pension deficit at the end of their 
2015 financial year had a combined deficit of £42.3bn, but the same companies 
paid out dividends worth £53bn, 25% more than their pension contributions.

Bob Scott, LCP’s senior partner and the author of the report, said: “Companies 
with large deficits may see pressure from the Pensions Regulator on their 
dividend policy in light of the select committee’s report into BHS.”

The biggest pension deficit in the FTSE 100 is BT’s £7.6bn according to the 
report.Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is second with a 
deficit of £4.8bn, followed by BAE Systems with £4.5bn, BP with £4.2bn and 
Royal Dutch Shell with £2.9bn. BAE’s deficit is the biggest relative to the 
size of the company. It is equivalent to 29% of its stock market value.

Retirees prove more prudent than expected after pension freedoms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/15/retirees-prove-more-prudent-than-expected-after-pension-freedoms>
Royal Mail’s pension scheme is in the strongest financial position thanks to 
backing from the government. Its funding level is 193%, meaning the amount it 
has pledged to pay out to workers is covered almost twice over.Royal Bank of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> made 
the biggest contributions to its pension scheme in 2015, paying in £1.06bn, 
just ahead of BT’s £1.05bn.

LCP said that FTSE 100 companies could reduce their pension liabilities by 
£30bn – about 5% – if they were allowed to shift how the annual 
inflation-linked increase in benefits is calculated from the retail price index 
(RPI) to the lower consumer price index (CPI). This reduction could swell to 
£100bn if companies were allowed to increase benefits by the minimum level.

Tata Steel, the owner of Britain’s largest steel works in Port Talbot, is in 
talks with the government about asimilar restructuring for the British Steel 
pension scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/12/tata-steel-uk-rescue-deal-pension-protection-fund>
, which has liabilities of £15bn. This, however, would require changes to the 
law.

Scott said: “The government should end the uncertainty – the legal lottery – 
by allowing companies to move from RPI to CPI, subject to safeguards. The 
safeguards are important as they should not automatically allow a profitable 
company with a large pension surplus to increase that surplus by reducing 
benefits.”

Unions threaten battle with Royal Mail over pension scheme change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/unions-threaten-battle-with-royal-mail-over-pension-scheme-change>
Pension experts, however, said it would set a dangerous precedent. John Ralfe, 
a pensions consultant, said: “Why should pension scheme members lose out when 
shareholders continue to be paid cash dividends? It can only be fair to members 
if dividends are stopped and they can only start again once the full RPI lost 
is paid to pension scheme members.

“The proposal is wrong in principle and is unworkable in practice. It is a 
half-baked idea, pushed by pension lobbyists with a vested interest in allowing 
companies to break their pension promises.

 “Companies can change the terms of new pension promises going forward, but it 
is a crucial principle that companies must pay the pension promises they have 
already made.”
 