
In recent weeks, after a series of failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/10/ted-cruz-sweeps-colorado-amid-trump-camps-disarray>
 to pick up delegates and embarrassing distractions arising from the behavior of
his top campaign aide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/14/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski-battery-charges>
, Donald Trump has attempted to restructurehis senior campaign team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/15/donald-trump-friends-family-staff-inner-circle-whos-who>
.

Entering the orbit of a 'total narcissist': who's who in Donald Trump's inner 
circle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/15/donald-trump-friends-family-staff-inner-circle-whos-who>
But Trump’s senior policy adviser, Stephen Miller, may be bringing his own 
baggage to Trump Tower, in the form of more thantwo dozen columns 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/search?q=0&page=1&ti=0&tg=0&ty=article&ts_month=0&ts_day=0&ts_year=0&te_month=0&te_day=0&te_year=0&s=0&au=Stephen+Miller&o=date&a=1>
 he wrote for his college newspaper a decade ago.

Miller, who attended Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, has been a 
member of the billionaire Republican frontrunner’s team since January, when he 
left the office of Alabama senator Jeff Sessions to serve as Trump’s No1 
adviser on foreign and domestic policy.

Most of his work has been behind the scenes, although he gained notoriety in 
March when helaughingly told CNN <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzdNRfdkuGI> 
Trump’s retweet of an unflattering photograph of Heidi Cruz, wife of opponent 
Senator Ted Cruz, “speaks for itself”.

Trump’s senior policy adviser appears not to have changed much since his days 
at Duke.

His columns for The Chronicle range in subject from multiculturalism (which he 
calls “segregation 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2005/09/welcome-leftist-university>”); to 
paid family leave (which results in men “getting laid off because [their] boss 
was losing too much money bypaying absent employees 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2005/11/sorry-feminists>”); to the Duke 
lacrosse scandal (“a large number of people – instead of rejoicing at our 
peers’ innocence – will insist it is aconspiracy of white privilege 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2006/04/prejudice>”).

The columns offer a revealing glimpse into the opinions and ideology of 
Trump’s top policy adviser, and the sort of advice the presidential hopeful 
might be getting.

In addition to standard college newspaper fare – an essay about town-gown 
relations in which Miller details the “condescension 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2006/04/welcome-durham-petting-zoo>” 
inherent in giving a janitor a birthday card – Miller’s 25 columns, written 
between September 2005 and April 2007, frequently touch on hot-button issues.

On torture, for example, Miller writes that criticism of the use of enhanced 
interrogation techniques by American soldiers made then-senator Ted Kennedy “a 
traitor <http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2006/02/unpatriotic-dissent>”, 
and that comparing the actions of the US military with those of its enemies 
means “you have betrayed your nation and are morally guilty of treason”.

Most of Miller’s writings, however, are concerned with the culture wars, 
particularly matters of race. In an article titled “Paranoia”, Miller writes 
that “racial paranoia <http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2006/09/paranoia>” 
– belief in systematic racism – does a “tremendous disservice” not only to 
those accused of harboring racist beliefs, but to racial minorities as well.

“It saps their motivation and has devastating results on their potential for 
success,” he writes.

Another piece concerns the Duke lacrosse scandal 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2016/03/birth-of-duke-scandal>, which 
involved now-disproven allegations of sexual assault against a sex worker. In 
the column, titled “Racial Hypocrisy”, Miller declares that the true 
instigators of racial prejudice were those agitating against the Duke team.

“There is racial disharmony in our society,” Miller writes 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2007/02/racial-hypocrisy>. “And if they 
want to know the cause, they need look no further than the mirror.”

The concept of a broader campaign against traditional values is a frequent 
theme in Miller’s work. In one piece in which he calls the entertainment 
industry “the left’s most influential resource”, after the education system, 
Miller intimates that Hollywood elites are engaged in a pro-LGBT conspiracy to 
force societal acceptance.

“Shows like Queer As Folk, The L Word, Will & Grace and Sex and the City all 
do their part topromote alternative lifestyles 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2006/01/hollywood-and-culture-war> and 
erode traditional values,” Miller writes.

Miller, who did not immediately respond to a request for comment, appears to 
have relished the reputation his columns established on campus.

“As a deeply committed conservative who considers it his responsibility to do 
battle with the left,” he writes inhis farewell column 
<http://www.dukechronicle.com/article/2007/04/farewell>, being a “controversial 
figure” at Duke “is not in the least surprising”.

Trump's campaign manager Corey Lewandowski will not face battery charges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/14/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski-battery-charges>
In a jeremiad against political correctness redolent of his future employer, 
Miller writes that “politically correct dictates are anathema to American 
values”.

He continues: “Inside our borders, the nation of e pluribus unum [out of many, 
one] threatens to be fractured across ethnic lines by racial animus and 
divisive multiculturalism. We suffer from sagging patriotism, growing malaise 
and a loss of faith in the noble history and principles that have made us 
great.”

Many who once wrote for their college newspaper may look back at such 
scribblings with regret. But if Miller’s current statements as the top policy 
adviser to the Republican frontrunner are any indication, his opinions have not 
changed much.

At a campaign event on 3 April, he said 
<https://twitter.com/woodruffbets/status/716807406177509377> that Cruz, Trump’s 
main opponent for the nomination, was an “Obama ally” who supported a “policy 
of mass migration”.
 