
Tuesday's countdown from 15-11 prompted an interesting debate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2011/dec/20/top-20-games-of-2011#start-of-comments>
 on the relative merits of Battlefield 3 and Modern Warfare 3, as well as lots 
of other juicy issues. What will today's five titles inspire?

One thing you won't find is smartphone titles – we'll be running a separate 
list for those. But what of your favourite console titles – will they be 
adequately represented? Judging by some of the excellent games talked about in 
the comments section for the previous instalment, the answer is a resounding 
... maybe. Some of them.

Well, what are you waiting for? Let's continue with our arbitary and highly 
subjective Top 20!


10. Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2011/nov/08/call-of-duty-modern-warfare-3-review>
 (Activision, PC, PS3, Xbox 360)
 Call Of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 
Oh lord, here we go. Modern Warfare 3 – a glorified map pack, a sullen, 
cynical insult to gamers, a shameless exercise in pro-imperialist messaging. Or 
wait, maybe it's more of what Infinity Ward has been doing really quite 
brilliantly for the past decade. Super smooth, turbo-charged military mayhem, 
wrapped around a loopy plot that stretches the game's naturalistic framework to 
breaking point. And the multiplayer, with a group of friends and a few hours to 
kill, is still some of the best fun you can have with virtual firearms and 
close-proximity combat.Modern Warfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/modern-warfare> 3 is meaningless, it's 
silly, and it has certainly been the most divisive game of the year – we all 
understand what some people hate about it. But crafted with great care to do 
exactly what the series always has done and always will, MW3 isn't part of the 
problem or the solution, and it certainly isn't going to destroy the industry – 
or, indeed, humanity. It's a game where you shoot baddies, and shoot 'em good. 
Frankly, we've giving up feeling guilty about enjoying it.

9. Minecraft 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2011/dec/09/minecraft-pc-mac-review>
 (PC)
 The world building game Minecraft won the inaugural GameCity Prize 
Minecraft isn't so much a game as an unstoppable indie phenomenon, a sort of 
reality TV documentary about design, a meta-game, a way of life. There was a 
time when its creator Notchwasn't an internet celebrity – how weird is that? 
But now, with this creative, procedural role-playing build-'em-up, he and is 
team have not only invented a new sub-genre, they have instigated a movement in 
which games aren't simply released, they're sort of evolved and mutated over 
months of beta-testing and semi-availability. If Minecraft were an X Factor 
contestant we'd all be marveling over its "journey" as emotionally manipulative 
music played in the background and chunkily pixelated figures congratulated 
each other in slow motion on the screen. Minecraft is quite probably the 
greatest story indie gaming has ever told.

8. Super Mario 3D Land 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2011/nov/21/super-mario-3d-land-review>
 (Nintendo, 3DS)
 Super Mario 3D Land ... the little plumber gains an extra dimension 
Could it be that the world was ready to love 3DS all along – we just, you 
know, needed the right games? Well, Super Mario 3D Land is the right game. 
Taking elements of the original Super Mario Land and combining them with a 
twist ofSuper Mario <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario> 
Galaxy, this is a platformer in the traditional Nintendo mould – and by that I 
don't mean unchanging and stifled, I mean traditional in the sense that it's 
filled with magic, innovation and joy. Whereas in other 3DS titles, the 
stereoscopic effect has been little more than an annoying parlour trick, here 
it enforces the beautiful level designs, the sense of space and of Mario's 
place in the world. Not the most far-reaching or ambitious Mario title, but as 
a standard-bearer for this maligned platform, it could turn out to be one of 
the more important.

7. Uncharted 3 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2011/oct/25/uncharted-3-drakes-deception-review>
 (Sony, PS3)
 Uncharted 3 
Oh Nathan, there really is something about that boy. Whether he's leaping 
across rooftops as a teenage rapscallion, floundering in the desert or 
navigating through a seemingly endless boat graveyard, he has so much charm he 
virtually seduces us through the game. Other titles aspire to be cinematic and 
think it means epic set-pieces and orchestral music; Naughty Dog knows that 
cinema is as much about relationships. The surrogate father/son interplay with 
Sully, the touching rapport with Elena – these are human interactions we can 
really invest in, so much so that they become genuine rewards for our 
perseverance. But, yeah, the epic set-pieces are astonishing too.

6. Dark Souls <> (Namco Bandai, PS3, Xbox 360)
 Dark Souls 
The concept of "player skill" has been largely abandoned by mainstream 
developers keen to just nudge us gently through their narrative adventures, 
like kindly care home workers on a seaside day out. Not Dark Souls. Namco 
Bandai's dungeon romp is a twisted, pitiless exercise in providing a system and 
then bashing the gamer over the skull with it until they can do it properly. So 
many disturbing enemies, so many customisation and progression decisions – all 
housed within a towering gothic world that combines the nightmarish vision of a 
Piranesi prison etching, with the intricate workings of a Swiss-made watch. We 
should all get down on our pathetic knees right now and thank the black empty 
universe that games like this still exist.
 