
Don't forget that there are various considerations to take into account before 
you book your first ski holiday – hire skis and boots in the resort so you can 
change them if they don't suit, and maybe consider hiring ski clothing too 
rather than splurging on kit you may never use again. Check outskitogshire.co.uk
 <http://www.skitogshire.co.uk> for a range of options.

Also remember that if you decide to buy skis or boots, you should get any hire 
charges knocked off the holiday price.

1. Les Arcs, France 

Les Arcs <http://www.lesarcs.com> has nursery slopes directly above each of 
the resort's main villages, of which Arc 1800 has the most variety. It also has 
a free beginner's lift, plus a good range of more advanced slopes as you 
progress. The best ski school is the award winning Brit-runNew Generation 
<http://skinewgen.com> in Vallandry — their friendly instructors will instil 
confidence in the most timid of beginners.

· Skiline <http://www.skiline.co.uk> offers seven nights' chalet accommodation 
in mid-February from £599pp. Ski lessons (five sessions of two hours) with New 
Generation costs €179pp (£128).

2. Bansko, Bulgaria 

Bansko <http://www.banskoski.com> is a World Heritage Site surrounded by 
spectacular mountains, with a modern lift system and a good range of nursery 
slopes. Skiing here is great value, and once you progress there's a superb 16km 
intermediate run all the way from the top lift at 2,560m back to base at 935m.

· balkanholidays.co.uk <http://www.balkanholidays.co.uk> Balkan Holidays 
offers seven nights' half-board apartment accommodation from £199pp including 
flights and transfers, and a Learn to Ski package including ski and boot hire 
and three two-hour lessons from £109 adults/£64 children.

3. Cortina, Italy 

It won't be the skiing but the views over the Dolomites that take your breath 
away inCortina <http://www.cortina.dolomiti.org>, one of the world's loveliest 
ski resorts. It also has some superbly groomed beginner slopes in the Socrapes 
area, with instructors who are especially good with kids. And, when you need to 
give your legs a break, there's no better place to sit in the sun and people 
watch.

· Made to Measure Ski <http://www.mtmhols.co.uk> offers seven nights from 
£737pp including flights and transfers. Beginners' lessons (six days of three 
hours) cost €260 (£186) low season/€370 (£264) high season.

4. Killington, US 

The advantages of skiing in North America are that locals and instructors 
speak the same language (well, kind of…), ski schools are generally excellent 
and at the moment the pound is kicking the dollar's ass.Killington 
<http://www.killington.com> in New England is the closest US resort to the UK, 
and has excellent, large nursery slopes and a Discovery Centre for first timers 
where you're shown how your equipment works and a video of it in action before 
hitting the slopes. Just one thing to be wary of – it can be ferociously cold 
at times.

· Directski.com <http://www.directski.com> offers seven nights' B&B hotel 
accommodation from £250 (not including flights and transfers). Ski lessons can 
be booked in the resort – five three-hour lessons with all equipment and lift 
ticket costs from $409 (£199).

5. Lech, Austria 

Lech <http://www.lech-zuers.at> is the classic alpine resort – picturesque 
village, fine hotels and well-regarded ski schools with good, English-speaking 
instructors. There's also plenty of decent runs for better skiers so it's a 
fine option for mixed-ability groups.

· Do it in style by staying at the four-star Hotel Montana 
<http://www.montanaoberlech.at>, owned by downhill Olympic gold medallist and 
world champion Patrick Ortlieb and situated next to the ski school. From €720pp 
(£515), flights (Innsbruck) and transfers extra. Ski school costs from €167 
(£119) adults/€154 (£110) children for six days. For two adults with two 
children the second child is free.

6. Poiana Brasov, Romania

Poiana Brasov <http://www.poiana-brasov.com> focuses on providing beginners 
with the chance to give skiing a try without breaking the bank. There are two 
nursery areas and the ski instructors are very helpful and enthusiastic. If you 
want a break from skiing, take the classic daytrip to nearby Dracula's castle. 
Drinking and dining are cheap and cheerful, the locals are friendly and this is 
a genuinely fun place to take your first ski holiday.

· Direct Line Skiing  <http://www.directline-skiing.co.uk>offers seven nights 
from £349pp including flights and transfers. Ski lessons (six sessions of four 
hours) cost £60 adult/£40 child.

7. Soldeu, Andorra 

One of Europe's best beginner resorts, Soldeu <http://www.grandvalira.com> has 
two extensive nursery areas and excellent ski instructors who are native 
English speakers. When you progress there's also a good range of slightly 
harder runs. The weather is usually good (Soldeu translates as Sun God), the 
nightlife is pretty messy and, of course, Andorra is a duty-free zone so it's 
cheap.

·  Inghams <http://www.inghams.co.uk> offers seven nights' self catering from 
£341pp including flights and transfers, and ski school packages (five sessions 
of three hours) from £84 adult/£76 child.

8. Tignes, France 

For female skiers, there are several advantages to taking a women-only course 
— no braying machos, and the fact that female physiognomy means that women ski 
slightly differently to men. Ski and boot manufacturers now recognise this in 
their gear design, so why not take a course that allows you to make the most of 
it? Tignes is high and snowsure and has a very good range of nursery,
intermediate and expert slopes, accommodation, non-skiing activities and 
après-ski. It also has a well-established women's-only course run bySkiworld 
<http://www.skiworld.ltd.uk>.

· Skiworld offers courses in small groups (three to six skiers) led by 
experienced women instructors. Four two-and-a-half hour lessons cost £105pp, 
flight and accommodation extra.

9 Wengen, Switzerland

Tucked beneath the mighty north face of the Eiger, Wengen 
<http://www.wengen-muerren.ch> boasts stupendous mountain scenery and is 
particularly good for families, with the ski school regularly receiving rave 
reports. There are plenty of options if skiing turns out not to appeal, from 
tobogganing to taking the Europe's highest funicular railway up the lower 
slopes of the Eiger.

· Inghams <http://www.inghams.co.uk> offers seven nights in self-catering 
apartments from £353pp including flights and transfers, and ski school packages 
(five sessions of three hours) for £116 for both adults and children.

10. Ski UK

Try before you buy with a visit to one of the UK's many ski domes. The 
recently openedChill Factore  <http://www.chillfactore.com> in Manchester has 
the UK's longest indoor slope at 180m, "real" snow and fully qualified 
instructors offering 50-minute taster courses from £17 for adults/£14 children. 
Skiing in a snowdome is a bit like surfing in a swimming pool but it will give 
you the chance to see how you cope with sliding around on snow before 
committing to a full ski holiday.

· The Chill Factore is located next to Manchester's Trafford Centre, off 
junction 10 of the M60.
 