
Minutes before lunchtime on the first working day of the year, Canada’s 100 
highest paid chief executive officers had already earned more than the average 
Canadian will earn in all of 2017, according to a new report.


CEO earnings in Canada – which rank among the highest in the world relative to 
the average worker – have soared to record levels in recent years, with the top 
100 CEOs taking home an average of C$9.5m ($7m) in 2015, an analysisby the 
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, 
<https://www.policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/National%20Office/2017/01/Throwing_Money_at_the_Problem_CEO_Pay.pdf>
 an Ottawa-based thinktank, showed. Their compensation is now 193 times that of 
the average industrial wage in the country.

“Sadly, I’m not really surprised by the findings at all,” said Hugh Mackenzie, 
the author of the report. The executives’ pay has proven to be resilient, 
growing some 7% over 2014 figures even as the Canadian economy shrank.

UK bosses will make more by midday than workers will earn all year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/04/uk-bosses-will-make-more-by-midday-than-workers-will-earn-all-year-fat-cat-wednesday>
The findings offer a window into growing income inequality in the country, 
said Mackenzie. In 1995, the thinktank tracked 50 of Canada’s highest-paid CEOs 
and found they made around 85 times the average income. By 2015, this same 
cohort was making 290 times the average Canadian income of C$49,510. “Not only 
are these high incomes, but they are incomes that demonstrably have grown 
significantly relative to the incomes of average people.”

When adjusted for inflation, the average income of the top 100 CEO’s has grown 
by 99% since 1998, compared to 9% for the average Canadian.

Research suggests there is little link between the soaring earnings and better 
company performance. Instead Mackenzie pointed to stock market-based forms of 
compensation, arguing that they keep executives transfixed on what is happening 
to their bottom line in the short term and encourage moves such as mass layoffs 
to boost shares of the company. “I think its fair to say that we are 
collectively paying the price for the short-term focus of corporate 
decision-making,” said Mackenzie. “We just have a fundamentally broken system 
for establishing executive compensation.”

The thinktank, which has tracked CEO compensation in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> for the past decade, used 
information from companies listed on the Toronto stock exchange to compile the 
report. Earnings reflect compensation that ranges from base pay to bonuses as 
well as grants of shares and stock options.

America's top CEOs pocket 340 times more than average workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/17/ceo-pay-ratio-average-worker-afl-cio>
Just two women made the list. The 100 listed include five named Mark or Marc 
and another five named Michael. “It’s a very clubby, white Anglo-Saxon 
Protestant male world,” said Mackenzie. “It doesn’t look like Canadian society 
at all.”

At the top of the list sits Michael Pearson of Valeant Pharmaceuticals, who in 
2015 earned C$182m – nearly seven times that of the next CEO on the list. 
“Pretty much every year there’s a few people who are sticking out at the top 
end,” said Mackenzie. Recently the company has beenplagued by a series of 
problems, 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-31/valeant-ex-ceo-ex-cfo-said-to-be-a-focus-of-u-s-criminal-probe>
 from accounting issues to reports of a probe by US prosecutors. Pearson 
stepped down in early 2016.

Data from the OECD regularly suggests that Canada, along with the US and 
Britain, rank among the countries with the most extreme gap between CEO’s and 
the average worker.

Many in Canada point to the US – where the gap is most extreme, with the top 
500 CEOs earning 340 times the average worker’s wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/17/ceo-pay-ratio-average-worker-afl-cio>
 – and fears over brain drain to explain the pressure to ensure executives are 
well remunerated. Mackenzie, however, said research suggests it is relatively 
rare for executives to cross the Canada-US border in search of jobs.
 