 Tale of the Fox still 
10. The Tale of the Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82938/tale-of-the-fox>

A sneaky fox plays a series of underhand tricks on his neighbours in the 
animal kingdom, among them a timorous hare and a gullible wolf. The king of the 
beasts, a lion, summons him to face charges but the fox proceeds to outwit 
everyone, including the king himself. When Ladislas Starevich told this tale in 
the 1930s it was by no means new – versions of the Reynard story had been 
circulating around Europe for the best part of a millennium – but the means of 
telling it were utterly novel. Animated over 18 months from 1929 to 1930 (and 
premiering after a long delay in 1937, in Nazi Berlin), Starevich's beguiling 
film is often cited as the one of the earliest animated features ever made; 
it's certainly one of the first features composed of stop-motion animation.

What's striking, eight decades on, is just how sophisticated it is. By 1930, 
Starevich had been directing stop-motion films for 20 years – he started out 
making short films using dead insects in what is now Lithuania; after the 
October revolution, he emigrated to France and continued making films there 
until the 1960s. The Tale of the Fox is a testament to his great skill as an 
animator: the anthropomorphised cast (an unscrupulous badger barrister, a 
courtier cat with eyes for the queen) are remarkably expressive and the 
film-making brims with invention. In the process of tricking the poor old wolf 
for the umpteenth time, the fox conjures up a gourmand's vision of heaven that 
recalls the imaginative flights of Georges Méliès (whose neglected studio in 
Paris Starevich used after arriving in France). There are extended dream 
sequences and, at the climax, when the king has been exasperated into all-out 
military action, a comically protracted siege on the fox's lofty lair involving 
many pulleys and swinging logs. It's hard to imagine that Wes Anderson, in 
preparation for The Fantastic Mr Fox, didn't watch Starevich's film with an 
attentive eye, and pick up a trick or two in the process.Killian Fox

9. Grave of the Fireflies  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90194/grave-of-the-fireflies>
 Seita tries to protect his young sister Setsuko as Tokyo is firebombed. 
Animation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/animation> in Japan has a more 
adult and exalted status than in other parts of the world, in part because 
they've used it to grapple with darker issues than the likes of Disney-Pixar 
dare touch: politics, metaphysics and of course the defining event of 20th 
century Japanese history – nuclear annihilation. Whereas the supernatural, 
end-of-days millenarianism of Akira (1988) was a slightly insane response to 
the insanity of instantly losing 200,000 citizens from two bombs, Isao 
Takahata's Grave of the Fireflies – released the same year as Akira – is 
something else entirely: a human response to how the war affected two perfectly 
average children.

The teenage Seita's mission to take care of his baby sister, Setsuko, in an 
old bomb shelter after their parents are killed is foolhardy and prideful – you 
can't help screaming "Go back to your wicked aunt!" as he ponders eating frogs 
to stay alive – but it is a kind of genuine heroism that is not reflected in 
the actions of the film's selfish grownups. Seita and Setusko watch as the rest 
of the country slows returns to normal; but their Robinson Crusoe adventure, 
though doomed, has a joyful purity that damns the hypocritical status quo.

Though Studio Ghibli's animation may be slightly dated now, it also shows how 
you can draw what you'd struggle to capture on camera: maggots dropping from 
burn victims, yes, but also the physical details of a little girl's life – 
rocking from side to side to cope with separation from her mother, bravely 
conserving her three remaining fruit drops by eating only the sticky shards. 
It's pathos a four-year-old actor could never convey. You wouldn't think a film 
about child starvation would be so uplifting, or so beautiful.Chris Michael

8. The Iron Giant  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/81812/iron.giant>
 QUALITY:2ND GENERATION-- IRON GIANT-- FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT WARNER 
PRESS OFFICE ON 0171 437 5600 IRON GIANT 5 
When the new Star Wars films were announced, there was a brief glimmer of 
excitement when Brad Bird's name was mooted. It's not hard to see why. While 
Mission: Impossible IV and The Incredibles showed that Bird could pull off 
style and kinetic set-pieces, 1999'sThe Iron Giant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-iron-giant> proved that he's also got the 
one thing that's been missing from Star Wars for over 30 years: colossal heart.

A loose remake of Ted Hughes's tremendously sad modern fairy tale The Iron 
Man, The Iron Giant flopped on release. This, plainly, is absurd. The film has 
been called one of the best non-Disney animations ever made, and the assessment 
is still hard to argue with.

Hogarth, a young boy, discovers a giant metal robot that has fallen from 
space, its memory wiped. Hogarth goes about teaching him a uniquely childlike, 
wide-eyed ideology of the world. The giant learns about good and bad, about 
death. He becomes a kind of local folk hero, but falls afoul of the military. 
By the film's end, after Bird has forced Hughes's broader themes of courage and 
pacifism through his own retro-futurist prism, heartstrings will have been 
tugged and tears will have been fruitlessly fought back.

A true hidden gem in all regards, The Iron Giant was perhaps a little ahead of 
its time. Five years after its release, Bird had corralled the might ofPixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pixar> into making The Incredibles; a 
flashier film that shares many of The Iron Giant's core messages. Had he held 
on for a few more years and given it the full CGI treatment, there's little 
doubt that The Iron Giant would have conquered all that stood in its way.Stuart 
Heritage

7. Yellow Submarine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79773/yellow.submarine>
 Paul, John, Ringo and George performing in Pepperland in a scene from Yellow 
Submarine. Photograph: Apple Corps 
Yellow Submarine was the fourth Beatles film in the space of four years and 
premiered in the summer of 1968, two years after the band quit touring in a 
hail of jelly babies (George Harrison's favourite candy, thrown by screaming 
fans). Seen in the light of the band's growing contempt for their publicity 
machine, this ambitious animation feature not only builds on the conceit of the 
the Fab Four's three previous films, in which they played versions of 
themselves as characters, it takes it to the logical extreme: not only are they 
not physically in it, they didn't even voice it.

Following their landmark Sgt Pepper album, and pre-empting the Monkees' 
equally surreal Head by several months, the Beatles somehow managed to smuggle 
the film's psychedelic aspects past the general public. Indeed, the film was 
quickly embraced by children, who responded to the simplicity of Lee Minoff's 
script, which seems remarkably rich considering he later claimed his only 
influences were repeated plays of the song Yellow Submarine itself and a 
meeting with Paul McCartney, in which the moptop expressed his hope that the 
film would contain "a monster".

Pitting the band against music-averse killjoys the Blue Meanies, who attack 
Pepperland and leave it in a state of frozen limbo, the film was directed by 
experimental Canadian animation producer George Dunning on a budget of just 
$1m. Dunning's masterstroke was to install Czech-German illustrator Heinz 
Edelmann as art director, and it is Edelmann's pop-art creations that stay in 
the mind, notably the Eleanor Rigby sequence with its bombed-out Liverpool 
streets and the abstract brainscapes of Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds. It says 
a lot about the band's careful curation of their own image that Yellow 
Submarine remains their favourite of their three feature films for United 
Artists. But it perhaps says more that the following year's Let It Be – the 
only film to capture the "real" Beatles, on the precipice of a break-up – is 
currently unavailable on DVD.Damon Wise

6. Persepolis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118580/persepolis>
 Persepolis is Iranian director Marjane Satrapi’s adaptation of her graphic 
novel about growing up during Iran’s 1979 Islamic revolution. Photograph: 
c.Sony/Everett / Rex Features 
French-Iranian graphic novelist Marjane Satrapi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/marjane-satrapi> co-wrote and co-directed 
the film adaptation of her own Persepolis, based on her memories of growing up 
during the 1979 revolution. Her young on-screen counterpart, Marji, is a 
spunky, rebellious sprite who worships Bruce Lee, shoots the breeze with God 
and believes herself to be a prophet. Her family embraces the overthrow of the 
shah's regime, but Marji realises that Iran is not changing for the better. 
Like John Boorman's Hope and Glory, which offered the definitive child's-eye 
view of life during wartime, Persepolis honours its protagonist's trifling 
concerns. Even with the Iran-Iraq war escalating and missiles destroying the 
neighbourhood, Marji's prime concern is winning a game of "My uncle has been in 
prison longer than your father", or scoring a copy of the new Iron Maiden album.

Persepolis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/persepolis> brings a lightness of 
touch to weighty topics, while the drawings capture precisely Marji's 
bewilderment at her rapidly changing world. When she visits her dissident uncle 
in a Gothic prison cell rendered in charcoal smudges, the soft, clear lines of 
her own body make it seem as if she's strayed into a more sinister comic book. 
At school, headscarves and veils transform Marji and her classmates into rows 
of Russian dolls, peeking timidly from behind each other's sloping shoulders.

The picture's back-to-basics visual flair remains wonderfully refreshing. The 
simple black lines, or the blocks of inky darkness inflected with white detail 
(such as the silhouetted gas masks with two lunar circles for eyes), are both 
plain and poetic. Satrapi and her co-director, Vincent Paronnaud, make a little 
go a long way: the dots of snow falling on a sooty Tehran landscape show that 
you don't need to be David Lean to conjure an evocative sense of place. There's 
something satisfying, too, about the use of tidy, monochromatic, 
near-minimalist animation to describe a subject as messy as modern Iran.Ryan 
Gilbey

5. Chicken Run <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83798/chicken.run> 
 ROCKY & GINGER Film 'CHICKEN RUN' (2000) Directed By PETER LORD & NICK PARK 
21 June 2000 CTE12503 Allstar/Cinetext/DREAMWORKS SKG **WARNING** This 
photograph can only be reproduced by publications in conjunction with the 
promotion of the above film. For Editorial Use Only Entertainment Orientation 
Landscape Group Shot Film Still Comedy Animation Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/DREAMWORKS SKG 
Why did the British animators cross the road? To sign a multi-picture deal 
with Steven Spielberg. Having turned down a similar offer from Disney several 
years earlier,Aardman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman> Animation, the 
stop-motion "claymation" studio from Bristol, teamed up with Spielberg's 
DreamWorks. "It used to be that the best we could hope for — the very summit of 
our ambitions — was to do something like The Wombles or Paddington Bear," said 
Peter Lord, who co-directed Aardman's debut feature, Chicken Run, with Nick 
Park. The Aardman/DreamWorks marriage was dissolved after disappointing returns 
from subsequent collaborations Flushed Away and The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. 
But Chicken Run, the first out of the coop, was a hit.

At the very moment that slick, spick-and-span computer animation was 
threatening to render old techniques obsolete, this movie went boldly against 
the grain by looking for all the world like it was all made in someone's back 
yard. It's essentially a PoW film with chickens rather than plucky British 
soldiers, rubbery beaks instead of stiff upper lips. It revolves around the 
efforts of Ginger (voiced by Julia Sawalha) and her fellow hens to escape 
Tweedy's Chicken Farm — a struggle that is given a boost by the arrival of 
Rocky the rooster (Mel Gibson), who has fled the circus and is recruited to 
teach the downtrodden hens to fly.

Even in its most ambitious sequences, such as those involving a terrifying 
pie-making machine, into which chickens are dropped only to emerge at the other 
end ready for the supermarket shelves, the picture has the earthy, handmade 
feel consistent with Aardman's earliest shorts. You can feel the care that has 
gone into it. More than that, you can practically see the thumbprints.RG

4. Spirited Away <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96263/spirited.away>
 Film Spirited Away (2001) 
Japanese animator Hayao Miyazaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hayaomiyazaki> took his lead from Lewis 
Carroll to rustle up this delirious rites of passage tale about a small girl's 
adventures in a bath-house for the gods. One moment 10-year-old Chihiro is 
bored on the back seat, en-route to a new home. The next, it seems, her parents 
are pigs, she's forgotten her name and is being asked to scrub down a "stink 
spirit" that has booked an appointment. Somewhere up ahead sits a dragon and a 
witch.

In a perfect world, more children's films would be like Spirited Away, which 
boasts a kind of dream logic, rustling up an outlandish universe which 
nonetheless runs to its own set of rules. Most film-makers install their 
supporting players as fixed representations of good and evil. Miyazaki, 
however, sends them bouncing like pinballs, troublesome and scary, so that the 
diffident "No Face" blooms into an all-consuming carnivore. Spirited Away has 
the same skittish, volatile rhythm. It's a magic spell, a booby trap, a 
helter-skelter to a happy ending.Xan Brooks

3. Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129187/up>
 Up 
The economy, grace and restraint of Up's four-minute "Married Life" montage, 
at the very start of the film, may alone be one of animation's finest 
achievements. At the peak of their flawless streak in the mid-00s, Pixar dared 
to follow that up with the tender, energetic and boundlessly adventurous story 
of Carl Fredricksen and Russell, the unlikeliest pair of South American 
explorers. Up is sillier and more committed to spectacle than some other great 
animated films, but it's told with Pixar's famously rigorous storytelling, 
along with precise animation that brings it all – from perfectly cartoonish 
humans to dramatic vistas – to roaring life.

Up is a story that couldn't exist outside of animation, with a flying house 
and talking dogs, but even the most realistic moments prove the value of the 
medium; Carl's weary movements through his creaky house, the vibrant colors the 
balloons cast on the ground, the cliffs of South America made that much more 
crooked and wild by being drawn. The film walks a taut line between fantasy and 
reality, so that the canine fighter pilots feel as important and authentic as 
Carl's grief. The emotional climax comes as the house is perched at the top of 
Paradise Falls – the sacrifices and joys of marriage and age made powerfully 
literal.

Animation is still made in Hollywood almost exclusively for children, which 
means most big screen cartoons have similar numbing themes of self-acceptance 
and triumph. Up has that too, but slips in richer, deeper themes from its very 
start, as much an exploration of the life's disappointments and regrets as of 
the majestic Paradise Falls.Katey Rich

2. Fantasia <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36150/fantasia>
 Fantasia. Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The popular view of Walt Disney is that he was a pragmatist; even the recent 
quasi-biopic Saving Mr Banks, released by his own company, shows the animation 
legend handing out pre-printed autographs at his theme park. Yet at the height 
of his popularity, Disney set out to make a high art concert movie – inspired 
by the abstract films of New Zealand artist Len Lye – that would take the Silly 
Symphonies series of the 1930s to a place where "sheer fantasy unfolds". He 
knew the risks he was taking, telling the New York Times that "if someone 
didn't break loose with new things, the movies wouldn't be where they are 
today… Somebody's got to be a damn fool."

Even with today's resources the 1940 Fantasia is a remarkable undertaking, 
mixing the music of Bach, Tchaikovsky, Schubert and Beethoven with hand-drawn 
animation from his 700-strong team, using an innovative sound system – 
Fantasound – that would give the illusion of a full orchestra in the cinema. 
But Disney's plan was not for the music to accompany the images but the other 
way round, in perhaps the film's most extraordinary sequence we are invited to 
Meet The Soundtrack – literally, the film's white magnetic strip gets its own 
surreal solo as it responds to various instruments.

This movement by movement approach made the studio's distributor, RKO, 
nervous, so Disney released the film in the roadshow fashion of the silent 
days, moving from city to city, which proved to be a costly mistake. Regular 
Disney fans didn't get the non-narrative aspect, and classical music experts 
hated its literal-mindedness. Over time, though, Disney's intent sank in; once 
known as his flop, it is now his high watermark. Indeed, its most famous 
section – Mickey Mouse in The Sorcerer's Apprentice – isn't simply a great 
piece of 20th century populist art, it is also the apotheosis of its creator's 
thinking: whoever would have expected Uncle Walt to bring Goethe to the masses?
DW

1. Waltz With Bashir  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124299/waltz.with.bashir>
 Waltz with Bashir 
This extraordinary, hallucinatory animation by Israeli film-maker Ari Folman 
is the story of what he sees as his nation's willed amnesia at the Sabra and 
Chatila massacres during the Lebanese civil war. The "Bashir" of the title is 
Lebanon's internationally admired Phalangist leader Bashir Gemayel who was 
engaged in a tricky diplomatic and strategic dance with Israel, appearing to 
connive at the Israelis' invasion of his country in 1982 to help drive out the 
Syrians and the PLO.

Gemayel was assassinated by pro-Syrian forces three months after Israel's 
invasion, but the killing was wrongly blamed on Palestinians. In the sinister 
atmosphere of fear, anger and revenge, Israeli troops helped close off the 
camps in Beirut's Sabra and Chatila districts to facilitate a horrendous 
retaliatory massacre by Lebanon's Christian militia: up to 3500 Palestinian 
civilians were slaughtered. Israel was not held directly culpable for this 
proxy bloodbath; its Kahan Commission accepted a partial or indirect guilt; and 
this, Folman suggests, is why the historical fact has never been entirely 
resolved or absorbed in the nation's collective consciousness, and is always 
threatening to break the surface of memory. It is evidently why he has chosen 
the medium of animation for the movie, digitally derived from live-action video 
— like the Rotoscoping techniques of Bob Sabiston.

It is hyperreal and at the same time unreal: a bizarre dreamscape in which 
reality is morphed into something between two and three dimensions. Planes and 
surfaces stir and throb with colours harder, sharper, brighter than reality. It 
looks like one long hallucination, and therefore perfect for the trauma of 
Folman's recovered memories. This is his acid-trip down memory lane, and he 
might just have created Israel's very own Apocalypse Now.

It starts with the director's appearance as himself: in middle age, having a 
beer with a guy who did military service in the Israel Defence Force with him. 
His friend tells him that he is plagued by a recurring dream about being 
pursued by savage dogs and says that he believes it has something do with the 
1982 Lebanon war. The director himself realises that he has suppressed much of 
his memory of his own participation of these events. It is all a blur.

So he sets out to track down his old comrades, to ask them what they remember, 
and so the animation surreally assumes something of oral history and 
psychoanalysis as well as personal drama. They tell him bizarre and horrifying 
episodes which pulse out onto the screen: sometimes it is not entirely clear if 
these episodes were real, or if they are the traumatised dreams which are, 
however, nonetheless telling the dreamer something important.

And still the director does not know what he remembers about Sabra and Chatila 
or even if he himself was actually present. As his investigations proceed, he 
gets nearer and nearer to the truth, and the experience becomes more and more 
painful, and disorientating.

Waltz With Bashir appeared in 2008, seven years after Richard Linklater's 
Waking Life <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90621/waking.life>, which 
employed a similar animation technique; it did not become widespread or 
popular, like the style of Pixar and Dreamworks in their golden decade of 
digital animation, and it did not become a personal signature, like the 
"hand-drawn" work of the Japanese master Hayao Miyazaki. But it is distinctive 
and compelling — and uniquely suited to a unique film.Peter Bradshaw

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
• Top 10 comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>
• Top 10 horror movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/14/top-10-horror-movies>
• Top 10 sci-fi movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/16/top-10-sci-fi-movies>
• Top 10 crime movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/18/top-10-crime-movies>
• Top 10 arthouse movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/21/top-10-arthouse-movies>
• Top 10 family movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/25/top-10-family-movies>
• Top 10 war movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/28/top-10-war-movies>
• Top 10 teen movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/01/top-10-teen-movies>
• Top 10 superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/04/top-10-superhero-movies>
• Top 10 westerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/08/top-10-movie-westerns>
• Top 10 documentaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/12/top-10-documentaries>
• Top 10 movie adaptations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/15/top-10-movie-adaptations>
 