
The houses (or homes) we live in are such an important part of who we are, 
whether or not we actually like them. And houses can have different 
personalities. They are not just the stage upon which the acts of our lives are 
played out, but perhaps, at times they can be characters in their own right.


In my new book, Our House, the house itself is just such a character. It 
talks, groans, grumbles, sings and sighs. It also locks people in or out from 
time to time. It has gloomy, cold parts and warm, comfortable parts. The main 
character, Chloe, is unsure about the house at first, but as time goes on she 
becomes to understand the house is a part of her family, for better or worse.

In assembling this list, I’ve tried to choose houses which themselves seem to 
have a personality which affects the story.

My Family and other animals by Gerald Durrell - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/mar/15/review-my-family-other-animals-gerald-durrell>
1. The Strawberry Villa. My Family and Other Animals 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-family-and-other-animals-5.html> by Gerald 
Durrell

Actually one of two villas Durrell lives in on Corfu. The description of the 
house and the surrounding countryside is an essential ingredient in Durrell’s 
writing. The villa is the stage for most of the family dramas, as well as a 
laboratory and zoo for Durrell’s fascination with animals, both dead and alive. 
The scene in which Leslie awakens to a terrible smell and comes out to find 
Gerry “disembowelling Moby Dick on the veranda,” is one of the funniest in 
literature.

 2. Manderley. Rebecca 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308475/> by Daphne Du 
Maurier

Manderley represents so much more than just a house in Daphne Du Maurier’s 
Rebecca. It represents wealth and success, a sense of seclusion and protection. 
And yet, the house has a dark side, harbouring terrible secrets, a violent 
history and an uncertain future.

My inspiration: Sally Green on Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/06/my-inspiration-sally-green-wuthering-heights-emily-bronte>
 3. Wuthering Heights. Wuthering Heights 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wuthering-heights-37.html> by Emily Bronte

A dark, bleak house described as though it was a person. Mirroring 
Heathcliff’s dark, forbidding character, the house sits and sulks, at once 
exposed and yet hidden from view of Thrushcross Hall, its grander, more 
prepossessing neighbour.

4. Castle Dracula. Dracula <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dracula-38.html> 
by Bram Stoker

The iconic setting for the defining Gothic novel. Castle Dracula has been 
reproduced, re-imagined and depicted countless times in literature and film. I 
feel Dracula would not have been quite the story it was if it had been set in a 
terraced house in Bermondsey.

Winnie-the-Pooh - quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/quiz/2013/jan/18/quiz-winnie-the-pooh>
5. The House at Pooh Corner. The House at Pooh Corner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409377/> by AA Milne. 

The house that Piglet and Pooh build for their friend Eeyore is more than the 
sum of its parts. It represents friendship, togetherness and loyalty and has 
such an important role that the book itself is named for it. It’s not the only 
house in the book either. Let’s not forget the Wolery, Owl’s new home, as found 
by Eeyore himself. Ultimately, the Pooh stories are all about finding one’s 
sense of place.

The 10 best Pippi Longstocking quotes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/02/the-10-best-pippi-longstocking-quotes>
 6. Villa Villekulla. Pippi Longstocking 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pippi-longstocking.html> by Astrid Lindgren 

What would Pippi be without her crazy house? Home to her monkey and horse and 
as unconventional as she is. The house is plonked right in the middle of a 
well-to-do, properly-mannered suburb, mixing it up. Didn’t we all want a 
neighbour like Pippi when we were little?

 7. The Gingerbread House. Hansel and Gretel 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hansel-and-gretel-18.html> by Brothers Grimm

Possibly the most well-known house in literature. The house is a trap, luring 
children whether greedy or desperate. It is a metaphor for those unscrupulous 
folk out there who offer temptations in order to take advantage, the literary 
equivalent of a Nigerian email scam. The house is effectively an extension of 
the witch herself. All I can say is beware, if it looks too good to be true, it 
probably is.

8. 221b Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sherlock-holmes-273138.html> by Arthur 
Conan-Doyle

What more can be said about this house (or apartment if we’re to be picky) 
that hasn’t been said before? The house is an essential component of 
Conan-Doyle’s stories. The quintessential bachelor’s apartment and a reflection 
of the London of the 1880s, the house is packed with a bewildering variety of 
Holmes’ oddities and accoutrements. The apartment is his mind palace, complete 
with his stored knowledge and experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3da9b05f289f5155a61de9d6272063c6ad5e37a0%2F0_2392_3512_2106%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20fictional%20houses%20with%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20fictional%20houses%20with%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3da9b05f289f5155a61de9d6272063c6ad5e37a0%2F0_2392_3512_2106%2F3512.jpg>
 Enid Blyton’s first Famous Five book, Five on a Treasure Island. Is Kirrin 
Cottage the sixth member of the gang? Photograph: Alamy 
9. Kirrin Cottage. The Famous Five 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/329110/> books by 
Enid Blyton

The sixth member of the Famous Five, if that makes any sense. Kirrin Cottage 
is many things, not just a plot device to bring the children together for 
extended periods, it is sanctuary. It has hidden nooks and corners, nearby 
smuggler’s caves, a beach, a cove and an island as well as a secret passage 
heading to endless adventure.

10. Unnamed cottage. Perijee and Me 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376343/> by Ross 
Montgomery

Ross Montgomery’s sweet, funny and slightly bonkers novel features an unnamed 
cottage on a remote Scottish island. The isolation of the cottage reflects the 
emotional distance between the family members who live in it. Later, the house 
itself becomes an integral part of the story when it is reproduced on top of a 
gigantic alien sea-creature worshipped by a bobble-hat wearing cult…oh look 
it’s too hard to explain. Just read the book and you’ll see what I mean.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11af29d37fce210b96c4fda2430d77d161f449bb%2F0_0_2031_3118%2F2031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20fictional%20houses%20with%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20fictional%20houses%20with%20personality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ftop-10-fictional-houses-with-personality-castle-dracula-manderley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11af29d37fce210b96c4fda2430d77d161f449bb%2F0_0_2031_3118%2F2031.jpg>
Tom Easton is an author of fiction for all ages who has published books under 
a number of different pseudonyms as well as his own name. His teen novel Boys 
Don’t Knit (Hot Key Books) was nominated for the Cilip Carnegie Medal. Our 
House is the first in a younger, funny, family-oriented set of stories for 
Piccadilly Press. Buy Our House at the Guardian bookshop. Find out about Tom on 
hiswebsite <http://tomeaston.co.uk>. 
 