
As the Toronto film festival turns 40, directors seek to avert mid-life crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/09/as-the-toronto-film-festival-turns-40-directors-seek-to-avert-mid-life-crisis>
With Telluride out of the way and Venice winding down, all eyes are firmly set 
on Canada with the 40thToronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> set to unveil a wide 
range of major awards contenders.

By the end of the 10 days, we’ll have a much clearer idea of the impending 
Oscars race. Here’s 15 titles we’re keeping an eye out for.

The Martian
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441641%2FKP_267418_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441641%2FKP_267418_crop_640x360.jpg>
Ridley Scott’s big budget return to space will hopefully be a far more 
interesting excursion than Alien prequel Prometheus, a sequel to which he is 
currently prepping. A juicy premise (astronaut stranded on Mars) and arguably 
the year’s most impressive cast (Matt Damon,Jessica Chastain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jessica-chastain>, Chiwetel Ejiofor, Kristen 
Wiig, Jeff Daniels) suggests it might.

Premiere: 11 September

Freeheld
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblk27Jj9UE8&media=>
After forever being the plentifully nominated bridesmaid, Julianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore> is hoping for her second 
best-actress Oscar in a row with another Toronto premiere for an 
awards-friendly role. She’s following up Still Alice with a fact-based tale of 
a landmark fight for gay rights alongside Ellen Page.

Premiere: 13 September

Trumbo
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn0dZ_2ICpJE&media=>
Bryan Cranston <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston> aims 
to finally shake off the meth-cooking shadow of Walter White with a lead in 
Austin Powers director Jay Roach’s McCarthyism-era biopic. He leads a cast that 
also includes Helen Mirren, John Goodman and Louis CK in a tale of a 
screenwriter who gets blacklisted.

Premiere: 12 September

Our Brand is Crisis
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBLZo_ILZhfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBLZo_ILZhfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBLZo_ILZhfk&media=>
Save for a voice role in this summer’s Minions, Sandra Bullock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sandra-bullock> has been biding her time 
before following up her Oscar-nominated turn in Gravity. It appears as if she’s 
picked smartly with a lead in David Gordon Green’s political satire based on a 
2005 documentary about warring spin doctors.

Premiere: 11 September

High Rise
 Loki to High Rise ... Tom Hiddleston in Ben Wheatley’s dystopian thriller. 
Photograph: Allstar 
One of the festival’s biggest British hopes sees Tom Hiddleston take 
centre-stage in an adaptation of JG Ballard’s dystopian thriller about an 
isolated tower block that offers luxury at a price. It’s the latest film from 
Ben Wheatley, who impressed with Kill List and A Field in England.

Premiere: 13 September

Truth
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2015-20-key-films-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441758375013%2F9ccbc4c1-8aea-46d5-9585-912750c17a04-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toronto%20film%20festival%202015%3A%2015%20key%20films%20to%20watch%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2015-20-key-films-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toronto%20film%20festival%202015%3A%2015%20key%20films%20to%20watch%20out%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2015-20-key-films-tiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441758375013%2F9ccbc4c1-8aea-46d5-9585-912750c17a04-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Press notes on a scandal ... Cate Blanchett and Robert Redford in Truth. 
Photograph: PR 
While her role as a bored housewife in the romantic drama Carol has pretty 
much ensured her an Oscar nomination next year, Cate Blanchett is hoping to 
double her chances with a supporting turn in this journalism drama. She plays 
Mary Mapes, the producer to Dan Rather, played byRobert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford>, in this story of Bush-era 
controversy.

Premiere: 12 September

Stonewall
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNXkJMXPBGc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNXkJMXPBGc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkNXkJMXPBGc&media=>
Roland Emmerich might be an unlikely figure to helm a 60s-set drama about the 
Stonewall riots in New York, but this has been a passion project for the 
director usually associated with disaster epics.While there’s already been 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/07/stonewall-boycott-claims-roland-emmerich-film-gay-whitewash-sylvia-rivera-marsha-p-johnson>
 over the white, cisgender cast, this could still prove to be a much-needed 
take on an under-reported period in gay history.

Premiere: 18 September

The Program
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434034334345%2FKP_270363_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Program%3A%20Lance%20Armstrong%20biopic%20gets%20shot%20by%20Stephen%20Frears%20%E2%80%93%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Program%3A%20Lance%20Armstrong%20biopic%20gets%20shot%20by%20Stephen%20Frears%20%E2%80%93%20trailer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fthe-program-lance-armstrong-ben-foster-cycling-trailer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434034334345%2FKP_270363_crop_640x360.jpg>
The rise and fall of Lance Armstrong has been covered in depth in 
documentaries from Alex Gibney and BBC’s Storyville, but Stephen Frears is 
hoping for yet more public interest in the doomed cyclist and is heading to 
Toronto with his dramatised take. Ben Foster plays Armstrong with Chris O’Dowd 
and Dustin Hoffman in support.

Premiere: 13 September 


Where To Invade Next
 Moore of the same ... the controversial documentary film-maker is making a 
return to the big screen. Photograph: PR 
Michael Moore’s return to film is shrouded in secrecy and was only officially 
announced when the Toronto schedule was released. Like his other films, it’ll 
be a provocative, politically fuelled, possibly angry look at America’s knack 
for invading countries.

Premiere: 10 September

Demolition
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTJ1qS7KOm4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTJ1qS7KOm4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeTJ1qS7KOm4&media=>
This year’s opening film is a return for director Jean-Marc Vallée who has 
previously premiered both Dallas Buyers Club and Wild at the festival.Jake 
Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> stars in his 
latest drama as a man recovering from the death of his wife by befriending a 
woman, played by Naomi Watts, and her son.

Premiere: 10 September

I Saw the Light
 Elizabeth Olsen and Tom Hiddleston in I Saw the Light 
One of a number of music biopics landing during festival season (Ethan Hawke 
is Chet Baker in Born to Be Blue and Don Cheadle plays Miles Davis in Miles 
Ahead), this is likely to be the most traditional of the three, in terms of 
structure. Tom Hiddleston plays Hank Williams as he becomes one of country 
music’s biggest stars before his untimely death at the age of 29.

Premiere: 11 September

London Fields
 Heard in London ... Amber Heard with Theo James and Jim Sturgess in London 
Fields. 
Martin Amis adaptations have been scarce on the big screen and those that did 
make it to production have been underwhelming at best. Hoping for more luck is 
director Matthew Cullen, best known for Katy Perry’s California Gurls video, 
who is bringing this noir thriller to life with a cast that includes Amber 
Heard, Billy Bob Thornton and Johnny Depp.

Premiere: 18 September

Sunset Song
 Mullan it over ... Agyness Deyn and Peter Mullan in Sunset Song. Photograph: 
PR 
It’s been a long four years for Terence Davies groupies since the release of 
his melancholic Rachel Weisz drama The Deep Blue Sea. But he’s now got two on 
the way, the first of which is debuting at the festival. It stars Peter Mullan 
and Agyness Deyn as father and daughter struggling to survive in rural Scotland.

Premiere: 13 September

About Ray
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4SkwJk9KB2c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4SkwJk9KB2c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4SkwJk9KB2c&media=>
After acclaimed Australian drama 52 Tuesdays and the recent Venice premiere of 
Eddie Redmayne’s fact-based drama The Danish Girl, 2015 is shaping up to be an 
important year for transgender stories on the big screen. In this drama, Elle 
Fanning plays a teenager going through the transition from female to male and
Naomi Watts <https://www.theguardian.com/film/naomi-watts> and Susan Sarandon 
star as mother and grandmother.

Premiere: 12 September

Je Suis Charlie
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQmo5IRXOis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQmo5IRXOis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIQmo5IRXOis&media=>
One of the most highly anticipated documentaries of the festival focuses on 
the Charlie Hebdo tragedy and the radical upheaval that occurred in the 
aftermath. Father and son Daniel and Emmanuel Leconte direct from their own 
footage as well as using television cameras at the time.

Premiere: 16 September
 