
A rightwing Tory MP’s complaint about a Russell Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/russell-howard> comedy show in which he was 
described as a “windbag” and “toad-faced hypocrite” in Commons debates has been 
rejected by the BBC Trust.

Philip Davies came under fire in two editions of Russell Howard’s Good News, a 
topical comedy show that provides the comedian’s “unique perspective on the big 
stories”.


In November, Howard claimed Davies tried to block proposals to introduce free 
hospital parking for carers by speaking for 93 minutes in a debate.

Bake Off will be a 'total disaster' on Channel 4, says Lord Sugar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/27/bake-off-channel-4-lord-sugar-apprentice-bbc>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dhucDEXkvY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dhucDEXkvY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6dhucDEXkvY&media=>
 Russell Howard on Philip Davies 
And in December, the comedian went after Davies again, citing a debate in 
which Davies allegedly spoke for 52 minutes against a law to teach pupils first 
aid.


Howard, who variously referred to Davies as an “arsehole”, “wanker”, 
“toad-faced hypocrite”, “windbag” and a “shit for brains”, accused Davies of 
filibustering, or speaking for long periods to slow down a bill passing into 
law.


Davies lodged a complaint with the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
that the comments made about him were inaccurate and defamatory and that the 
show misrepresented him.


The MP succeeded in getting a clarification about some of Howard’s comments 
published on the Clarifications and Corrections section of the BBC website 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/corporate2/helpandfeedback/corrections_clarifications/corrections_jan_2016#>
.


However, not satisfied with this he said that “no satisfactory solution” had 
been proposed and took his complaint further to theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, the corporation’s governing body.


The BBC Trust cannot decide whether a programme is defamatory – that is a 
matter for the courts – but it investigated Howard’s show to assess whether the 
content was “fair or duly accurate”.


The BBC Trust said that the satirical nature of the long-running programme was 
clear to the audience which would expect it to be “biting and bruising” to its 
targets.


“Those in the public eye, such as politicians, could expect robust criticism,” 
said the BBC Trust. “Programmes featuring satire and particularly political 
satire would necessarily be allowed substantially more leeway in their approach 
to accuracy and fairness than, for example, news or a current affairs 
programme. To do otherwise, would be to risk an unwarranted curtailment of 
freedom of expression which would not be acceptable in a democracy.”


The BBC Trust felt that the BBC’s two clarifications published online 
regarding Davies and his portrayal on the show, as well as an agreement not to 
air the episodes again, was a “proportionate and appropriate response” by the 
corporation.


“The [editorial standards] committee agreed that further action was not 
necessary,” said the BBC Trust.


Davies’s complaint was therefore not upheld.

 