
Investors’ first instinct, as they woke on Friday 24 June to news that the UK 
had voted for Brexit, was to sell shares. This didn’t feel remotely odd at the 
time. Sterling was plunging, the prime minister would resign by mid-morning and 
shares, in theory, are meant to be the asset you don’t want to own when there 
is a whiff of panic in the air.

Tough luck if you sold your FTSE 100 tracker fund on Monday 27 June, the day 
the index closed a shade below 6000 points. You’ve just misseda remarkable 
1100-point run to 7074 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/uk-stock-markets-soar-as-sterling-slumps-to-record-low>
. The vote for Brexit created the best buying opportunity for years.

Or, rather, it was a golden chance if you are a sterling investor. As 
everybody knows by now, the single biggest factor fuelling the Footsie’s surge 
has been the weakness of the pound. Most of the gain reflects currency 
adjustments. The profits generated overseas by big UK-listed multinationals – 
BP, Shell, the crew of miners, the cigarette merchants, the pharmaceutical 
giants, HSBC, Unilever, etcetera – are worth more when converted back into 
sterling, the currency in which their shares are quoted. Calculated in terms of 
US dollars, theFTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 has gone 
roughly sideways since the referendum.

GlaxoSmithKline illustrates the point. If you bought on the day of the 
referendum at £14.29, you’re up 18.7% with the share price now at £16.96. But 
if you are a US investor and bought the dollar-denominated American Depositary 
Receipts (each one represents two ordinary shares), it’s as if nothing has 
happened. The price of a Glaxo ADR has ticked up from $42.56 on referendum day 
to $43.30 on Tuesday – a gain of about 2%. It all depends on where you’re 
sitting.

Thus the sight of the Footsie above 7000 is the secondary story. Sterling’s 
slide to a 31-year low against the dollar is the main event, and the reason why 
chancellor Philip Hammond should stop saying, as he did again on Monday, that 
“the markets have calmed since the referendum vote.” Shares have calmed but 
sterling hasn’t. The currency still tends to slip on every indication from 
ministers that a “hard Brexit” is on the cards. Those pundits suggesting the 
pound could fall to $1.20 against the dollar, versus Tuesday’s $1.27, may be 
proved correct.

Yet Hammond would be right to claim that even $1.20 would not represent a 
crisis. In trade-weighted terms, the pound currently sits at a 
six-and-a-half-year low, which feels roughly the right level. First, the vote 
for Brexit has plainly created all the uncertainties that causedthe IMF to cut 
its growth forecast for the UK next year to 1.1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
. Second, the UK also needs to get its current account deficit under control 
and a weaker currency offers the best hope on that front. An overshoot on the 
low side would not be the worst problem for the UK economy to have.

That is true as long as a weaker pound doesn’t cause eruptions elsewhere. But, 
as matters stand, there are no signs of distress in bond markets, or even 
worries that a weaker currency will deliver a nasty dose of inflation. There’s 
still time, of course, and the risk rises the further the pound falls. But, 
right now, the UK can borrow for 10 years at a rate of 0.8%. That feels a very 
long way from crisis levels.

£40m payday for Jeremy and chums 

Currency winds have also played a role in the entertaining scrap for SVG 
Capital, the quoted firm that invests in private equity funds. To recap: US 
fund HarbourVest Partners made a £1bn, or 650p-a-share, offer last month in 
what looked to be a smash-and-grab raid. HarbourVest declared its offer final, 
thereby ruling out improved terms, and invited quick acceptances.


Not so fast, said SVG, which had another look at its assets (most of which are 
euro and dollar denominated) and came up with a value of 735p a share, rather 
than the 666p it had offered the last time it spoke. Everyone is allowed to 
believe their investments are improving in value but the trick in a bid 
situation is to find someone prepared to agree – and then to pay up.

SVG has only half succeeded. Late in the day, it said on Tuesday that two 
other private equity investors, Pomona Capital and Pantheon Ventures, are 
willing to buy half the investment portfolio for £379m. That is still a 
discount to the book value for those assets, calculated at £401m, but, 
crucially, is a tighter discount than the one implied by the HarbourVest offer.

HarbourVest can protest that it is willing to buy all the investments, rather 
than half, and that SVG’s self-liquidation plan is riddled with uncertainties. 
Fair comment. But at least SVG’s board has given its shareholders a choice: 
they can have 650p for a quick sale to an opportunist bidder or they can take 
their chances on seeing 700p-ish via an orderly, but still brisk, liquidation.

Either outcome would represent a triumph for Jeremy Coller, whose Coller 
Capital outfit rescued SVG by injecting cash at 100p for a 20% stake in 2009. 
Coller Capital should make a sixfold-plus return from a punt taken in the 
depths of the financial crisis. And remember, in the fee-heavy private equity 
industry, the partners usually keep a fifth of the uplift for themselves. Call 
it a £40m payday for Jeremy and chums for riding the recovery.
 