
Len McCluskey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey> has 
described the attempted coup against Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, as a 
“political lynching of a decent man” as he asked MPs to allow trade unions to 
“broker a peace”.

Jeremy Corbyn aides refuse Tom Watson one-on-one meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/corbyn-keeps-watson-arms-length>
The general secretary of Unite warned that a challenge to the leadership by 
MPs such as Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/labour-mps-divided-over-how-to-depose-jeremy-corbyn>
 or Owen Smith would plunge Labour into an ugly civil war. But, on the same 
programme, McCluskey said it was unhelpful for “former leaders to be dragged 
out to be part of an unedifying coup”, arguing that Neil Kinnock andEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/senior-labour-figures-warn-of-party-breakup-and-urge-corbyn-to-go>
 had also shown that they did not know how to win elections.

McCluskey dismissed a survey of 750 Unite members which showed widespread 
support for Corbyn to resign as a “poll of half a dozen people”, while 
describing theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader as a 
“man of steel” who was going nowhere.

“The coup has failed. Jeremy is made of tougher stuff,” McCluskey told the 
BBC’s Andrew Marr, saying it was outrageous that grandees such as Lord Kinnock 
were part of a coup which he claimed was being run by a communications company 
with links to Tony Blair.

McCluskey responded to calls from Kinnock for Corbyn to go by saying the 
former leader had a poor track record when it came to elections. Kinnock had 
argued that there had been a “significant shift” away from Corbyn among party 
members. “Members across the country have got deep, residual doubts about the 
possibility of him leading the party to election victory,” he said.

Kinnock also argued that if Corbyn is challenged he ought to have to collect 
nominations from MPs, as Kinnock had to in the late 1980s when Tony Benn took 
him on with the support of Labour’s current leader. The issue is significant 
because Corbyn’s team believe he will automatically be able to stand again, but 
his opponents strongly disagree. It seems unlikely that he would receive the 
backing of enough politicians if he has to seek their support.

A new, well-led Labour party could make a difference | Will Hutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/02/labour-party-leadership-under-jeremy-corbyn-failing-to-provide-opposition>
Talking about the large numbers of people who paid £3 to become registered 
supporters of Labour in order to back Corbyn in last year’s election, Kinnock 
said they were “very welcome in the party”, arguing that they brought energy 
and vibrancy. But he added: “They have to then decide whether they are serious 
about putting principles into power ... or if they joined up to a social 
protest movement.” He said the latter would mean attending the funerals of 
industry across Britain as the Tories took power for decades.

Corbyn hit back on Sunday, telling his party’s MPs that they should “respect 
democracy”, stressing that he was elected by 60% of Labour members and 
supporters just nine months ago.Writing in the Sunday Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-corbyn-exclusively-reveals-hes-8335834>
, he added: “I am ready to reach out to Labour MPs who didn’t accept my 
election and oppose my leadership – and work with the whole party to provide 
the alternative the country needs.”

However, aides were unable to add details as to how Corbyn might be able to 
reach a consensus, with the MPs who oppose him saying his article lacked 
substance. They urged him to show leadership and respond to theoverwhelming 
vote of no confidence among MPs last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
.

Tom Watson is understood to have welcomed McCluskey’s comments, which are seen 
as a sign that a “negotiated settlement” of some sort may still be possible.
 