
Prior to the guys’ Take-That-style reunion in the forthcoming sequel T2, here 
is a very welcome big-screen rerelease of Danny Boyle’s original Trainspotting, 
21 years on. It holds up terrifically well. This movie was the first, maybe the 
only successful 90s British attempt at answering films likeGoodfellas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/philip-french-classic-dvd-goodfellas-martin-scorsese-25th-anniversary-robert-de-niro-liotta-pesci>
 orPulp Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/15/pulp-fiction-review>; it has a 
version of their spirit and power – and matches them for hardcore violence, 
horror and drugs. But John Hodge’s screenplay, taken from the novel by Irvine 
Welsh, brings in a grittily British kind of social-realist pessimism. Watching 
it again, especially during the periodic “family” scenes in pubs after court 
appearances and funerals, I thought of Ken Loach’sPoor Cow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/poor-cow-review-ken-loach-debut-masterpiece>
.

Trainspotting <https://www.theguardian.com/books/trainspotting> is 
supercharged with sulphurous humour and brutal recklessness: it charges at you 
like Ewan McGregor’s Renton sprinting from store detectives in the opening 
sequence. In 1996, his famous “choose life” monologue was dynamic; in 2017 it 
sounds poignantly light and breathy, almost childlike, like a kid reciting in 
school. With his mates Sick Boy (Jonny Lee Miller), Spud (Ewen Bremner) and the 
psychotic Begbie (an unforgettable performance by Robert Carlyle), Renton 
grapples with getting off heroin and somehow making sense of his life, 
incidentally falling hard for the beautiful Diane (Kelly Macdonald).

The only problem with Trainspotting is that it inspired an Uncool Britannia 
parade of geezer-gangster Britflicks, all of them introducing their adorable 
semi-crim characters in freeze-frame voiceover. But it planted a seed for the 
Scottish independence campaign with Renton’s state-of-the-nation aria: “It’s 
shite being Scottish! We’re ruled by effete arseholes!” Like Archie Gemmill in 
1978, scoring for Scotland against Holland in the World Cup, Trainspotting 
found the back of the net.
 