
Morton on the move

How good to be back after a long summer gathering nuggets. Venice was 
interesting – Paul Thomas Anderson'sThe Master 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/01/the-master-review> is a mighty 
piece and Susanne Bier's romcom Love Is All You Need a surprise charmer that, 
handled right, could be a big hit. But the lack of a British film presence was 
lamentable - all the Brits have gone to Toronto hoping for distribution deals 
and Oscar buzz. I'd have thought Joe Wright'sAnna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/09/anna-karenina-review-philip-french>
would have been well received there, just asAtonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/aug/29/festivals.romance?INTCMP=SRCH> 
was in 2007.

Between you and me, I hear the British industry has decreed Venice too 
expensive now, although I thinkShame and Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy did pretty 
well out of it last year. It was left to the brilliantSamantha Morton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/02/samantha-morton-actor> to 
fly the flag on the Lido, which she did as a spectacularly committed and 
thoughtful jury member.

When I shared a glass of prosecco or two with her, she was thrilled to reveal 
that she's been commissioned to do two more parts to her excellent debut film
The Unloved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/21/the-unloved-film?INTCMP=SRCH>. 
"They won't be sequels as such," she told me, "but they'll examine the care 
system through different girls and situations." Sam has moved to the 
countryside with her husband Harry Holm to write in peace and quiet. "Not sure 
it was the best idea for me," she says, "but time will tell and if I knuckle 
down and get the scripts done then it'll all be worth it."

Sight to behold

One of the stars at the new-look London film festival launch – apart from new 
boss Clare Stewart – was Alice Lowe , about to have a huge breakout success in 
Ben Wheatley's terrific black comedySightseers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2012/aug/28/sightseers-trailer-ben-wheatley>
. The film is sure to be a highlight of the LFF as it was in its sidebar at 
Cannes and at its screenings in Toronto. The film's international appeal is 
perhaps surprising because much of its charm is its very English specificity, 
an erotic odyssey checking out Midlands beauty spots such as Redditch.

"We played it in Germany and it took them a while to start laughing," Alice 
told me. "Different audiences laugh at very different bits, but as long as they 
laugh, we're all right." Indeed, considering the film is about a murderous 
couple, playing it for comedy was always a risk. "We took research very 
seriously actually," says Alice, who wrote the script with her co-star Steve 
Oram. "We looked at Fred and Rosemary West and the Moors murderers very 
closely."

Alice revealed she workshopped her character Tina using ideas from her 
favourite film, the Maysleses'Grey Gardens, with a smattering of Ronnie 
Corbett's Timothy from the 80s sitcomSorry! "Tina's kind of me if I'd stayed at 
home and not dared to go into acting," she says. She's going into directing 
next. "TheSightseers experience has finally given me confidence," she says with 
delight. "I'm working on making a film calledLilly, which I'm pitching as 
Madame Bovarymeets Trainspotting. Usually, I'd be laughed out of the room with 
that, but afterSightseers, people hear that and think: hmm, interesting…"

Sightseers is scheduled for UK release on 30 November after premiering at the 
LFF on 20 October.

Goody two shoes

I was lucky enough to be at the Hackney Picturehouse for the premiere of Shut 
Up and Play the Hits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/06/shut-up-and-play-the-hits-review>
, a rocking concert doc about the last gig of James Murphy's LCD Soundsystem. 
James is a very funny and eloquent fellow, and he told me he's been working on 
a novel since retiring his band from the dance music scene. He's also been 
racking up the ailments and we spent much time backstage discussing injuries. 
You know it's time to call it a day on dance music when you've got a perforated 
eardrum (from scuba diving) and a nasty case of gout (he blames his dad's genes 
and an overdose of champagne at a recent wedding). Meanwhile, a guest at the 
premiere was Klaxons bassist Jamie Reynolds, who told me he's directing his 
first film, a doc about 80s star Adam Ant and his comeback tour.

"I was approached to do the film," he says. " And the chance to get into 
film-making was too good for me to turn down. We've been filming on and off for 
over a year and it's been eye-opening but I think it's getting there. I'm 
hopeful it'll be ready to show pretty soon." While his bandmate James Righton 
is also dipping into the film world by getting engaged to Keira Knightley, 
Reynolds promised me this doesn't meanKlaxons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/klaxons> are quitting music.
 