
Ball masque

Footballer Eric Cantona will have the Cannes crowds cheering tomorrow when he 
takes to the the red carpet to celebrate his starring role in Ken Loach's 
competition film Looking for Eric. The climax of the film features a memorable 
scene of a hundred-strong mob, including l'homme lui-mÃªme, all wearing rubber 
Cantona masks. I hear the film's backers are now under pressure to reproduce 
the masks on a mass scale, due to an unlikely twin demand: from both Manchester 
United fans and film enthusiasts here on the Croisette. Actor Steve Evets, who 
stars as Eric the postman visited by visions of Eric his hero in Loach's film, 
already has one, however. "We all got to keep them at the end of filming," he 
tells me. "It was a treat from Ken to all of us who turned up. I got Eric to 
sign mine. It's in my council flat, staring at me when I get out of bed every 
morning."

Beastly reply

Former Beastie Boy turned film-maker Adam Yauch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adam-yauch> is in town. As is the way with 
Americans, they get their publicists to demand tickets to all the hottest 
events and parties. I hear that Yauch's rep has been particularly insistent in 
sourcing Yauch some impossible-to-get tickets. No surprise that one UK wag 
snapped back: "I'm sorry but it just isn't all that easy - anyway, shouldn't 
Adam ... have to fight for his right to paaaarty?"

Sugar rush

Maybe the credit crunch is biting, but with a sweet tooth. The opening night 
party for Disney's Up left guests, including the beautiful actress Aishwarya 
Rai, hungry by only serving sweets. After enduring a long opening ceremony - 
during which Bryan Ferry serenaded Charles Aznavour (who voices Up's old man 
character in the French version of the film) with a version of "She" - enjoying 
the film and then negotiating unruly queues to get in, guests were met with 
bowls of dolly mixtures, trays of coloured macaroons, plates of fruit and bowls 
of chocolate sauce. Colourful Pixar boss and vineyard owner John Lasseter even 
brought some cases of his own wine over from California, although it was 
reserved for VIP contacts only.
 