
The chairman of the Treasury committee has stepped up the pressure on the 
accounting watchdog over its examination of KPMG’s auditing of the failed bank
HBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>.

Andrew Tyrie has written to Stephen Haddrill, the chief executive of the 
Financial Reporting Council, asking how the regulator decided on the terms of 
reference for its inquiries into KPMG’s conduct and whether there will be 
independent oversight of the FRC’s work.

The FRC said two weeks ago that it was considering an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/accounting-watchdog-frc-kpmg-audit-hbos>
 into whether KPMG or its partners committed misconduct when signing off the 
accounts of HBOS, which almost collapsed in 2008 at the peak of the financial 
crisis.

HBOS report: a damning indictment of failed bankers and regulators
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/nov/19/hbos-report-a-damning-indictment-of-failed-bankers-and-regulators>
The regulator made the decision after taking into account a scathing official 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/hbos-collapse-report-recommends-formal-investigation-into-former-executives>
 into HBOS’s failure published in November. The FRC considered investigating 
KPMG’s judgments on HBOS’s bad debt provisions in 2013, but decided not to 
proceed.

The FRC’s preliminary inquiries will examine whether KPMG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/kpmg> was correct in allowing HBOS to be 
classed as a going concern in its 2007 accounts and whether threats to the 
bank’s viability should have been included in the financial statements. The FRC 
will use the information gathered by its enforcement chief to decide whether to 
launch a full investigation.

In his letter, dated 3 February, Tyrie asked Haddrill why the FRC is looking 
at these two elements instead of conducting a wider review of KPMG’s work for 
HBOS. He also asked if there was scope for the review to be broadened.

Tyrie asked Haddrill whether there would be an external monitor of the FRC’s 
inquiries, as there was for the Financial Conduct Authority’s long-delayed 
official report into HBOS. He also requested a deadline for reporting of the 
FRC’s findings and asked at what stage in the process the FRC decided not to 
launch an investigation in 2013.

“The process by which the FRC has reached this decision, as well as the 
approach it plans for its preliminary enquiries, both raise a number of 
concerns,” Tyrie wrote. “The Treasury committee will be keeping a close eye on 
the progress of these inquiries and the extent to which they are able to 
command public confidence. It is likely that the committee will want to take 
evidence from the FRC.”

HBOS timeline: the countdown to collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/hbos-timeline-countdown-collapse-lloyds-takeover>
Tyrie has been a thorn in the side of the FRC over its decision not to hold 
KPMG, one of the big four auditors, to account over the HBOS affair. Hewrote to 
Haddrill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/14/mps-accountancy-watchdog-look-again-kpmg-hbos-scandal>
 in December after the HBOS report was published, demanding that the FRC 
re-examine its decision not to investigate KPMG.

HBOS, which traded as Halifax and Bank of Scotland, was forced to ask 
shareholders for £4bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/apr/30/hbosbusiness.banking1> to 
strengthen its finances in April 2008, two months after its accounts for 2007 
gave it a clean bill of health. The bank almost imploded in September 2008 and 
wasrescued by Lloyds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness> 
in a government-engineered takeover. The combined bank was bailed out by 
taxpayers a month later at a cost of £20bn.


Tyrie said: “I have written to the FRC to seek assurances about the scope, 
independence and rigour of these initial inquiries. The committee will be 
watching the FRC’s work closely. Given the shocking delay in initiating this 
work, a less than thorough job would be inexcusable.”

The official report into HBOS’s failure, and a separate review of decisions 
taken by the now-defunct Financial Services Authority, has reopened questions 
over the bank’s near-collapse. Last week, the FCA said it wouldre-examine the 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/fca-orders-new-inquiry-into-hbos-chiefs>
 of the bank’s former bosses, who could be barred from working in the City.
 