
Trinity Mirror has no right to own newspapers. Its board should resign. Read 
the story of what the publisher did to Robert Norman,as detailed in a Press 
Gazette interview 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/daily-mirrors-paid-prison-whistleblower-speaks-out-about-impact-of-publishers-decision-to-give-his-identity-to-police/>
, and you will understand why.

Let’s begin with these statements of principle that guide journalists in 
Britain and Europe:

“Journalists have a moral obligation to protect confidential sources of 
information.” (UK editors’ code of practice 
<https://www.ipso.co.uk/editors-code-of-practice/#ConfidentialSources>)

“A journalist protects the identity of sources who supply information in 
confidence.” (National Union of Journalists’ code of conduct 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/about/nuj-code/>)

“Protecting sources is a key principle of journalism for which some 
journalists have gone to jail.” (BBC editorial guidelines)

Now consider the judicial support for that principle:

“Protection of journalistic sources is one of the basic conditions for press 
freedom.” (European Court of Human Rights judgment,Goodwin v United Kingdom, 
1996 <http://worldlii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/1996/16.html>)

But Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> did not 
agree. It sacrificed that principle. In so doing, it set in train events that 
have wrecked the life of a confidential journalistic source: Robert Norman, 
former prison officer.

He is not the only one of Trinity Mirror’s victims. Nor is the Daily Mirror’s 
owner the only sinner:News Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> also revealed the 
identities of the sources of Sun reporters.

What is different is that Norman has become the first of the 32 sources who 
were convicted under Operation Elveden 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/new-law-needed-to-protect-journalists-sources-after-conviction-of-32-under-operation-elveden/>
, the Metropolitan police investigation into newspaper payments to public 
officials, to speak out.

Here is what happened to him. In April 2006, he was working at Belmarsh 
maximum security prison in London, acting as health and safety officer for the 
Prison Officers’ Association.

He was upset about the management’s failure to deal with the fact that a 
female officer was having an affair with an inmate, regarding it as a potential 
danger to staff.

So he phoned the Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> 
newsdesk and was put in touch with reporter Stephen Moyes. The story, leaked by 
other prison colleagues, broke before Moyes could get to it, but he asked 
Norman to get in touch should anything else happen.

Norman told Press Gazette’s editor Dominic Ponsford: “I did, over staff cuts 
and security. All the stories I gave him were in the public interest, 
highlighting dangers to the public and dangers to staff.

“Stephen managed to get a story in about the staff cuts and we went from 
there.”

Over the following five years, Norman shared 40 pieces of information with 
Moyes. In return he received tip fees totalling £10,684.

Money, he stresses, was not the driving factor. Ponsford lists some of the 
stories. They included the regrading of prisoners to ease overcrowding, 
security issues over laptops, a prisoner’s suicide, excessive expenditure on a 
staff party and the prison’s failure to pass security inspections.

In 2011, he decided to stop giving stories to Moyes, who had moved to the News 
of the World. He said: “I cut all ties with Stephen and decided to concentrate 
on getting through to retirement.”

But two years later Trinity Mirror took a fateful step. Caught in the backwash 
of phone-hacking allegations and aware of News Corp having passed on 
information about payments to public officials, it decided to do the same.

Norman was one of those identified in the documents it passed to the police. 
And, in May 2013, Norman was roused from his sleep at 5.45am.

Sixteen police officers “barged into my house,” he said. “All that was missing 
were the helicopters and the napalm.” He was placed on police bail for two 
years, prosecuted for committing misconduct in a public office and, after a 
three-week Old Bailey trial in 2015,he was convicted  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/01/belmarsh-prison-officer-paid-mole-mirror-news-of-world-reporter>
andsentenced to jail for 20 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/02/belmarsh-prison-officer-jailed-paid-mole-reporter>
.

By contrast, charges against Moyes, and other journalists, were dropped  
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/crown-prosecution-services-drops-nine-journalist-prosecutions-after-latest-elveden-acquittals/>
 after the Crown Prosecution Service reviewed Operation Elveden cases. Sources, 
however, were not spared.Moyes was upset about the prosecution of Norman 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/evidence-against-cleared-sun-reporter-stephen-moyes-said-he-demonised-suffolk-strangler-writing/>
.

Norman had to sell his house in order to pay the £51,000 costs of his defence. 
His wife’s mental health, already fragile, deteriorated. She attempted to take 
her own life and was committed to psychiatric care on three occasions. (Now, 
thankfully, she is said to be “on the road to recovery.”)

Norman served six months in prison and five under home detention. Last month, 
helost his appeal against conviction. 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/jailed-daily-mirror-prison-source-loses-appeal-court-says-publisher-willingly-gave-up-union-official-to-police/>
 He is planning a further appeal to the supreme court.

He now lives on the £64 a week, which he receives from the state as his wife’s 
full-time carer.


Ponsford asked Norman what he thought of Trinity Mirror’s action. He replied: 
“You’re a source and journalists are supposed to look after their sources...

“I think the way myself and other whistleblowers have been treated is 
absolutely atrocious.”

Moyes, who left the Mirror for the News of the World and later moved to the 
Sun, clearly agrees. Heregistered his dismay at Norman being charged 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/evidence-against-cleared-sun-reporter-stephen-moyes-said-he-demonised-suffolk-strangler-writing/>
, saying: “Without him a number of important security and safety exposés would 
have been hushed up.”

Trinity Mirror, which declined to comment to Ponsford, confirmed to me that it 
is not making any response. No surprise there. How could it be anything other 
than embarrassed by Norman’s sad story?


I repeat. The board should resign. It is led by chairman David Grigson and 
chief executiveSimon Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fox>. Vijay 
Vaghela is the finance director, and there are five non-executives: Lee 
Ginsberg, Steve Hatch, David Kelly, Helen Stevenson and Olivia Streatfeild.

Grigson, Fox and Vaghela were in post when the decision was made to inform the 
police and are therefore responsible for breaking a cardinal rule of 
journalism. The five non-execs, who were appointed later, should also consider 
their positions.

If any of them have a shred of respect for the trade from which they profit 
they should step down.
 