
Earlier this week, as the non-controversy over Suicide Squad’s scathing reviews
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/03/suicide-squad-bad-reviews-dc-comic-fans>
 reached its vesuvian apex,studio Warner Bros quietly announced the news 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/second-fantastic-beasts-movie-release-set-1201829550/>
 that it has picked safe pair of directorial hands David Yates to direct the 
follow-up to forthcoming Harry Potter spin-off Fantastic Beasts and Where to 
Find Them. Potter author JK Rowling will also return to write her second 
screenplay.

From Suicide Squad to Batman v Superman, why are DC’s films so bad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/aug/03/from-suicide-squad-to-batman-v-superman-why-dc-films-so-bad-zack-snyder>
The news may not have made much of an impact because Yates is, on the face of 
it, not the most exciting of film-makers. In fact, he is not even the most 
exciting Harry Potter film-maker: Alfonso Cuarón turned in perhaps the only 
near-classic Potter movie to date, 2004’s Harry Potter and the Prisoner of 
Azkaban. Yet Yates has now been in charge for the past four movies in the 
second-highest grossing film series of all time, and will now direct the first 
two episodes in its much-hyped successor series. In Hollywood terms, the former 
TV director is a very big deal indeed.

To see why, we only have to look at what happens when studios trust their 
mega-budget productions to greener talent than Yates. Josh Trank was one of 
Hollywood’s most-buzzed-about young film-makers, on the back offound footage 
superhero tale Chronicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/jan/27/chronicle-found-footage-superhero-powers>
, before taking onlast year’s Fantastic Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/10/josh-trank-fantastic-four-clobbered-us-box-office>
 for 20th Century Fox, while David Ayer was widely expected to make a 
triumphant debut in the comic book arena with Warner/DC’s currentSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/02/suicide-squad-review-dc-comics-will-smith-margot-robbie-jared-leto>
. Neither movie has quite worked out the way its key architects might have 
hoped. And the Hollywood trades have been full of reports about the struggles 
Gareth Edwards is facing on the upcoming Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, which 
(like both Trank and Ayer’s films) has faced extensive reshoots and editing 
issues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe29772079aa5e3b71a4abbe67c56adf8bd5c5c99%2F385_0_4825_2896%2F4825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trouble%20in%20Hollywood%3A%20who%20has%20the%20formula%20for%20blockbuster%20success%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trouble%20in%20Hollywood%3A%20who%20has%20the%20formula%20for%20blockbuster%20success%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe29772079aa5e3b71a4abbe67c56adf8bd5c5c99%2F385_0_4825_2896%2F4825.jpg>
 Bad reviews … Fantastic Four. Photograph: Moviestore/REX Shutterstock 
The latest report suggests that the Michael Clayton director and regular 
Bourne series screenwriterTony Gilroy has been called in by Disney 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/rogue-one-drama-writer-tony-916695>
 to oversee Rogue One’s edit, though Edwards is said to still be involved. 
We’re told the two also partnered up on Warner Bros’s Godzilla when the 
Englishman’s previous big-budget blockbuster ran into trouble.

This follows Tuesday’s report that Suicide Squad’s problems may have stemmed 
from a rushed production schedule 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/suicide-squads-secret-drama-rushed-916693>
, as Warner Bros battles to bring its DC extended universe up to speed with the 
hugely successful rival Marvel films. The article suggests Ayer had just six 
weeks to write his screenplay for the antihero epic, and that executives 
(terrified of a repeat of the bad reception that greeted previous DCEU 
instalment Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice) repeatedly intervened during the 
editing process. The most horrifying rumour is that Warner Bros cut its own 
version of the film with the help of the company that made the popular, punky 
and fast-cutting trailers that brought Suicide Squad all its buzz in the first 
place.

Why DC fans should learn to love Suicide Squad's critics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/03/suicide-squad-bad-reviews-dc-comic-fans>
Studios have been cutting their noses off to spite their faces since the dawn 
of the blockbuster era. Richard Donner’s visionary, Hesiodic vision of Superman 
as a god living among men was eventually destroyed by interventions from 
producers Alexander and Ilya Salkind, who wanted the saga to take a more 
comedic turn. They kicked Donner off Superman II in favour of the Three 
Musketeers director Richard Lester. David Fincher’s Alien 3 was famously ruined 
by 20th Century Fox’s incessant meddling, almost derailing the nascent career 
of a promising young film-maker.

And yet it seems the march towards endless big budget fantasy fare is 
increasing the chances of cinemagoers paying to see a dud. A paragraph in the 
Hollywood Reporter’s piece onSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad> hints at a reason:

If the villain team-up ultimately works – and it has drawn some harsh early 
reviews – it will be in spite of the kind of behind-the-scenes drama that is 
becoming typical for giant franchise movies that now are the main focus of the 
studio business: a production schedule engineered to meet an ambitious release 
date; a director, David Ayer (Fury), untested in making tentpole movies; and 
studio executives, brimming with anxiety, who are ready to intercede forcefully 
as they attempt to protect a branded asset. Often, efforts to fix perceived 
problems ratchet up costs, which drive anxiety ever higher. In extreme cases, 
such as Fox’s troubled Fantastic Four, the intervention is so aggressive that 
it becomes unclear what it means to be the director. (In each such case, 
studios are careful to stress that the credited director is on-scene and in 
charge, which is essential to avoid DGA issues. And the wise director plays 
along.

Is this where fans’ ravenous desire for new big-screen material featuring 
their favourite fantasy icons, and Hollywood’s willingness to sate it for 
money, has ultimately brought us? Not so long ago, it looked like studios were 
getting better at making blockbusters: 2015 saw few large-scale duds, and big 
winners such asStar Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> and Jurassic World 
took box offices by storm. Now, all of a sudden, DC’s malaise looks like it 
might be feeding into a larger crisis. The Hollywood machine has been infested 
by gremlins.

Looking back at 2015’s big beasts, a pattern emerges. Neither The Force 
Awakens nor Jurassic World made any real attempt to push the envelope with 
bold, visionary twists into radical new territory for their respective 
franchises. In fact, just the opposite.

JJ Abrams ripped up Michael Arndt’s original script for the Star Wars sequel 
and borrowed elements from the original 1977 movie that introduced us all to 
Luke Skywalker, lightsabers and the Force. Likewise, Jurassic World’s director 
Colin Trevorrow played heavily on nostalgia for the Steven Spielberg original, 
even wheeling out everyone’s favourite dino, the T-Rex, to take down his 
hideous genetically modified successor in the movie’s denouement.He was 
promptly rewarded with a Star Wars film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/15/star-wars-episode-ix-to-be-directed-by-jurassic-worlds-colin-trevorrow>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8316a7e33385f337cc318ab385f0bb558b5919f8%2F8_191_3381_2029%2F3381.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trouble%20in%20Hollywood%3A%20who%20has%20the%20formula%20for%20blockbuster%20success%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trouble%20in%20Hollywood%3A%20who%20has%20the%20formula%20for%20blockbuster%20success%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fhollywood-blockbusters-directors-star-wars-dc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8316a7e33385f337cc318ab385f0bb558b5919f8%2F8_191_3381_2029%2F3381.jpg>
 Recycled … Star Wars: The Force Awakens reused elements of the original films. 
Photograph: Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
Marvel is the model for delivering regular, strong content. Since the release 
of 2008’s Iron Man, the Disney-owned studio has pumped out roughly two new 
movies each year, with only the odd semi-dud (such as last year’s Ant Man or 
2013’s Thor: The Dark World) to slightly tarnish an overall excellent back 
catalogue. But is it any coincidence that Marvel president Kevin Feige has 
increasingly turned away from maverick film-makers (such as Edgar Wright,
unceremoniously dumped from Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/23/edgar-wright-departs-marvels-ant-man-due-to-differences-in-vision>
 in favour of Yes Man’s unheralded Peyton Reed) and towards directors used to 
turning round movies to quick deadlines? Directors, who quite often, in fact, 
have their roots in the faster-moving, more collaborative territory of TV.

It doesn’t always work. The Dark World was a mess despite being overseen by 
Game of Thrones regular Alan Taylor, butMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> hasn’t yet allowed a real critical 
or box office turkey – a movie as disastrous as Batman v Superman, Fantastic 
Four or Suicide Squad – to find its way into cinemas. And most of its films 
have been popular with both reviewers and fans, so clearly something is working.

Joss Whedon: 'I was beaten down by making The Avengers: Age of Ultron'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/19/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron-mark-ruffalo-tribeca>
Sticking with the Disney-owned studio, and Joss Whedon’s travails on Avengers: 
Age of Ultron are well-documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/19/joss-whedon-avengers-age-of-ultron-mark-ruffalo-tribeca>
. Yet the creator of Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Firefly had the TV industry 
nous and film industry standing (after delivering the $1.5bn Avengers) to pull 
through when a lesser-known director might have buckled. Ultron is not perfect, 
but it was well-received and didn’t fall far short of its predecessor at the 
box office.

And yet it looks increasingly likely that visionary film-makers such as Whedon 
may slowly be shifted off these movies. Marvel’s new heroes are Captain 
America: Civil War directors the Russo brothers, who appear able to work within 
the confines of the cinematic universe – with its constantly-evolving demands 
to cater for new superheroes and meet tight deadlines – yet are still capable 
of delivering the Whedonesque brio and inter-superhero badinage that made the 
first Avengers film such a high-octane treat.

Once again, the Russos’ background is in TV, often seen as the movies’ poor 
relation. Yet this is now a golden age for the small screen, so why shouldn’t 
modern Hollywood learn from the only model that turns round new content at the 
speed it now requires – forStar Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>
 to deliver a movie a year and for the DC universe to stop throttling itself to 
death with every new desperate, rushed instalment?

In a new era for blockbuster film-making, we may need a new kind of film-maker 
to stop the disastrous turkeys continuing their relentless march into 
multiplexes. A little less visionary, a little less maverick, but capable of 
keeping the good stuff coming with the help of strong screenwriting. Someone 
with an understanding of how to work within an abiding macro-vision of a 
multiple-film story arc. A director, in fact, who probably works a lot like 
David Yates.

 