
The line to get in stretched around the block and deep into a hotel parking 
lot.

Thousands of people had turned up to an election campaign event in Medicine 
Hat, a small Albertan city in Canada’s conservative heartland, hoping to catch 
a glimpse ofJustin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>. 


Think Canada is a progressive paradise? That’s mooseshit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/canada-politics-progressive-liberal-trudeau>
About 800 of them made it inside, cheering wildly as Trudeau spoke of first 
visiting the citywith his father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2000/oct/05/guardianweekly.guardianweekly1>
 when he was just seven months old. Later, the Liberal party leader waded into 
the crowd outside, shaking hands and snapping selfies with admirers among the 
1,600 or so people who had teemed around loudspeakers to hear his speech.


The boisterous welcome came not during the election campaign which swept 
Trudeau to power, nor during the heady days after he assumed office 12 months 
ago – it took place during a local byelection last month, and offers a snapshot 
of an extraordinary political honeymoon that has come to define Trudeau’s first 
year in office.

“This is really uncharted territory,” said Nik Nanos of Nanos Research. “In my 
20 years of experience, no one has had a one-year honeymoon.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5872db8cd03fa98430b7ee9077a3e9cd786f6fc%2F0_67_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada's%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada%27s%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5872db8cd03fa98430b7ee9077a3e9cd786f6fc%2F0_67_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau speaking in Montreal. Photograph: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images
Others question whether honeymoon is the appropriate word to capture what 
exactly is going on. “Honeymoons last maybe a month or two, maybe three – but 
not a year. This is something else,” said Frank Graves of EKOS Research 
Associates. “Certainly in the time I’ve been polling – which is a pretty long 
time – I’ve never seen anything like this.”

Friday marks one year since Trudeau took power in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/justin-trudeau-sworn-in-canada-prime-minister>
. The 44-year-old former high school teacher and snowboarding instructorswept 
into parliament at the helm of a majority government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/oct/19/canada-election-justin-trudeau-stephen-harper>
, after campaigning on an ambitious manifesto which promised to take bold 
action on climate change, revive the country’s sluggish economy and reset the 
country’s relationship with indigenous peoples.

This is really uncharted territory. In my 20 years of experience, no one has 
had a one-year honeymoon
Nik Nanos, public opinion researcher 
During the election campaign, his team racked up 219 promises that seemingly 
offered something for everyone. So far, 34 of these promiseshave been fulfilled 
and 64 are in progress <https://www.trudeaumetre.ca/>. In their first year, the 
government has unmuzzled government scientists, ended Canada’s airstrikes 
against Isis and brought in 33,239 Syrian refugees, among other actions.

It hasn’t all been smooth sailing; Trudeau and his government have been 
disparaged byindigenous people who continue to feel sidelined from decision 
making 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/09/canada-site-c-hydroelectric-dam-indigenous-rights>
 and Green voters who wonder why thegovernment has adopted the carbon cutting 
targets of its predecessors 
<http://www.ctvnews.ca/politics/liberals-back-away-from-setting-tougher-carbon-targets-1.3075857>
. Revelations of fundraisers offering access to cabinet ministers for up to 
$1,500 a ticket havesparked questions about government transparency 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/trudeau-defends-cash-for-access-fundraising/article32523956/>
 while at a youth labour forum last week, dozens of delegates turned their 
backs to Trudeau 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/25/trudeau-heckled-booed-at-youth-labour-forum-in-ottawa.html>
, heckling him to honour his promises on pipelines and tackling youth 
unemployment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F714fa4358bce82d56549550e021f8be2c831b971%2F0_337_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada's%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada%27s%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F714fa4358bce82d56549550e021f8be2c831b971%2F0_337_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau in a ceremonial headdress while visiting the Tsuut’ina First 
Nation near Calgary, Alberta. Photograph: Jeff McIntosh/AP 
But most see these as small knocks for a government that has political capital 
to spare.Polls routinely suggest 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html 
https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2016/10/19/justin-trudeau-honeymoon-continues-a-year-after-election-poll.html>
 that were an election to be held today, Trudeau and his party wouldearn an 
even greater number of seats than the 184 won last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-set-to-become-pm-as-liberals-sweep-board-in-canada-election>
 in Canada’s 338-seat House of Commons.

“The reality is that they are very different from the previous government,” 
said Nanos. The Trudeau government’s popularity is hard to untangle from the 
divisiveness that dogged his Conservative predecessor, Stephen Harper, whose 
governmentshunned climate change obligations, 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/canada-pulls-out-of-kyoto-protocol-1.999072> 
slashed funding tofederal efforts on gender equality 
<http://www.macleans.ca/politics/ottawa/why-stephen-harper-doesnt-want-to-talk-about-womens-issues/>
 andsought to ban women wearing the niqab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/01/zunera-ishaq-veil-canada-election-conservatives>
 from participating in citizenship ceremonies.

At the outset of last year’s election campaign, it was clear voters were 
looking for change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/tom-mulcair-and-canadas-progressive-democrats-lead-push-for-change>
. Many of Trudeau’s actions so far – fromlaunching a long-awaited inquiry  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/03/canada-indigenous-women-missing-murdered-inquiry>
into the thousands of missing and murdered indigenous women toimplementing 
gender parity in his cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/canada-cabinet-gender-diversity-justin-trudeau>
– have sought to demonstrate they are enacting the change they promised.

Some of Trudeau’s strength can also be explained by the weakness of the 
country’s major opposition parties, said Nanos. The Conservatives and the New 
Democratic Party are currently both lacking a permanent leader, leaving them 
struggling to offer a meaningful counterpoint on the right or left.

“The Liberals shouldn’t be too smug with the very strong numbers because 
they’re the only game in town right now,” said Nanos. Trudeau’s political 
honeymoon, he said, could stretch well into 2017 until the two opposition 
parties choose new leaders.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78147da718f00e7c6d725682793665a7cf62c85c%2F0_24_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada's%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada%27s%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78147da718f00e7c6d725682793665a7cf62c85c%2F0_24_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau, who once worked as a snowboarding instructor, boxes at a gym 
in Toronto.
 Photograph: Mark Blinch/Reuters 
Trudeau’s popularity has endured even as his first nine months in office rank 
among the House of Commons’least productive in more than two decades 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/09/17/justin-trudeau-least-productive_n_12066614.html>
, according to data compiled by the library of parliament.

His government points to the myriad of consultations underway to explain the 
slow pace, but Canadians aren’t necessarily looking for substance at this 
point, said Darrell Bricker of Ipsos Public Affairs. “When we ask people 
directly: is it more style than substance, they say ‘yes, it is more style than 
substance,’ but they’re enjoying the style.”


Canadians across the country regularly gather to snap selfies with the prime 
minister while social media gleefully shares photos ofa shirtless Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/07/justin-trudeau-shirtless-photo> 
or as he shares an intimate moment with his wife, former television presenter 
Sophie Grégoire Trudeau.

“He’s prime minister selfie, right?” Bricker said, referring to the name given 
to him by his critics. “All of that stuff you wouldn’t see Harper do – for good 
or for bad. It’s very symbolic of the change.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F497db8caeed425bd0a1b7957f1cda9b5beb3f08b%2F0_79_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada's%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada%27s%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F497db8caeed425bd0a1b7957f1cda9b5beb3f08b%2F0_79_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau and his wife Sophie, a former television presenter. Photograph: 
Chris Wattie/Reuters 
What emerges is an image of a young, dynamic and transparent government. 
“There is just generally a lightness associated with this government as opposed 
to what came before it,” said Bricker. “So if you wanted to change this is a 
180-degree change from what existed before.”

We’re consulting’ will work for a while – but at some point you've got to come 
up with some very concrete answers
Frank Graves, political analyst 
The hard work starts now, he said. Details must be hashed out on the 
government’s plans tolegalise recreational marijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/canada-legislation-decriminalize-recreational-cannabis-weed-marijuana>
, reform the country’s electoral system and meet its emission targets. After a 
year of vague promises to strike a balance between environmental protection, a 
limping economy and a fraught relationship with Indigenous peoples, Trudeau’s 
government will be forced to put these pledges to the test in imminent 
decisions on several massive energy projects. “It’s the first time they’re 
going to actually have to pick a side,” said Bricker.

It’s a challenge that may get a boost from an unexpected source: international 
media. In a country long wary of being overshadowed by its southern neighbour, 
Trudeau has been wholeheartedly embraced by global media who delight inhis 
feminist views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/justin-trudeau-feminist-twitter-explodes>
 orhis take on quantum physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2016/apr/16/justin-trudeau-and-quantum-computers>
. The international attention has helped propel his popularity at home, said 
Graves of EKOS Research Associates. “I do believe that Canadians, one of the 
reasons they’re so happy with the government is that they really like the way 
we’re being seen on the world stage.”

It’s a sharp contrast to the previous government, he said. “Frankly I had data 
showing that Canadians were ashamed and embarrassed about our image with our 
performance on things like climate change or our policies on Israel or moving 
to towards militarism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd53360ff4b879a680faf85b1dae476e5fa90f512%2F0_125_3428_2057%2F3428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada's%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tru%20love%3A%20Canada%27s%20year%20of%20Justin%20Trudeau%20has%20been%20a%20honeymoon%2C%20but%20will%20it%20last%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjustin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd53360ff4b879a680faf85b1dae476e5fa90f512%2F0_125_3428_2057%2F3428.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau and Barack Obama at the White House state dinner reception. The 
pair are seen as in step on key issues. Photograph: Olivier Douliery/EPA 
The government’s approval rating has persisted even as stagnation and rising 
inequality has given rise to Canada’s worst economic outlook in two decades, 
said Graves. “In some respects he’s sort of tapped into the same sentiment that 
drove Brexit and Trump but with a very different type of message – instead of 
take back control and close the borders and build walls, let’s talk aboutsunny 
ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/sunny-side-canada-justin-trudeaus-light-touch-revives-liberals>
, let’s talk about a more optimistic approach.”

The government has vowed to counter the slumping economy by pumping billions 
of dollars into infrastructure. Vowing to restore middle-class progress, 
they’ve raised taxes on the top 1% to help pay for a middle-class tax cut, as 
well as handed out a means tested universal child benefit.

It’s an approach that will have to start delivering growth and shared 
prosperity soon, said Graves, or risk jeopardising the government’s 
unprecedented popularity.

He likened it to the other challenges facing the government as they move into 
their second year, from democratic renewal to climate change.

“These are really daunting challenges. So yeah, ‘we’re consulting’ will work 
for a while – but at some point you’ve really got to come up with some very 
concrete and solid answers about how to deal with those tough problems.”
 