
Justin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> will be 
questioned by Canada’s ethics watchdog over reports of political fundraisers 
that allegedly offered privileged access to the prime minister and his cabinet 
ministers for a price.


The development marks the first time in a decade that the ethics commissioner 
has questioned a sitting prime minister and is a turning point for Trudeauwho 
swept to a majority government last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-set-to-become-pm-as-liberals-sweep-board-in-canada-election>
 on broad promises to run a transparent administration that would abide by the 
highest standards of ethics.

The scandal began brewing in October, after a series of media reports 
documented Liberal party fundraisers 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/trudeau-defends-cash-for-access-fundraising/article32523956/>
 being held in the homes of wealthy Canadians and which offered access to 
members of Trudeau’s government for up to C$1,500 ($1,100) a ticket.

Justin Trudeau: 'Globalisation isn't working for ordinary people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump>
The reports raised questions of whether the government was opening itself up 
to behind-the-scenes lobbying, such as areport by the Globe and Mail that 
quoted a British Columbia multimillionaire 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/trudeau-discussed-chinese-investments-at-fundraiser-host-says/article33200126/>
 who said he had urged the prime minister to allow Chinese investment in senior 
care and real estate development just as the government was reviewing a bid by 
a China-based company to purchase a majority stake in one of British Columbia’s 
largest chains of retirement homes.

The allegations, which have left Trudeau and his government fending off daily 
accusations of wrongdoing, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/justin-trudeau-under-pressure-amid-cash-for-access-fundraising-claims>
 triggered complaints to the ethics commissioner from the opposition 
Conservatives and the New Democratic party.

Responding to the complaint from the Conservatives, Mary Dawson, Canada’s 
ethics commissioner said in a letter on Thursday that while there is no 
evidence to date to suggest that Trudeau violated the country’s conflict of 
interest act, she would query Trudeau over his involvement with the fundraising 
events. A copy of the letter was provided to the Guardian.

Addressed to interim Conservative leader, Rona Ambrose, the letter noted 
Dawson’s unease over the issue. “While the information provided in support of 
the allegations is not sufficient to cause me to initiate an examination under 
the act at this time, your letter and media articles leave me with concerns in 
relation to Mr Trudeau’s interactions with individuals involved with the canola 
export agreement, Wealth One Bank and Anbang Insurance Group,” Dawson wrote.

No timeline was given as to when she would question Trudeau. A spokesperson 
for the ethics commissioner confirmed that Dawson is looking into the matter 
and noted that it is the usual practice of the commissioner to follow up with 
questioning when the office receives a letter containing allegations.

Based on the answers provided by the prime minister, the ethics commissioner 
will then determine whether a full-scale investigation should be launched.

In late October, Canada’s lobbying commissioner announced it would launch an 
investigation into the fundraisers in order 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/lobbying-watchdog-investigates-liberal-fundraisers/article32544638/>
 to determine whether any of the government rules around lobbying had been 
breached.

The allegations of trading cash for access have come as a blow to Trudeau, as 
they appear to contradict accountability rules issued by the prime minister 
after his government came into power last year. The rules, which aim to go one 
step further than the fundraising rules that ban corporate and union donations 
and limit individual donations to a maximum of C$1,500 annually, state “there 
should be no preferential access to government, or appearances of preferential 
access, accorded to individuals or organisations because they have made 
financial contributions to politicians and political parties”.

Speaking to reporters on Thursday, Trudeau said he would work with the ethics 
commissioner to answer any questions she may have. “We have very strict rules 
on fundraising at the federal level and no one is suggesting that we are not 
following those rules. And that’s something that is important for Canadians to 
remember,” he said. “Our commitment is to show the highest level of ethical 
standards, and that’s exactly what we’re doing.”

Earlier this week, Trudeau acknowledged that government business is discussed 
at the fundraisers 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/trudeau-says-hes-lobbied-but-not-influenced-at-liberal-fundraisers/article33297922/>
 – contrary to what officials from the Liberal party had previously told 
reporters – but insisted that donors have no special sway when it comes to 
government policy.
 