
Canada’s new prime minister Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> has named a young and 
ethnically diverse cabinet, with a ministerial team that for the first time in 
the country’s history is equally balanced between men and women.

The ministers – 15 women and 15 men – are mostly aged under 50, in a team 
marking both a generational change and a commitment to reflecting Canada’s 
diversity.

“It’s important to be here before you today to present to Canada a cabinet 
that looks like Canada,” Trudeau, 43, told reporters on Wednesday soon after he 
was officially sworn-in as the country’s 23rd prime minister – the
second-youngest in its history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/justin-trudeau-sworn-in-canada-prime-minister>
.


Asked to explain his gender parity promise, he answered: “Because it’s 2015.”


An astronaut, a ‘badass’ colonel – and women: inside Canada's new cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/05/canada-diverse-cabinet-includes-astronaut-badass-colonel>
Many of the incoming female ministers have been given key roles, including 
former journalist Chrystia Freeland – now in charge of international trade – 
and Maryam Monsef, who fled Afghanistan as a refugee 20 years ago and will 
oversee the democratic reform portfolio.


Trudeau’s cabinet also includes two aboriginal members of parliament and three 
Sikh politicians.


But the prime minister also included some of the Liberal party’s old guard, 
putting former party leader Stéphane Dion in foreign affairs and giving one of 
his closest advisers, MP Dominic LeBlanc, the role of government leader in the 
House of Commons.


Trudeau is the son of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, one of Canada’s most 
recognizable and longest serving prime ministers. But he said he wasn’t 
reflecting on his father’s legacy during Wednesday’s swearing-in.


“My thoughts today – sorry Dad – aren’t mostly on him, they’re very much on my 
own kids and the kids across this country that we are going to work very, very 
hard for to ensure they have a better future,” he said.


An MP since 2008, Trudeau led the centrist Liberals to a resounding victory in 
October’s federal election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-set-to-become-pm-as-liberals-sweep-board-in-canada-election>
, replacing Stephen Harper’s Conservatives, who held power for nine years.


The mandate gives him the opportunity to undo some of the former prime 
minister’s record, including amending sections of controversial anti-terror 
legislation andpulling Canadian forces out of the US-led coalition against 
Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/21/canada-end-airstrikes-syria-iraq-new-prime-minister-trudeau>
.


In a dig at his predecessor, Trudeau promised cabinet members would have 
significant independence with their files.


“Government by cabinet is back,” he said. 


Harper was known for centralizing power around the prime minister’s office 
during his tenure and dominating the policy decisions being implemented by his 
own ministers.


Trudeau had repeatedly promised his government would be more open and 
transparent than the previous one.


That promise extended to Wednesday’s swearing-in, as hundreds of people took 
up the Liberals’ open invitation to watch the ceremony on large screens set up 
on the grounds of Rideau Hall.


Eschewing the customary black cars that carry soon-to-be ministers to the 
doors of the official residence of Canada’s governor-general, Trudeau and his 
family and the new cabinet arrived on the grounds in a bus.











Trudeau later greeted the crowds and took selfies with fans lining the long 
driveway to the entrance of the governor general’s official residence.


During the ceremony, cheers from the crowd came in support of some of his 
cabinet picks, including for new justice minister Jody Wilson Raybould, a 
former Crown prosecutor and First Nations leader from British Columbia.


The portfolios of a number of newly appointed cabinet ministers will demand 
immediate attention as the Liberals push to quickly follow through on their 
campaign commitments.

Immigration minister John McCallum will oversee the Liberal campaign promise 
to bring 25,000 Syrian refugees intoCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> by the end of this year.

Catherine McKenna, a lawyer by training, will join Trudeau in Paris at the end 
of the month for the COP 21 conference as the new minister of environment and 
climate change.

And indigenous affairs minister Carolyn Bennett, a longtime Liberal MP who has 
worked extensively on First Nations issues, will oversee the implementation of 
a national inquiry into the cases ofhundreds of missing and murdered indigenous 
women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/25/indigenous-women-murders-violence-canada>
.
 