
Donald Trump on Friday attempted to resolve an issue that is thought to have 
caused him significant damage with minority voters by admitting thatBarack Obama
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> was born in the US after 
years of promoting false claims that the US president was born in Kenya.


Trump finally admits Obama was born in the US – campaign live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/16/donald-trump-barack-obama-birther-movement-election-live>
But the Republican presidential candidate continued to falsely claim that his 
Democratic rivalHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> was behind the conspiracy 
theory.

Speaking in the presidential ballroom of his new luxury hotel in Washington, 
Trump boasted about his new establishment, trotted out over a half-dozen 
generals to fawn over him and then almost casually remarked that he now thinks 
the president was born in the US, before walking swiftly away in what bore more 
resemblance to a dog and pony show than a campaign event.

Trump finally said the words “President Barack Obama was born in the United 
States, period” afterfalsely blaming 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/05/05/fact-check-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-birther-movement-obama/83968036/>
 Hillary Clinton’s 2008 campaign for starting the rumor, an accusation thatthe 
Washington Post’s fact-checker called 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2016/05/06/donald-trumps-ridiculous-claim-that-hillary-clinton-started-the-birther-movement/?tid=a_inl>
 “ridiculous”.

Although Trump’s campaign released a statement on the topic last night, the 
Republican nominee had never publicly acknowledged that Obama was born in the 
US.

Trump had long fanned the flames of this conspiracy theory, known as 
“birtherism”. He spent much of spring 2011garnering media attention 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/03/us/politics/donald-trump-birther-obama.html?_r=0>
 by constantly claiming without any evidence that Obama might have born 
overseas. The allegations that Obama, who was born in Honolulu on 4 August 
1961, was born in Kenya have long been considered a racist dogwhistle.

Although his campaign said in the statement sent late night: “In 2011, Mr 
Trump was finally able to bring this ugly incident to its conclusion by 
successfully compelling President Obama to release his birth certificate,” 
Trump has repeatedly questioned the circumstances of Obama’s birth since then.

As recently as 2014, Trump suggested 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/trump-questioned-obama-birth-certificate-in-2014-despite-cam?utm_term=.csvXxGMzl#.yiQ0nqz5E>
 that Obama’s birth certificate was faked, and in 2013he even suggested 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/411247268763676673?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 that the late state health official who certified the birth certificate had 
been murdered. In an interview published on Thursday in the Washington Post, 
Trump hedged on the question, saying: “I’ll answer that question at the right 
time. I just don’t want to answer it yet.”

His answer on Friday was limited to only a few seconds at the end of 40-minute 
event, which was inaccurately billed as a press conference and then as Trump 
finally addressing the topic of Obama’s birthplace.

Instead, it was as CNN anchor Jake Tapper called it, a “rick roll”, 
analogizing it to the internet practice of sending a email promising one thing 
andreplacing it with a link <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ> to 
the 1987 Rick Astley music video for Never Going to Give You Up.

Trump started the event by praising his new hotel, stating: “I think when this 
hotel opens – one of the best hotels anywhere in the world … I really think 
this will be the best hotel in Washington.” He was followed by a parade of 
former generals and Medal of Honor recipients who repeatedly lauded Trump in 
glowing terms, all aired live on cable television.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-barack-obama-birther-theory-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20short%20history%20of%20Donald%20Trump's%20'birther'%20conspiracy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-barack-obama-birther-theory-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20short%20history%20of%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20%27birther%27%20conspiracy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-barack-obama-birther-theory-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s birther comments: a short history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/16/donald-trump-barack-obama-birther-theory-video>
Only then did Trump address the matter at hand. “Now, not to mention her in 
the same breath, but Hillary Clinton and her campaign of 2008 started the 
birther controversy,” he said. “I finished it. I finished it. You know what I 
mean, President Barack Obama was born in the United States, period. Now we all 
want to get back to making America strong and great again. Thank you.”

Trump concluded his remarks as reporters, separated from the podium by six 
rows of Trump supporters attending as spectators, attempted to ask questions.

The spectacle happened as rival Clinton spoke only a few blocks away at the 
Black Women’s Agenda symposium, held at a downtown hotel.

Clinton said that “there is no erasing” Trump’s role in spreading the 
“birther” gospel. “For five years he has led the birther movement to 
delegitimize our first black president,” she said. “His campaign was founded on 
this outrageous lie.

“He is feeding into the worst impulses, the bigotry and bias, that lurks in 
our country. Barack Obama was born in America, plain and simple, andDonald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> owes him and the American 
people an apology.”

Pausing frequently for rounds of enthusiastic clapping, Clinton thanked the 
group for boosting her candidacy in the primary season and said a strong 
turnout by African American women could tip the election in her favor.

“In many ways, this profound choice is up to the women in this room,” she said.

“African American women turned out to vote more than any other group of 
Americans in 2012. This year, once again, you have your hands on the wheel of 
history and you can write the next chapter of the American story.”

Her campaign manager, Robby Mook, said in a statement: “Trump’s actions today 
were disgraceful. After five years of pushing a racist conspiracy theory into 
the mainstream, it was appalling to watch Trump appoint himself the judge of 
whether the President of the United States is American.

“This sickening display shows more than ever why Donald Trump is totally unfit 
be president.”

When asked about Trump’s views on his birthplace earlier in the day, Obama 
told reporters: “I’m shocked that a question like that has come up at a time 
when we have so many other things to do.”

He added: “Well, I’m not that shocked actually. It’s fairly typical. We got 
other things to attend to. I was pretty confident about where I was born. I 
think most people were as well. My hope would be the presidential election 
reflects more serious issues than that.”
 