
American investors seem naively trusting of President-elect Trump’s economic 
plans. On one hand, they say those wild campaign pledges to slap stiff tariffs 
on Chinese and Mexican imports in pursuit of the most protectionist US trade 
policy since the 1930s should not be taken too literally. On the other, they 
conclude that a Trump presidency definitely means heavy investment in 
infrastructure, which will be excellent news for all those suppliers of raw 
materials and equipment needed to upgrade roads, bridges, schools, tunnels, 
electricity networks and so on.

Both thoughts are understandable, of course. Even Trump has never been firm on 
the idea of 45% tariffs on China. It was a threat “if they don’t behave,” he 
said during one debate, “it doesn’t have to be 45%, it could be less”. Plenty 
of scope there to water down the policy.

Yet the pledge to spend $1tn on new infrastructure is being taken as if it is 
firm, irreversible and a gift from Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/corporate-winners-donald-trump-election-private-prisons-pharma>
. Look at the share prices of some London-listed companies that could, 
potentially, benefit. BHP Billiton, the world’s largest miner, is up 15% this 
week. So is Ashtead, which rents out mechanical equipment in the US.

The optimism looks to be a case of too much, too soon. Remember, Trump has not 
pledged to splurge $1tn of pure federal money. Such a policy would indeed be a 
financial gift for many sectors. But any president, even one whose party 
controls both houses of Congress, would struggle to get such a programme of 
massive expansion approved by the fiscal hawks.

It seems far more likely that Trump’s $1tn figure refers to money he hopes 
other people will provide, albeit encouraged by tax breaks and partnerships. It 
all counts in the end, of course, but marshalling public-private partnerships 
on such a grand scale is time-consuming work and the US market is 
underdeveloped compared to Europe. Nor, as Trump will find, is private capital 
inclined to shoulder many risks before opening its wallet: it tends to demand 
rock-solid, inflation-proof returns, as the UK as learned to its cost.

For now, investors seem happy to celebrate the direction of travel. Fair 
enough, there seems to be a broad consensus in the US that an infrastructure 
upgrade is required. But it’s the small print that will matter. Investors would 
be well advised to believe the $1tn figure only when they know what it is.

Why drugmakers need to take a chill pill 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc425e131910daacd8b6ed38f6fd2853048108df4%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20%241tn%20pledge%20sounds%20impressive%20but%20beware%20the%20small%20print&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20%241tn%20pledge%20sounds%20impressive%20but%20beware%20the%20small%20print&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc425e131910daacd8b6ed38f6fd2853048108df4%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Many healthcare stocks have risen since Trump’s victory. Photograph: Alamy 
In similar vein, investors in healthcare stocks should curb their enthusiasm. 
Hillary Clinton, who had pledged to cap drug prices, will not be entering the 
White House but it’s hard to know what Trump’s changes imply. Pascal Soriot, 
chief executive of AstraZeneca,has the right idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/astrazeneca-us-healthcare-trump-pascal-soriot-affordable-care-act>
. While it is safe to assume that Obamacare will be scrapped or heavily 
modified, “nobody knows what the new landscape will look like”.

AstraZeneca’s shareholders know the feeling: Soriot keeps telling them that 
“an inflection point” is arriving, meaning a return to sales growth. In the 
meantime, they must live with the reality of competition from generic 
manufacturers to the group’s cholesterol pill, Crestor. Thursday’s figures 
revealed the generic effect is every bit as severe as feared.

ITV’s slide: structural upheaval or a hiccup?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2016ca2656328b925a103c186c253e23ae3138%2F0_380_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20%241tn%20pledge%20sounds%20impressive%20but%20beware%20the%20small%20print&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20%241tn%20pledge%20sounds%20impressive%20but%20beware%20the%20small%20print&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-1-trillion-infrastructure-pledge-american-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2016ca2656328b925a103c186c253e23ae3138%2F0_380_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
 The outlook for the ad market continues to drive ITV’s share price. 
Photograph: Getty 
In some corners of the media world, such as newspapers, 20% annual declines in 
advertising revenues – at least in print – have become the norm in the digital 
age. Commercial television has suffered nothing similar but here comes a figure 
to make you wonder: ITVexpects its advertising revenues to fall 7% in the final 
quarter of this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/itv-revenues-advertisers-fourth-quarter>
. For 2016 as a whole, that implies a slip of 3%, the first annual decline 
since 2009.

The start of structural upheaval or just a hiccup? For the time being, ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> deserves the benefit of the doubt. 
If one takes a grand sweep, television still claims about 26% of all 
advertising spending in the UK, roughly the same as a decade ago.

ITV’s chief executive, Adam Crozier, can also say, fairly, that the company 
these days is less of a hostage to the UK advertising market. ITV Studios, the 
production business, sells programmes such as Victoria and Poldark around the 
world. That is one reason why full-year earnings for 2016 will roughly match 
last year’s.

Yet the outlook for the ad market still drives the share price, which is down 
by a third since the EU referendum was called in February. If ad buyers’ 
confidence returns in the new year, long-term shareholders have nothing to 
worry about. But ITV is at a crucial juncture. It has showered investors with 
dividends, including specials, for the past three years. Judge Crozier’s true 
level of confidence only when he reveals next year whether he thinks he can 
sustain the generosity.
 