
Large majorities of both Republicans and Democrats support expanded background 
checks on private gun sales, including sales at gun shows,Donald Trump boasts 
on his campaign website 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/>. 

It’s an odd statistic to find as part of Trump’s second amendment policy 
platform 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/?/positions/second-amendment-rights>
, since Trump himself opposes expanded background checks on gun sales.

It’s not clear why Trump’s website would tout the broad bipartisan support for 
a policy he and the National Rifle Association both oppose.

But the inclusion of a pro-gun control talking point in Trump’s policy 
platform once again raises the question of how well a candidate whoonce 
supported an assault weapon ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-endorses-donald-trump-convention>
 –and has fluctuated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check> on 
almost all of his major policy positions – will deliver on his promised defense 
of gun rights if he is elected.

On his website, Trump’s “Constitution and Second Amendment” platform notes, 
regarding background checks, that “we need to fix the system we have and make 
it work as intended. What we don’t need to do is expand a broken system.”

Then, a little further down the same page, Trump’s platform cites and links to 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/01/05/5-facts-about-guns-in-the-united-states/>
 Pew Research survey results that found that “85% of the public – including 
large majorities of both Republicans (79%) and Democrats (88%) – favored making 
private gun sales and sales at gun shows subject to background checks. There 
was also bipartisan support for laws to prevent people with mental illness from 
purchasing guns.”

These statistics would seem like a better fit for the policy platform  
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/issues/gun-violence-prevention/>of his 
opponent, Hillary Clinton, who actuallysupports 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/issues/gun-violence-prevention/> expanding 
federal background check laws to cover private gun sales, includingprivate 
sales at gun shows and online 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/feed/33636-reasons-we-need-act-gun-violence/>.

A campaign spokeswoman did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

The NRA, which just launched a new $6.5m pro-Trump television ad campaign 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20161005/nras-largest-trump-ad-buy-featuring-armed-citizen-kristi-mcmains>
, hasrepeatedly pushed back 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/feb/18/nra-says-no-way-members-back-limits/>
 against survey results that suggest that even a majority of self-described NRA 
members favor expanded background checks. Trump doubled down to his opposition 
to expanded background checks in anofficial NRA Q&A last month 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20160929/trump-the-official-nra-qa>.
Gun rights 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=eeb74528-5dfb-4870-ad1a-ddb251f76bcb>
A new Pew Research Center survey conducted in August found that 75%of Trump 
supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/guns-background-checks-trump-supporters>
 said they favor background checks on private gun sales and sales at gun shows, 
as did 90% of Clinton supporters.

The NRA has invested heavily in supporting Trump’s campaign, an endorsement 
Trump has welcomed. The candidate has been enthusiastic in his praise for the 
NRA’s leaders, and has repeated the claim that Hillary will “abolish” or 
“virtually abolish” the second amendment. Trump has pledged to appoint a 
supreme court justice who will uphold the court’s pro-gun-rights record, and 
has endorsed national concealed carry permit reciprocity, a priority for gun 
rights advocates. He now says he opposes an assault weapon ban. (“The 
government has no business dictating what types of firearms good, honest people 
are allowed to own,” his policy platform now reads.)

“I will not let you down,” he promised NRA members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-endorses-donald-trump-convention>
 in May. “Remember that, I will not let you down.”

At times, though, Trump’s rhetoric has seemed to veer from the NRA party line. 
After the mass shooting at Pulse Nightclub in Orlando, Trump suggested ifmore 
people 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/284073-trump-orlando-clubgoers-should-not-have-had-guns>
 in the nightclub had been armed, “you wouldn’t have had the same kind of a 
tragedy”.

“No one thinks that people should go into a nightclub drinking and carrying 
firearms. That defies common sense. It also defies the law,” the NRA’s chief 
lobbyist, Chris Cox, said in an interview after Trump’s comments. Trumplater 
tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/744838252369043456?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “When I said that if, within the Orlando club, you had some people with guns, 
I was obviously talking about additional guards or employees.”

Trump also suggested in the first presidential debate, as he did after 
Orlando, that he wanted to block people on government no-fly lists and watch 
lists from buying guns, a comment thatleft it unclear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/trump-debate-transcript-issues-facts>
 whether he might agree more with Hillary Clinton’s position on the issue than 
with the NRA. Cox said after Orlando that any apparent tension between Trump’s 
views and the NRA’s position was “a media-created diversion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/trump-debate-transcript-issues-facts>
”.

In August, even gun rights advocates criticized Trump’s insinuations of 
violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/10/trump-assassination-remark-clinton-second-amendment>
 when he said, in an offhand remark during a speech, that only “second 
amendment people” might be able to do something to stop Hillary Clinton from 
appointing supreme court justices if she were elected.

At the NRA’s annual meeting this May, some members were enthusiastic Trump 
supporters. Others described Trump as unprincipled and untrustworthy, with some 
staunch gun rights advocatesconcerned about whether he would follow through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/20/nra-donald-trump-gun-record-skepticism>
 on his promises to protect gun rights if elected.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20firearm-loving%20Maine%20could%20defeat%20the%20gun%20lobby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20firearm-loving%20Maine%20could%20defeat%20the%20gun%20lobby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra&media=>
How firearm-loving Maine could defeat the gun lobby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/05/gun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra>
In a Q&A recently published on the NRA’s website 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20160929/trump-the-official-nra-qa>, Cox asks 
Trump: “First, do you support so-called ‘universal’ background checks?”

“There can never be a so-called ‘universal’ background check, because 
criminals obviously ignore gun laws. That’s what makes them criminals,” Trump 
is quoted as responding.

Trump is also quoted as saying that “background checks haven’t stopped the 
mass shooters we’ve seen.”

Both the NRA and gun control advocates have been pushing to have the two 
candidates address gun control at Monday’s second presidential debate in St 
Louis.

Gun control advocates have been pushing 
<https://twitter.com/riromtz/status/781589292372070404> for a question on 
expanded background checks, asking the candidates: “Would you support requiring 
criminal background checks for all gun sales?”

The NRA has been encouraging its supporters 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20160930/help-us-get-the-second-amendment-in-the-presidential-debate>
 to push for the question: “How will you ensure the second amendment is 
protected?”
 