
In a deposition released on Friday afternoon, Donald Trump acknowledged that 
his infamous statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
 that Mexico was deliberately sending rapists into the United States was 
planned in advance.

In testifying in June in an ongoing court case, prompted when restaurateur 
Geoffrey Zakarian pulled out of a lease in Trump’s Washington hotel after the 
presidential candidate’s remarks caused a national furor, Trump insisted his 
comments were not ad-libbed. However, he made clear that they weren’t scripted 
and said that he did not anticipate any damage to his brand.

In the aftermath of the comments, which came when Trump announced his 
candidacy on 16 June 2015, the real estate developer saw a number of former 
business partners pull out of commercial enterprises with himincluding Macy’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/01/macys-fires-donald-trump-mexico>
 andUnivision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/univision-donald-trump-miss-universe-mexican-immigrants>
. In addition to Zakarian, chef José Andrés also pulled out of a planned 
restaurant project in the same hotel.

The multi-hour deposition was released by a court order on Friday after a 
number of organizations,led by Buzzfeed 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/danielwagner/trump-video-depositions?utm_term=.hgj07DgZE#.bwnApgKbm>
, sued to have the video unsealed. Trump insisted that his comments should not 
be controversial because “I’ve been making this statement for many years. This 
is not just new.” He also insisted that he thought his candidacy would draw 
more Hispanic customers than otherwise, insisting: “I think you will get more 
business. I think you’ll get more business,” although he acknowledged “it’s 
always possible” that some might not patronize his hotel as a result.

The Washington hotel project in the Old Post Office building has long loomed 
over the Trump campaign. The Republican nominee has repeatedly bragged about 
the building and his work in redeveloping it. Trump even touted it during 
Monday’s presidential debate. He has held multiple campaign events there, 
including his statement earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/trump-obama-birth-certificate-clinton>
 in which he acknowledged that Barack Obama was born in the United States after 
years of spreading a conspiracy theory to the contrary.
 