
Some Oscar nominations are set in stone before the cameras start rolling. Cast 
an actor at the sweet spot in his career as a suitably illustrious historical 
figure in a digestible Hollywood biopic and it’s awfully hard to escape the 
Academy’s notice. As the eponymous, McCarthy-blacklisted screenwriter inTrumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/trumbo> (eOne, 15), Bryan Cranston seems 
engaged in a cheeky experiment: how much overbaked ham can he serve in a
still-successful 
<http://oscar.go.com/nominees/actor-in-a-leading-role/bryan-cranston> Oscar 
bid? A lot, it turns out. His braying, smirking turn as the cigar-chomping 
showbiz rebel takes a thoroughly literal approach to “larger-than-life” 
characterisation. It is not good acting by a long shot, but it is less dull 
than the stuffy, overdressed film surrounding him, which professes cynicism at 
the Tinseltown machine, but is mostly in wide-eyed thrall to high-end movie 
stars giving high-pitched performances in high‑style clothes.

Another film dewily in love with its megawatt stars? By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/by-the-sea> (Universal, 15). The difference 
here is that one of them is the director: a certain Angelina Jolie, joined on 
screen by husband, Brad Pitt (but, critically, none of their brood), as an 
exquisitely miserable couple holed up in a plush seaside hotel in 1970s France. 
He wrestles with writer’s block, she stares moodily into mirrors; now and then 
they convene for a round of sullen glaring.

The arrival of a young, sexually compelling couple in the room next door 
raises the temperature a degree or two before the thuddingly obvious backstory 
kicks in. Antonioni it ain’t, but credit Jolie for brazenly committing to the 
vanities of her vanity project: it’s a film coldly fascinated by its own creamy 
beauty and the luscious lassitude of its stars in glam-glum repose proves 
weirdly transfixing.

Hypnotic to more stimulating effect is Evolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/08/evolution-review-lucile-hadzihalilovic-innocence-roxane-durant>
 (Metrodome, 15), French renegade Lucile Hadžihalilović’s worth-the-wait 
follow-up to 2004’ssublimely disquieting Innocence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/sep/30/1>. Her latest follows that 
film’s cross-breeding of fairytale, body horror and gender theory, cultivating 
clinically lyrical atmospherics around its tale of a young boy in an eerie 
seaside village, populated entirely by male children and female minders, who 
works out what’s behind the community’s strange demographic balance. What could 
have been the stuff of B-movie sci-fi pulp is given a very different 
tonal slant by Hadžihalilović’s gorgeously nightmarish imagery and symbolism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7241f3d6660f218bf536a6967657661a749749%2F79_0_877_526%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trumbo%3B%20By%20the%20Sea%3B%20Evolution%3B%20The%20Forest%3B%20Truman%3B%20That%20Cold%20Day%20in%20the%20Park%3B%20The%20Exquisite%20Corpus%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trumbo%3B%20By%20the%20Sea%3B%20Evolution%3B%20The%20Forest%3B%20Truman%3B%20That%20Cold%20Day%20in%20the%20Park%3B%20The%20Exquisite%20Corpus%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7241f3d6660f218bf536a6967657661a749749%2F79_0_877_526%2F877.jpg>
 A scene from Lucile Hadžihalilović’s hypnotic drama Evolution. 
What goes on underwater in Evolution is certainly more unnerving than anything 
happening in The Forest (Icon, 15), a low-energy chiller starring Game of 
Thrones’ Natalie Dormer as a Yank seeking her twin sister in Japan’s Aokigahara 
wood, a notorious suicide spot. It’s the same location thatdid for Gus Van Sant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/16/cannes-uncovered-day-4> 
in last year’s dire, still-unreleasedSea of Trees, albeit with more insidious 
exoticised spirits drifting about this time, jumping out at all the expected 
intervals.

There are few surprises in the construction of Truman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/05/truman-review-last-goodbye-to-a-doted-on-dog>
 (StudioCanal, 15), Spanish director Cesc Gay’s amiably melancholic buddy 
movie, in which a cancer patient on the brink of death gradually bids adieu to 
the world – and his beloved bull mastiff – with the help of his visiting best 
friend. It’s the careworn performances of Javier Cámara and Ricardo Darín, 
however, that sell you on this dogeared, tear-stained premise anyway. Gay’s 
film is pure sucrose beside the bittersweet humanism ofFlowers, Will Sharpe’s 
rare black orchid of a sitcom that defies all expectations of the usual 
dysfunctional family wackery: still streaming at Channel 4, it’s enough of a 
keeper to merit box-set investment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520052b62bd1c0170aa1861b404ef723ec1244a8%2F0_146_2394_1436%2F2394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trumbo%3B%20By%20the%20Sea%3B%20Evolution%3B%20The%20Forest%3B%20Truman%3B%20That%20Cold%20Day%20in%20the%20Park%3B%20The%20Exquisite%20Corpus%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trumbo%3B%20By%20the%20Sea%3B%20Evolution%3B%20The%20Forest%3B%20Truman%3B%20That%20Cold%20Day%20in%20the%20Park%3B%20The%20Exquisite%20Corpus%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftrumbo-by-the-sea-evolution-the-forest-truman-that-cold-day-in-the-park-the-exquisite-corpus-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520052b62bd1c0170aa1861b404ef723ec1244a8%2F0_146_2394_1436%2F2394.jpg>
 ‘Head-scrambling’: Peter Tscherkassky’s The Exquisite Corpus. 
Robert Altman’s 1969 curiosity That Cold Day in the Park (Eureka, 15), widely 
dismissed upon release, has been given a rehabilitating polish by the Masters 
of Cinema team: there’s renewed glister to the broken edges of this aloof study 
in abnormal psychology, many of them in Sandy Dennis’s fascinating performance 
as a lonely young woman seeking companionship in an unresponsive teen. The 
Criterion Collection, meanwhile, takes a safer punt onHere Comes Mr Jordan 
(Sony, 15), 1941’s winsome reincarnation romcom (remade by Warren Beatty as
Heaven Can Wait <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147646/heaven-can-wait>
) that has perhaps lost some of its Great American Standard status in recent 
decades. The new restoration doesn’t exactly invite renewed perspective – the 
film breezes along as blithely as it ever did – but it’s welcome all the same.

Finally, mubi.com <https://mubi.com/films/the-exquisite-corpus>’s ongoing 
partnership with the Cannes festival’s Directors’ Fortnight programme yields 
its wildest revelation yet in Austrian director Peter Tscherkassky’s 
head-scrambling shortThe Exquisite Corpus 
<https://mubi.com/films/the-exquisite-corpus>. The 19-minute found-footage 
fantasia splices together scenes from assorted vintage erotica, soft porn and 
advertisements, treated and distorted to form one consistent daydream of desire 
and sensual discovery. It’s the kind of miniature marvel for which streaming 
platforms are ideal: there would be little way of shoehorning Tscherkassky’s 
film into commercial cinema screenings, but for a short time, it’ll stun those 
who stumble upon it.
 