
As Russian diplomats expelled by Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> left the US on Sunday, 
Donald Trump’s incoming White House spokesman attempted to cast as a diplomatic 
triumph the president-elect’s controversial response to intelligence community 
reports that Moscow sought to influence the presidential election.

US-Russia tensions rise as malware found at Vermont electric utility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/31/russia-hacking-malware-vermont-electric-obama>
“That’s actually good for our country,” Sean Spicer told ABC’s This Week 
<https://twitter.com/ThisWeekABC/status/815561261152776192>, referring to 
Russian president Vladimir Putin’s decision not to pursue immediate retaliation.

“So everyone wants to talk about the tweets that he sends, but I want to focus 
on the action that he’s getting. Donald Trump’s not president yet and he’s 
getting action, successes and wins both abroad and here at home.”

Trump’s decision to praise Putin, question intelligence findings and 
repeatedly say the US should “move on” places the president-elect at odds not 
just with the current White House, but with his own party in Congress.

On Thursday, Obama ordered the expulsion of 35 Russian diplomatic personnel 
and the closure ofestates in Maryland and New York used by embassy staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/georgian-mansions-moscow-dachas-and-the-souring-of-us-russian-relations>
. The expelled personnel left Washington on Sunday, Reuters reported, citing a 
Russian news agency report.

“The plane took off, everyone has left,” Reuters quoted the embassy’s press 
service as saying, from a report in RIA.

On Friday, contrary to the view of his foreign ministry, Putin declined to 
respond to Obama’s move, signalling that he would rather wait to gauge 
relations with the Trump administration. As is his wont, and to familiar 
uproar, Trumpexpressed his approval on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/814919370711461890>. 

“Great move on delay (by V. Putin),” he wrote. “I always knew he was very 
smart!”

On Sunday, Spicer, formerly chief strategist and communications director of 
the Republican National Committee, said Obama’s measures were unlike any “in 
modern history for any action” and could prove too far-reaching.

“I think one of the questions that we have is, why the magnitude of this?” he 
said. “I mean you look at 35 people being expelled, two sites being closed 
down, the question is, is that response in proportion to the actions taken?”

Spicer and Trump’s comments stand in sharp contrast to views held by 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> in Congress.

Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell said the White House had “not yet 
dissuaded [Russia] from attempting to breach our cybersecurity systems, or 
harass our diplomats in Moscow”.

House speaker Paul Ryan called the sanctions “overdue” and “an appropriate way 
to end eight years of failed policy with Russia”.

Leading Republicans have joined calls for a bipartisan congressional 
investigation. Arizona senator John McCain scheduled a hearing on foreign cyber 
threats for 5 January, and called senior intelligence officials to testify.

On Sunday, speaking in Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/john-mccain-russia-vladimir-putin-ukraine-georgia>
, McCain said: “We will strongly urge our colleagues toward more meaningful and 
stronger sanctions against Russia because of their attack on the United States 
of America.”

Spicer also expressed concern that Obama had acted to Trump’s political 
disadvantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/obama-russia-sanctions-donald-trump-republicans>
 and pointed to what he said was a lack of public response toChina’s hacking of 
the federal government’s network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/10/chinese-national-security-officials-hack>
 in 2015, breaches that exposed sensitive information belonging to more than 
22m federal employees and contractors.

“A White House statement wasn’t even issued,” Spicer said. “No action publicly 
was taken. Nothing, nothing was taken.”

He added: “So there is a question about whether there’s a political 
retribution here versus a diplomatic response.”

In his own remarks to reporters at his Mar-a-Lago estate on Saturday night, 
Trump again expressed doubt over the US intelligence consensus regarding 
Russian breaches of Democratic party infrastructure.

“I just want them to be sure, because it’s a pretty serious charge,” he said. 
“If you look at the weapons of mass destruction” – a reference to justification 
for the invasion of Iraq under George W Bush in 2003 – “that was a disaster, 
and they were wrong.”

Trump, who has long advocated for warmer relations with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, pressed his view that the US does 
not know for sure who was behind the cyber-attacks, which he has suggested 
could have been carried out by China, another state or “someone sitting on 
their bed weighing 400lbs”.

Asked on Saturday about the reported discovery that Moscow could be behind 
malware found on a laptop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/31/russia-hacking-malware-vermont-electric-obama>
 owned by a Vermont electricity utility, Trump questioned the premise.

“It could be somebody else. And I also know things that other people don’t 
know so we cannot be sure,” Trump said, adding that more would be revealed on 
“on Tuesday or Wednesday”.

The president-elect is set to meet intelligence officials this week, a meeting 
to which he agreed after the announcement of the Obama sanctions, despite 
repeating his wish for the American people to “move on” from the issue.

Donald Trump is technology's befuddled (but dangerous) grandfather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-technology-computers-cyber-hacks-surveillance>
Echoing his vague and much-discussed remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-technology-computers-cyber-hacks-surveillance>
 earlier this week about security in the “age of computer”, he said his 
10-year-old could “do anything with a computer”, advocated the use of couriers 
to transfer information, and said: “I know a lot about hacking. And hacking is 
a very hard thing to prove.”

Responding to Trump’s comments, Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House of 
Representatives’ intelligence committee, told ABC the president-elect stood 
alone in questioning the conclusions of US intelligence agencies.

“This is the overwhelming judgment of the intelligence community and, frankly, 
all of the members of the intelligence committees in Congress, Democrats and 
Republicans,” Schiff said.

“None of us have any question about this. The only one who does, apparently, is
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”

Schiff warned that Trump would face bipartisan resistance if he tried to lift 
the Obama sanctions.

“The reaction is going to be even more vigorous, I’m convinced, in favor of 
stronger sanctions against Russia,” Schiff said.

“You’re going to see Democrats and Republicans, like McCain and [South 
Carolina senator Lindsey] Graham and others, come together with a strong 
[congressional] sanctions package because frankly even though what the 
administration did was more than symbolic – it was very meaningful – it is not 
enough to deter Russia.”


 