
Donald Trump once described Mexico’s wealthiest man as the string-pulling 
manipulator who orchestrateda media conspiracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/trump-groping-accusations-new-york-times-rally>
 to defeat his election campaign.

Carlos Slim has previously scrapped a TV deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/30/donald-trump-mexico-tv-carlos-slim-televisa>
 with Trump on the grounds that he was a racist.

But the two billionaires appear to have set aside those differences, for now 
at least, sitting down to a meal at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida on 
Saturday.

Carlos Slim: biography of Mexico's richest man penetrates 'cloak of silence'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/carlos-slim-biography-diego-enrique-osorno-interviews>
Contents of the dinner or discussion were not disclosed, though Trump called 
the encounter “a lovely dinner with a wonderful man” in a statement to the 
Washington Post, which broke news of the meeting.

The president-elect’s statement sounded a softer note on the subject of Slim, 
who Trump attacked over his ownership stake in the New York Times and 
friendship with Bill Clinton, whose foundation Slim has donated to over the 
years.

“The New York Times strings are being pulled by Mexico’s Carlos Slim, a 
billionaire who benefits from Nafta and supports Hillary Clinton’s open border 
policies,” Trump alleged in an 23 October campaign statement.

Slim, the son of Lebanese immigrants, made his early money by investing in 
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> at a time others were 
abandoning the country. His net worth dwarfs that of the property 
developer-turned-president elect.

He won control of the Telmex monopoly in the early 1990s and turned it into 
what was for a time the world’s largest private fortune. Slim has attacked 
Trump’s talk of ripping up Nafta, which threatens to undo two decades of 
increased economic integration with the United States.

The Washington Post reported Trump’s ex-campaign manager Cory Lewandowski 
travelled to Mexico City to arranged the meeting, which was to touch on topics 
such as trade and the economy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
News of the encounter came as a surprise, as Trump had described Mexicans as 
“rapists” and promised to build a border wall and deport millions of migrants. 
He also appears to have had an unhappy history in his attempts at doing 
business south of the border.

“He doesn’t seem to have any good Mexican buddies,” said Federico Estévez, 
political science professor at the Autonomous Technological Institute of 
Mexico. “The only Mexicans he knows he hates – like Slim.”

Slim has not spoken on the Trump meeting, but had softened his tone since the 
election, telling a business forum, “If the United States grows 4%, increases 
infrastructure and lowers taxes, that is good.”

Other suspected self-interest from a man whose business empire is so expansive 
in Mexico, it’s joked that Mexicans can’t help but put money in Slim’s wallet 
as they go about their daily lives.

“As patriotic as Slim may be, he’s interested foremost in his business. So he 
could be meeting Trump to ensure that nothing happens to all his dealings in 
the US,” said Esteban Illades, editor of the Mexican magazine Nexos.

“Slim probably noticed that the Mexican government isn’t doing enough, so he’s 
taking diplomacy into his own hands.”

Mexico reels at nightmare vision of a Donald Trump White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mexico-trump-white-house-nafta-border-wall-remittances>
The Mexican peso has plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/mexico-peso-sinks-donald-trump-border-trade-policy>
 since Trump announced his presidential aspirations and forecasts have slashed 
2017 growth projections. The federal government and central bank, meanwhile, 
say they have plans to confront Trump, though few proposals have been 
announced. Many Mexicans seem to be betting that Trump will soften his 
positions before taking office.

“They’re still expecting him to smooth over the message … once he has to 
govern, he will act and think differently from when he was campaigning,” 
Estévez said.

“They firmly believe that piece of establishment nonsense, even though he has 
shown no evidence of it thus far.”

Past attempts at talking with Trump have proved problematic for Mexico’s 
president, Enrique Peña Nieto.

Peña Nieto invited Trump to the presidential palace in Mexico City in late 
August – an ill-fated meeting in which Mexicans complained their leader acted 
passively in the presence of a person they considered a bully and the biggest 
threat to the country since the authors of the Mexican-American war of the 
1840s.

“The [Peña Nieto] government has not known how to deal with Trump from the 
start,” said Javier Garza, a journalist and political analyst in the city of 
Torreón. “It’s not clear that Trump will soften his message on Mexico. What is 
clear is that Trump seems inclined to use businessmen instead of politicians or 
diplomats as his channels with Mexico.”
 