
The co-chair of Donald Trump’s New York state presidential campaign has denied 
that comments he made aboutMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> “being a male” who should 
be “let loose in the outback of Zimbabwe” to live “in a cave with Maxie, the 
gorilla” were racist.

'Let it be an arms race': Trump appears to double down on nuclear expansion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
Carl Paladino, a 70-year-old entrepreneur who ran for New York governor in 
2010, made the inflammatory comments toArtvoice, an alternative paper in Buffalo
 <http://artvoice.com/2016/12/23/want-2017-lot-different-opinions/#.WF1oUTYrLXR>
.

In response, Governor Andrew Cuomo condemned what he said were Paladino’s 
“racist, ugly, reprehensible remarks about the president and first lady”.

Paladino visited Trump Tower earlier this month, telling the Buffalo News 
<http://buffalonews.com/2016/12/07/paladino-meets-trump-nyc/> he spent an hour 
with the president-elect.

Among key figures he met were the vice-president-elect Mike Pence, chief of 
staff nominee Reince Priebus, senior counsel nominee Stephen Bannon, Trump’s 
son-in-law Jared Kushner and nominated national security adviser Michael Flynn.

“It was a wide-ranging conversation about all the people across the state who 
were on my team,” the newspaper reported Paladino as saying.

“We talked about New Yorkers who might have a role, how we might structure 
appointments and who would get input. I think I will have an ongoing ability to 
make recommendations.”

Artvoice included Paladino among a number of people asked what they wanted to 
see happen in 2017.


Rockettes' inauguration gig is reportedly causing turmoil within troupe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/rockettes-inauguration-performance-donald-trump>
“[Barack] Obama catches mad cow disease after being caught having relations 
with a Her[e]ford,” he said.

“He dies before his trial and is buried in a cow pasture next to [senior Obama 
adviser] Valerie Jarret[t], who died weeks prior, after being convicted of 
sedition and treason, when a Jihady [sic] cell mate mistook her for being a 
nice person and decapitated her.”

About Michelle Obama, he said: “I’d like her to return to being a male and let 
loose in the outback of Zimbabwe where she lives comfortably in a cave with 
Maxie, the gorilla.”

Cuomo said Paladino had a “long history of racist and incendiary comments” and 
most New Yorkers knew not to take him seriously, as “his erratic behavior 
defies any rational analysis and he has no credibility”. But, the governor 
added, “his words are still jarring”.

Amidst furious condemnation on social media and in the press, Paladino released
an open letter 
<https://s3.amazonaws.com/bncore/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Paladinos-response.pdf>
 in which he said his comments to Artvoice had “nothing to do with race”.


“That’s the typical stance of the press when they can’t otherwise defend the 
acts of the person being attacked,” he wrote, accusing the first lady of having 
hated America before her husband won office in 2008.

He also accused Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>
 of being “a yellow-belied coward who left thousands to die in Syria”.


Paladino confirmed to the Buffalo News 
<http://buffalonews.com/2016/12/23/carl-paladinos-harsh-2017-wish-list-causes-firestorm-social-media/>
 that he made the original comments. “Of course I did,” he said on Friday 
morning. “Tell them all to go fuck themselves.”

Trump’s latest tweet about nuclear weapons is both daft and dangerous | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons>
During the presidential campaign, Paladino described Trump supporters as 
people frustrated with government who “want the raccoons out of the basement”.


He later spoke of ridding the US of “the Washington elite monsters”. At a 
political rally in 2015, he spoke about “damn Asians” and other “foreigners” 
attending university in Buffalo.

This week, Paladino was criticized for introducing a resolution to mandate all 
Buffalo public schoolsdisplay a picture of Trump 
<http://buffalonews.com/2016/12/23/carl-paladinos-harsh-2017-wish-list-causes-firestorm-social-media/>
.
In his condemnation of Paladino’s remarks, Governor Cuomo said his latest 
outburst did not reflect “the sentiments or opinions of any real New Yorker”.

“He has embarrassed the good people of the state with his latest hate-filled 
rage,” Cuomo said.
 