
To mark the deadline for uni applications through the University and Colleges 
Admission System (Ucas),we asked you to re-write your personal statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/15/students-share-your-honest-uni-applications-with-us>
 without any of the usual blagging and bravado, and instead be completely 
honest.


We’ve had loads of revealing responses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications>
 so far, from the would-be law student who’sonly in it for the posh lunches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1884786>
, to the media studies student whojust wants an easy life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1883737>
.


We asked the admissions officer of Honest University to sift through your 
applications and pick out some star candidates for a place in September. Here 
are their (truthful) responses to your applications.

Examining English


Name: Suzanne Curley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1887673>

Personal statement: “I got through an A-level English exam without reading the 
book I was tested on... Surely I can do this in a university exam too?” 


Response: Dear Suzanne, I’m pleased to say that you can. You’ll have at least 
a novel a week to feast on at university, but you’ll soon realise that by 
reading the first chapter and the synopsis (try Wikipedia), you can blag your 
way through lectures and exams without too many problems. 


Students: share your honest uni applications with us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/15/students-share-your-honest-uni-applications-with-us>
Hiking horrors


Name: N 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1886815>
acbrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1886815>

Personal Statement: “I originally wrote that leading a two-day charity hike 
showed my teamworking skills and leadership. In reality, I spent most of it 
trying not to strangle, scream at, or break down crying in front of the other 
hikers and ended up hating them all so much that I’ve not spoken to them since.”


Response: Dear Nacbrie, your hiking experience is going to be more useful to 
you at university than you realise. Getting talked into things that sound fun 
at first but later turn out to be a terrible idea will be commonplace. And 
housesharing with students – which may seem like a fun novelty at first – will 
soon provide you with a whole new group of people that you hate and never want 
to speak to again.

Friend request


Name: Katie Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1885404>

Personal Statement: “I like reading... and I don’t get enough time to do it in 
my current job. Also, I live and work in a city I don’t like, and I’m lonely. 
Let me in, so I can read more and make friends! Please?” 

Response: Dear Katie, if you like reading, you’ve come to the right place. 
Plus, by the time you leave university you’ll never have to worry about finding 
time to read, because you’ll never want to see a book again. Don’t fret about 
making friends either: we have a student called Nacbrie who would love to live 
with you. Good luck!

Chemistry confessions

Name: Ryn_ptrs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1886354>

Personal Statement: “It’s very hard talking about your love of chemistry when 
the real reason you chose it was because the rest of your subjects sucked and 
you like mixing random chemicals together at the end of the practical to see 
what cool colours were made.”


Students' end of year artwork – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/jul/24/students-end-of-year-artwork-in-pictures>
Response: Dear Ryn_pters, if mixing stuff together to make cool colours is 
your thing, it’s a shame you didn’t take art: I think you would have loved it. 
Still, STEM subjects are pretty big right now, a bit like the Macerena was in 
the 90s. We’d love to have you.

Reaching for the stars


Name: JennaKate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1886204>

Personal statement: “I just really want to be a journalist and meet 
celebrities. You’re making £9,000 a year, may as well let me try to make my 
dreams come true.”


Response: Dear JennaKate, your drive and ambition is certainly impressive. I 
can’t pretend your time at university is likely to help your dreams come true, 
but £9,000 a year is a lot of money – welcome aboard.

Common law


Name: Evilscreaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2016/jan/18/students-express-your-truthful-university-applications#item-1883755>

Personal statement: “No, law is not my passion, I haven’t always wanted to be 
a law student and I wasn’t born with an ‘innate desire to help change the 
world’.”


Response: Dear Evilscreaming, we’d like to offer you an unconditional offer to 
study at our law department – it sounds like you’ll fit right in.


 * There’s still time to submit your honest applications – visit our Guardian 
Witness project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/15/students-share-your-honest-uni-applications-with-us>
 and send us your 50-word statement.



 