
Turkish authorities have shut down 15 media outlets, including one of the 
world’s only women’s news agencies, and detained the editor-in-chief of an 
opposition newspaper, in the latest crackdown sincea coup attempt in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>.

The Cumhuriyet editor-in-chief, Murat Sabuncu, and other executives from the 
paper were detained in raids early on Monday morning on accusations that they 
committed crimes on behalf of Kurdish militants and a network linked to the 
US-based cleric Fethullah Gülen, the Istanbul prosecutor’s office said.

Gülen is blamed by the Turkish government for the attempted putsch.

An emergency decree issued late on Saturday ordered the shutdown of 10 
newspapers, two news agencies and three magazines. Most of the media 
organisations that were closed had head offices in the predominantly Kurdish 
south-east. A further 10,000 civil servants have also been sacked.

The decree brought the total number of media outlets closed since July to more 
than 160.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Ferdogans-crackdown-hes-becoming-a-dictator-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Erdo%C4%9Fan's%20crackdown%3A%20'Free%20speech%20is%20being%20rebranded%20terrorism'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Ferdogans-crackdown-hes-becoming-a-dictator-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Erdo%C4%9Fan%27s%20crackdown%3A%20%27Free%20speech%20is%20being%20rebranded%20terrorism%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Ferdogans-crackdown-hes-becoming-a-dictator-video&media=>
Erdoğan’s crackdown: ‘Free speech is being rebranded terrorism’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/19/erdogans-crackdown-hes-becoming-a-dictator-video>
“The police came around 4am on Sunday morning and sealed the office,” said 
Beritan Canözer, a journalist in Diyarbakır for Jinha, the news agency staffed 
entirely by women. “We have not received a court order. There have not been any 
official justifications for this measure. Nobody explained anything to us.”

Canözer, who was detained last December while reporting on a demonstration in 
Diyarbakır because police decided she looked “too excited”, underlined that the 
shutdown would not spell the end to Jinha’s work. “We will find other ways to 
inform the public,” she said. “We will continue to report … They cannot silence 
us.”

Rights groups have harshly criticised the recent crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/turkey-closes-20-tv-and-radio-stations-post-coup-clampdown>
 on press freedom in Turkey.

According to independent media platform P24, 99 journalists have been formally 
arrested since the botched military intervention, turningTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> once again into the world’s leading 
jailor of reporters. Thousands of journalists have lost their jobs. Hundreds of 
government-issued press accreditations have been cancelled, and an unknown 
number of journalists had their passports revoked, thus banning them from all 
foreign travel.

General Mayhem guides Turkey’s media repression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/16/turkey-media-repression-general-mayhem-erdogan>
Almost 2,000 academics and teachers were also among those sacked via the 
emergency decrees, many of whom were members of the leftist teachers’ union 
Eğitim-Sen.

A state of emergency, announced on 20 July, has recently been extended for 
another three months until January. The measure allows PresidentRecep Tayyip 
Erdoğan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> and the AKP 
cabinet to bypass parliament, rule via decree, and suspend rights and freedoms 
as they deem necessary.

According to state-run news agency Anadolu, more than 37,000 people were 
formally arrested. Around 100,000 more civil servants were fired or suspended 
during recent purges.
 