
As more and more films are released simultaneously in cinemas and on VOD, it’s 
worth asking whether some movies are better suited to one medium than the 
other. This week, Turkish indie horrorBaskin – out yesterday on screens both 
big and small – offers an answer: though the film has proved a runaway success 
at horror festivals and midnight screenings, it turns out to be a strikingly 
different film at home.

In its opening scenes, we meet a gang of cavalier cops whose meal at a dingy, 
off-the-grid restaurant is interrupted by a mysterious call for back-up. For 
now, the film maintains the feel of a darkly comic police thriller – presumably 
to the confusion of viewers familiar with its extremist horror reputation – and 
therefore translates just fine to a laptop screen.

After the men stumble upon an eerie, disused police station, however, Baskin 
executes a staggering tonal shift that renders the film less well-suited to 
home viewing. Upon entering the building, the officers find themselves in what 
appears to be a literal hell: a subterranean network of grotesque supernatural 
torture chambers overseen by a demonic figure named The Father, who looks 
disconcertingly like the mechanical ceiling baby from Trainspotting all grown 
up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy9SfWmXQY3o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy9SfWmXQY3o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy9SfWmXQY3o&media=>
This nightmarish labyrinth is genuinely, revoltingly horrific: all writhing 
bodies, gushing fluids and don’t-even-know-what-I’m-looking-at spectacle. 
Director Can Evrenol fashions his seventh circle in tones that Hieronymus Bosch 
might have found excessively macabre, and reduces his previously braggadocious 
characters to monosyllabic wrecks, doomed to cry out hopelessly in 
non-comprehension at their sudden change in fortune.

Those who watch the film at home may sympathise. As the bloodletting 
continues, it soon becomes apparent that Baskin intends to keep viewers in the 
belly of its beast for quite some time, with only The Father’s clunky attempts 
at profundity (“Hell is not a place you go, you carry hell with you at all 
times”) and a few wilfully inscrutable narrative twists by way of plot 
development.

I suspect that’s because Evrenol knows the movie’s lengthy scenes of 
grotesquery will go down a treat at crowded theatrical screenings, where 
disembowelings are liable to be met with enthusiastic cries of revulsion. The 
film even seems to leave breathing space for such reactions, ensuring quieter 
viewings on VOD are punctuated by dramatic downtime. For all the suffocating 
gore, it’s an oddly airy vision of inferno.
 