
By the time Sergio Leone got to Monument Valley 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monument_Valley> in 1968 to film exteriors for 
Once Upon a Time in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36274/once.upon.a.time.in.the.west>, 
its sandstone buttes – engrained in the popular consciousness by their presence 
inJohn Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnford>'s westerns – had 
already assumed the hulking mythic grandeur the great Italian director needed 
for his story of American beginnings. Nuri Bilge Ceylan was surely hoping for a 
little of the same when he had his night convoy of murder investigators sweep 
their headlights across the vast prairie in last year'sOnce Upon a Time in 
Anatolia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141833/once-upon-a-time-in-anatolia>. 
The auburn-grey hills aroundKeskin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keskin>, near 
the capital Ankara, might not be as singular a location as the Utah valley, but 
they've got their own mute, unknowable magnificence – a suitable backdrop for 
Ceylan's gloomy night of the Turkish soul.

Ceylan is normally an urban fox – but he joins the growing crop of film-makers 
drawn towards the country's spectacular rural interior, which is starting to 
take a place as central to Turkish cinema as the American west once was to 
Hollywood. While both cinemas always have a moment for a sweeping romantic 
vista, the Anatolian landscape seems to feature in a very different way.Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> might be rapidly modernising in the 
way that the US once did, but – as a site of civilisation for thousands of 
years already – it's not like it's being physically discovered by a people in 
the process. So Turkish rural cinema is less bound up with notions of manifest 
destiny and the subjugation of nature, and is more a place where a deep, 
binding nostalgia wells up from the rocks.

That nostalgia comes in many different shades: invigorating, unsettling, 
disappointing. All these moods are on show at this year'sLondon Turkish film 
festival <http://www.ltff.co.uk/>. Reha Erdem's Jîn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AaaPK4G8XeY> – about a 17-year-old Kurdish 
guerrilla fighter on a picaresque odyssey through forests and mountain passes – 
takes the purest line, almost a kind of devotional parable calling for 
immersion back into nature. A kind of paganism seems to be emerging in his 
film-making, from the delirious, dervish-like 360-degree pans over the Black 
Sea coast in his much-praised 2006 filmTimes and Winds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/115680/times.and.winds>, to the 
shrieking, cawing, feral lovers of 2010'sKosmos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147851/kosmos>. And now the strange, 
almost Malick-like reverie of Jîn, its eruptions of faceless violence almost an 
extension of the natural world.Erdem <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0258732/> is 
surely now second only to Ceylan in Turkey's directorial rankings.

Elsewhere, sinking into the Turkish heartland means interrogating deep-seated 
customs. Emin Alper shows a wry Chekhovian eye in hisBeyond the Hill 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vY3hh5mPoIw>, set in a lush Anatolian valley 
belonging to a grizzled patriarch obsessed with the nomads who wander over his 
land from over the rise. Family tensions, crackling over western-type campfire 
scenes, get projected on to the wanderers until a (literal) scapegoat gets 
made. In Deniz Çinar'sThe Circle Within 
<http://www.ltff.co.uk/feature_films/the_circle_within.php>, a wrathful young 
man imprisons a tinker, from the Yazidi minority, inside a glyph scratched onto 
a hillside, challenging him to leave it; are old beliefs being mocked, or 
gathering strength? Both films feature characters who've been mentally unhinged 
by their military service, patrolling the wilds: the Turkish interior can be a 
damaging one for those who spend too long there.

Whether it belongs to the characters themselves, or is implicit in the 
director's desire to head for the hills, there's a longing in all these films 
to be enfolded in Asia Minor's vast outback. But the payoff isn't always 
satisfactory: the depressed Istanbul architect inYurt (Home) 
<http://www.cineback.com/2012/09/08/yurt-hd-trailer/>, directed by Ceylan 
protege Muzaffer Özdemir and released in April, is hoping to rekindle primal 
feelings when he returns to his hometown,Gümüşhane 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%BCm%C3%BC%C5%9Fhane>. He finds the valley, 
in north-east Anatolia, overdeveloped, and the mountain torrents harnessed by 
industry. "I've always considered this the heavenly garden of my childhood, a 
unique place," he concludes, overlooking what looks to me like a pretty special 
massif; "What I saw seemed like a grey raw material depot." It's like the 
foreboding, ungiving,anti-romantic landscapes <http://vimeo.com/47961685> in 
There Will Be Blood; the mind of the modern exploiter can't see anything else.

So modern life ultimately drives attitudes towards the wilderness. Hollywood 
only got nostalgic on behalf of the nation when cinema had been invented, and 
the west had long ceased to be wild; Turkish cinema gets the benefit of 
examining and lamenting the process as it's happening. For the moment, its 
landscape films are purely the preserve of its arthouse brigade. The potent 
Turkish commercial sector is too busy pumping out comedies to do what Hollywood 
did in its westerns heyday: really linger on the view, and what it means. Some 
of Anatolia's most spectacular spots – likeCappadocia's extraordinary meringue 
rock-formations 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=cappadocia&hl=en&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=O4MsUerMKOON0wX7yYHQBw&sqi=2&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAQ&biw=1024&bih=577>
, surely the country's answer to Monument Valley – will have to wait for their 
closeup.

• The London Turkish film festival <http://www.ltff.co.uk/> continues until 3 
March. Yurt (Home) is out on 5 April.

• What global cinematic stories would you like to see covered in the column? 
Let us know in the comments below.
 