
Team Turnbull is taking shape, with the new prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> making key hires 
to replace the public servants who have been filling in since the change of 
prime ministership.


He is drawing staff largely from his own long-serving and loyal advisers or 
his former staffers returning from the private sector, as well as some new 
young talent and some experienced staff from theJohn Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> era.

The Malcolm Turnbull interview: 'If something isn't working, chuck it out'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/23/the-malcolm-turnbull-interview-if-something-isnt-working-chuck-it-out>
After the highly centralised operation of his predecessor, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, Turnbull has said his 
ministers will be his primary advisers on each portfolio and his office will 
not be structured to second-guess them.

The secretary of Turnbull’s old department of communications, Drew Clarke, 
continues to serve as a temporary chief of staff, with no news yet on a 
replacement.

Sally Cray, a former head of corporate affairs at the ABC and long-term 
Turnbull adviser, is principal private secretary and Tony “Parko” Parkinson – a 
former journalist, adviser to former foreign affairs minister Alexander Downer, 
and most recently corporate affairs manager for Coles – is director of 
strategy. Jon Dart, another Turnbull loyalist and former journalist, will work 
with Parkinson.

Policy advisers will be organised into five broad teams.

Frances Adamson, currently Australia’s ambassador to Beijing and formerly 
chief of staff to Labor minister Stephen Smith in both the foreign affairs and 
defence portfolios, will be international adviser overseeing foreign and 
national security policy. Her team includes Justin Bassi, a former acting 
assistant secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department in charge of cyber 
security and most recently an adviser to the attorney general, George Brandis, 
and long-term Turnbull adviser Peter Anstee.

'One of the interesting things about being PM is people take more notice of 
you'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/23/turnbull-being-pm--people-take-more-notice-of-you>
Social policy will be overseen by Kerry Pinkstone, a former Turnbull adviser 
who left to work at Twiggy Forrest’s Generation One Indigenous employment 
advocacy group and advisers include Amy Dobbin, who previously worked for 
Turnbull’s former parliamentary secretary Paul Fletcher and at the New South 
Wales Department of Premier and Cabinet.

Another group will cover climate, water, infrastructure and cities policy, 
including Bruce Male, a former Howard government adviser who was also on the 
staff of former water minister Bob Baldwin and has detailed policy knowledge of 
what could be a controversial area.

Tony Nutt appointed new federal director of the Liberal party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/23/tony-nutt-appointed-new-federal-director-of-the-liberal-party>
Turnbull’s “signature” policy of innovation will be handled alongside higher 
education and science by advisers including Ali McDonald, a former Turnbull 
adviser who left for a stint with Google and in the bureaucracy and Mark 
Brudenell, another former adviser who will handle the digital economy.

The economics team are in the final stages of hiring.

Turnbull’s head of communications is David Bold, with the media team including 
former Channel Ten journalist Matt Moran and former Simon Birmingham adviser 
Caitlin Keage and formerEric Abetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/eric-abetz> adviser Erika Seymour.

The former Howard chief of staff Senator Arthur Sinodinos, as Turnbull’s 
cabinet secretary, is also crucial to the policy and cabinet operation. Another 
former Howard staffer, Tony Nutt, who oversaw the transition from Abbott to 
Turnbull,was formally appointed as the Liberal party’s federal director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/23/tony-nutt-appointed-new-federal-director-of-the-liberal-party>
 on Friday after the resignation of the long-serving Brian Loughnane, husband 
of Abbott’s former chief of staff Peta Credlin.
 