
Have you applied to university through Ucas, but received no offers? Or did 
you change your mind and decline your offers? Don’t worry, you can still go to 
university. You can find other courses with vacancies throughUcas Extra 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/track-your-application/extra-choices>
, which opened on 25 February and closes on 4 July.

By now, a button saying “add an extra choice” will appear on Ucas Track under 
the “your choices” section. You can then use the search tool to find courses 
available via Extra and learn more about them, including their entry 
requirements.

Once you’ve entered the details of your new course and university or college, 
Ucas will make your application available to them, using the same personal 
statement you used in your original application. If you’re applying for a 
different course, ask your new choice if they require a new one and would 
accept it directly.

Only one choice can be sent at a time through Extra, so once you’ve found a 
suitable course, contact the relevant admissions office to see if they are able 
to make you an offer, says professor Martin Coyle, an admissions tutor at 
Cardiff University.

We asked them to reject me, so the Extra option popped up on my Ucas 
application page 

You can’t change your choice for 21 days – unless you receive and decline an 
offer or the university or college you’ve applied to rejects your application – 
so it’s important not to rush things. If you previously received offers but 
didn’t accept them, it might be because you changed your mind about the subject 
or university, so try to thoroughly research potential courses and institutions.

Discuss your options with as many people as possible and discuss the pros and 
cons. Along with your parents, talk to teachers, careers advisers, admissions 
officers and course tutors, to work out whether it’s suitable for you.

Lucy Tallentire, 22, originally applied to study English and received three 
offers, but then realised she wanted to study German instead. “We rang them up 
and asked them to reject me, so that the Extra option popped up on my Ucas 
application page.” She got a place at the University of Sheffield in 2011 
through Extra and is now studying for a master’s at Cambridge, with a view to 
doing a PhD.

If you were rejected by your five original choices, ask them for feedback to 
help you choose a new course, advises Laura Kishore, head of admissions at 
Oxford Brookes University. If your grades are below the standard offer for the 
course, they might tell you to look at courses with a more achievable standard 
offer. Look at joint honours courses and combined degrees to broaden your 
options.

However, don’t be afraid to aim high in your choice of university. According 
to theUcas end-of-cycle report for 2015 
<https://www.ucas.com/corporate/data-and-analysis/ucas-undergraduate-releases/ucas-undergraduate-analysis-reports/ucas>
, many highly selective UK universities lowered their entry requirements as the 
cap on student numbers was lifted. It has never been easier to get into an 
elite university, so take advantage of this opportunity.

Once you’ve made your choice, you’ll need to wait for an offer: if you receive 
one, you can still choose whether or not to accept it, but must reply by the 
date shown on Track. If you accept an offer you can’t apply anywhere else.

If you’re unsuccessful or decline an offer, you can apply for a different 
choice and repeat the process, just make sure there is enough time left. If 
you’re not offered a place through Extra before it closes in July, don’t panic, 
as you can apply again through Clearing.

Visit the Ucas website <https://www.ucas.com/> and follow @ucas_online 
<https://twitter.com/ucas_online> for more information

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 