
A credit boom that is close to levels not seen since the 2008 financial crash 
shouldset alarm bells ringing in Theresa May’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/jan/04/credit-boom-ticking-timebomb-uk-plc>
, debt charities have warned.

The latest figures from the Bank of England 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Pages/home.aspx> show unsecured consumer 
credit, which includes credit cards, car loans and second mortgages, grew by 
10.8% in the year to November to £192.2bn, picking up pace on the previous 
month to grow at its fastest rate in more than 11 years.

In September 2008, the month that Lehman Brothers collapsed and the banking 
crash triggered a worldwide recession, the level of UK consumer credit debt hit 
a peak of £208bn.

Credit card debts, which accounted for £66.7bn of the total, hit a record high 
last month as Britons used the plastic to fund shopping as never before in the 
run-up to Christmas.

The debt charity StepChange <https://www.stepchange.org> said the rise in debt 
levels would leave thousands of families vulnerable to higher levels of 
inflation and changes in income from wage cuts, divorce or redundancy.


Its head of policy, Peter Tutton, said: “Levels of outstanding borrowing are 
approaching the 2008 peak, and the growth rate of net lending is at its highest 
since 2005. Alarm bells should be ringing.

“Previous experience shows how such increases in the levels of borrowing can 
leave households over-indebted and vulnerable to sudden changes in 
circumstances and drops in income that can pitch them into hardship.

“Lenders, regulators and the government need to ensure that the mistakes made 
in the lead-up to the financial crisis are not repeated and that there are 
better policies in place to protect those who fall into financial difficulty.”

Research conducted for National Debtline by YouGov found that one in three 
British adults bought Christmas food or presents on credit this year.

Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline <http://www.nationaldebtline.org/>, said there had been a 
spike in calls to its helpline.

“Consumer credit continues to soar, and this is something we should all be 
concerned about amidst the current uncertainty over the UK economy,” she said.

“Most people are currently able to handle this extra borrowing, but if the 
economy does indeed suffer in the years ahead, these extra debts could become 
even more difficult to repay.”

Economists polled by Reuters expect economic growth to more than halve this 
year to a rate of 1.1%, as inflation rises to close to 3% from zero at the 
beginning of 2016 due to the effect of sterling’s sharp fall since June’s 
Brexit vote.


Recent surveys of consumer confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/consumer-and-business-confidence-tumbles-in-november-surveys-find>
 have shown a sharp dip after a recovery from the panic that dented sentiment 
after the Brexit vote.

The charity’s warning follows more than a year of intense competition among 
credit card companies for new customers, who are commonly offered 0% interest 
rates for several years.


Households have £66.7bn of credit card debt outstanding, up £600m on the 
previous month, while the total level of outstanding consumer credit reached 
£192.2bn, up £1.9bn on October.

Last month the Bank said some households were highly indebted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 and might struggle as unemployment rose, and separate data showed British 
households saved the lowest portion of their incomes since 2008 during the 
three months after the EU referendum.


But the Bank’s figures showed homeowners remained upbeat, with the number of 
mortgages for house purchase approved by lenders rising to an eight-month high 
of 67,505, from a slightly downwardly revised 67,371 in October.

The Bank forecast in November that mortgage approvals would slow to a monthly 
average of 65,000 over the next six months, and major lenders expect weaker 
house price growth.

Net mortgage lending, which lags behind approvals, rose £3.157bn in November, 
the Bank said, less than a forecast of £3.5bn in a poll of City economists.
 