
Investors from the world’s three largest economies are increasingly sceptical 
about doing deals in the UK due to uncertainty overBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, according to a report 
from one of the world’s top accounting firms.

The UK dropped out of the top five global destinations for mergers and 
acquisitions for the first time in the seven-year history of theEY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ernst-and-young> Global Capital 
Confidence Barometer survey.


Sentiment among investors in China, the US and Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> – the top three economies in the 
world – showed the biggest downturns, due to fears Britain will no longer offer 
a “gateway into Europe”, the report said.


Around 82% of Japanese respondents declared themselves less confident about 
investing due to Brexit-related turmoil, while 56% of those from the US and 53% 
fromChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> agreed.


“Brexit may not have created the initial turmoil some feared but investment 
uncertainty is clouding the UK’s longer-term economic prospects,” said Steve 
Ivermee, a managing partner at EY. He said the survey “highlights the size of 
the government’s task as it starts to reposition the UK … For businesses, 
reassuring overseas investors and setting out clear trade priorities with 
favoured nations is a priority.”

The UK fell to seventh in the list of the most attractive countries to pursue 
corporate deals, above India and below Japan, despite theweakness of sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/11/pound-pressure-city-fears-hard-brexit-bank-of-england-business-live>
 making British assets cheaper for foreign firms. Thelast EY survey 
<http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-uk-ccb-14-edition/$FILE/ey-uk-ccb-14-edition.pdf>
, released before the EU referendum in May, put the UK second only to the US as 
a country in which to pursue takeovers and mergers.

Investors in India, Russia and Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> still favour the UK, the report 
said, while EY said the UK’s fundamentally strong economy meant companies 
“don’t look ready to run for the exit … Nevertheless, smaller inflows into new 
and existing operations are concerning in the context of falling domestic 
investment and the UK’s negative current account,” said Ivermee.

Brexit is also proving a worry for domestic businesses, the survey found.


While 87% of those surveyed see the UK economy as stable, around 92% expect 
Britain’s exit from the EU to affect their ability to hire skilled people.

 