
Support for staying in the EU has risen among the finance bosses of big 
British firms, but they are also increasingly jittery as June’s referendum 
approaches.

With opinion polls tight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/02/eu-referendum-young-voters-brexit-leave>
, a survey of chief financial officers (CFOs) indicates they are holding off 
hiring new staff and reluctant to spend on new equipment before the public 
vote. Risk appetite has fallen to a three-year low, according to the poll of 
120 CFOs of FTSE 350 and other large private companies.


The survey by consultancy Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte> put the referendum at the top 
of CFOs’ risk lists, eclipsing longstanding concerns about turmoil in emerging 
markets and growth in the eurozone.

Brexit jitters dent UK consumer confidence, study claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/31/brexit-jitters-uk-consumer-confidence-eu-referendum>
“A fog of uncertainty has descended on the corporate sector. Perceptions of 
financial and economic uncertainty are back to levels last seen in early 2013 
as the euro crisis abated,” said Deloitte chief economist, Ian Stewart.

The quarterly poll found support for staying in the EU had risen to 75% of 
CFOs, up from 62% in the final quarter of 2015. But Deloitte noted that in that 
earlier poll, 28% of CFOs said their position would depend on the outcome of 
David Cameron’s renegotiation of UK membership. That response was not an option 
in this quarter’s survey.


In the latest survey, conducted after the prime minister announced his EU deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/david-cameron-deal-european-leaders-paves-way-june-referendum>
 and the 23 June referendum date, 8% of CFOs said UK business would benefit 
from leaving the EU and 17% were uncertain of their position or preferred not 
to say.

Support for staying in EU rises
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596709f4ddf5db198a5c08a1fc4a992b3e507961%2F0_0_789_387%2F789.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F596709f4ddf5db198a5c08a1fc4a992b3e507961%2F0_0_789_387%2F789.jpg>
 Support for staying in the EU and for leaving, according to last two Deloitte 
CFO surveys. Illustration: Deloitte 
Stewart said the rise in support for staying in the EU and the increase in 
risk aversion mirrored what the consultancy had seen among its clients.

“Since the announcement of the date of the referendum, demand from clients to 
understand the risks has gone up. A year ago it was a distant possibility, now 
we have got a date and people are more focused on the issues,” he said.

When CFOs were asked how they thought EU membership had benefited the UK 
economy and UK businesses, 89% said it had helped UK export performance and 86% 
said it had attracted foreign direct investment.

Chiming with business groups’ complaints over red tape, the survey showed the 
legal, regulatory and compliance framework aspects of UK membership ranked 
lowest with just 15% of CFOs saying they benefit the UK.

Export help seen as top EU benefit
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c9e94b274c829a24b7b9662e02a8e33f5fcd7d%2F0_0_714_615%2F714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c9e94b274c829a24b7b9662e02a8e33f5fcd7d%2F0_0_714_615%2F714.jpg>
 What benefits CFOs see in EU membership. Illustration: Deloitte 
The survey echoed other reports suggesting companies are nervous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/financial-sector-confidence-over-uk-economy-drops-sharply>
 about investing until they know the outcome of the June vote.A consumer survey 
last week also noted “Brexit jitters” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/31/brexit-jitters-uk-consumer-confidence-eu-referendum>
 with households gloomier about the UK’s economic prospects. according to 
market research company GfK.

“We are already seeing the unsettling effect of the referendum on business 
sentiment,” said David Sproul, senior partner and chief executive of Deloitte.

“While voices on both sides of the debate argue about the potential economic 
impact of a ‘leave’ vote, the referendum appears to already be contributing to 
a slowdown.”

Referendum tops risk list
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc59ffe1368535576cafe0d68fa35f2d1e6a536e6%2F0_0_950_584%2F950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20finance%20chiefs%20delay%20hiring%20and%20investment%20as%20Brexit%20tops%20risk%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fuk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc59ffe1368535576cafe0d68fa35f2d1e6a536e6%2F0_0_950_584%2F950.jpg>
 How CFOs rate risks to business from a range of factors. Illustration: Deloitte
CFOs ranked the EU referendum as the biggest risk their businesses face. On a 
scale of 0 to 100 (where 100 is the greatest risk) CFOs gave the vote a rating 
of 54, up from 50 three months earlier. That was ahead of economic weakness in 
the euro area at 48, weak demand in the UK at 46 and the prospect of higher 
interest rates in the UK at 44.


Despite those worries, only 26% of CFOs said their company had made, or was in 
the process of making, contingency plans for a possible British exit from the 
EU. More than half, 53%, said they had made no such plans.

Stewart said that could reflect the high level of uncertainty over what trade, 
migration and other deals would be put in place in the event of a vote to leave.

“Given the wide range of alternatives to EU membership there will be some 
corporates who say this side of the referendum there is little we can do,” he 
said.

The report will add fuel to the debate among high-profile business figures 
over the benefits of staying in or leaving the EU.

Last month, a group of 250 business leaders, including the former boss of HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings>, added their voice to the 
Brexit campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/26/250-business-leaders-sign-up-as-backers-of-vote-leave>
, saying EU membership harms the UK’s economic prospects.

That followed a letter in February in support of the UK remaining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/22/brexit-eu-referendum-top-firms-sign-letter-times-pro-eu-shell-easyjet-bae-systems-supermarkets-sainsbury-morrisons-tesco>
 in the EU signed by the bosses of some of Britain’s biggest companies, 
including easyJet, BAE Systems and Shell.

The Bank of England has also waded into the EU referendum debate, warning last 
week that a vote to leave could cause a run on sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/bank-of-england-clamps-down-buy-to-let-lending>
, a credit crunch and higher interest rates for mortgage holders and 
businesses. The Bank’s financial policy committee judged that the closely 
fought campaign posed the “most significant near-term” domestic risk to 
financial stability.
 