
The government is weighing into the battle for compensation for victims of 
last year's Rana Plaza factory collapse inBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> with a letter warning British 
retailers including Matalan to pay up.

The cut-price clothing chain, based in Skelmersdale, Lancashire, has admitted 
that its clothes had been produced on the second floor of the factory building, 
where over 1,100 people died, but has refused to pay into a compensation fund 
backed by the International Labour Organisation.

The company says it was not using Rana Plaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rana-plaza> when the building collapsed and 
has insisted that it has already helped victims with a donation to a charity 
support programme to mothers involved in the disaster.

Alan Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan>, the 
international development minister, said he is writing personally to a number 
of retailers, understood to include Matalan, as he was alarmed that a number 
had not made any contribution to the ILO fund.

Workers' rights campaigners say the type of charity scheme Matalan has paid 
into does not provide full compensation for loss of earnings by injured workers 
and the families of those who died. They wantMatalan to pay £3m into the ILO 
fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/compensation-fund-victims-bangladesh-rana-plaza-one-third-full>
 that remains less than halfway to its $40m (£24m) target more than a year 
after the disaster. Although Duncan refused to name the companies he has 
written to, his action marks the first time a government minister has put 
pressure on individual retailers over payments into the compensation fund. It 
comes after Frances O'Grady, the TUC general secretary, called on the government
to pressure UK companies sourcing from Bangladesh to pay up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/19/rana-plaza-uk-pressure-compensation-fund-victims>
.

To date, $17.1m has been donated or pledged to the compensation fund. Victims 
have received a first tranche of cash, but there are fears that additional 
payments will be cut short if further donations by retailers are not 
forthcoming.

"We have to raise the pressure over a year after the event to make sure a 
complete compensation package is assembled," Duncan said. He added that 
retailers could not claim that they weren't aware of where their clothes were 
produced because production had been sub-contracted by their suppliers.

Duncan's intervention comes after Jenny Willott, the consumer affairs 
minister, said retailers must have a policy on sourcing ethical products, 
because ignoring consumers' concerns about forced labour and dangerous working 
conditions could risk putting them out of business.

In the wake of a Guardian investigation which found prawns sold in the UK were 
produced with the help of slave labour, sheordered the British Retail 
Consortium to produce new guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/25/government-uk-retailers-ordered-improve-human-rights>
 urging its members to improve transparency about human rights abuses linked to 
food, drink, clothing and other products.

Duncan's intervention also comes ahead of a high-level international meeting 
in Paris at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that 
will discuss global efforts to build more responsible supply chains in the wake 
of the Rana Plaza disaster.
 