
Heading for a first … UK science


Aside from a new round of bin collections, the Conservative party conference 
was light on policy announcements this week, and even lighter on ideas to 
stimulate economic growth. However, in amongst the doom and gloom, and George 
Osborne's desperate attempts to convince us "we're (still) all in this 
together", there was one significant piece of good news, as the chancellor 
announced £200m of additional investment in UK science.

Of that money, £50m has been designated for a "graphene hub", which builds on 
the Nobel prize-winning work of academics from the University of Manchester who 
secured the physics prize in 2010. The higher education community in the UK has 
long argued that it has the capacity and potential to deliver the research and 
innovation to ensure the UK can remain internationally competitive.

Successive governments have recognised that our best chance of remaining 
competitive lies in high-level skills and research, rather than a desperate 
race to the bottom, but it needs to be backed up with funding. And so this 
announcement, although not Earth-shattering in size, is a welcome start because 
of the message it sends to the science community that there is a recognition 
that it can still play a significant role in boosting the UK economy in the 
long term.

But although welcome, a one-off announcement is hardly a coherent strategy, 
nor will it be enough to sustain the UK research and science base in an 
increasingly competitive environment. So as question marks about the 
coalition's economic growth strategy, or perhaps more pertinently lack of one, 
continue to become more and more important, our research community would be 
well served to strengthen its case for investment and the resultant 
contribution it can make to kick start our faltering economy.

Heading for a fail … University of Wales/HE in Wales


It was only a few weeks ago that concerns became public about the nature and 
quality of the University of Wales' partnership arrangements with other 
institutions, both in Wales and further afield. The press were critical, the 
education minister in Wales gave them a public dressing down, and the QAA 
appeared to be marshalling their evidence to report back a pretty dismal 
account of what was going on.

So as the storm clouds started to circle around the University of Wales, it 
seemed obvious that a drastic response would be required, but few predicted 
what would happen next.This week, the University of Wales announced 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/2011/10/04/university-of-wales-to-stop-validating-degrees-from-other-insitutions-91466-29532216/>
 that it would sever ties as an accrediting body for other universities in 
Wales. Although they recognised they have a"duty of care"  
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=26&storycode=417649&c=1>
to existing students on programmes, it is clearly a less than satisfactory 
denouement for students who will probably be left wondering who will accredit 
their degrees, and if they are accredited what value they will have anyway.

In a more disturbing twist it came to light that the institutions with which 
the University of Wales had, up until now been validating programmes, were not
warned about the decision <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-15159041> from 
the University of Wales. So while recognition should be given to the university 
for all but conceding there is legitimacy to the accusations that have been 
levelled at the quality of their external degrees, it now opens up a series of 
important questions about the status of the students currently enrolled on 
their programmes. This concerns their future relationship with institutions in 
Wales and further afield and given the direction of recent developments, 
ultimately whether the university itself has any future.

Aaron Porter is an education consultant and freelance journalist, was formerly 
president of theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> 2010-11 and 
tweets at@AaronPorter  <http://twitter.com/#!/aaronporter>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 