
Britain’s version of austerity is more aligned to the poorest nations of the 
European Union,according to figures from Brussels 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/news/news-releases> which reveal the UK was the 
only rich EU country to cut welfare spending as a proportion of GDP between 
2011 and 2014.

Related: The Tories will reduce UK public spending to Estonian levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/15/tories-reduce-uk-public-spending-estonia-imf-figures>

France, Germany and Italy increased spending on welfare, as did the 
Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden and Denmark, Luxembourg, Finland and Austria. Even 
Portugal, Spain, Slovakia and Poland marginally increased the proportion of 
national income they spend on welfare.

France pushed spending from 32.7% to 34.3% and Germany raised the level from 
28.6% to 29.1%, while Italy managed to commit 30% in 2014 compared with 28.5% 
in 2011.

But the UK cut the amount it spends on what Eurostat calls social protection 
(as a proportion of GDP) over the four years from 29.1% to 27.4%.

 UK spend on welfare dropped in four years to 2014 as a percentage of GDP  See 
the full visual 
Its compatriots in the austerity camp are Estonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/15/tories-reduce-uk-public-spending-estonia-imf-figures>
, Latvia, Lithuania, Ireland, Greece, Hungary and Romania.

Britain is also among the lowest spenders per head of population, matching the 
EU average, but falling behind Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands and Denmark, Finland and Sweden.

France and Germany both spent 131% of the average, though this failed to match 
the 140% spent by Denmark.

Slovakia spent 52% of the EU average while Ireland managed 87%, bringing it 
close to Italy’s 98% per capita.

The UK also spent more as a proportion of GDP than any other country on 
subsidising housing, illustrating the importance since the financial crash in 
2008 for successive governments tosubsidise tenants in private housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/07/rent-gap-local-housing-allowance>
.
 UK’s housing benefit is biggest property rental subsidy in EU  See the full 
visual 
Housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> benefit accounted for 
7.7% of all benefits compared with 1.4% in Spain and 4.2% in Sweden. Only 
Denmark and the Netherlands come close, spending 6.5% and 6.4% respectively.

Britain is among the majority of nations to spend more on pensions and “old 
age and survivors” than “sickness, healthcare and disability,” as the European 
commission’s statistical agency puts it.

Pensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> account for 43.1% of all 
benefits in the UK compared with 37.2% for the health service and 10.4% for 
families and children.

Germany is one of the few countries to spend less on pensioners than health, 
with 39.2% of benefits going to older citizens and 42.8% spent on healthcare.

 