
In Kiev, a Soviet memorial to the second world war stands at one end of 
Shevchenko boulevard, which is named after the poet who formulated Ukrainian 
language and literature as distinct from Russia’s.

The boulevard passes monuments to Mykhailo Hrushevsky, a founder of the 
short-lived Ukrainian People’s Republic in 1917, and Mykola Shchors, who fought 
for the Bolsheviks against that republic. It ends with an empty plinth where a 
statue of Lenin stood untiltoppled by protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/08/kiev-protesters-lenin-statue-ukraine>
 in late 2013.

Round the corner, where men in camouflage collect donations for Ukraine’s 
“anti-terrorist operation” in the east, a bookshop – part of a Russian chain – 
displays a book about Stepan Bandera, the Ukrainian nationalist leader who is a 
hero for some but also, in deeply entrenched Soviet and Russian rhetoric, the 
ultimate fascist and Nazi collaborator.

While the country struggles for its future, a war is also being waged to 
reclaim its past

Here in a nutshell is Ukraine’s confused and contradictory commemoration of 
history. While the country struggles for its future in the ongoing war to 
reclaim breakaway eastern regions, a war is also being waged to reclaim its 
past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429463172806%2F0fee6a0c-f145-48b3-b802-c6c66e93c680-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20'decommunisation'%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20%27decommunisation%27%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429463172806%2F0fee6a0c-f145-48b3-b802-c6c66e93c680-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ukrainian nationalists march to mark the birthday of Stepan Bandera, a 
Ukrainian leader assassinated by the KGB. Photograph: Sergey Dolzhenko/EPA 
The Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, is expected to sign a package of 
laws on “decommunisation 
<http://www.kmu.gov.ua/control/en/publish/article?art_id=248057658&cat_id=244314975>
”, recently passed by parliament, which will lay down an official version of 
Ukrainian 20th century history. The laws ban Nazi and Communist symbols and the 
“public denial of the criminal nature of the Communist totalitarian regime 
1917–1991”; they open former KGB archives; replace the Soviet term “great 
patriotic war” with the European second world war, and provide public 
recognition to anyone who fought for Ukrainian independence in the 20th century.

Proponents say the legislation, based on other post-Soviet countries such as 
Poland and the Baltic states, is long overdue to freeUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> of a painful past and create a new 
national identity based on events repressed or rewritten by the Soviet regime.

Others are concerned that the laws will replace one officially sanctioned 
history with another

“The Communist totalitarian regime set out deliberately to destroy national 
identity,” said Volodymyr Vyatrovych, the 37-year-old historian and head of 
Ukraine’s National Memory institute, who introduced the laws in parliament. 
“Many people’s ideas here are still formed by Communist propaganda, and many 
events from the past are viewed exclusively through the prism of Communist 
propaganda.”

But others are concerned that the laws will further divide the country by 
replacing one officially sanctioned version of history with another. “Of course 
we need history to form a contemporary national identity,” said Vasyl Rasevych, 
senior researcher at the Institute of Ukrainian Studies in Lviv and editor of 
the internet journalzaxid.net <http://zaxid.net/>, in a recent interview. “But 
unfortunately Ukrainian history is so antagonistic and confrontational, it 
can’t perform a consolidating function. It doesn’t unite, it divides.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429461914668%2F8b66f03b-86fa-4611-af02-5a991bbea520-2060x1632.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20'decommunisation'%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20%27decommunisation%27%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429461914668%2F8b66f03b-86fa-4611-af02-5a991bbea520-2060x1632.jpeg>
 Veterans dressed in historical uniforms of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA) 
march to celebrate Heroes Day. Photograph: Stringer/Reuters 
 One of the four bills in the package, On the Legal Status and Honouring of 
Fighters for Ukraine’s Independence in the Twentieth Century 
<http://w1.c1.rada.gov.ua/pls/zweb2/webproc4_1?pf3511=54689>, covers a long 
list of individuals and organisations from human rights activists to guerrillas 
accused of ethnic cleansing. It would allow veterans of the Organisation of 
Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA), followers 
of Bandera, to receive state benefits, and rules that denial or disrespect of 
their role in fighting for Ukrainian independence is an unlawful “desecration 
of their memory”.

But even a cursory knowledge of Bandera and the two militias will reveal how 
contentious their role in history has been - not just for Ukraine and Russia 
but forEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. This is 
especially true for Poland, Ukraine’s current ally against Russia.

Imprisoned for fighting Polish authorities in west Ukraine in the 1930s, 
Bandera briefly joined sides with the German army to fight the Soviets, only to 
fall out with both half the OUN and with the Nazis who returned him to prison 
for most of the war.

In 1943–4, fighters from both militias were implicated in the slaughter of an 
estimated 70,000–100,000 ethnic Poles in Volhyn and Galicia; there were also 
atrocities against the Jewish population. After the war, the militias continued 
a partisan struggle until the 1950s; Bandera emigrated to Germany to be courted 
by French and British secret services until he was assassinated in 1959 by a 
KGB agent.

UPA was a very broad popular movement, they were real freedom fighters. But 
there were also dark sides to their story
Myroslava Petsa 
Post-war Soviet history propagated the image of Bandera and the UPA as 
exclusively fascist collaborators and xenophobes. The term “Banderite” to 
described his followers gained a recent new and malign life when Russian media 
used it to demonise Maidan protesters in Kiev, telling people inCrimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea> and east Ukraine that gangs of 
Banderites were coming to carry out ethnic cleansing of Russians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429462123698%2Fa3024f5d-2fc1-4ff3-adbb-8a71b4a6a137-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20'decommunisation'%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ukraine%20to%20rewrite%20Soviet%20history%20with%20controversial%20%27decommunisation%27%20laws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fukraine-decommunisation-law-soviet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F19%2F1429462123698%2Fa3024f5d-2fc1-4ff3-adbb-8a71b4a6a137-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko lays flowers at a memorial to the unknown 
sailor in Odessa. Photograph: Tass/Barcroft Media 
Historians and activists such as Vyatrovych believe now is the time to replace 
that negative view for a positive one. “I think now people will start to 
understand that the UPA is a part of Ukrainian history,” Vyatrovych said. 
“Ukraine needs to remember those who fought and died for their independence, 
especially now we have a new generation who are fighting and dying for 
independence.”

Myroslava Petsa is part of that new generation. Her grandmother helped UPA 
fighters as a teenager while her grandfather was fighting in the Red Army to 
liberate Europe from the Nazis. “After the second world war they both worked in 
a collective farm seven days a week, practically as slaves of the Communist and 
collectivisation system,” said Petsa, a Kiev-based journalist.

“UPA was a very broad popular movement, they were real freedom fighters. But 
there were also dark sides to their story. What makes me wary of the newly 
adopted bill is that history isn’t black or white. It takes courage to 
recognise the dark pages from the past. Own it, say sorry, and then move 
forward.”

The opening of the archives should allow people to do just that, said 
Vyatrovych, whose National Memory Institute will now be in charge of the 
archives. “Not one of these laws aims to regulate or limit academic discussion; 
on the contrary, opening the KGB archive will stimulate discussion.”

Vyatrovych defended the provision that outlaws public denial or disrespect of 
aspects of the fight for Ukrainian independence. Publicly calling those who 
fought collaborators, he said, “is a way of breaking Ukrainian society”.

But Rasevych in Lviv believes that much archival evidence has already been 
destroyed by partisan researchers on one or the other side of the historical 
debate, and that the laws will curtail any critical view of recent history in 
Ukraine. “All we have now are propaganda constructs,” he said. “The ideological 
struggle is ongoing.”
 