
Ukraine qualified for the 2016 European Championship after a nervy 1-1 draw in 
Slovenia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovenia> saw them through 3-1 
on aggregate, after the second-leg play-off on Tuesday.

Slovenia, who were in England’s qualifying group, had the perfect start at the 
Stadion Ljudski when the captain Bostjan Cesar headed in from close range after 
11 minutes, when Valter Birsa’s cross was not cleared.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic on target as Sweden qualify after draw with Denmark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/denmark-sweden-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
However, the home side, trailing 2-0 from the first leg in Lviv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/ukraine-slovenia-euro-2016-play-off-match-report>
, could not find a second goal and ended the match with 10 men after the 
defender Miso Brecko was shown a red card for a foul on Yevhen Konoplyanka.

Then, deep into stoppage time, Andriy Yarmolenko equalised from close range to 
ensure theirEuro 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> spot was 
safe as Ukraine put an end to their play-off misery, having lost out for a 
place at the 2014 World Cup to France.

Slovenia had piled on the pressure from the start and Cesar made the most of 
their first chance. theUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> 
goalkeeper Andriy Pyatov had failed to deal with a teasing cross by Birsa and 
after a visiting defender blocked Milivoje Novakovic’s effort, the ball fell 
kindly for Cesar.

Slovenia then came close to levelling the tie on aggregate when the midfielder 
Nejc Pecnik’s fierce shot cannoned off a static Pyatov shortly before 
half-time. Nonetheless, Slovenia’s goalkeeper Samir Handanovic had some work to 
do and denied Yevhen Konoplyanka and Yarmolenko, and the defender Yaroslav 
Rakitskiy volleyed inches over the bar, as Ukraine gained the upper hand after 
the interval.

The visitors were nearly punished several minutes later, when Cesar was left 
unmarked at the far post for a free header which Pyatov somehow kept out, and 
Ukraine then survived a fierce Slovenia onslaught. The substitute Zlatan 
Ljubijankic had a shot blocked and the home side forced a flurry of corners in 
the dying minutes, before Yarmolenko put the game beyond their reach.
 