
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> has 
renewed its warnings to Uruguay and the US states of Colorado and Washington 
that their cannabis legalisation policies fail to comply with international 
drug treaties.

The annual report 
<https://www.unis.unvienna.org/unis/en/events/2015/incb_2015.html> from the 
UN’s International Narcotics Control Board <https://www.incb.org/>, which is 
responsible for policing the drug treaties, said it would send a high-level 
mission to Uruguay, which became thefirst country to legalise the production, 
distribution, sale and consumption of cannabis for recreational purposes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/11/uruguay-cannabis-marijuana-production-sale-law>
.

The UN drug experts said they would also continue their dialogue with the US 
government over the commercial sale and distribution of cannabis in Colorado and
Washington state <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-state>.

The possession and cultivation of cannabis became legal on 26 February in 
Washington DC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc>. Voters in 
Oregon and Alaska have also approved initiatives to legalise the commercial 
trade in cannabis for non-medicinal purposes.

The INCB said it “continues to engage in a constructive dialogue” with the US 
government on cannabis developments and it is clear the UN is putting strong 
pressure on the US government to ensure that the drug remains illegal at a 
federal level.

 The US government has issued new guidance to banks on their provision of 
services to marijuana-related businesses and all state attorneys have been 
reminded of the need to investigate and prosecute cannabis cases in all states.

The INCB said it was aware that the US government intended to monitor the 
impact on public health of legalising cannabis and has again reminded the Obama 
administration that the position inColorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/colorado> and Washington meant the states 
were failing to comply with the treaties.

Lochan Naidoo, the INCB president, said the limitation of use of narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances to medical and scientific purposes was one of 
the fundamental principles underpinning the international drug control 
framework. “This legal obligation is absolute and leaves no room for 
interpretation,” he said.

The UN body also renewed its call for the abolition of the death penalty for 
drug-related offences and voiced concern that Oman was proposing to make use of 
the death penalty for drug-trafficking offences.

The INCB’s annual report records a further rise in the number of new “legal 
highs” or psychoactive substances that have been identified. The number has 
risen from 348 to 388 in the past year – an increase of more than 11%. More 
than 100 countries are taking action against “legal highs” and the INCB has 
welcomed moves by China, considered by many to be one of the main sources, to 
start banning these synthetic substances that imitate the effects of 
traditional drugs such as cannabis and ecstasy.

The UN drug board also warns of a 66% increase in the global consumption of a 
stimulant, methylphenidate, which is primarily used in the treatment of ADHD or 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and is better known by one of its 
trade names, Ritalin. The rise has been seen in its use by teenagers and young 
adults in the US, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Australia.

It also highlights the lack of access for 5.5 billion people to medicines 
containing drugs such as codeine and morphine, which means that75% of the 
world’s population do not have access to proper pain-relief treatment 
<https://www.incb.org/incb/en/news/AR2014/ar2014.html>.
 