
“Engaging in misrepresentation or subterfuge … can generally be justified only 
in the public interest and then only when the material cannot be obtained by 
other means.”

So says the editors’ code of practice, which newspapers sign up to. In my job 
as a financial journalist, it is a condition that is normally pretty easy to 
stick to.

My day can be spent talking to forensic accountants, poring over public 
records or (occasionally) meeting financiers in City wine bars. The people I 
speak to know exactly who employs me and what I am likely to do with the 
information they provide. There are no exceptions. Well, almost no exceptions.

As the editors’ code implies, special cases do exist, specifically “detecting 
or exposing crime or serious impropriety”. That is exactly what the Guardian 
sought to do in the final months of last year, when the newspaper sent me to
work undercover in a warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
 in Derbyshire. Our investigation sparked a parliamentary investigation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb091b34a013d390e75ffe63ca0b7fbb73bdcae1%2F0_53_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undercover%20at%20Sports%20Direct%3A%20rewarding%2C%20exhilarating%20and%20sometimes%20petrifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undercover%20at%20Sports%20Direct%3A%20rewarding%2C%20exhilarating%20and%20sometimes%20petrifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb091b34a013d390e75ffe63ca0b7fbb73bdcae1%2F0_53_1555_933%2F1555.jpg>
 Mike Ashley gives evidence to the parliamentary select committee. Photograph: 
Reuters 
In a string of reports in December on the working conditions at the Shirebrook 
depot of Sports Direct, we exposed the fact that this giant retailer was 
breaking the law by effectively paying its warehouse workers less than the 
minimum wage.

Sports Direct’s billionaire founder Mike Ashley finally admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashley-admits-sports-direct-staff-were-not-paid-minimum-wage>
 as much this month, when he was hauled in front of a parliamentary select 
committee to explain himself. The challenging hurdles of the editors’ code, we 
would argue, had been well and truly cleared.

Getting to that point, however, had been at times fiddly, laborious and boring 
– and certainly a million miles from the image that many people might have of 
an undercover job. This was not the world of John Le Carré’s hero Jonathan 
Pine, smoothing his way into the nefarious circle of an arms dealer in the 
novel-cum-television seriesThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>.

But like the far more dramatic fictional representations, the experience of 
working undercover is also hugely rewarding, exhilarating and, at times, 
petrifying.

When you begin with a subterfuge, even if you are in no physical danger, it is 
difficult not to feel anxious. The reason is pretty simple: most people would 
hate to be exposed as a liar. And lying – albeit with a purpose – is what you 
are doing.

The first steps were simple enough as they were conducted online; I merely 
responded to an advert recruiting minimum wage workers as “warehouse 
operatives”. I was then invited to attend an induction at the offices of a 
Sports Direct employment agency, Transline, in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire.

There, surrounded seemingly exclusively by eastern European applicants who 
were genuinely in need of this work, I felt extremely conspicuous. My heart 
sped up slightly as I waited for what I assumed would be my inevitable 
unmasking.

Looking at the situation through my recruiter’s eyes, it becomes obvious that 
she did not see a middle-class, university-educated undercover reporter looking 
to gain access to a warehouse suspected of exploitative practices.

If I asked questions of my superiors, they were dropped into conversations 
when I was looking for help with my job

She was focused on what I was to her – a 43-year-old man who could help her 
achieve one of her daily goals. She was simply trying to find a team of people 
who were able to start working in a Derbyshire warehouse at 5.45am the next 
day. To please her managers, she just needed to get the right number of bodies 
on site.

Grasping the principle that people are almost always more interested in 
themselves – and only become interested in you if you somehow affect them – is 
quite a blow to the ego. Still, it is hugely helpful when you are engaged on an 
undercover job.

When I arrived in the warehouse, my manager also had a boss who needed 
pleasing. So if I spared him any grief by performing the tasks asked of me, I 
became invisible. And being invisible is the perfect way to watch – partly 
because nobody stops what they are doing just because you are there.

I diligently maintained this low profile during my time at Shirebrook. I 
didn’t kick up a fuss when managers told me about practices that I knew 
breached employment law. I didn’t pummel colleagues or bosses with questions, 
instead putting brief queries to those who spoke English during our breaks.

If I asked questions of my superiors, they were dropped into conversations 
when I was looking for help with my job. I was a new boy, desperate to keep his 
new post. In short: I tried to do my warehouse job and to notice what happened 
to me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20da4988e724266834c2769abfab86046059aa02%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undercover%20at%20Sports%20Direct%3A%20rewarding%2C%20exhilarating%20and%20sometimes%20petrifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undercover%20at%20Sports%20Direct%3A%20rewarding%2C%20exhilarating%20and%20sometimes%20petrifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fundercover-sports-direct-rewarding-mike-ashley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20da4988e724266834c2769abfab86046059aa02%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Unite union members demonstrate outside the headquarters of Sports Direct last 
year. Photograph: Alamy 
This anonymity eventually helped me shed any fear of being exposed. Even when 
I filmed the security searches at the end of my shifts – when workers were made 
to strip down to their final top layer, expose the top of their underpants and 
roll up their trouser legs to show their socks - my only concern was whether 
the hidden camera would work, rather than if any of the security guards would 
be meticulous enough to spot it.

It was only later that the company had to take notice and the result has been 
pay rises for Sports Direct’s poorly rewarded workforce, as well as the 
likelihood of compensation for all the workers not paid properly in the past.

That acknowledgement of wrongdoing, as Ashley sat in front of the select 
committee and admitted the company had underpaid staff, produced a mixture of 
emotions.

First, there is the obvious professional pride derived from being part of a 
project that achieved its aims. But second, as the editors’ code states, it is 
difficult to justify going undercover unless there is a wider, dare I say more 
altruistic, motivation. In that sense, I hope the reports might play a part in 
improving the lot of warehouse workers in Shirebrook and, perhaps, elsewhere.

Clearly that’s not quite as dramatic as a Le Carré ending, but like all his 
books there is plenty of truth in the detail about the trade.

As one of the group infiltrated by Pine says to the hero: “You see everything, 
and say nothing.” It is excellent advice.
 