
When Mark Hodson gets on his bike in the morning, like many cyclists in the 
UK, he hascome to expect a few close calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/24/cycling-near-miss-close-pass-road-rage>
. Perhaps drivers will whizz past him too close, or someone will even try a 
‘punishment pass’.

Luckily, Hodson is a West Midlands Police traffic officer, albeit in plain 
clothes, and just yards up the road a colleague in a police car is waiting to 
pull over drivers that give himless than 1.5m space when overtaking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/aug/11/how-to-overtake-cyclists-the-video-all-drivers-should-watch>
 (a distance that increases for faster speeds and larger vehicles).

That driver will be offered a choice: prosecution, or 15 minutes’ education on 
how to overtake a cyclist safely. The worst drivers, or repeat offenders, will 
simply be prosecuted.

This tactic is part of a ground breaking new initiative launched by West 
Midlands Police, in partnership withBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> City Council, to tackle cycling 
safety.

How to overtake cyclists – the video all drivers should watch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/aug/11/how-to-overtake-cyclists-the-video-all-drivers-should-watch>
The Highway Code states drivers should give cyclists at least the same amount 
of space as they would give a car, but often this is not the case. Over four 
trial days ahead of the scheme’s launch 80 people were pulled over for close 
passes.

This morning Hodson and his colleagues pulled over eight offenders within an 
hour – people who could have been prosecuted for their driving. Among those 
stopped were lorry drivers, and a pupil under supervision by a driving 
instructor.

In many cases drivers just aren’t looking out for cyclists.

He said: “The last two drivers we pulled over, we asked: ‘do you know how far 
away you were from the cyclist’, and they said ‘what cyclist?’”

One of those was the driver of a 7.5 tonne vehicle. 

Responding to the 530 cyclists killed or seriously injured on West Midlands 
roads over four years, Hodson and fellow traffic officer, Steve Hudson, asked 
the Central MotorwayPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Group to 
analyse collision data from the region.

They found about 70% of collisions involving cyclists occur at junctions, most 
involve a motor vehicle, and in most cases occur because drivers failed to see 
a cyclist.

“We needed to do something about driver behaviour,” he said. “In about 98% of 
cases [the collision] was down to driver action, it was nothing to do with the 
cyclist.”

“We are some of the highest trained road users,” he said of himself and his 
fellow officers. “We can anticipate anything and everything, but what we can 
never account for is if someone hits you from behind.”

This tactic will now become part of normal police business in the West 
Midlands and, after an initial three-month blitz, officers will move beyond the 
education phase to enforcement only, by which point Hodson says people should 
have got the message to drive safely. Then, if anyone is caught overtaking 
Hodson or one of his colleagues, they will be prosecuted.

As Hodson puts it: “It is the fear of prosecution that stops drivers 
committing offences, it is a fact of British driving.”

Going forward, close passes will be targeted periodically in the same way 
drink driving is, across the West Midlands.

Duncan Dollimore, Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> 
UK’s senior road safety and legal campaigner, praised the initiative. “This is 
the first time a police force has come forward with a plan to prioritise 
enforcement against close pass drivers. It is quite simply the best cyclist 
safety initiative by any police force, ever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fundercover-bike-cops-launch-best-ever-cycle-safety-scheme-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683f802c613e8b4d7bc953d05e33b5c87af7757d%2F0_4_746_447%2F746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Undercover%20bike%20cops%20launch%20'best%20ever'%20cycle%20safety%20scheme%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fundercover-bike-cops-launch-best-ever-cycle-safety-scheme-in-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Undercover%20bike%20cops%20launch%20%27best%20ever%27%20cycle%20safety%20scheme%20in%20Birmingham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fundercover-bike-cops-launch-best-ever-cycle-safety-scheme-in-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683f802c613e8b4d7bc953d05e33b5c87af7757d%2F0_4_746_447%2F746.jpg>
 Police say that in many cases drivers just aren’t looking out for cyclists. 
Photograph: Courtesy of WMP Traffic 
He called the mix of education and enforcement “a simple but effective way to 
combat a long-standing concern”. He hopes other police forces around the 
country will follow their lead and is going to approach five police and crime 
commissioners looking for cost-effective ways to tackle road danger, with the 
‘blueprint’ from the West Midlands.

He says the operation is cheap – costing £70 for a mat to demonstrate safe 
overtaking plus a police or community support officer to be the cyclist – and 
efficient: based on the West Midlands’ experience, 20 drivers can be prosecuted 
within two hours.

When asked whether it could be rolled out nationwide, a National Police Chiefs 
Council spokesperson said: “Police forces are committed to keeping the roads 
safe. Individual forces are always looking for the best ways to help their 
local communities, and the West Midlands initiative is a positive step. All 
forces aim to develop new and effective means of keeping people safe on their 
roads.”
 