
Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> is facing a 
battle with its 140,000 workers after unions threatened a campaign of action 
against plans to slash pension benefits.

Royal Mail’s plan to switch 90,000 workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/10/royal-mail-pension-post-office-hit-brexit-defined-benefit>
 out of their current pension arrangements into a new scheme that will pay out 
lower benefits emerged on Wednesday. If the cuts are similar to plans at the 
Post Office’s near-identical pension scheme, it could see some workers lose up 
to half their projected pension.


The Communication Workers Union (CWU), which represents most of Royal Mail’s 
workforce, said it overwhelmingly rejected the pension changes.

Terry Pullinger, CWU deputy general secretary, said: “It is unfortunate that 
Royal Mail’s actions have resulted in this issue being in the public domain 
prior to any formal consultation.

Thousands of Post Office workers forced to take pension benefits cut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/post-office-pension-benefits-cut-defined-contribution>
“The CWU do not accept that closure of the Royal Mail Pension Plan is 
inevitable and will explore every avenue to defend it. We will challenge any 
convenient leap by the employer to close the scheme and move the entire onus on 
to our members.”

Royal Mail said the cost of its pension scheme will balloon from £400m to 
£900m a year unless it cuts the scheme. It wants to prevent workers from 
building up any future entitlement to the current career average-based pension 
scheme, and switch them to a pension where the outcome is entirely dependent on 
stockmarket movements.

Pullinger added: “It is very concerning that the recent press articles, which 
have prompted this statement, give an impression of fait accompli. Royal Mail 
will need to bring far more imagination into these ongoing discussions and 
should be in no doubt that the CWU will use every means at our disposal to 
encourage the company to think again and secure an agreement that defends our 
members’ incomes and dignity in retirement.”

Royal Mail said an existing agreement runs out in March 2018 and it welcomed 
talks. In a statement it said: “We are committed to constructive, ongoing talks 
with our unions about the future of the plan after March 2018.”

The CWU is already engaged in a battle with the Post Office, which split from 
Royal Mail on privatisation in 2012, over changes to its pension scheme. It 
called a strike ballot over changes to thePost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> pension, and other working 
arrangements at crown post offices, and said it expects a resounding vote in 
favour of action.

Post Office 'heading for extinction' amid plan to cut 600 jobs, say unions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/17/unions-warn-post-office-is-planning-to-cut-600-jobs-cwu-unite>
Severe cracks are appearing in many final salary-style pension schemes because 
what appear to be esoteric movements in gilt yields – interest paid on 
government bonds – are having a dramatic impact on the financial viability of 
pensions.

Since the EU referendum result, gilt yields have plummeted to historic lows, 
with interest rates on some government bondsturning negative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/uk-borrowing-costs-record-lows-bank-post-brexit-plan-gilt-buybacks>
.


This hits pension funds, as gilt yields are a major component in valuing the 
future liabilities of a scheme. Each time yields fall, the gap between assets 
and liabilities grows, throwing many schemes into deficit.

Figures earlier this week from the Pension Protection Fund revealed that the 
total deficit at nearly 6,000 of the UK’s biggest company pension schemes had 
widened by more than £24bn in a month to reach a new high of £408bn.

The latest rise in the deficit of schemes covered by the pensions lifeboat 
points to the difficulty in tackling troubled schemes including BHS, where
former owner Sir Philip Green is battling to “sort” the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/06/bhs-pension-deficit-sir-philip-green-sort-it>
, and Tata Steel, where apensions restructuring could be key to a rescue bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/20/business-secretary-greg-clark-crisis-talks-tata-steel-bosses-unions>
.

The latest deficit estimate comes after a 31% rise announced last month in the 
wake of the Brexit vote but before this month’s decision by the Bank of England 
to cut interest rates to 0.25% and start pumping money into the economy.


A spokesperson at the Pension Protection Fund said: “Record lows in gilt 
yields continued to put pressure on pension scheme funding.


“Total liabilities increased in cash terms but the ratio of assets to 
liabilities is still above the all-time low of 76.4% in May 2012.”
 